John Deane of Nottingham--Historic Adventures by Land and Sea, By W.H.G. Kingston.

According to the author in his preface, John Deane really existed and had an interesting and
successful life in a variety of roles.  He was born in 1679, of well-to-do parents, but started
his working life as a drover, that is to say a person who drove great herds of cattle from
the countryside to the great cities like London, for consumption there.  He then joined the
Navy and rose to become a ship's captain.  After a spell as a Merchant Adventurer, he commanded
a vessel in the Russian navy of Alexander the Great.  Later he became British Consul at Ostend,
on the coast of Belgium, quite close to south-east England.  Finally he came back home to live
in a village near Nottingham, receiving civic honours in that city.  He died in 1760.

This book could therefore be called a historical novel, but written with the style and genius
of Kingston it becomes far more than that.  You will enjoy it.

PREFACE.

John Deane was a real person, and I hope that the readers of this my book about him will be
as much pleased with it as I was with the history of his adventures, placed in my hands by
a friend who long resided at Nottingham.  He was born at that town A.D. 1679.  Though of gentle
parentage, in his early days he followed the occupation of a drover.  He then went to sea,
and became a Captain in the Navy; after that he was a Merchant Adventurer.  He next took service
under Peter the Great, and commanded a Russian ship-of-war.  On leaving Russia, he obtained
the post of British Consul at Ostend, held by him for many years.  Returning home, he was made
a Burgess of his native town, and took up his abode at the neighbouring village of Wilford,
where, in 1760, he died.  In the quiet churchyard of that sweet spot, his tomb and that of
his beloved wife Elizabeth are to be seen:--

  "His age, fourscore years and one."

  "After life's fitful fever, he sleeps well."

                                                             The Author.

CHAPTER ONE.

MR HARWOOD AND ALETHEA IN SHERWOOD FOREST, AND JACK DEANE'S FIRST ADVENTURE.

Romantic Sherwood!  Its pristine glories since the days when bold Robin Hood and his merrie
men held sway within its borders, and levied taxes from the passers-by, had sadly dwindled
even in the year 1696, when our history commences.  The woodman's axe had been busy and the
plough had gone over the land, and mansions and homesteads had arisen where once flourished
the monarchs of the forest, and the huntsman's horn had been wont to sound amid sequestered
glades; still many a wide stretch of woodland and moorland remained, over which the fallow
deer roamed at freedom, and rows of far-spreading trees overhung various by-paths green and
narrow winding in all directions, and shaded the king's highway which ran north to York and
south to the ancient and pleasant town of Nottingham.  And there were likewise majestic avenues
leading to the abodes of nobles and squires, and thick copses and scattered groves, above which
rose the hoary giants of ancient days; and by the borders of the streams and rivulets which
find their way into the Trent numberless trees had been allowed to stand.  Wide strips also
of grass-land were to be found running even with the road or between different estates, extending
sometimes in an unbroken line for several miles together, with oaks and elms and beeches stretching
out their umbrageous branches to meet from either side, and preserving by their shade the soft
velvet of the turf even during the heats of summer.

Thus the old forest trees, if marshalled in close order, would have formed a wood of no inconsiderable
magnitude.

The noon-day sun of the warm summer was shining down on the branches of the wide-spreading
trees shading a long woodland glade, such as has been described running from the north towards
Nottingham, the walls of whose siege-battered castle could be seen in the far distance, where
on a slight eminence the trees opening out afforded a momentary glance of the country in front.

Just at that spot a gentleman of middle age, mounted on a strong, active horse, accompanied
by a young lady on a graceful palfrey, was riding at a leisurely pace along the glade in the
direction of the town.  The gold lace with which his long, loose riding-coat was trimmed, his
embroidered waistcoat, the gold ornament which secured the turned-up flaps of his beaver, and
more than all, the jewel-hilted sword by his side, bespoke a person of position.  He wore also
leather breeches and buff-leather boots, the usual horseman's dress of the period.

The fair girl by his side sat her horse with that perfect ease which habit alone can give.
Her blue riding-coat was turned up with white, with broad flaps and pockets, the petticoat
below being of the same colour; her waistcoat was elegantly embroidered, and the small three-cornered
hat with a jewel in front which she wore on the top of her light auburn hair, undisfigured
by powder, completed her unassuming yet most becoming costume.  Her figure was tall and slight,
and her fair and brilliant complexion increased the beauty of her well-formed features, expressive
of wit and humour, at the same time indicating thought and feeling.

Such at sixteen was Alethea Harwood, the only child of the Worshipful Mr Rupert Harwood, of
Harwood Grange, the gentleman on the tall horse by whose side she rode. 

In Seldwyla they stopped at the inn to the rainbow, where there is a number that carriage drivers
the glass was sitting. When the couple appeared in the host hall, ran around like a fire that
speech: "Ha! because we have a kidnapping;! we have initiated a delicious
story, "

However, Wenzel went through it without looking around with
his bride, and having in their rooms disappeared, he went to the Wild
Man, another good inn, and walked proudly through the border there
is also still home Seldwylers and into a room that he desired, and
she left her astonished deliberations over which they are the fiercest
headache were compelled to drink.

Also in the city Goldach around the same time was already running around the word "abduction,".

Early in the morning and already went to the pool of Bethesda Seldwyla,
excited by the Böhni and climbed Nettchen Concerned father.

Almost if they were in their haste without evidence of Seldwyla down,
as they are safely in time the carriage Fortuna front of the guest
house and saw her consolation suspected that at least the Pretty Horses
are also not far would.

They did so relax, when the assumption was confirmed and the arrival and residence Nettchen
heard, and also went into the rainbow.

But it took a while to ask you Nettchen the father was, she in her room to visit and there to
talk to her alone. Also they said that it had already the best The city attorney can call,
which will appear in the course of the morning.

The Amtsrat somewhat reluctantly went up to his daughter, pondering the ways in which he the
desperate child best from the error of Return, and was on a desperate Practices combined.

But with calm and gentle strength came to meet him Nettchen. She thanked her father with Emotion
for all their love and kindness demonstrated and explained in some phrases, then: first they
no longer wanted to live in Goldach had happened, at least the next
Years and second, they wish her maternal heritage important to accept
themselves, which of the Father would have long been ready in case
their marriage held, thirdly, it wanted the Wenzel Strapinski marry,
what would change nothing in particular; fourth, she wanted him live
in and help him establish Seldwyla as a capable business, and, fifth,
and final 'll be all right, for they have convinced themselves that
he was a good person and she is happy will do.

The councilor began his work with the reminder that Nettchen know how much he already I wanted
to invest their assets in order to justify their true happiness, the sooner the better their
lay hands to. But then he described with all the grief that it since the first News of the terrible
disaster, fulfilled the impossible of relationship that they wanted to hold on and finally he
was the great means by which the heavy Let alone resolve conflict worthy. Mr Melchior Böhni was
the one who is willing to momentary knock down of obligation to his person and the whole business with
his untouchable Names to protect their honor before the world and
to maintain.

But the word of honor, but now brought the daughter into greater agitation. She cried, just the
Glory be to you what areas to marry the Lord Böhni not because she did not suffer for instance,
could remain faithful to the poor strangers, whom they had given their word, and the suffering
she could too!

There was now a fruitless opposition talk to and what the steadfast
beauty but finally brought to the shedding of tears.

Almost simultaneously broke in. Wenzel and Böhm, who met on the stairs and it threatened a
lot of confusion to arise, and the lawyer appeared, one of the Official
rate of well-known man, and called for the present to the peaceful
calm.

When he few preliminary words heard what it was a question, he ordered that particular Wenzel
In the wild man retire and there still believe that Mr. Böhni not
interfering and go away, that in turn Nettchen all forms of bourgeois
etiquette true to the discharge of the case and the father renounce
any coercion, as freedom the daughter is undoubtedly the law.

So it was for a ceasefire and a general isolation for several hours.

In the city where the lawyer had announced a few words of a great power which perhaps after Seldwyla
comes through this story, was now a big noise. The mood the Seldwylers suddenly struck to the
benefit of the tailor and his fiancée, and they decided to protect the lovers with their wealth
and, in its town law and individual liberty to maintain.

So when the rumor went, the beauty of Goldach should be returned
by force , they banded together, put armed protection and honor guard
at the rainbow and before the savage man and committed at all with
huge amusement of one of their major Adventure, as a strange continuation
of yesterday.

The frightened and irritated Amtsrat sent his Böhni to Goldach for help. The driving Galloping out, and
the next day drove a number of men with a considerable police force from there over to assist
the councilor, and it began to look as if a Seldwyla should be new Troy. The parties faced each
other menacingly, the city turned Tambour already on its tightening screw, and did some shots with
the right stick. Then came higher officials, spiritual and temporal lords to the court, and
the negotiations, which were carried on all sides, revealed at last
as Nettchen remained firm and the Wenzel not intimidated, encouraged
by the Seldwylers that the banns of her marriage to Collection of
all necessary documents to take place and that was to be formally
gewärtigt if and what legal objections raised during this process
would, however, and with what Success.

Such objections could be raised only still at the age of majority because Nettchen the dubious
identity of the false Count Wenzel Strapinski.

But the lawyer who conducted his case and Nettchen now determined, that the foreign young man
either in his home or on his trips to date, only the shadow an evil reputation had taken from
anywhere and only good and benevolent testimonies poured in for him.

As for the events in Goldach, then pointed to the lawyer that actually Wenzel even never even spent
a count, but that this ranking him forcibly from others been awarded,
that he really writing with his pieces on all existing evidence Wenzel
Strapinski name without any ingredient is signed and therefore had
no other offenses was present, but that he had enjoyed a foolish hospitality
that had not been granted would be if he had not arrived in that car
and that driver is not those poor Would have made fun.

So then the war ended with a wedding at which the Seldwylers with their so-called Cat heads shot
powerfully to the chagrin of the gold Acher, which all the artillery could hear well, as the
west wind was blowing. The councilor gave out Nettchen her entire estate, and she said, Wenzel
now had a great Marchand-Tailleur and cloth in Seldwyla Lord, for
there was still the draper cloth Lord, the iron merchant iron master
and so on.

This was done, but in a completely different way than Seldwylers had dreamed. He was modest, frugal
and industrious in his business, which he to be a large scale understood. He gave them their violet-colored
or white, and blue-checked Sammetwesten; their Ballfräcke with gold buttons, red-lined their coats,
and everything they were him guilty, but never for too long. For to obtain new, beautiful things,
which he had come or causes, they had to pay him the former, so that
they together complained that he press them out the blood under the
nails.

He was handsome and looked around and did not almost dreamy, and he was from year to year more
experienced and skilful business and knew in conjunction with its soon reconciled father, the
councilor to make such a good speculation that his assets and he
doubled after ten or twelve years, with as many children who now Nettchen,
the Strapinska born had, and with the latter to Goldach moved and
there a respected man was.

But he did not return a Seldwyla Stüber, whether for ingratitude or revenge.

The blacksmith of his fortune

John Kabys, a wonderful man of almost forty years, introduced the
award in his mouth, that each must be the blacksmith of his own happiness,
should and could, without much fidgeting and shouting.

Quiet, with only a few master strokes wrought the right man to be lucky! was his frequent Speech,
which he not only achieve the necessary, but anything at all desirable and superfluous understand.

Because
he had run as a tender youth was already the first of his master stroke and its Christian name
John in the English John converted to from the outset for the unusual
Joyous and cook, as he contrasted by Hansen and also from all other
one Anglo-Saxon enterprising Nimbus received.

Then a few more years he remained quiet, without much to learn or to work, but also without
having to cut down on the string, but as wise, cautious.

When, however, bite the luck to the bait would not ejected, he did the second Master stroke and
i turned the cabbage in his family name into a y. This gave this word (elsewhere also Kapes), which means
cabbage, and a noble alien view Breath, and John Kabys expected now
with more justification, as he thought, happiness.

But it passed again several years, without that the same applies wanted to set herself, and has
he approached the thirty-first, as it should not be significant legacy
with all the moderation and division had finally exhausted yet.

Now he began to earnestly but rain and thought of a company that should not be for the fun.
Many times he had many Seldwylers their stately corporate envy, which
resulted from adding the woman's name.

This custom was once arisen suddenly, no one knew how and where, but enough to the men seemed
admirably to the plush red suit and West sounded at once the All towns in all corners of pompous
double name. Large and small company boards, doors, Bell trains, coffee cups and teaspoons were
described, and thus the weekly bursting a time of ads and statements
whose only purpose to affix the signature Alliance was.

In particular, it was among the first joys of the newly married, so soon as any to be launched
by the year listing. There were also many envy and annoyance, because if Schuster about a blackish
or otherwise for despised by guiding such a double name wanted to participate in the general
respectability, he was frowning on the bad noted, although he was in the legitimate owner
of the other half of marriage. After all, it was not no matter whether one or more unauthorized amused
by this means in the general Banking invaded, since experience shows that gender-like extension
to the name more effective, but most tender Maschinenteilchen credit system that was.

John Kabys however, the success of such a major change not be in doubt. The need was now large
enough to be saved this many master stroke to the left lead to hour, as befits an old blacksmith of his
happiness, not because of the day into hammers, and therefore saw John look like a woman, quietly
but firmly. And lo! already, the decision seemed to conjure up the happiness at last, for in the
same week arrived, lived in Seldwyla with a marriageable daughter of an elderly woman and called himself
Mrs. Oliva, the daughter of Miss Oliva. Kabys-Oliva! sounded immediately echoed in John's ear
and it in his mind! With such an established company had a modest business in few years, a big
house out of it. So he set the matter wisely because, equipped with all its attributes.

These consisted of a gilded glasses, in three enameled Hemdeknöpfen
by golden Chains connected among themselves, in a long gold watch
chain, which has a flowered vest crossed, with all sorts of appendages,
in a huge brooch, which as a miniature painting a representation of
the Battle of Waterloo, contained also in three or four large rings,
a large cane, the knob a little opera glasses formed in the shape
of a Perlmutterfäßchens.

In his pockets was pulled out and laid it in front of him when he sat down: a large Case of
leather, in which a cigar tip rested carved from meerschaum, representing the bound on the
horse Mazeppa, this group stood him if he smoked up between the Eyebrows up, and was a fine
copy, also a red with gold plated cigar case Concluded, lay in what beautiful cigars with cherry
and white striped cover, a bizarre elegant lighter, a silver snuff-box and an embroidered slate.
Also led he the most complicated and most graceful of all the money bag with infinitely mysterious
departments.

This all the equipment he was the ideal features of a man in prosperity, he had the same, as boldly designed
living environment, in advance, purchased when he was still at his
small fortune nibbled, but not without a deeper meaning.

Because such accumulation was not now both the hangings a tasteless vain man, but rather a school
of exercise, endurance and consolation at the time of Unsterns and keep for a worthy stop
off for the last border Fortunately, that could even come as a thief in the night. Rather he would
have starved, but that He would have sold the least of his decorative pieces, or offset, so
that he could not before World, are still to come even for a beggar and learned about the utmost endure without
losing luster. Likewise, in order to lose nothing to destroy, to break or bringing disorder,
offers a constantly calm and dignified bearing. No Räuschchen and no other excitement, he could
allow himself, and he really had been his Mazeppa For ten years, without there being stopped
at the horse an ear or the flying tail, and the hook and his little ring boxes and toilet bags
closed even as good as the Day of its creation. He also had to save all the ornaments neatly skirt and
hat, and he always knew how to have a bright Vorhemdchen to his buttons, chains and needles
to show on a white ground.

Of course actually more trouble lay in the fact when, in his Proverbs of the few master strokes wanted
to admit, but yes it has always displayed the works of genius, easily mistaken for.

When the two women were lucky enough now, so it was not reluctant in the stretched Networks of the master
catcher, he seemed to be neat and its many treasures just be the man to find they had come into
the country. Be controlled idleness pointed to a comfortable and secure Zinsleinpicker or reindeer,
the value of his title certainly kept in a box-like. They said some of their own well-ordered
Essence, but when they realized that Mr. Kabys seemed not to place much weight on it, holding
she wisely held her personality and for what this good man dressed alone. In short, in a few
weeks he was engaged to Miss Oliva, and he also traveled to the Capital to let stand a richly decorated
with magnificent double Adreßkarte name on the other hand, to order a magnificent company sign
and trade links with some credit open for a deal with Elle goods. In high spirits, he bought
the same two or three Elle bars of polished plum wood, a few dozen exchange forms with many mercurial
Emblems, price tag and small scraps of paper with a golden edge to stick, story books and such
more

.
  On that occasion he told Colonel
Hutchinson, who had so bravely defended those stout walls for the Parliament, that he was heartily
vexed at it.  The Colonel replied that he had procured it to be done, and believed it to be
his duty to ease the people of charge when there was no more need for it.  Some of the tower?
and walls, however, still stood conspicuous among the newer parts of the edifice with which
they had been incorporated by the architect.  In the market-place, as has been observed, there
were a number of fine old mansions belonging to the country families who were accustomed to
spend their winters in the town.  There were also a good many other handsome places in the
immediate neighbourhood.  None, however, could be compared for beauty of situation with the
castle which crowns the rock rising abruptly from the Trent valley, with its stream at the
bottom, which, after coming down from the Yorkshire moors, finds its way through the midst
of that vast forest district, with its heaths and leafy alleys, which was once all included
under the name of Sherwood Forest.

"Well, Neighbour Deane, what news do you bring from the big city of London?" inquired Mr Samuel
Pinkstone, a most respected burgess of Nottingham, during a pause in the conversation.  "I
am glad to see that you and Master Jasper have escaped all the dangers you had to encounter
there and on your way back.  They say that housebreakers are as thick there as gooseberries
on a gooseberry-bush; and as for highwaymen, I wonder any stage escapes being robbed from the
number of them, I am told, who throng the roads."

"Thank you, Master Pinkstone, we met with no accident of any sort or kind," answered Mr Deane.
"I did not set eyes on the muzzle of a pistol either in London or on our way from it.  Some
of the young rakes, who have not forgotten the pranks they played in the last king's reign,
occasionally had a scuffle with the watch, and a few heads were broken now and then, but no
brains were let out--for the best of reasons, that there were none within.  It is proposed,
however, to light the city, if our Greenland whalers would but bring us oil enough; but unless
they have a fortunate fishing season, there is but little chance of their doing that.  I saw
some odd sights in the city, I must say; and unless the ladies of quality mend their manners,
I am afraid things will come to a pretty pass before long."

"But as to public matters, neighbour," said Mr Pinkstone, "what about them?  We do not hear
much about them down here.  What is our fleet about?"

"We have as fine a fleet as ever sailed, under Mr Russell," answered Mr Deane.  "All the year
he has managed to keep master of the Mediterranean, and has had the French fleet shut up within
their ports, though contrary winds have prevented him making a descent on Marseilles or at
Toulon, though he has had regiments of soldiers on board for that purpose.  Then we have another
fleet in our Channel, ready to bombard the French coast.  They have destroyed Gronville, and
have made an attack upon Dunkirk, but they failed in that, I am sorry to say.  But the worst
matter, however, is, that the Marquis of Carmarthen, with a squadron under him, which lay off
the islands of Scilly to protect our trade, fancying that a superior French fleet was coming
out to attack him, when it was only a fleet of merchant-ships, left his station and retired
into Milford Haven.  This mistake has caused a great blow to our trade.  Many of the Barbados
ships have been taken by French cruisers, and two rich ships coming from the East Indies have
also been captured, besides which three other large ships have fallen into the hands of French
privateers off the Irish coast.  All the city of London therefore complains that neither the
Admiralty nor the Government take proper care to preserve the wealth of of the nation."

"Nor are they likely to do so," observed Mr Harwood in an under-tone to his next neighbour,
"while we have men of the present stamp at the head of affairs.  Old England is going to rack
and ruin, I see that very clearly, with all her new-fangled schemes and arrangements.  They
are yielding to the cry of the manufacturers, and are about to pass a law to put a stop to
our free trade in wool and corn; and they will soon shut us up to our home markets, and not
allow us to sell where we can get the best price abroad."

Mr Harwood among country gentlemen was not singular in his opinions on that subject.

The first course being removed, Mrs Deane folded her arms, to recover after the fatigue of
carving for so many guests; no slight labour, considering the size of the joints which had
been placed before her. Now, the cloth being removed, and the dessert spread on the shining
mahogany table, came the usual accompaniment of pipes and tobacco, which Kate and Polly Deane
had to prepare with their own pretty fingers for the use of the gentlemen.  This being done,
and small pieces of lighted charcoal being brought from the kitchen, wreaths of smoke began
to ascend round the table.

"There is an important toast to be proposed, Neighbour Deane, is there not?" said the Worshipful
Mr Pinkstone, turning to the host; "but that should be Dr Nathaniel's task, I opine, should
it not?"

"To be sure, certainly," said Cousin Nat, "I will gladly undertake the honour.  Our friends
are generally aware of the object which has called us together this day.  I have, then, the
pleasure to announce that my kinsman, Mr Jasper Deane, is about to enter into the profession
of which I have, for so many years, been an unworthy member, and I trust that by devoting his
mind to science, and his energies to the care of those who are placed under him, he may be
the means of largely benefiting his fellow-creatures, which all will agree is the great object
a physician should have in view.  I have infinite satisfaction, therefore, in proposing the
health of the future MD, my young kinsman aforesaid, Mr Jasper Deane."

At the conclusion of Dr Nathaniel's short speech the guests rose to their feet, and all turned
towards the young Mr Jasper, wishing him in succession health, happiness, and success in his
proposed profession. He received the compliments paid to him with due modesty.  His voice slightly
trembling from nervousness, he returned thanks in a very neat and proper speech, which it is
not necessary here to repeat.

Mr Deane then rose, and filling his glass, did the same in his own name, and in that of his
dame, for the honour paid to their son, and then drank to the health of all the guests present,
beginning with the ladies, and taking Mr Harwood first among the gentlemen, expressing at the
same time his gratitude to Dr Nathaniel for having undertaken to introduce his son into the
noble profession to which he himself was so great an ornament.

Alethea watched the countenance of Mr Jasper as he was addressing his guests, and she probably
remarked that it lighted up with far more expression and animation than a stranger who saw
him under ordinary circumstances would have supposed it capable of exhibiting.

"Well, Mr Jack, and what profession do you intend following?" asked Mr Harwood across the table.

"That depends upon circumstances, sir," said Jack.  "I have no fancy for sitting indoors all
day, and driving a pen, nor any other pursuit that would keep me out of the fresh air.  To
say the truth, if I had a free choice, I would follow some calling which would let me see the
world at large, and our own country in particular.  Last year, during the vacation, I took
a trip with Will Brinsmead, Mr Strelley's head drover, as far as Stourbridge, to the fair,
and I never enjoyed any thing more in my life.  I thought then, and I think now, that for a
young man who likes being on horseback, and enjoys the free air of heaven, galloping across
country, there is not a pleasanter sort of life.  And it is not unprofitable either, if a man
knows any thing about beasts, and where are the best pastures on which to put flesh on their
bones.  If my father and mother, therefore, have no objection, I have made up my mind to turn
drover."

Most of the company expressed their surprise at this announcement, by their looks if not by
their remarks.  Mr Deane was evidently somewhat annoyed at the announcement his younger son
had made.  Alethea especially looked at him across the table with surprise, while the colour
mounted into his sister Polly's cheeks, for though she had heard him express the same resolution,
she little dreamed that he was in earnest in the matter, thinking that it was only a way of
talking in which lads of his age were apt to indulge.

"I should think, my lad, that you are fit for a higher walk in life than the one you have mentioned,"
said Mr Harwood across the table.  "With a trusty sword by your side, and a hundred men at
your orders, you would be more in your place, I suspect.  There is plenty of work for gentlemen
in these days, if not in Old England, at all events out of it.  There are many wrongs to be
righted, and many good causes to be sustained. There are many I could tell you of who would
willingly accept the offer of your sword."

Mrs Deane looked highly pleased at the compliment Mr Harwood was paying her son, and thanked
him with one of her beaming smiles, although Cousin Nat screwed up his lips in a peculiar manner
and gave a significant look at Jack.

"Thank you, sir," said Jack, "but I have no fancy for offering my sword to any one out of the
country, however high he may bid for it, or in using it, indeed, except in my own defence,
or in that of my country.  I do not see what is amiss in the life of a drover, such as I hope
to be one of these days.  It is no easy task, I should say, to drive three hundred head of
cattle from the Yorkshire hills down South, and I hope in time to deal on a large scale, like
Mr Strelley, and other friends I know of."

"Well, well, Master Jack, you must take your own way," answered Mr Harwood, "or be guided by
your honoured parents: we will have a talk another time about these matters."

Mr Deane's lips had become considerably compressed while his son was speaking, and there was
an hysterical cry from Aunt Bethia, whose great wish had always been to see her favourite Jack
figure in what she called good society.

"You may quit the society of your equals, for which you have so little respect, Jack," said
his father in somewhat stern accents; "those you do not value will take little pains to keep
you among them; but let me hear no more of this matter.  Now, friends," he continued, making
an effort to recover his usual tone of voice, "fill the ladies' glasses, and keep the bottles
moving among you.  Lads often talk nonsense when they fancy they are talking sense, and so
may I beg you to forget what my son Jack has just said?  He will think better on the subject
another day."

"Don't be too hard on the lad, cousin," said Dr Nathaniel, turning to the host.  "It is a great
thing, in my opinion, to get a young man to choose a profession for himself.  There are too
many men like Jack who are not content unless they can mount a helmet and jackboots, and go
about the world slaughtering their fellow-creatures without rhyme or reason, should they not
find a good cause to fight for.  So, Jack, here's to your health, my boy, and success to you
in whatever honest calling you determine to follow!"

Dr Nathaniel's word was law in Mr Deane's family, as it was in several others in the town,
and he therefore quickly succeeded in smoothing down the somewhat ruffled temper of different
members of the family.

Other toasts and speeches followed, but the songs which were generally sung on such occasions
were reserved for the supper, of which all the guests present were expected to partake, at
a later hour of the day.

The ladies then rising, gracefully sailed out of the room, while the gentlemen continued to
pass the battle round for some time longer.  It was still broad daylight, though the fresh
air of evening was already blowing through the windows.  Mrs Deane therefore proposed to her
female guests that they should enjoy the breeze for a while on the Castle Terrace, which was
the usual promenade of the gay world of Nottingham, and there was a general call for hoods
and gloves.  The party of ladies, as they glided out of the house, precedence being given to
the more elderly dames, took their way towards the castle, and passing through the grand gateway
which had stood so many attacks, soon ascended the broad stone steps with massive balustrades
which led in two flights to the noble terrace in front of the building.  It was well paved
with large flat stones, and with a breastwork of stone, and on the south side of the castle
a convenient arcade, where in rainy or hot weather the gentry of the town could walk under
shelter.  On that beautiful summer's evening, however, the ladies required only their green
fans to protect their eyes from the almost level rays of the setting sun, which fans the young
ones occasionally found useful for other purposes--either to hide their faces from an unwelcome
admirer, or to beckon a too timid one, perchance.  The park with its three long avenues lay
before them, and the steep declivities which ran down from it to the river Leen were covered
with woods, broken here by some old tower which had withstood all attempts at its demolition,
and there by a jutting mass of grey rock, looking scarcely more solid than the rock-like masonry
of the tower.  The new building had only been finished the year Jack was born, as Mrs Deane
was in the habit of telling any friends who came to visit her for the first time at Nottingham.
It was built in the Italian style of architecture, with a fine double flight of steps to the
principal entrance, over which was an equestrian alto-relievo of Charles the Second.  The flat
roofs were surrounded by balustrades, and the spaces between the long terrace of windows were
filled up with architraves and entablatures, which produced a rich and picturesque though somewhat
heavy effect.  On one side the view ranged over the town, with its fine churches, and the distant
sweeps of Sherwood Forest, and the nearer woods of Colwick Park.  On the other side lay a rich
and varied expanse of country, with the silvery Trent winding through the valley, and round
many a bold and thickly wooded promontory; while the hills of Derbyshire and Leicestershire
formed a beautiful background to the peaceful and smiling landscape.

Kate and Polly Deane, with Alethea Harwood, after taking a turn or two, sat down on one of
the stone benches on the terrace.  This was the first moment that they had had the opportunity
of speaking together on the subject of Jack's determination to leave home, though neither Alethea
nor Kate could believe he really purposed following the calling of a drover.  Polly, who knew
him better, was not so sure on the subject.  He had often described to her in glowing language
the life which he proposed to lead, and she could not help sympathising with him in that as
in most other matters in which he took an interest.

"But surely he is formed for better things than that," observed Alethea, and Polly thought
she saw a slight blush rise on the cheek of her friend.

"He would never consent to associate with the rude, rough men which drovers surely must be,
even though he might meet occasionally with the adventures you describe," she exclaimed.

"Oh! but he intends not only to be a drover, but a grazier; and that, he tells me, is a sure
road to wealth and independence," observed Polly.

"Here he comes to answer for himself," said Kate, and the young ladies, looking up, saw Jack
advancing towards them, and presenting a very becoming appearance in his grey suit, with his
hair brushed as smoothly back from his smooth open forehead as its curly nature would admit
of, and his hat in his hand, a fashion he gladly adopted, to avoid the necessity of constantly
removing it as he passed his numerous acquaintances.

Polly's affectionate little heart bounded at seeing many friendly glances thrown at him, and
she whispered to Kate, in a tone which Alethea overheard, "He does not look as if we need ever
be ashamed of him, after all."

"If he follows the life he proposes, he will never wear a sword like a gentleman," observed Kate.

"He is tolerably well able, I should say, to defend himself without one," observed Alethea,
"from the specimen he gave us of his prowess this afternoon," and she described the scene which
had occurred on their entering the town, when Jack had so bravely taken the part of the poor
widow's cow.

While she was speaking, Jack himself came up to them.  The sisters immediately attacked him
on the subject, and Alethea inquired whether he had driven back the animal to Widow Pitt's paddock.

"Oh, yes!" he answered; "but I should have had a far better appetite for dinner, had I been
able to find the fellows who had been so cruelly baiting her.  However, they will not manage
to escape me altogether, I'll warrant; but, as you know, I do not expect to remain here much
longer, now that I have finished my course at the Grammar School.  They will be for sending
me to college if I do, and that I could never brook. But before I go, I must come and pay you
a visit at Harwood Grange, Mistress Alethea."

"We shall always be glad to see you," said the young lady, looking up with a bright glance
at Jack's honest countenance.  "Here comes my father to say the same."

"Yes, indeed we shall, Jack," said Mr Harwood, who came up at that moment.  "I may be able
to give you some useful introductions, when I hear where you are going.  I have many friends
scattered about the country, north and south."

"And you will not mind introducing me," asked Jack with kindling eye, "though I follow the
calling of what Kate calls a poor, miserable drover?"

"Oh, no, no!" answered the Squire, "not if you always show the spirit you did this afternoon,
and that I am sure you will wherever you go, or whatever calling you follow."

Here he took Jack's hand, and pressed it kindly in presence of the various people of fashion
who were walking up and down the terrace. Mrs Deane observed the action, and seemed well pleased
with the attention paid her younger son.  Taking somewhat after herself, he was, it must be
confessed, her favourite.

The sun was now sinking over the distant hills, and as the mist began to rise from the river
below, the parties on the terrace gradually dispersed, the Deane family and their friends returning
to their mansion, where they assembled once more round their well-spread board, at eight o'clock
precisely, the fashionable hour for supper.  Jack, in better spirits than he had been in the
afternoon, joined the family party.  Songs were sung, and numerous stories told by Dr Nathaniel,
Mr Pinkstone, and other acknowledged wits of the party.  Ere ten o'clock had struck, the whole
party retired to their chambers, our forefathers being of opinion that early to bed and early
rising was far more conducive to health than the late hours adopted by the present generation.

CHAPTER THREE.

A POACHING EXPEDITION TO COLWICK PARK--JACK FORMS AN ACQUAINTANCE WHO LEADS HIM INTO DIFFICULTIES.

As soon as the party broke up, Jack hurried to his room, and very contrary to his usual custom
threw himself into a chair, and unconsciously pressing his hand on his brow, rested his elbow
on the little oak table which stood by his bedside.  The way in which the walls were adorned
showed the tastes of the occupant of the chamber.  The most honoured ornament was a fowling-piece
with a curious lock lately invented, the gift of Cousin Nat, and which had superseded the stout
cross-bow hanging beneath it.  One wall was devoted to fishing-rods, tackle, and nets.  Among
them was a rod of which Izaak Walton, that great professor of the gentle art, had himself spoken
approvingly when once, while fishing in the silvery Trent, he had seen it flourished in Cousin
Nat's hands.  There were two sets of foils with masks and gloves, and several cudgels with
strange knots and devices, cut from ancient trees in Sherwood Forest, beneath whose once wide-spreading
boughs certain feats of the renowned Robin Hood were said to have been performed.  In one and
all the tales relating to the exploits of the bold outlaw, it is scarcely necessary to say
that Jack put the most implicit faith, and would have been highly indignant had any one ventured
to doubt their authenticity or correctness.  In one corner of the room stood a book-case, a
very unpretending piece of furniture in itself, but it contained every ballad Jack believed
to have been written, or at all events on which he could lay hold, connected with Robin Hood.
It contained however other tomes: besides several schoolbooks, their dark covers sadly battered,
and their leaves inked, dog's-eared, and torn, there were kind Izaak Walton's "Complete Angler,"
highly prized by Jack; Foxe's "Book of Martyrs," presented to him by Aunt Bethia; and a work
he valued more than all the others--Purchas's "Travels:" and often and often as he conned these
pages he longed to be able to visit the strange countries and to go through the wonderful adventures
therein described.

The fact was that Jack had a very good head on his shoulders, and had he broken his leg, or
met with any other accident which would have confined him to the house, he would have taken
very readily to reading.  In his case his physical powers demanded more exercise than his mental,
whereas in the case of his brother Jasper his mental activity preponderated over his mere animal
spirits.  Jack required a tether to keep him within bounds, Jasper a spur to make him move
fast enough to keep up with the times. 

"I have to sleep for a while," said Hinzelmeier, "Give me a room and when the tap crow, then
knocks on my door. "

Now the landlord gave him a chamber and Hinzelmeier laid to rest. He dreamed of his beautiful
mother, he smiled, she talked to him in a dream. Since Krahirius flew through the open Window
and sat down at his head on the bed. He resisted his black feathers and hacked with his claw,
the goggles of the beaks. Then he stood motionless one leg and looked down at the sleeping man.
The Dream on, and his beautiful mother said to him: "Forget the rose is not!" The sleeping quietly
nodded his head, the raven but opened the clamp and let the glasses
fall on his nose.

Since transformed his dreams, his sunken cheeks began to twitch, he extended is long, and groaned
.-- And so the night.

As in the twilight of the cock had crowed, the landlord knocked on the Kammertuer; Krahirius extended
the wing and straightened his bellows; "! krahira krahira" he cried Hinzelmeier laboriously sat
up and stared around him, so he looked through the glasses that still
his nose was sitting, to Kammertuer addition, a wide, barren field,
then continue on gradually rising hill, on this, under the trunk of
an old pasture, was a gray, flat stone, the area was lonely, seeing
no one.

"This is the Philosopher's Stone!" Hinzelmeier said to himself. "Finally, finally it is still be
mine! "

He quickly threw his clothes over and took staff and knapsack and walked out the door. Krahirius
flew at his head, knappte with the beak and struck by flying somersaults in the Air. So they
walked for hours.

At last they seemed to come closer to their goals, but Hinzelmeier was tired, his chest panting,
the sweat dripped from his white hair; He stopped and leaned on his
staff there came from far away, behind him, entirely of the distance,
almost like a dream, a song over to him:

Rinke, cirrus, Rosenschein,
Leave him alone, alone!

Hold him fast and get it on, Rinke, cirrus, Rosenschein.

The spinning him like a golden net around him, he let his head fall
to his chest; But Krahirius shouted: "krahira krahira!" because the
song was missing and as Hinzelmeier the eyes opened again, he stood
at the foot of the hill.

"Only a little while yet," he said to himself and let his tired feet
again migrate.

But when he the big, wide stone gradually saw in the neighborhood because he thought: "Den you
will never lift."

At last they reached the height, Krahirius flew ahead with its wings spread and settled on the
tree, Hinzelmeier swayed behind Trembling. As he leads the Tree had reached, he collapsed, the walking
stick straight out of his hand, his head fell back to the stone,
but at the same moment the glasses fell from his nose.

Since He looked deep in the horizon, at the edge of the desert plain
that he had wandered, the white figure the young woman rose, and once
more he heard from afar:

Rinke - Rank - Rosenschein.

He wanted to get up, but he could not, he stretched out his arms, but a Shiver ran over his limbs,
and the sky was gray and gray, the snow began to Falling flake by flake, shimmered and flickered
and it went white veil between him and the distant, hazy appearance. He dropped his arms, his
eyes a dropped, his breathing listened to.

On the willow stump at his head the raven's beak put to sleep in his Fluegeldecken .-- The snow
fell about them both.

The night came and the night after the morning came and the morning came the sun, which melted
across the snow and the sun came the Virgin Rose, which sparked her braids and knelt next to
the dead, that the blond hair all over his pale face covered and cried until the day passed.
But when the sun went out, the raven in his sleep cooed and rustled
the Springs.

As advised the delicate figure of the Virgin from the floor on, with her white hand they took
the raven in the wings and threw him into the air that he croaked
in the gray sky into it flew, she planted a red rose on the stone
and sang:

"Now stretch the Wuerzlein deep down, now throw the little
leaves the grave, And the wind sings in the evening light, then you
also say a word in it, with Rink, cirrus, Rosenschein!

"
Then she tore her white dress from the hem to the waist and went
to eternal captivity back in the rose garden.
He seemed considerably entertained by Jack's challenge, and repeated his question with great
good-humour, in an unmistakable Yorkshire accent.

"You perhaps know as much as I do about the beasts," answered Jack. "Some of them are Scotch,
and well fed on these rich water-meadows, till they are nearly as valuable as the Leicestershire
breed.  I see a few down there which are real Herefordshire, too.  And now may I ask who you are?"

"Well, a fair answer deserves another in return.  I am a Yorkshire cattle-dealer, at your service,
just passing through Nottingham, and I walked out here to see if there was any thing likely
to suit me, in case I chose to make a bargain to-morrow morning.  I must be early on the road
to Derby.  I hope you are satisfied, young man.  And now let me ask you what game you are after?"

"To be honest with you, we came out to catch a salmon or two," answered Jack.  "There are some
fine ones now and then down the stream a little way, though it is not often salmon come so
far up the river.  We shall have a boat here, which will carry us close up to the weir."

"Ah!  I like that sort of thing!" said the Yorkshireman; "I have seen a good bit of such sport
in my time.  What now if I were to lend you a hand?  With the leister we would soon have a
fine one that way, and if we had a lantern ready, we might take a few by `sunning' besides."

"Oh, yes! we shall be glad for you to come," answered Smedley, before Jack could say any thing.
"I should like above all things to see fish sunned."

"Well, then," answered the Yorkshireman, "you and your friend here must give me your word to
forget, if ever you should see me again, that you met me this night.  On that condition I will
show you some north-country sport--on that alone, mind.  You," he added, turning to Jack, "for
I can trust you by the tone of your voice, must answer for your friends in the boat."

"Oh, yes!  I will answer for them as I would for myself," said Jack, who, forgetting his former
good resolutions, was almost as eager as Smedley to witness the new style of sport which the
stranger promised them.

Just then the boat of which they had been talking came stealthily in sight, rowed by two other
lads, much of the same age as Jack and his friend.  The latter with the Yorkshireman quickly
stepped into her, when without loss of time the boat glided again down the stream.

"This is a friend we have picked up, who is going to show us some sport, Bligh," said Smedley
in a low tone of voice.  "We can trust him, and he knows that he can trust us; so it is all right."

In a short time they entered the Trent, and quickly arrived at the weir, which was formed by
large stones roughly laid together, so as to throw the water into a broad cascade, as it came
tumbling over it to the lower reach of the river.  Smedley was more inclined to be talkative
than Jack or the other lads in the boat.

"What are we to call you, master?" he asked of the stranger.

"Call me Master Pearson; that is a good midland-county name enough," he said with a low laugh.
"You have not got a leister in the boat, have you?  I have an idea, from the look of the place,
that if I had one, I could catch you a salmon quicker than by any other way."

The leister of which Master Pearson spoke is a three-pronged fork used for spearing fish.

"No," answered Smedley; "none of us are good hands at using such a thing."

"Well, just pull in here to the bank, and I will see if I cannot get a stick which will answer
the purpose," answered Master Pearson.

Without having to search long, he found a stake which had been driven into the stream to prevent
drawing nets across it.  The stick apparently suiting his fancy, with a piece of wire, with
great dexterity, he in a short time manufactured a pronged harpoon.  Balancing it in his hand,
he seemed satisfied with his performance.  Sitting down in the boat, he next took off his boots
and long-skirted great coat, which he deposited on the seat, and then, tucking up his ample
trousers, waded up to the weir, while the boat was still rocking some distance from it.  Jack
followed close behind him, and with delight saw a noble salmon glistening now and then in the
straggling moonlight, and playing securely in the shallow water, but ready to dart out into
the deeper part of the stream at the slightest sound.  In another instant a crimson bubble
came up to the surface of the water, showing with how unerring a hand the clumsy-looking weapon
manufactured by Master Pearson had been struck home.  At a signal the rest of the party came
up to him to carry off their prize, while he continued looking about for another.  They felt
inclined to be rather annoyed at the ease with which the stranger had captured a fish which
they would have thought it impossible to kill in the same way.  Smedley at that moment declared
that he heard sounds in the distance, which made him fear that the keepers were coming through
the wood.  "If we are not off we shall be getting into trouble," he sung out.

"Hoot, mon!" cried Master Pearson, loud enough to be heard through the brawling of the weir;
"you have time enough to learn how to strike a `sawmon;' but come, I will show you another
trick, since we have joined company for the night."

Saying this, he returned to the boat, and, putting on his coat and boots, produced a small
lantern from his capacious horseman's pocket. With a flint and steel it was lighted, when,
leaning over the side of the boat, he slowly moved the light along the surface of the water.

"Now stand by with your nets," he answered, "and you will soon pull up enough fish for your
suppers."

As he spoke, the lads saw a number of small fish attracted by the light to the surface of the
water; and, following his advice, in a short time a considerable quantity were caught.

"This is not proper sunning," he observed: "if I had had such a lantern as we use in the north,
we should have caught far larger fish.  It should be made watertight, and then, when lowered
down close to the net, the fish are so eager to come and see the cause of the brightness, thinking,
maybe, that the sun has come down to pay them a visit, that they swim right against the net,
and are caught in great numbers.  That is what we call sunning in the north."

"I heard a voice!" exclaimed Smedley, as Master Pearson ceased speaking. "There!--there again!
It's the keepers as sure as we are living men!"

"Hold your tongue!" exclaimed Master Pearson somewhat sharply.  "Here, give me the oars; we
will soon distance the keepers, if so be that they are coming this way.  You're right, I believe,
though."

Taking the oars in his hands, he sent the boat through the water at a rate she had seldom moved
before.  The noise of the oars attracted the keepers, who rushed down to the water just in
time to see the boat turning a reach of the river.  They hurried along the bank for some distance,
shouting to those in her to stop--an order not very likely to be obeyed.  So vigorously did
Pearson ply the oars, that there seemed every probability of the boat escaping its pursuers.
Still the latter continued to chase along the banks.

"You must take the consequences, then," exclaimed a voice, and directly afterwards a shot whistled
over their heads.

The lads crouched down in the boat, with the exception of Jack, who followed Pearson's example
in sitting still.

"A miss is as good as a mile," observed the latter coolly.  "They must be good marksmen to
hit us at the rate we are going in this uncertain light.  Now, if I was minded, I might return
the compliment with one of my long pistols, and maybe they would wish I was farther off."

"What do you carry pistols for?" asked Jack in a tone of surprise.

"Never you mind, young man," replied Pearson, in a different style of voice to that which he
had hitherto spoken.  "If I spoke of pistols, maybe I was joking: you understand me?"

All this time he was vigorously rowing away, edging the boat off to the other side of the bank
to that on which the keepers were following.  In a short time they reached the shade of some
tall trees which overhung the stream, and here the boat was completely hid from sight.

"A few more strokes, and there is little danger of their finding us," observed the stranger;
and now once more they entered the mouth of the little river Leen, up which he turned the boat's
head.  "We have now to pull against the current," he observed, "and my advice is to land and
leave the boat to look after herself."

"The best thing we can do," answered Jack, and a few strokes brought the boat to a spot where
they could easily leap on shore.

"Don't leave your fish behind you, lads, or your tackle either.  If you leave one, you will
lose your suppers; and if you leave the other, you will be very likely to be discovered.  Now,
lads, you take your way, and I'll take mine, only just remember your promise.  I consider it
as good as an oath, and any man who breaks his oath to me will have cause to repent it.  Now,
good night to you all."

Having bid the stranger farewell, Smedley and the other two lads took their way along the banks
of the river, in the direction of some dilapidated sheds, where they had arranged to meet and
enjoy, according to their own fashion, their hard-won supper.  The stranger lounged away across
the bridge at some little distance from the sheds, while Jack, anxious to get home, hurried
off in the direction of the market-place.

"I was wrong to go," said Jack to himself.  "Suppose one of us had been shot, it would have
been paying very dear for our night's sport.  Such doings might be easily overlooked in a boy,
but I am one no longer.  I feel that.  I claim to be a man, and as a man I must act.  I hope
there is work for me to do in the world of some sort, and the sooner I begin it the better,
and put aside all my boyish pranks."

"A good resolution," said a voice behind him.

Jack was not aware he had been speaking aloud.

"I followed you, because I want to have a word more with you," said the speaker, in whom Jack
at once recognised his late companion, Master Pearson.  "There's mettle in you of the right
sort," continued the stranger.  "What say you?  Would you like to join a band of brave fellows
who have a right good cause to fight for?" he whispered in a low voice.  "There's honour and
distinction to be gained, and a name, maybe, and wealth in the end.  It is what most men fight
for, and I take it that you would not be less ready than others to use your sword for such
an object."

"I am much obliged to you for the compliment you pay me," answered Jack, "and for the good
opinion you have formed of my courage; but I have no great fancy for undertaking what I know
nothing about.  Men do not always agree as to the goodness of a cause, and what you may consider
a good cause, you will pardon me for saying it, I may consider a bad one."

"A very discreet answer," observed Master Pearson, "and I think all the better of you for making
it.  Well, I will not press you just now.  I have no doubt we shall meet again before long,
and though I cannot tell you where to find me, I have a fancy that I shall have no great difficulty
in putting my finger upon you at any time.  So farewell, Master John Deane: you see I know
you, and moreover I wish you well."

Saying this, the stranger wrung Jack's hand cordially.  Still he lingered, rather unwilling
perhaps to let the young man go without making a more favourable impression.

"It is a good cause and a right cause which I invite you to join.  I must not explain it more
to you just now, but just think the matter over; and stay, it's just possible I shall remain
in Nottingham all to-morrow.  Will you meet me in the evening as soon as it is dusk, down by
the bank of the river, where you fell in with me just now?  I will explain matters more fully
to you then." Nettchen
went past him and seemed, judging by some proclaimed words, after to search her car, although
the same was on the other side of the house and only Winter cabbages and roses wrapped trees
to sleep of the just dreamy. Then she came back, and as he now stood in the way their heart
pounding and pleading hands stretched out to her, she interrupted him easily around the neck
and began miserably to cry. He covered her cheeks glowing with its finely perfumed dark curls
and His coat capsized the slim, proud, snow-white figure of the girl as with black Eagle's wings,
it was a truly beautiful picture and its place alone in the seemed to be borne.

Strapinski but lost in this adventure, his mind and won the happiness
that often the foolish is hold.

Nettchen opened her father nor the homecoming that night driving, that its none other than
yours would count, he appeared very early in the morning, order in which amiable father, shy and melancholy
as always, to advertise, and the father held the following speech: "Thus has the will and because
the fate of this foolish Girl meets! Even as a schoolgirl she maintained continuously, only an
Italian or a Pole, a great pianist or a robber baron married with beautiful curls to do and now
we are! All domestic applications for well-meaning it has knocked out, yet the other day I
had to send home the clever and capable Böhni Melchior, still make the big business is, and
they have mocked him terribly because he only Back with a reddish beard and snuff from a silver
jar! Well, God Thanks, is a Polish count because of the wildest distance! Take the goose, Count,
send and Me the same again when it freezes and once in your Polackei is unhappy and crying!
Ah, what would the Blessed Mother to enjoy a delight if it had not experienced that become
the spoiled child is a countess! "

Now there was great movement, should quickly in a few days to celebrate the engagement, for the
councilor claimed that the future son-in its stores and intend be
Travel should not be stopped by marriage matters, but this by the
transport that would accelerate.

Strapinski brought Engagement Wedding Gifts, which it half of its assets over time cost, the
other half he devoted to a feast, he wanted to give his bride.

It was just at carnival time and bright sky, a brilliant late winter weather. The Highways offered
the most luxurious train carriage, as it occurs only rarely and keeps and Lord of Strapinski
organized about a sleigh ride and a ball in for such Festivals popular stately guest house, which
on a plateau with the best views location was good for about two hours away and right in the
middle between Goldach and Seldwyla.

About this time it happened that to get Mr. Melchior Böhni in the
latter city shops and therefore had a few days before the winter festival
in a light carriage then drove his best cigar smoking, and it was
also shown that the Seldwylers on the same day as the gold Acher,
a sleigh ride arranged, according to the same places, namely a costume
and mask carrier.

So then the gold Acher Toboggan crashed into the lunch hour with sound clip, post horn sounds
and whip through the streets of the city that the symbols of the old houses amazed looked down
and out to the gate.

In the first carriage Strapinski sat with his bride, in a Polish-coat of green velvet, embellished
with strings and filled with heavy fur and fed. Nettchen was all covered in white fur, blue
veil covering her face against the fresh air and against the glory of the snow. The councilor
was by any sudden Event was prevented hitch a lift, but it was his team and his sledge, in which
they drove a golden image of women as Schlittenzierat the right to Fortuna imagining; because the
City Council was called to the home of the Official Fortuna.

Them fifteen or sixteen companion followed, each with a gentlemen and a lady, all dressed up and
full of life, but none of the pairs so beautiful and stately, like
the couple.

The slides contributed, as the sea their ships Galion, always the symbol of the house, where
everyone belonged, so that the people shouted, "Look, here comes the bravery! How beautiful is
the efficiency! The improvements seems to be newly painted and gilded, the parsimony fresh! Ah,
and Jacob's well the pool of Bethesda, "The Pool of Bethesda, which is a modest one-horse carriage to the
train closed, Melchior Böhni drove quietly and happily. Galion his vehicle as he had the image
that Jewish males before him, who went on that ponds thirty years on his luck maintained. So
then the squadron sailed there in the sunshine and soon appeared on the well- shimmering high,
nearing the goal itself. Was heard simultaneously from the opposite Page funny music.

From a fragrant forest tires broke out a jumble of bright colors and shapes and became a Toboggan,
which is high in the white box on the edge of the blue Sky drew and
also after the middle of the area glided from adventurous vision.

It seemed mostly to be a great rural load carriage, tied two to peculiar Structures and show
positions to serve as the base. stood on the front carriages a colossal figure up, the goddess Fortuna
imagining that to fly out into the ether appeared. It was a gigantic straw man shimmering tinsel,
that Gazegewänder fluttered in the air. On the second companion but also drove a gigantic goat hand in hand,
black and grim parting with lowered horns and chasing the Fortuna. On this followed by a strange
scaffolding, which presented itself as a fifteen-shoe high iron, then one massive snapping scissors,
which was determined by a cord to-closed and and seemed to watch the sky on a blue silk fabric
west. Other such widely held Allusions to the cutter still being followed, and sat at the feet
of all of these structures on The spacious, each drawn by four horses, the carriage of the most
diverse society in Seldwylers Costume, with loud laughter and song.

When both trains simultaneously drove into the square before the inn, there was therefore a noisy image
and a great crowd of people and horses. The gentlemen Goldach surprised and amazed about the
meeting were adventurous, the Seldwylers however, presented themselves for the time being comfortable
and friendly modest.

Your front-slide with Fortuna bore the inscription "people clothes" make and so it happened,
then, that the entire company, according to Schneider people from all nations and of all ages
represented. It was to some extent a historical and ethnographic Schneiderfestzug, which reversed
the completed and additional inscription: "Clothes make the man" In the last slide with this one!
Were heading, namely, as the work of forward-driven pagan and Christian seam vultures any kind,
venerable emperor and kings, councilors and staff officers, prelates and canons the highest gravity.

Schneider knew this world turned to order from the chaos and made the gold Acher Men and ladies, the couple
headed for a walk humbly into the house after the lower Rooms of it, which were ordered for them
to occupy, while those broad stairs up after the great festival hall
roared.

The Society of the Count found this behavior propriety and her surprise turned to joy and smile
approvingly the irrepressible humor of Seldwylers, only the Count himself had no dark feelings
which he did not like, although in the current bias of his soul does not certain suspicion
felt and had not even noticed where the people had come. Böhni Melchior, who had brought his pond
Bethesda carefully aside and carefully was near Strapinskis called loudly that this could not
hear it, a very different town as the origin of the mask turn.

Soon both sat companies, all on their floors, at the laid boards and devoted themselves to happy
talk and jests, in expectation of further joy.

The announced themselves as well as for the gold Acher, when she pairs
over to the dance hall steps, where the musicians have tuned their
violins.

How, then, but all stood in a circle and wanted to arrange the series, appeared an embassy
of Seldwylers that the neighborly Request and offer recited, the
men and women of Goldach pay a visit to and they must dance to the
delight of a show listed.

This offer was not well be rejected, nor was expected to result from the comic Seldwylers a
capable Was fun and therefore to the arrangement of the embassy said in a large semicircle, in
the middle and Strapinski Nettchen shone like royal stars.

Now those were gradually Schneider said groups in turn. Each resulted in modest Gestures the sentence
"People with clothes" and its reversal by until Assiduity any handsome article of clothing,
a coat prince, priest robe, and the like and then seemed to make a poor person so held, which converted
all of a sudden in the highest esteem and straightened in time to
the music ceremony coincided.

Also The fable was in this sense, staged as a huge crow appeared, are adorned with peacock feathers
and hopped around quacking, a wolf, which is a sheepskin manage tailor, finally, a donkey, carrying
a terrible lion skin of tow and is heroic so draped as a Karbonarimantel.

All that as issued, resigned after he had finished his presentation and made gradually the semicircle
of the Sun Goldach a wide ring of spectators, whose inner space at last was empty. At this
moment the music went in a melancholy way above and at the same time serious trod a final appearance
of the circle whose eyes were all on them. It was a slim young man in a dark coat, dark hair
and beautiful with a Polish Cap, it was none other than Count Strapinski,
as on that November day on the road had hiked and climbed the fatal
car.

The whole assembly looked forward to the silent figure who solemnly melancholy some courses in time
to the music came about, then in the middle of the ring came to pass, the coat on the floor,
spread out in terms Schneider sat down and began a bundle unpack. He pulled out a nearly finished Graf
Rock, just like him in this Strapinski Moments was sewed, with great haste and skill tassels and
cord on it and ironed him out of school just by the apparently hot
iron tested with wet fingers.

Then he sat up slowly, pulled out his threadbare coat and the plumage , it took a little mirror,
combing her hair, and completed his suit that he finally incarnate as the Image of the Count
stood. Suddenly the music went into a quick, bold way of, The man wrapped his belongings in the
old coat and threw the pack far over the heads the audience away into the depths of the hall, as
if to himself forever from his past . Separate He then committed suicide as a proud man of the
world in imposing the circle dance steps, here and since bowing graciously to those present, until
he reached the bridal couple. Suddenly he seized the poles hugely surprised to lay in the
eye, stood still as a pillar in front of him, while on appointment as the music stopped and a terrible
silence as a silent flash occurred.

"Hurray hurray!" He cried with a loud voice and well-stretched his arm towards the unfortunate out,
"look as the brother of Silesian, Wasserpolacken! That's me running out of work, because he
thought because of a small business fluctuations, be it with me to the end. Now it says me that it
is so funny you and keep you here so joyful carnival! Are you in Goldach work? "

He also gave the pale, and sitting there smiling Graf son's hand,
which of those will- seized as a fiery iron bar, while the double
cried, "Come, friends, see Here our gentle tailors who looks like
a Raphael and our maids, and the pastor's daughter liked it so well
that is certainly a little crazy!

"

Then came the Seldwylers people came and all crowded around Strapinski and his former Masters,
as they shook the hand of the former, trusting that he swayed in his chair and trembling. At
the same time the music started again with a lively march, the Seldwylers,
and they were at the couple over, arranged themselves for extraction
and marched singing of a well-rehearsed choir diabolical laughter
from the room, while the gold Acher, under Böhni which the statement
of the Mirakel had known to spread quickly through each other and
ran with the Seldwylers crossed, so that it was a big commotion.

When he finally submitted, the hall was almost empty, few people were at the Walls and whispering
to each other move, a couple of young ladies were in some Distance
from Nettchen, uncertain whether they should or should not approach
them.

The couple was sitting motionless in his chair like a stone Egyptian royal couple, very quiet and
lonely, it was believed the unpredictable hot desert sand to feel.

Nettchen know, like a marble, the face turned slowly to her groom, looking at him strange from the
side.

Then he got up slowly and walked away with heavy steps, his eyes fixed on the floor, while
large tears fell from them.

He went through the gold and Seldwylers Acher, which covered the stairs,
through it like a dead man, who steals from a ghostly carnival, and
they left him strangely, as well such a pass by laughing at him quietly
without dodging or call after harsh words.

He also went to the departure between the armed carriage and horses from Goldach through, However,
the Seldwylers in their neighborhoods still quite amused, and he
walked half-consciously, but in the opinion, nothing more to Goldach
come back the same road against Seldwyla out on what he was hergewandert
few months ago.

Soon he disappeared in the darkness of the forest, through which ran the road. He was bareheaded,
for his Poland are in the cap was Fenstergesimse of the dance hall
remained along with the gloves, and because he walked with bowed head
and the freezing hands under the sheltering arms crossed forward,
while his thoughts are gradually accumulated and came to some recognition.

The first clear sense of which he was held was that of a tremendous shame, the same as if he were
a real man of rank and prestige and have become infamous by now Irruption of some fatal misfortune.
Then this feeling did, however, to in a kind of consciousness suffered wrong, he had until his glorious
river leave to the haunted city never a crime to be guilty, as far as his thoughts dating back
to childhood was, he did not recall that he ever because of a lie or been punished or scolded
would be an illusion, and now he had become a cheater the fact that the foolishness of the
world it in an unguarded moment and say helpless had attacked him and made her play fellows.
He felt like a child who another mischievous child has persuaded to steal the cup from an altar,
and he hated despised now, but he also wept over him and his unfortunate aberration.

When a prince takes the country and people when a priest, the teaching of his church without conviction
announced, but consumed the goods of its living with dignity, when a full conceited teacher Honors
and advantages of a high Magisterium holds and enjoys, without the height of his science the least
to have the same concept to make even the smallest advance, if an artist without virtue, with
frivolous actions and empty trickery brings in fashion and Bread and glory of true vorwegstiehlt
work, or if a fraud, the merchant with a large Inherited or surreptitiously added to its follies
and its thousands of conscience Savings and Notpfennige brings, all these do not cry over
him, but enjoy to their well-being and not remain an exhilarating evening without company
and good friends.

Our Schneider wept bitterly over him, that is, he suddenly started such as Now his thoughts on
the heavy chain, in which it hung, unexpectedly to the abandoned
Bride and returned in shame to the invisible to the ground writhing.

The accident and degradation showed him with a bright ray lost happiness and accounted for the
ambiguous love Irrganger an outcast lovers. He stretched his arms against the cold stars shining
up and stumbled more than he did on his street there stood quiet again and shook his head when suddenly
a red glow around him the snow reached and was heard at the same time Schell sound and laughter.
It was the Seldwylers which went home with torches. Already approached him the first horse with
their noses, because He pulled up, did a great leap over the curb and ducked under the anterior trunks of
the forest. The great train went by and finally died away in the dark Distance, without the
refugees had been noticed, but this, after a good while had listened motionless in the cold
as the first fiery drinks and enjoyed his sorrowful stupidity overwhelmed,
stretched imperceptibly from his limbs and fell asleep on the crackling
snow, heranzuwehen during an ice-cold touch of the East began.

Meanwhile Nettchen also raised herself from her lonely seats. She had the departing lover to
some extent looked carefully, sat motionless for more than an hour and was then, by she began
to weep bitterly and helplessly went to the door. Two friends now joined to it by dubious comforting
words, they asked the same, her coat, to provide towels, hat, and the like, in which things
then they are dumb veiled, her eyes with her veil violently drying. But as you when you cry,
almost always at the same time must blow his nose, the nose, but it looked forced to take
the handkerchief, and did a capable Schneuz what they looked proud and angry about. Into this
look Melchior came Böhni who approached her friendly, humble and smiling, and her need represented,
zurückzuhaben now a guide and companion to his father's home. The Pool of Bethesda, he said he would
leave here at the inn and for the Fortuna the honorable unfortunate glide safely to Goldbach.

Without
answering, she went ahead with firm steps into the yard, where the carriage impatient with the
well-fed horses was ready, one of the last who were there. They quickly took is room, grabbed
the reins and the whip, and while the careless Böhni, with happy
Bustle are signs that the groom, who held the horses, the show was
looking for tips, drove them suddenly the horses and drove onto the
highway out in strong sets, which soon turned into a sustained brisk
gallop.

And although it did not go to the Home, but out on the street Seldwylers. Only when the light-winged
vehicle already the eyes had disappeared, discovered Mr. Böhni the event and ran in the direction
of Goldach with Ho ho! and maintenance call, jumped back and then drove his own carriage of the
fugitive or his opinion of the horses kidnapped beauty, until at the Gates of the city arrived
excited, engaged in what the scandal is already all tongues.

Why Nettchen taken the path, whether in the confusion or intent, is not sure to report. Two circumstances
may here give a faint light. Once were, strangely enough, the fur cap and gloves Strapinskis that
on the window sill behind the seats The couple had been lying, now in the carriage next to the Fortuna
Nettchen, when and how these Items seized, no one had considered and even they knew not, it
was like Sleepwalking happened. She did not yet know that hat and gloves lay beside her. Then
they said more than once aloud: "I must speak two words with him,
only two words!

"

These two facts seem to prove that not all of the accident, the fiery horse directed. It was also strange,
as the Fortuna reached the forest road, which is now the bright full moon shone like Nettchen moderated
the running of the horses and the reins attracted, so that the same almost at walking hand in hand,
danced while the helpless, the sad but keen eyes fixed on the curious way, without the slightest
left and right to be conspicuous object aside.

And yet at the same time as her soul was in deep, serious self-conscious, unhappy oblivion;
what is happiness and life! of what they hang on? What we are saying that because we are a ridiculous
Carnival lie be happy or unhappy? What are we to blame, if we a joyful
religious affection reap shame and hopelessness?

Anyone who sends us Such a silly illusion figures, engage in destroying our fate, while dissolve
itself by how weak soap bubbles?

Such dreamed more than imaginary questions Nettchen compassed the soul, as her eyes suddenly focused
on a dark elongated object which is to the side of the road took off from the moonlit snow.
It was the long outstretched Wenzel, whose dark hair is mingled with the shadow of the trees,
while his lean body was clearly in the light.

Nettchen did not help the horses, making a deep silence came over the forest. You stared intently
after dark body, until the same is her clairvoyant eye fast unmistakably represented and softly
laid the reins band got out, the horses for a moment reassuringly stroked and then the Release
carefully, silently approached.

Yes, it was him.

The dark green velvet of his coat took on himself the night's snow beautiful and noble from, the slender
body and limbs smooth, well put together and dressed said everything still in the solidification, on the
edge of destruction, in being lost: to make clothes People!

As the lonely beauty closer to him hinbeugte and it certainly realized they saw at once the
danger in which floated his life and was afraid he would already
frozen to death be.

She took one of his hands so safe that seemed cold and unfeeling. All others forgetting it
shook the poor and called him his Christian name into his ear, "Wenzel! Wenzel, "In vain, he did
not move, but breathed only weak and sad. She fell upon him, passed his hand over his face and
gave him the anxiety fillip paled on the nose.

Then she took, By this means put on a good thought, Hands full of snow and rubbed his nose
and face and the fingers working, so much and she could until the happy unhappy recovered,
awoke and slowly his form directed into the air.

He looked around and saw the Savior standing before him.
  If you go boldly and frankly, as He has told you to do, trusting
in His Son who died for you, He will never turn aside from your petitions."

Mr Strelley enforced what Cousin Nat had said with further arguments, and then having given
Jack various directions for his conduct on the road, and for the commissions he was to perform
for him, shook him cordially by the hand, and wished him every prosperity on the journey which
was to commence the following morning.

CHAPTER SIX.

PEARSON'S VISIT TO SQUIRE HARWOOD--PLAN TO ENTRAP JACK.

On the day Jack had paid his visit to Harwood Grange, while the Squire was walking up and down
the terrace, enjoying the cool of the evening, he saw a horseman riding along the avenue towards
him.  He was a strongly-built, active-looking man, with somewhat coarse features and a bold
expression of countenance.  He dismounted as he approached Mr Harwood, and presented a letter
which he drew from his bosom.

"That will tell you who I am," said the horseman, as the Squire opened the epistle and glanced
at its contents.

"Ah, yes!" he said, looking up at the stranger, "we have met before.  I remember you now. 
Come along here, down this walk; we shall be out of ear-shot.  Well, what success have you had?"

"Not so much as I should have expected," answered the stranger. "There's no spirit in the young
men now-a-days; they all seem to be finding employment either at home, or at sea, or in the
plantations, and there are few worth having, or who can be trusted at all events, who seem
disposed to draw a sword for King James."

"I am afraid you are right," answered the Squire.  "Most of those I have spoken to seem perfectly
contented with this Dutch William we have got over us, and do not show any wish to have back
their rightful king.  But still we must not despair, Master Pearson."

"I am the last man to do that either," answered the stranger; "and if we cannot find them on
this side of the border, there will be no lack on the other.  It will not cost much labour
to arouse the Highlanders, while some of the best soldiers in the country, though they refuse
to join us, will stand neutral, not for love of the Stuarts, just the contrary, but because
William did not treat King James as Cromwell and his party treated his father."

"What say you, Master Pearson?  Do you think you could arouse the people in the fen-country?
You might raise and drill an army in those wilds without the Government knowing any thing about
the matter."

"If the people had any spirit, it could be done," said Master Pearson; "but they are too dull
and stupid, I fear, to be aroused by any motive, and I suspect they care little what king sits
on the throne."

"I am afraid, then, we must be content with small beginnings," said the Squire.  "A good time
will come if we wait for it; and if William dies, though I would have no hand in hastening
his death, there would be no doubt that the people would be glad enough to get King James back
again."

"As to that, his life is as good as James's," observed Pearson; "and if we have not a strong
party in readiness to take advantage of any thing that may occur, I fear the Puritan Nonconformists
generally will still be too powerful in the country to allow the return of a Catholic sovereign.
We must go on recruiting, Squire, and work away among gentles and simples till we have increased
the strength of our party, and then will be the time to strike a blow, which may set things
to rights again."

"Perhaps it may be so," observed the Squire musingly; "but we must be cautious, Master Pearson;
too many honest men have lost their heads for want of that quality, and I have no desire to
lose mine or my estate either, which a plot of this sort, if discovered, would seriously imperil.
Mind, all I say is, that we must be cautious, and wait patiently till we can gain strength;
and by-the-bye there is a young man I wish to win over, a fine, spirited lad, and I'm sure
if we can gain him he will prove valuable to the cause.  Should you fall in with him, Master
Pearson, I must commend him to your care.  We have pressed him here pretty hard, and though
he seemed stubborn, I think if right arguments coming from another source were to be used,
he might yet be gained over.  He is the younger son of Mr Jasper Deane of Nottingham. You are
very likely in your rambles to come across him."

"I have done so already," answered Master Pearson, "and formed the same opinion of the youth
as you have expressed.  I hoped, indeed, to have gained him over by this time; but though he
promised to meet me again, I missed him.  Having, however, now received your further recommendation,
I will be on the watch for him, and I dare say I shall come across him before long."

"Do so, good Master Pearson.  I wish we could find a few hundreds such as he is, and the king
would not long be kept out of his own.  And now come into the house: we will send your horse
round to the stable, and probably you and he will not be the worse for some refreshment."

"As to that, Squire, I have not ridden far to-day, but I know not how many leagues I may have
to cover before to-morrow morning, and I make it a rule to keep my horse and myself in readiness
for a gallop north or south, as I find necessary."

"Well, come in, Master Pearson; you can rest here as long as you like. My people are faithful,
so that even if they suspected any thing, you need have no fear of their betraying you."

At a summons from the Squire the groom appeared, and was about to take Master Pearson's horse
round to the stable, when he interposed.

"Stay," he said; "my beast is a sorry-looking jade, but I have a regard for the animal, and
always make a rule of seeing her fed; so you will excuse me, Squire, while I go round, and
I will join you presently. Take care of her heels, lad," he added, as the groom led the mare
into the stable: "she has a trick of kicking, if she is not handled as she is accustomed to,
for I always look after her myself.  I will not unsaddle her, but just loosen the girths. 
There, that will do.  There's as much corn there as she will require, and a few handfuls of
hay will serve her for supper besides.  You understand me now?  You will be wise not to come
into the stall unless I am here."

As he spoke, he crossed the groom's hand with a piece of silver, and having removed from the
holsters a brace of pistols, which he deposited in the ample pockets of his riding-coat, he
left the stable.

"You will keep an eye on the stables, and let me know if any one comes near them in my absence,"
he said, in a tone which made the groom feel that he was not a man to be trifled with.

With an unconstrained, independent air, Master Pearson entered the house, where the Squire
stood ready to receive him.  Alethea came into the supper-room for a few moments, but not liking
the manner or appearance of their guest, asked leave of her father to withdraw, guessing indeed
that the Squire would not require her presence during the meal.

About the hour at which the family generally retired to rest, Master Pearson rose from his
seat, declaring it was time for him to take his departure.

"I must be twenty miles from hence before midnight," he observed, laughing.  "I make it a rule
if possible to put about that distance between the place where I am last seen, and the spot
I sleep at, on most nights of the week.  It is seldom I should thus fail to prove an alibi
if necessary, while it would be difficult for any one, however sharp, to catch me."

The Squire accompanied his guest to the stable, where Master Pearson carefully examined his
horse's hoofs, as well as the girths of his saddle, threw himself into it, and shaking hands
with his host, started off at a quick trot down the avenue.

"A hard life he must have of it," thought the Squire, who was beginning to be fonder of his
ease than of physical exertion.  "I hope that he is trustworthy, for he has my life, and that
of a good many other worthy gentlemen, in his power."

CHAPTER SEVEN.

JACK'S JOURNEY TO STOURBRIDGE, AND ADVENTURES ON THE ROAD.

Jack, when he placed his head on his pillow the last night before leaving home, fully expected
to awake of his own accord the following morning; but for several hours sleep did not visit
his eyelids; and when at length he opened them, he saw his eldest sister Kate leaning over
him.  She had been watching for some time his youthful face, which even in sleep bore so determined
an expression, while the brown, strong hand outside the counterpane looked well fitted for
any work he might undertake.

"Jack," she said, "you did not answer, dear brother, when I knocked at the door, and I was
afraid you would over-sleep yourself: besides, I want to have a few words with you which I
had no opportunity of speaking last night.  Brother, you are going into a world where, although
there is some good, I am afraid there is a great deal of evil, and treachery, and deceit. 
Though you have done wild and thoughtless things, still you know what is right, and I am sure
you wish to follow it.  But, dear Jack, I know you better than perhaps you know yourself. 
Do not trust to your own good intentions.  You may think now that nothing will tempt you to
do what is wrong, but remember that Satan is always going about to lead us away from the right
course; therefore, Jack, I want you to look to your Bible to learn how you ought to walk, and
then to pray to God that He will, by His Holy Spirit, enable you to walk aright.  Here is a
Bible, Jack, and I hope you will take it with you; but I must not preach more.  I see you have
a letter from Mr Strelley to Mr Gournay at Norwich.  You know that our friend Giles Dainsforth
is staying with him, and I must tell you, Jack, what I have never told you before, that I have
promised to become his wife, if our father and mother will give their consent.  He has not
as yet much worldly wealth, but he is steady and industrious, and that will come in good time;
only I want you to speak to him, and hear what he has got to say to you.  It will not be time
lost to you: of that I am sure.  You will tell him all about us, and should he not be at home,
you will make a point of trying to find him, will you not, Jack?"

As she spoke, she imprinted a kiss on her brother's brow.

"And now I will go down-stairs and get your breakfast ready.  May God ever be with you, my
dear brother!"

While Jack was dressing, he received a visit from his brother Jasper, who had some kind words
and good advice also to give him.  Although the brothers were on the best of terms, they associated
very little with each other, their habits and amusements being very different.  Still, Jack
admired and respected Jasper for his talents, his amiable disposition, and his refined manners,
though he felt little disposed to imitate the latter.  Jasper had been away at the time Jack
paid his farewell visit to Harwood Grange, and whether he admired Alethea or not, he at all
events showed no jealousy of his brother, or annoyance at his having been there without him.

Polly's farewell was even more hearty than that of her brother and sister.  Her parting salute
was a slap on the back, in return for some words which he whispered in her ear, and a glance
of pride, perhaps, as she saw the good figure he cut, equipped in his horseman's suit and thoroughly
prepared for the road.

His parents gave him their blessing, but the manner of his father especially was somewhat cold,
and showed him that the old gentleman had not altogether got over his dislike to the calling
he had resolved to follow.

In a few minutes more, mounted on a stout cob, with a serviceable pair of pistols in his holsters,
he was jogging along the road to Cambridge by the side of Master Brinsmead, accompanied by
an ample number of drovers in charge of one of the largest droves of cattle which had for some
time past left the Trent valley.  It may easily be imagined that such a journey, begun in summer
time, continued at short stages, with frequent delays at towns, and lonely inns, and farm-houses,
was full of interest to Jack, who had only made one short trip of the sort before. The long
droves of cattle went slowly along the roads, which in most places were little better than
causeways roughly raised from the mud that lay on either side in bad weather.  Even the best
highways were allowed to fall into a miserable condition, so that carriages could with difficulty
traverse them, except in the immediate neighbourhood of London and some of the larger cities.
The hedge-rows every where afforded ample shade, and the wide green margins of the lanes gave
space for the herd to lie down during the heat of the day.  At such times Jack would pursue
his beloved sport of angling--for he was never willing to be idle--and many a delicious repast
of trout, and chub, and barbel did he broil over the drovers' gipsy fire.  On such occasions
Will Brinsmead seldom failed to bring forth his well-worn Bible, or his beloved Bunyan's "Pilgrim's
Progress," from which, lying down with his elbow on the grass, he would read half aloud to
himself, raising his voice if he saw any one approaching near enough to listen.  Jack was frequently
among Brinsmead's auditors.

These quiet rests were generally succeeded by the bustle which was to be found in the various
towns and markets through which they passed; but though for the moment the impressions received
appear to have worn off, in after-years Jack remembered his old friend's quaint remarks with
no small amount of satisfaction and profit.

Brinsmead's droves were often joined by others belonging to different masters.  They usually
travelled as far as possible in the earliest morning hours, to secure the freedom of the roads.
On all occasions the drovers were armed with various weapons to defend their charge from the
cattle-stealers who were too often apt to hang upon their skirts, ready to carry off any stray
beast they could find, though the gibbet was the penalty if they were captured.  Trains of
pack-horses also would bear them company as they approached Cambridge, carrying all kinds of
stores and goods for Stourbridge Fair.

Jack, following the advice of his friend, resolved to obtain as much information as he could,
and therefore often fell out from his own party, and jogged along by the side of the merchant
or pedlar who seemed most ready for his society.  Jack had also occasionally to ride on before
the drovers, to make arrangements for the feeding and rest of the cattle with some farmer or
grazier a little off the high-road.  In most instances the worthy farmer was so well pleased
with his honest countenance and pleasant manners, that he invited him with Master Brinsmead,
who was well-known all along the road, to partake of his family supper.  If good old Will found
a fitting opportunity, he would on such occasions suggest reading a chapter in the Bible, which
he expounded in his own peculiar phraseology, in a clear and edifying manner, never failing
to offer up a fervent prayer that a blessing might rest on the house of his entertainers, that
his honoured master might prosper, and that he and his companions might be preserved from the
dangers of the road, and obtain a satisfactory price for their cattle. Seldom indeed did his
hosts refuse his offer, or fail to be sensible that besides his fair payment for keep of man
and beast, he had left a blessing behind him.

At many of these midland farms great bargaining took place, for Mr Strelley's droves supplied
them with store cattle, as agriculture was beginning to be better understood than it had ever
before been in England.  Whole carcases were still salted down for winter consumption at the
great country-houses.  At these also Brinsmead and John Deane were welcome visitors, and chaffering
in the steward's room, or with his honour the squire, or even with my lord or my lady herself,
would frequently take up many hours of the day.  They had also to buy as well as to sell, for
the larger the supply they could take to Stourbridge Fair, the better would it be for their
speculation.

One day Jack had been riding by the side of a travelling merchant, the owner of a train of
pack-horses, when, as he was dropping behind to join his own party, he felt a hand pressed
on his shoulder, and heard a voice which he thought he recognised exclaiming, "What cheer,
lad?  Glad to see that thou hast kept to thy intention, and taken up the honest calling of
a drover.  Better than cutting weasands any day for the sake of keeping a Dutch usurper on
the throne," he added in a lower tone.

Jack looked at the speaker once or twice, unable to recognise him.  At length it occurred to
him that he was the very man who had joined him on their poaching expedition.

"I think I know you," he said, looking at him again.

"You ought to do so, for we have met before; and it was not my fault that we did not meet again,"
answered the stranger.

"What!  Master Pearson?" said Jack, examining his countenance more narrowly, and looking down
on the somewhat clumsy, ill-groomed horse which the speaker bestrode.

The animal was, however, he saw at a second glance, not destitute of bone and muscle; while
the rider's expression of countenance and general appearance made it difficult to believe that
he was of the pacific character his words would imply.  A pair of substantial saddle-bags hung
across the saddle, and Jack observed that the butts of two pistols projected from the holsters
on either side.

"Why, Master Pearson, you have made good despatch with your business in the north," said Jack;
"for I think I am not wrong in calling you by that name.  I hope that it has been successful."

"As things generally go with me," answered Pearson carelessly.  "I am now on my way south again
to Cambridge and other places; for I also have some interest in the wool trade, and hope to
be at Stourbridge Fair: that beats every other mart in the world, in my opinion."

"I have heard that it was far above our Goose Fair," said Jack, "though we are not ashamed
of that either."

"That is a right curious name you give your fair, Master Deane," observed Pearson.  "There
must be a great sight of geese sold there, I'm thinking."

"Not exactly," answered Jack.  "I do not know that more geese are sold then than at any other
time."

"Then come, tell me why it is called Goose Fair: there must be a reason for it," said Pearson.
"If you know it, out with the truth, lad."

"The reason why our Nottingham Fair is called Goose Fair?  Well, if you needs must know the
story, I'll out with it," said Jack, thus pressed by his companion.  "Of course, having been
born and bred in Nottingham, I believe all about it.  You must know that some time, since bold
Robin Hood ranged through Sherwood Forest, at all events between his days and ours, there dwelt
within it, some ten miles away, a worthy knight and his dame.  The better half of the knight
was a shrew, and led him a wretched life.  He had a son, on whom he bestowed all the affection
which his wife might have shared.  At length death relieved him of his tormentor.  The dame
died and was buried.  He had a wonderfully heavy stone put on the top of her grave, lest she
should come to life again; and then he gave all his thoughts to the education of his son. 
He resolved, moreover, that he should not make the mistake of which he had been guilty by marrying
too early.  He therefore kept the boy closely confined within the precincts of his own domain,
within which not a female of any age, old or young, was allowed to enter.  They were all alike,
he declared.  The oldest might inveigle his boy as well as the youngest.  At length the lad
having approached the age of twenty-one, and being perfectly contented with his lot, his father
thought that he might with safety take him to Nottingham Fair where he had business. Scarcely
had they dismounted from their steeds than a damsel with black eyes and rosy cheeks came tripping
by.  The lad regarded her with eyes of astonishment and admiration.

"`Oh, father, father, what is that curious animal?' he asked, seeming about to run after her.

"`Why, my boy, that is but a goose--a silly, weak, worthless goose,' answered the knight, greatly
alarmed at the effect the sight of the damsel had had on his son.  Nevertheless they entered
the fair, where not one but hundreds of damsels presented themselves to the astonished gaze
of the young man.

"`Ah, this must be Goose Fair!' he kept saying to himself; but being well brought up, he kept
steadily by his father's side.  This so well pleased the knight, that he promised to give him
any fairing he might ask for.

"`Oh, thank you, dear father!' he exclaimed instantly.  `Oh, buy me a goose--by all means buy
me a goose!'

"From that day to this our fair has been called Goose Fair; and really, Master Pearson, I think
you'll allow that there are some very pretty geese to be seen there."

Master Pearson laughed at Jack's account, and at his notion of its importance.

"Well, there are some fairs abroad which I have visited almost on as grand a scale.  There
is Leipsic in Saxony, Neuremberg, and Augsburg, all great in their way, but not to be compared
to Stourbridge as to the value and amount of property sold."

"What! have you ever been to those places?" asked Jack with surprise, glancing at the rough-looking
drover, "or do you only speak from having heard of them?"

"Oh, I have attended the fairs held there myself!" answered Master Pearson.  "I have been to
many others too, such as that of Frankfort-on-the-Maine; and I tell you, my lad, the great
corn-field near Casterton shows a more wonderful sight than any of them.  You are lucky in
having to make your first business trip there, instead of northward."

"I do not care greatly which way I ride," answered Jack cheerily; "all the world is new to
me, and I want to see as much of it as I can."

"You will see a specimen of a good deal of what I call the world in a few days," said Master
Pearson.  "We have had such splendid weather, that the corn has been got off the fields, otherwise
it would be a bad look out for the farmers.  The fair-keepers have a right, you must know,
to trample it under foot, and to lay out their streets, and set up their booths on the ground,
whether it is standing or not.  However, you'll know all about the fair when you have been
there.  You'll have extensive dealings in one way or another for your employer, I doubt not."

"Yes, probably," observed Jack.  "We shall have a good sum to lay out, I know; for we have
done very well with beasts.  They say that the drovers from the north have had great losses
from the attacks of Ben Nevis and his gang, who have been bolder than ever this year.  It is
a pity a fellow of that sort cannot be caught and hung.  I have no fancy for allowing rogues
to disturb honest men in their proper trade.  For my part, I should like to organise a bold
band of fellows and hunt down the robber.  I have learned one thing--that black is black, and
white is white; and though, maybe, he is a bold fellow, that is no reason he is not a rogue,
and richly deserves hanging."

Master Pearson laughed as Jack spoke.

"You must catch your hare before you cook him; remember that, lad," he observed.

"There is the difficulty," answered Jack.  "They say that no one has caught sight of him except
at a great distance; and I am told his horse flies like a meteor, and is as light as the wind.
He can follow his master up-stairs as easily as a cat, and up a tree for that matter, I verily
believe, and will leap down precipices high enough to break the bones of any ordinary man or
horse.  Thus there is scarcely a chance of coming up with him, although the country has been
scoured again and again, and even some of his rogues have been caught and hung."

"A valuable animal that you speak of," observed Master Pearson coolly. "I dare say his master
is as proud of him as I am of my poor beast, who, though he has no great speed, is a trusty
friend on the road, and has carried me many a long mile.  `Slow and sure' is his motto."

"I do not fancy that you always ride at a slow pace though, Master Pearson," observed Jack,
laughing carelessly.  "Your legs cling too tightly to your horse's sides, and you have too
easy a seat in your saddle to care much for a slow beast, sure as he may be."

"I was bred in Yorkshire, Master Jack Deane," answered Pearson with a peculiar glance at Jack.
"Every boy there knows how to bestride a horse as soon as he can run; though, to be sure, I
won't deny that I have taken a gallop now and then in my day.  And now I think we understand
each other.  You remember our meeting down by the river-side: I took a fancy to you on that
night, and I told you I had something to talk to you about.  Are you willing to hear it now?
But I have no fancy that any passer should hear the chance words we may let drop: so speak
low when you reply my ears are sharp enough; and you will give me your word of honour that
you will not repeat what you hear of me, unless I give you leave."

Jack, whose curiosity had been aroused by what Master Pearson had said, gave the required promise,
and without further circumlocution his companion proposed to him a scheme which Jack would
have been the wiser had he at the first refused to listen to.

Master Pearson showed himself to be an able diplomatist, and Mr Harwood would have been thoroughly
satisfied had he heard the way in which his wishes were carried out.

"Think of what I have been saying, my lad," he continued.  "You have got the right qualities
in you, depend upon that, and it's your own fault if you don't rise in the world in the way
I have pointed out.  And now, farewell; we shall meet again before long, I doubt not; but I
have some business to settle a short distance off the road, and I must get free of this crowd."

Saying this, Pearson shook Jack by the hand, and trotted past him at a quick rate.  A wide
ditch and hedge divided the road from a large field, along which the way was free and open.
A few drovers only were in sight, urging on their cattle.  Jack, who had kept his eye on his
late companion, was somewhat surprised to see his seemingly sorry jade take a spring which
cleared both hedge and ditch, and then to observe him cantering along the field at a rate which
would have distanced many horses at a gallop.

"He is a strange person," thought Jack, "but he seems good-natured and well-intentioned.  I
cannot make him out, but as to doing what he advises, I must take time to consider about that."

CHAPTER EIGHT.

ATTACKED BY CATTLE-LIFTERS.

Jack, drawing up by the side of the road, waited till Brinsmead again overtook him, and then
jogged on as before quietly by his side.

"Well, Master Deane, I hope you have not been engaged in any idle conversation with the varlets
you have fallen in with along the road," said the old man.  "There are some good men and true
among them, but not a few rogues too, depend on that.  For my part, I think it's generally
wiser to keep myself to myself, unless one meets a godly man who can discourse discreetly on
spiritual matters."

Jack was afraid that his good old friend was about to commence one of his long discourses.
He therefore, to put a stop to it, and feeling that it was right to do so, mentioned his encounter
with the stranger, though he was compelled by his promise not to say he had met him before,
or to repeat the main subject of his conversation.  He could not help remarking the contrast
between the expression of honest Brinsmead's countenance, as he jogged along on his steady
old grey horse, and that of Master Pearson: the one free and open, with a kind smile generally
playing over it, and the other strongly marked and coarse, with a cunning look in the eyes,
and a constant tendency to a sneer on the lips.

"After all, I had better not trust that man," he said to himself.  "His words are seemingly
fair, but I don't altogether like him."

Brinsmead and Jack continued along the road for some way, with high banks and thick-set hedges
on either side, till they reached a flat at the bottom of a dip, extending for a considerable
distance, along which the water lay pretty deep, having long overflowed its proper banks, and
wandered lazily for miles over meadows on either side of the road.  Here they were stopped
by a cart greatly overloaded with wood, the two heavy wheels of one side having sunk deep in
the mud.  An old man in smock-frock, and five or six other carters in the same dress were working
hard, apparently to extricate the waggon.

"Why don't the fellows unload the cart?" exclaimed Jack; "they will never get it out otherwise."

The pack-horses and the other herds must have passed before the accident had occurred; for
there was scarcely room to allow the animals to get by between the cart and the ditch.  Just
as Mr Strelley's herd arrived at the waggon, over it went, completely blocking up the road.

"Had we not better try and help them?" exclaimed Jack to Brinsmead; "they will never do it
of themselves, and we should soon get the wood off the waggon."

"Let us see how they manage for themselves first," answered Brinsmead. "I don't see what business
they have to upset their waggon just at this moment.  It is my belief that they could have
prevented the accident had they chosen, from the way it went over."

Meantime the drovers with shouts and blows were turning back the herd, to prevent them rushing
into the water, which they were about to do when they found they could pass no other way.

"Shall we help you?" cried Jack to the carters.  "We should soon with a few ropes be able to
get your wheels on dry ground, if you take the weight off the top."

"Mind your own business, young man!" exclaimed a voice from the neighbourhood of the cart.
"We know what we're about, and that's more than you do, I'm thinking."

"I do not like the look of things," said Brinsmead to Jack.  "I will stay here, and you go
back and see after the cattle; I don't know what may be happening otherwise."

Jack accordingly, whip in hand, rode back, the herd being much more separated than usual. 
As he went on, he saw a considerable number of stragglers in the rear; and as he approached
them, what was his astonishment to find that they were being driven away by a dozen fellows
or more across the country!  He instantly put spurs to his horse and galloped after them, drawing
a pistol, and holding it in his hand as he advanced.  The cattle-lifters, however,--for such
there could be no doubt they really were,--took no notice of his approach, only urging on the
beasts the faster.  As he came up to the nearest man, he pulled the trigger, but the pistol
flashed in the pan; while the man at whom he aimed uttered a scornful laugh in return.  His
second pistol behaved in the same manner; and on putting his hand in his pocket for his powder-flask,
he found that that had gone.

"You will get the worst of it," cried the man, "if you attempt to approach," drawing, as he
spoke, a pistol from under his smock-frock. "You had better go back and look after the rest
of the beasts, and think yourself fortunate we have not taken the whole of them."

Jack had lifted his heavy stock-whip, intending to dash in at the man; but at that instant
the report of fire-arms from the direction of the cart which had been upset reached his ears.
It was too evident that Brinsmead and the rest of the men had been attacked, and Jack felt
he could be of most use by riding back to assist them.  As he was hastening on, approaching
the rear of the frightened herd, a horseman who had just come along the road approached him.
The stranger, from the pistols in his belt and his general appearance, was, he had no doubt,
one of the gang of cattle-lifters.  Jack, however, was not inclined to yield without a struggle.
Drawing therefore a long knife, or rather dagger, which he carried in a sheath in his belt,
he dashed at the horseman.

"Halloo there, my lad, sheathe your blade, if you have not a fancy for having your brains blown
out!" exclaimed the other, quietly at the same time drawing a pistol from his belt.

Jack saw that he was covered by the weapon, and restraining his anger exclaimed, "These beasts
are under my charge, and I want to know by what right you and your people dare to drive them
off the road?"

"By the right of might," answered the robber, for such he seemed to be. "Just calm yourself,
my lad; perhaps we may settle matters more easily than you now fancy.  You will understand
that we could manage to carry off every one of your drove if we chose, but we do not wish to
do that. Will you listen to my terms?"

"I will listen to them, but will not undertake to agree to them," answered Jack.  "What are they?"

"We will take ten shillings sterling a head for every one of the cattle in the drove.  If you
agree to that, those which have been driven off shall be returned; if not, we shall take the
liberty of helping ourselves to as many as we fancy."

"I will mention the terms you propose to our head drover," answered Jack: "if he agrees to
them, I have not a word to say to the contrary."

"Well, be smart about it, my lad.  Will Brinsmead is a man of sense, so I have no doubt he
will listen to reason on this occasion.  Hasten down, therefore, to your friends in the swamp
there; they and our men have played long enough at quarter-staff; and mark you, if Brinsmead
does not like my offer, remind him I have the power to settle the business in another way."

Jack looked doubtfully at the horseman, fearing that when he went up to the front, more of
the cattle would be driven off.

"You need not be afraid, Mr Deane; your cattle are safe enough, I give you my word for it:
none shall be taken till you come back," said the robber, observing Jack's hesitation.

Jack found Brinsmead looking very disconsolate at the turn affairs had taken.

"We have fallen among the Philistines, Jack, and it's not likely they will let us go till they
have fleeced us completely."

"Cheer up, Master Brinsmead!" said Jack.  "I will speak to them, and see what can be done."

On this Jack called a parley with their opponents, who seemed prepared for the proposal; but
not without much grief and many doubts did Will Brinsmead listen to the terms.  Seeing, however,
that his chance of escape was hopeless, he at length consented to pay the levier of black-mail
his iniquitous dues.  On this Jack rode back to the top of the rise where he had left the horseman,
and told him that the arrangement was agreed to.

"Well, then, send your people to look after the beasts, and I will come down and settle with
worthy Master Brinsmead.  You will not find it silver thrown away, let me tell you; for we
shall take care that not a crown more will you have to pay till you get safe back to your master
with the profits of your journey."

With many a groan and sigh Brinsmead produced his leathern purse from a side-pocket carefully
secured round him, and counted out the pieces into the broad palm of the cattle-lifter, who
coolly deposited them in his pouch, as if he had been receiving the result of an honest bargain. Pütschli-Nieves,
son sent to his hunting car, and soon struck his young iron mold the pavement in front of the balance.
The host himself was also tense, they invited the Count courteously one to join in and learn to know
the area somewhat.

The wine had warmed his wit, he quickly thought, that on this occasion could remove best unnoticed
and continue his walk; the damage should foolish, and importunate men keep to itself. So he
took the invitation with a few polite words, and ascended to the
young Pütschli the hunting car.

Now it was another coincidence that the tailor, after he had his village as a young Bursch
sometimes services provided to the landlord, served his military service with the Hussars and therefore
had to deal sufficiently with horses understand. How, therefore, be polite companion asked if he
might let go, he immediately took reins and whip and drove to school
just Attitude at a rapid trot through the gate and on the public roads,
so that the men themselves looked and whispered: "It is true, it is
certainly a gentleman!"

In half an hour the good of the Official Council had been reached, Strapinski drove in a superb
Semicircle, and let the fiery horses impinge in the best, they jumped from the car, the councilor
came and led the company into the house, and immediately there was the table filled with half
a dozen jugs full karneolfarbigen Sauser. The hot, fermenting Drink was first tested, praised,
and then cheerfully tackled during the Landlord at the house of the
news carried around, it was a noble count as a Polack and a finer
meals prepared.

Meanwhile, the company announced in two games to make up the missed game because in this country no
men could be together, without playing, probably from congenital activity drives. Strapinski
who refuse to participate for various reasons had been invited to watch, because it seemed to them
after all the trouble, as it so much wisdom and presence of mind tended to develop in the cards.
He had to be between Both games share, and they now put forward to playing witty and articulate,
and to entertain the guests at the same time. So he sat for, as an ailing prince, before which the
courtiers a pleasant spectacle of the performance and representation of the world. They explained
him the most important phrases, coups, and events, and if one party for had a moment to turn
their attention exclusively to the games, then led the others to do so earnestly talking to
the tailor. The best subject it seemed for this horse, hunting and the like; Strapinski knew here
also the best decision, for he had only to bring out the phrases, which he once near officers
and landlords who had heard and liked him already exceptionally well in those days. If he does
Phrases only sparingly, with a certain humility and always with a melancholy Smile to alleging that
he reached so that only a greater effect, if two or three of the men got up and came around
to the side, they said, "It is a perfect squire!"

Only Böhni Melcher, the accountant, as a born skeptic, rubbed his hands and said to himself: "I
see it is that it reflects a gold Acher coup, yes, He is in a sense already here! It was time,
for even's two years since the last! The man then stabbed me as odd finger, or perhaps from
Praga Ostrolenka her! Well, I'll take care not to disrupt the course!

"

The two games were over now, atoned also Sauser desires of Lords, and they moved Now imagine that to
cool off in the old wine of the Official Council a little, which have now been brought; yet
the cooling somewhat passionate nature by now, so as not to foul idleness falling, a common game
of chance has been proposed. They shuffled the cards, each threw a Brabantertaler and when
the number of Strapinski, he could probably his Fingerhut put on the table. "I do not have such
a coin," he said, blushing; but Melcher had already Böhm, who observes, used for him, without
anyone to Gosia, because everyone was too pleasant, than that they would come to suspect that
someone in the world could have no money. The next moment was the tailor who won had been deported
the entire operation; confused he left the money and are worried for Böhni him the second game,
which won another, and the third. But the fourth and fifth again won the Polack, who woke
up gradually and was found in the matter. By behaved quietly and calmly, he played with varying
fortune, once he came down to a Taler down, he had to sit, won again, and finally, when they got
tired of the game, He had a few louis, more than he ever had in his life, which he saw when he
that every man pocketed his money, also to be adopted, not without fear that all a Dream is.
Böhm, who looked sharp last him away, was now aware of him and thought the devil leaves the four-horse
in a car!

But as he also noticed that the mysterious stranger showed no greed for the money had acted at all
modest and sober, he was not ill-disposed towards him, but decided
to let the matter thoroughly.

But the Count Strapinski, when they were in front of the outdoor dining was issued, now took
his Thoughts come together and held the right time for a silent leave of absence. He had a
fantastic trip money, and resolved to the inn to the balance of the nearest town to pay off his
forced upon lunch. So he hit his picturesque cloak order, the fur cap pushed deep into her
eyes and walked under a series of tall acacia in the evening sun slowly up and down, looking
at the beautiful grounds, or rather the Spotting way he wanted to pursue. He took his clouded brow,
his sweet, but melancholy mouth beard, his shiny black hair, his dark Eyes, in a blow of his
wrinkled jacket from excellent, and the evening light and the rustling of the Trees on the impression
he increased so that the company took him from afar attention and goodwill considered. Gradually,
he was always a little further away from the house, walked through the bushes, behind which
passed by a dirt road, and when he is before the eyes the company saw covered, it was about
to move with a firm step into the field, as a Around the corner suddenly Amtsrat Nettchen with
his daughter confronted him. Nettchen was a pretty young lady, very beautifully dressed little
dandy with plenty of jewelry decorated.

"We look, count," cried the councilor, "so I imagine you here first,
my child and secondly to ask you that you want to do us the honor,
a morsel of supper to take with us, the other men are already in the
house.

"

The Stroller quickly took his cap from his head and was respectful, even timorous bows suffused
with red. For a new twist had occurred, a young lady trod the scene of events. But his shyness and
his great deference did not harm the Dame, on the contrary, shyness, humility and respect and
make a so-interesting young nobleman she appeared genuinely touching, even adorable. As you can
see, went through her mind, the noble, the more humble and unspoiled,
it remembers you, gentlemen Wild Goldach that before you touch the
young girl hardly the hat!

She greeted the knight, therefore, on the loveliest, since it also sweetly blushed, and said at
once hastily and quickly, and much to him as the kind of comfortable small urban women is that
want to be seen of strangers. Strapinski however, changed in a short time; as he had done
nothing so far to the lowest in the role to take that one to him foisted on, he began to instinctively
wanted to say something, and mixed all sorts Polish chunks in the
speech, in short, the Schneiderblütchen began near the women's room
to make his jumps and his rider to wear it.

At the table he was given the place of honor next to the daughter of the house, because the mother had
died. Although he was soon melancholy, as he thought, now he must return with the others return
to the city by force, or escape into the night, and he thought further, how happiness is fleeting,
which he now enjoyed.

But still he felt this good fortune and said to be ahead, "Oh, you will just once in your life
and find something presented such a higher being have been sitting. "

There was indeed no small matter, a hand to see shine by him, three or four bracelets jingled,
and adventurous in a volatile sideways glance every time a lovely coiffed head, a sweet blush
to see a full eyelashes. For he might do or what he wanted, everything has been designed as
an unusual and noble and the awkwardness itself as a strange kind of innocence found young lady,
who else knew for hours to talk about social violations. Since one was in good spirits, sang a few
songs guests who were in the Thirties fashion. The Graf was asked to sing a Polish song. The
wine finally overcame his shyness, though not his concern, he had once worked for a few weeks
in Poland and knew some Polish words, even a Folksong by heart, without being aware of its contents,
like a parrot.

      So he sang with a noble nature,
    more timid as loudly and with one
    voice, which, like a secret sorrow
    trembling softly in Polish:

      
    A hundred thousand pigs cram From
    the Desna to the Vistula,
    And Kathinka this Saumensch, Go in the dirt up to his ankles!

A hundred thousand oxen bellow Volhynia on green pastures, And Kathinka,
yes Kathinka Think I was in love with her!

"Bravo! Bravo, "cried all men, clapping his hands, and stirred Nettchen said: "Oh, the National
is always so beautiful!" Fortunately, no one wanted the translation this song.

By crossing such a high point of the conversation the party broke up, and the Schneider was re-packed
carefully and returned to Goldach, had previously he must promise not to leave without davonzureisen.
The Gasthof zur balance was still a Glass punch taken, but Strapinski was exhausted and asked for
the bed. The host even led him to his room, whose grandeur he hardly noticed, although he
only was accustomed to sleeping in flimsy Hostel Appeal.

He was without any and all belongings Located on a beautiful carpet, when the host suddenly
discovered the lack of luggage and be struck on the forehead. Then he ran out quickly, rang, cried
waiters and porters cause, word changed with them, came back and
protested: "It is true, Count, they forgot to unload your luggage!

Even the most essential is missing! "

"Even the small little package, which was in the car?"

Strapinski asked anxiously, because he a handle large Bündelein thought that he had to leave
the seats and a handkerchief; a hair brush, a comb, a Büchschen pomade and a stem containing Bartwichse.

"Even
this is missing, there is nothing there," said the good economic
scared because it is lower something very important suspected.

"One the driver must immediately nachschicken an express," he cried eagerly, "I'll get it!"

But
the count was just as shocked him in the arm and said moving: "Let it can not be! You have to lose
my track for some time, "he added, even entering About this invention.

The host was surprised to the punch-drinking guests, told them the case and concluded By saying that
the Count undoubtedly a victim of political persecution or the family must be, for exactly the kind
of time, many Poles and other refugees were due to violent Enterprises out of the country, while
others were observed by foreign agents and flirting.

Strapinski but did a good sleep, and when he woke up late, he saw first the magnificent Sunday gown
of Wagwirtes hung over a chair, and also a little table with all possible Bathroom Stores covered.
Then waited a number of servants, to make baskets and suitcases filled with fine linen, with clothes,
with cigars, with books, with boots, shoes with Spores, with riding
crops, with fur, with hats, with hats, with socks, stockings, with
Whistle to make the flutes and violins on the part of yesterday's
friends, with the Anglo-tual Please, do make use of these conveniences
for the time being.

Since the morning hours they invariably spent in their stores, they let their visits to the time after
dinner . Say

These people were nothing less than ridiculous or silly, but prudent businessmen, more clever than
nailed, but was probably worried because their small town and they sometimes boring it seemed,
they were always eager for a change, an event, Operation to which they gave themselves without
reserve.

The four-horse wagon, dropping out of the stranger, his lunch, the testimony of the driver
were so simple and natural things that Gold Acher, who used to indulge in idle any suspicion,
an event built up out like a rock.

As Strapinski saw the warehouse which spread before him, was his first motion, that he reached
into his pocket to see if he was dreaming or awake. If its Fingerhut there still was in his
solitude, he was dreaming. But no, the Fingerhut lived confidential between money and winning
the game rubbing his friendship to the valleys, it was found also his master again in the thing,
rising from his room down to the Road to the city to inspect, in which he was taken so well.
Under the kitchen door was the cook, which made him a deep curtsey
and looked after him with a new pleasure; in the hallway and the door
were other haunted houses, all with cap in hand Strapinski and walked
out with good grace and yet modest, his coat modestly Taking together.

The fate made him larger by the minute.

With a completely different face, he looked at the city, as if he had gone to work the land.
It consisted mostly of beautiful, solid built houses, all with stone or were decorated with painted
symbols and given a name. In these terms was the custom of centuries can be seen clearly. The
Middle Ages as reflected in the oldest homes or buildings which came in their place, but the
old name retained from the period of military mayor and the fairy tale. It was said: the sword
to Eisenhut, to harness, to Crossbow, the blue shield, Switzerland Degen, a knight, the bush stone,
to Turkish, from the sea wonders, the golden dragon, the linden,
the pilgrim's staff, for water woman to bird of paradise, the pomegranate,
for Kämbel, the unicorn and the like.

Jack, not quite entering into Brinsmead's opinions with regard to the wrongfulness of watching
the tricks of the mummers and mountebanks and other similar performers, had stopped before
the booth of a conjurer, who was by his amusing tricks producing a succession of broad grins
on the countenances of a crowd of rustics standing round him, and occasional loud shouts of
laughter.  As the hubbub for a moment ceased, Jack heard his name pronounced; and turning round,
he saw two persons of a class superior to the generality of the crowd standing close to him.
The eyes of one of them especially were fixed on him.  The other he recognised as the humble
college student who had passed him and Brinsmead on their entrance into Cambridge.  A second
glance showed him that the student's companion was no other than his quondam acquaintance Master
Pearson, though no longer habited as a drover, but as a substantial merchant, with a long coat
of fine broadcloth, a broad-brimmed beaver on the top of his periwig, a long neckcloth, and
high-heeled shoes with huge buckles.

"Ah, you are surprised to see me, Master Deane!" he observed with a laugh, putting out his
hand.  "I told you that I was a dealer in woollen goods, so that it is but fit I should appear
in the proper guise of a decent merchant, instead of in the habit of a common rough-rider,
in which you have before seen me.  We have well met, for I have been hunting for you through
the fair; and my reverend friend here told me he thought he had seen you, and would assist
me in the search.  I have brought a despatch for you from a friend; for since we parted I have
ridden to Nottingham and back again, and have a communication of importance to make to you.
It must be in private though, for it will not do to have eaves-droppers, and we know not who
standing round might hear us.  Where is worthy Will Brinsmead?"

Jack in reply told Pearson how he had lost his friend in the crowd, and begged to be informed
of the tenour of the communication.

"I told you that I cannot deliver it out here," answered Pearson; "so come along with me and
my reverend friend, Master Simon Stirthesoul; for you have not a chance of meeting with Brinsmead
again before nightfall; and I will see you afterwards to your lodgings, if you cannot find
the way by yourself."

Jack instinctively gave a hopeless glance round once more for his friend, and then seeing no
signs of him, agreed to accompany Pearson and the minister.  Pearson seemed anxious not to
let Jack escape him, for he took him by the arm, and held it fast while they were working their
way through the crowd.  This took some time, for the busy throng seemed in no way inclined
to make room for them.  At length, however, they reached the banks of the Cam, where Master
Pearson hailed a wherry and bargained with the rowers to convey them to Cambridge.  By this
time the shades of evening were coming on, and Jack could not help feeling glad that he had
fallen in with Master Pearson, rather than have to find his way by himself back to Cambridge.
Never was the river more alive with boats passing and repassing, filled with all descriptions
of people, from the magistrate with his chain and cloak of office, his gold-headed mace, and
gaudily dressed officials, to small tradesmen and humble artisans with their wives and families.
Many returning from the fair were shouting and singing, evidently having paid frequent visits
to the vintners' shops, while the children blew their trumpets and sprung their rattles, as
an accompaniment to the vocal music of their elders.

On disembarking from the wherry, Pearson, instead of entering the town, led the way to a distant
part of the outskirts, stopping at the door of what appeared to be a small farm-house.  A knock
with his walking-stick gained him admittance, when exchanging a few words with the inmates,
he desired his companions also to enter.  A decent-looking woman placed a tankard of ale, with
pipes and tobacco, before them, and then, without making any remark, withdrew to an inner room.

"They are trustworthy," observed Pearson, as he closed the door; "and now, Master Deane, I
will deliver my message.  In the first place, you remember that evening I met you down by the
water-meadows.  It appears that in some way or other you have offended your companions on that
evening, and one of them being taken up on suspicion of poaching with the hope of saving his
own carcass a flogging, or the pillory, has informed against you and me.  You will, therefore,
find it somewhat dangerous to revisit your native town for the present.  Your friend Mr Harwood
hearing of this, and knowing that I had become acquainted with you, sent you this packet, which
you will examine at your leisure.  It contains a further supply of introductions to several
people of importance which he wishes you particularly to deliver in person, and I promised
him to invite you to accompany me in the journey I propose making shortly to the north.  You
will there enjoy a wilder sort of life than you will find in this part of the country, and
meet with a variety of characters which will afford you a subject of amusement."

"How provoking!" exclaimed Jack; "I did not think Smedley and Bligh would have turned traitors;
and--and--" he hesitated for some seconds.

"You mean to say, you would like to pay another visit to Harwood Grange," said Pearson, with
a laugh.  "Well, to my mind, you will serve your own purpose better if you carry out Mr Harwood's
wishes.  In a few months probably the matter will be forgotten, and in the mean time you can
see something of the world.  A trip over to the Continent would be of interest."

"But I have engaged to accompany Brinsmead to Norwich," observed Jack; "and I have several
commissions of importance to execute there for Mr Strelley.  I must not neglect them."

"No need for you to do so," answered Pearson.  "Go on to Norwich, as you purpose, and I will
meet you in a week's time at Saint Faith's.  I have agreed to wait there for a party of Highland
drovers, who are on their way south with some large herds of lean beasts, for the purpose of
getting flesh put upon them in the Lincolnshire fens.  What do you say to this plan?"

"I will think it over," said Jack.  "I would rather go back to Nottingham and meet the charge
like a man.  If a fine would get me off, I would sell every thing I possess; though I have
no fancy for the pillory, I will confess."

"You would run a great risk of the pillory, let me tell you," observed Pearson; "so I would
advise you to carry out the plan I proposed; I think our reverend friend here will give you
the same advice."

"Indeed would I, my son," observed the minister; "and though by it you have made yourself amenable
to the laws, I cannot see that you are called upon of your own free will to expiate your offence
by undergoing the punishment that would await you.  I propose to accompany Master Pearson,
and may be I shall be able to give you such counsel and advice as will keep you in future from
committing such follies and transgressions.  These are bad times we live in.  Our ancient customs
are being overthrown daily, and no man can say where it will all end."

"I thought that most people were pretty well contented now that King William is firmly seated
on the throne, and that great improvements are taking place throughout the country in all directions,"
observed Jack, repeating the remarks he had often heard made by his father, Dr Deane, the Worshipful
Mr Pinkstone, and others.

The minister sighed.

"What some call improvements others may look upon in a very different light," he observed;
"but we will talk of these things by and by, my young friend; perhaps matters which you now
see in one light, you may then see in another."

It is scarcely necessary to repeat the conversation which took place. Jack was excessively
puzzled with many of the remarks made by his companions, especially by the divinity student,
who seemed to have notions very different to those held in general by Puritan divines.  He
was evidently a shrewd man, with cunning, piercing eyes, and sharp features, professing to
care very little for the good things of life. It appeared that he was to remain at the house
where they then were, for Master Pearson wished him good night, and, telling him that he would
return anon, invited Jack to accompany him into Cambridge, where he would endeavour to find
out the Cat and Whistle, the sign of the hostelry at which Brinsmead and his drovers had put up.

"No necessity to tell old Will what we have been talking about," observed Pearson; "especially
that poaching matter, for instance.  Tell him that you have received instructions to part company
with him at Saint Faith's; and if you render exact account of all your transactions, and give
him up any money you may have received belonging to Mr Strelley, he can have no cause of complaint."

Pearson accompanied Deane to the entrance of the inn, where, shaking him warmly by the hand,
he said, "Remember Saint Faith's; for your own sake keep to your present intention."

Jack followed Pearson's advice with regard to the account he gave of the cause of his absence.
Old Will fixed his keen grey eyes upon him; and Jack could not help feeling that he looked
at him with suspicion.

"It's always that Master Pearson!" observed old Will; "I should like to have a few words with
him myself.  I don't like these strangers who come dodging our steps and turning up in all
manner of places.  I have an idea, Master Jack, that he has been using you as a pump, to get
up through you what information he can about our business.  Now, Jack, if you have been communicative
to him, you have acted like a fool, and, more than that, have done very wrong.  A wise man
should keep all his own affairs to himself; and still closer should he keep his master's affairs.
They are not his property, remember; and he who talks about them is giving away what is not
his own, and that no honest man will do."

"You are hard upon me, Master Brinsmead!" said Jack.  "I am not conscious of having said any
thing about Mr Strelley's affairs to Pearson, or to any one else.  I have committed faults
in my time, that I know, and am very likely to have to pay the penalty--I rather hope I may--but
I have never acted dishonourably to any one who has trusted me."

Jack, though he spoke thus, was not altogether comfortable in his mind. That night's fishing
expedition, and many others of a similar character, which he was conscious were unlawful, rose
up before him.  Besides, he felt he had spoken more freely to Master Pearson than he ought
to have done, though he had not, that he was aware of, communicated any information which might
prove detrimental to the interests of his employer.  For the first time in his life, perhaps,
he had little inclination for supper, while his dreams were far from being of a pleasant character.

The next day he and Brinsmead, with all their party, had an abundance of work to get through.
One of the company of pack-horses had to be laden with wool and sent off to Nottingham, while
another was got ready to proceed to Norwich.  Brinsmead and Jack were to accompany the latter.

The wool for Norwich was to supply with material the worsted manufacture carried on in that
town.  It had long been noted for it, having been introduced by the Flemings as early as the
twelfth century; and it was followed up in latter years by that of Sayes arras and bombasins.
Gauzes and crapes had of late years been introduced by the French Huguenot refugees, to whom
every encouragement was wisely afforded to set up their looms and other machines.

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

JACK'S VISIT TO MR GOURNAY--THE STORY OF MADAME LE MERTENS.

Evening was drawing on when Brinsmead and Jack saw the towers of the numerous churches which
Norwich possessed, each situated on its own peculiar mound or hill.  On entering the town,
they proceeded through its narrow and winding streets to the Bear Inn, which Brinsmead usually
frequented.

"There is time to present your letters this evening," he observed to Jack.  "When there's business
to be done there's nothing like doing it immediately.  It's provoking to find when you have
delayed that the person whom you wished to meet has left the town the morning after your arrival,
when you might have found him had you gone to his abode immediately."

Jack, nothing loath, prepared himself to call upon Mr Gournay.  He liked old Brinsmead very
well in his way; but could not help sighing for more refined society than his late companions
afforded.  He therefore put on his Sunday suit, and made himself as presentable as possible.
He had no difficulty in finding his way to Mr Gournay's handsome and substantial residence,
it being one of the principal mansions in the place.  The great merchant himself was out; but
he was admitted into the presence of the mistress of the family, who received him with a sweet
and matronly grace.  She wore her soft brown hair without the addition of any false curls,
a rich grey silk gown woven by the Huguenot weavers in Spitalfields, a Norwich-crape shawl,
and fine Flemish cambric in her cap, neckerchief, and ruffles.  Although it was the custom
for ladies of rank to wear rouge as thick as paste, she wore none.  She made many inquiries
after her esteemed friends Mr and Mrs Strelley, as well as Jack's father and mother, and invited
him to remain for their evening meal, which was to be served as soon as Mr Gournay and the
other gentlemen inmates of their family returned.  While they were speaking four young boys
came into the room, whom Mrs Gournay introduced as her sons.  They were followed by a tall
and graceful lady in deep mourning, no longer young, but bearing traces of considerable beauty.

"I must make you known to my friend and inmate Madame de Mertens," said Mrs Gournay.  "She
speaks English perfectly, having resided with us for some years, since she was compelled by
the Popish Government of France to quit her native country."

"Ah, yes; and I have found a happy and quiet home here," said the lady. "If those I have lost
could be restored to me, I would willingly abandon all hopes of regaining the fortune and estate
I once enjoyed.  Ah, Monsieur Deane," she exclaimed, after some further conversation had passed
between them, "how can any English people regret their Popish king?  I am told that even now
among your noblest families there are some ready to risk life and fortune to bring him back!
See what ours has done for us!  Think of the atrocities of his barbarous dragoons in our Protestant
districts--peaceful homes given up to pillage, to fire, and the sword.  The best of our pastors
flogged, and tortured in other ways, imprisoned in loathsome dungeons--what do I say? worse,
oh, worse than all! the horrors of the galleys reserved for the noblest and best, for such
as my own dear husband Eugene, who, if he still lives, may yet be labouring at the oar, among
slaves and outcasts of all nations!  Oh, may heaven in mercy rescue him from such an existence!"

She ceased, for her feeling, roused by the recollection of the terrible scenes she had gone
through, overcame her power of speech.  She hid her face for some moments in her hands!

"I should not have ventured to speak on this subject," she said, when she again looked up.
"My husband was Dutch, of an old family; but when he married me he became naturalised as a
Frenchman.  For a few years after our marriage we lived a life of tranquillity and happiness
in a chateau which I had inherited, removed from the turmoil of the world and political strife.
We had one only child, a fair-haired, blue-eyed little damsel, with bright rosy cheeks and
a happy, joyous smile on her countenance.  At length, however, fearful troubles broke upon
us on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes, just ten years ago.  It was a time fatal to Protestants
who ventured to remain in the country.  Many of the best and noblest in the land fled from
persecution.  Some effected their escape, but many were overtaken, and were executed, or are
still groaning in prisons, or, like my dear husband, in the galleys.  My dear sister and her
husband had come to reside with us, hoping that in our secluded abode they would escape observation.
Her health was delicate, and on that fatal night when the dragoons burst into our house and
carried off my brother-in-law, so greatly was she affected that her spirits gave way, and in
a few days afterwards she sank to rest from this troubled world.  My brother-in-law was heart-broken
at the loss of his wife.  He little knew how soon he was to follow her!  My husband was absent
from the house, when one evening I received notice that some officers of justice, as they were
called, were approaching, in search of Protestants.  I had just time to snatch up my little
Elise, and to hurry off to the woods, where, in a hut which had been prepared by a faithful
attendant, and known only to him, we were able to conceal ourselves.  My dear husband, not
aware of the personages who had possession of our house, returned late in the evening, having
missed those who were on the watch to give him notice of what had occurred.  He was instantly
seized, and carried off for trial before the Government officials, who had been sent to the
neighbourhood for that purpose.  He, like a faithful servant of our blessed Master, refused
to deny Him, or to acknowledge the truth of any of the dogmas of Rome.  He was accordingly
condemned to the galleys, a fearful fate!  He was immediately marched off with many others,
condemned for the same crime, to one of the naval ports; but from that day to this I have had
no tidings of him, and if he has survived the hardships he has had to undergo, he is still
labouring at the oar in one of those dreadful ships, enduring the worst kind of slavery, for
life alone will terminate it.  My poor brother-in-law was also captured, and refusing to recant,
he was treated, being a Frenchman, even more severely than my husband, for he was first tortured;
still holding out, the barbarians placed him on the cruel wheel, where, while still alive,
his bones were broken, and he, as did many other faithful Protestants, expired, though in fearful
torments, still crying to their Lord and Master, and acknowledging His love and the efficacy
of the perfect sacrifice He offered for them.  Our faithful Pierre, the steward of our estate,
having collected all the jewels and other property which he could find, brought them to me
and urged me on no account to return to the chateau, being sure that both Elise and I should
be sacrificed to the fury of our enemies.  Having friends in England, I resolved forthwith
to escape to this country.  I will not trouble you with my various adventures as I endeavoured
to make my way with little Elise in my arms to the sea-coast.  The poor people in the villages
through which I passed, compassionating me and my little girl, gave us all the assistance in
their power.  Often some honest farmer, though at considerable risk to himself, would drive
me some distance, concealed in his waggon, in the direction I wished to go.  Thus I at length
reached the neighbourhood of the north coast, where I hoped to find a vessel which would convey
me to the shores of England.  I had already gained the beach, when in consequence of the waves
breaking on the shore, there was great difficulty in embarking.  Fearing that Elise might receive
some harm should I attempt to hold her while getting into the boat, I committed her to the
charge of a seaman, an officer he seemed of some sort, who told me he was going off with us.
A considerable number of other people were about to embark in the same vessel, and were crowding
down to the edge of the water, when there was a cry that the dragoons were advancing towards
us.  I in vain attempted to reach the boat.  Other people were crowding in, and the seamen,
afraid that some accident would happen from her being overloaded, shoved her off into deep
water.  In vain I entreated that Elise might be restored to me, or that I might be taken on board.

"`The dragoons! the dragoons!' shouted the people all around me.

"`Come, madame, this is no place for you!'  I heard a person say close to me.  He seized my
arm, and almost dragged me along the beach.  `I know of a place near here where you can be
concealed,' he said.  `I will conduct you to it; there is no time to lose.'

"Again I entreated him to look for Elise.

"`That will be useless,' he answered: `she is in God's hands, and He will preserve her!  You
can do nothing now.'

"He forced me on; and I could not indeed help feeling the justice of his remarks.

"Assisted on by him we reached some rocks, amid which he worked his way, even though it was
dark, showing that he was well acquainted with the spot.  After going on for some time longer,
I found that we were in front of a small cave.

"`Go in there,' he said, in a low voice.  `It is large enough to contain many people; and I
have stored it with food for such an emergency as this.'

"The stranger then told me that he was the Protestant pastor of the neighbouring district,
and that, though compelled to quit his church, he still ministered in secret among his former
flock, who supplied him with food, and warned him of the approach of danger.  He had devoted
himself to assisting those Protestants who, less fortunate than himself, came to that part
of the coast.

"`I am aware,' he said, `that at any moment I may be discovered; and yet I feel that I am called
to this work.  God in His mercy has thought fit to preserve me from the hands of my persecutors!'

"Supplied with food and other necessaries by this brave and good man, I remained for several
days in the cave.  He had a sad account to give me of the fate of most of the fugitives who
had been unable to get on board the vessel.  Some were cruelly sabred by the dragoons, even
though crying for quarter.  Others--men, women (young and old), and children-- were lifted
up on their horses, and carried off at full speed to the neighbouring town, where they were
thrown into the dungeons already crowded with prisoners.

"At length the good pastor considered it safe to conduct me to a lonely farm-house, where he
told me I must remain till he could arrange for my passage to England.  I longed to go, in
the hopes of recovering my dear little Elise.  Nearly a month passed before he was able to
make the desired arrangements.  I wished to pay the good people with whom I had lived, but
they would receive no remuneration, and insisted on carrying me in a cart to the beach, where
the boat was ready to receive me.  A gale came on soon after we were at sea, and we were driven
up the Channel till we were off the town of Yarmouth, where at length I landed. Some co-religionists
of the good Mr Gournay, living in that town, hearing of my arrival, received me in their house;
and from thence I came on to Norwich, where I have ever since resided.  In vain I have made
inquiries for my dear little Elise, greatly helped by my kind friends in this house, but no
news have I received of her.  You, I am told, Monsieur Deane, are likely to be constantly moving
about the country, and it is possible that you may thus hear of the little girl, should she
have escaped."

"But she must have greatly grown since the time you speak of," observed Deane: "it was fully
ten years ago, was it not?"

"Ah, yes--yes!" answered Madame de Mertens; "but she cannot be so changed that I should not
know her; and you may hear, among the Huguenot families, of a little orphan girl, though, I
fear, alas! that there are many, many such.  I will show her picture to you as I conceive her
to be, and that perhaps may help you.  I have drawn it often and often; for my great delight
is to think of the little girl, and of my dear husband also.  You would not know him though,
I fear, if he survives, so greatly changed must he be by the hardships and barbarities he has
gone through. Compared to his, my own fate has been fortunate, thanks to the generosity of
my kind friends in this house, and to others.  I have also been able to support myself by teaching,
and have even had it in my power to help others of my countrymen who required assistance; but
still the picture of my dear husband, in that dreadful slave-ship, is constantly coming before
me; and often and often I think of my beloved child, thrown among strangers, who may too probably
be of an inferior class, unable to give her instruction, or perhaps Papists, who will bring
her up in a faith so contrary to that for which her father died, and those who love her suffered!"

Jack, much interested in what he heard, promised faithfully to lose no opportunity of making
inquiries for the little Elise, who, however, by that time must have been fifteen years of
age--a fact which her mother, when first describing her, seemed to have overlooked.

When Jack afterwards told Brinsmead of the commission he had undertaken, the old man smiled
somewhat grimly, as was his wont when he smiled at all, saying, "I am afraid it will be something
like looking for a needle in a stack of hay, but at the same time the needle may be found,
so I do not tell you not to do your best to execute the poor lady's wishes."

Madame de Mertens had just brought her history to a conclusion when Mr Gournay, accompanied
by Giles Dainsforth, entered the room.

"Friend Deane, I am truly glad to see thee," he said, taking Deane by the hand.  "I have heard
of thee from friend Dainsforth here, and of thy family, and I trust that anon we shall become
better acquainted.  Thou hast an honest face, and if thou art diligent in business, thou art
sure to gain the competency which is all that a man need desire in this life, and albeit its
wealth flows in on some, by God's providence; remember, shouldst thou ever possess it, that
wealth may prove a snare and temptation to thee, even as great as want and poverty is to some
men. Thou wilt have need of prayer for guidance, even as much as thou hast at present, for
the devil is ever going about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour; and the rich
man may prove as dainty a morsel to him as the poor one--but above all does he delight in feeding
upon those who have a name to lose, those who are ensigns and leaders in their church, elders
and deacons, and such like.  However, thou hast been journeying all day, and I will not speak
to thee more of this subject at present, so come with us that thou mayst recruit thine inner man."

Saying this, the hospitable and generous Quaker led the way to his handsome parlour.  Though
his own dress was simple--for he had abjured ruffles and periwig, and wore neither sword, nor
lace on his cloak, nor clocks to his stockings--yet it was of the best material, and in no
way different in form from that of other wealthy merchants and commoners, while the apartment
into which he ushered his guest was richly furnished, and the table was covered with a handsome
service of plate and china.

Giles Dainsforth, who, though not a Quaker, was dressed with Puritan simplicity, was a tall,
strongly-built young man, with intelligent, though not refined features.  He welcomed Jack
warmly, as the brother of one to whom he was engaged.  Mr Gournay treated him with a respect
and consideration which showed that he had confidence in his integrity. Jack thus at once made
himself at home, and he could not help contrasting his present position to the life he had
been leading for so many days.

His host, John Gournay, who was born in 1655, was the founder of the family, who have since
become known for their wealth and liberality.  At an early day he had joined the Society of
Friends, or Quakers, as they were called, and established himself as a merchant at Norwich,
where he became the owner of several manufactories.  It was greatly in consequence of the encouragement
and support which he gave to the French Protestant refugees that he was enabled to lay the
foundation of the vast wealth of the family in trade, which their industry supplied.  His generosity,
liberality, and industry being thus speedily rewarded by the hand of Providence.  His silk
and wool mills were the best then in England for the usual Norwich manufactures, as also for
other delicate productions, such as crape shawls and dress-fabrics.  Although somewhat grave
and formal in his discourse to strangers, at his genial board his formality soon disappeared,
and Jack Deane, as has been said, passed a pleasanter evening than he had enjoyed for some
time.  Although profane music was not indulged in, Mistress Gournay and Madame de Mertens sang
some very sweet and touching hymns, which went more to Jack's heart than any music he had ever
heard.

Giles Dainsforth insisted on accompanying Jack back to his inn, to which he wished to return,
though hospitably pressed to remain by Mr Gournay. Dainsforth of course had many inquiries
to make about Jack's family, and especially about Kate.  He confided to Jack his intention
of seeking his fortune in the new colony in America, established by Master William Penn, the
son of the celebrated Admiral. 

The same presented a large powerful and coherent Swiss landscape, which to all four walls and
running around the mountains with snow peaks represented, Alpine, waterfalls and lakes. But as the room,
which was intended for earlier this beautiful wallpaper work by half was higher than the room
in which it had just been transplanted, it also the ceiling that can be clothed, so that the mighty
mountain giants, namely the Virgo, the monk, the Eiger and the weather horn, scaring and Finsterarhorn,
in their half the height and collided umbogen their snowy heads in the middle of the low ceiling,
However, where they were obscured by haze and a little lampblack. perched on the wall, however, the green
Alps with red and white cows sown, further down, the blue lakes, Ships went out with colorful
streamers, Inn on terraces could be seen walking gentlemen and ladies in blue and yellow skirts
and frock coats with high old-fashioned hats. Also, soldiers were was at a dead straight line the
whole, lined with white pants and helmets beautiful left red cheeks set off a little next to
the proper agency or printed by the wallpaper printer what the commanding colonel with his
big disapprove Bogenhut and an outstretched arm just seemed, for the half-way red shoes standing next to
the empty slices were considered, like the moon emerging from the earth's shadow during a lunar eclipse.

On
the whole, however, was painted around the country in the height of a seated man, a dark Fouling
of the greasy head of the regulars, which over time have it had rubbed.

Suddenly discovered a pale fellow who was described as preferably the idealist, the painted wallpaper
nocturnal country and used it once to a fiery toasts the gorgeous,
expensive, beautiful country, which the club are so brave Confederates
enclose rather than closer home.

And since these poor in spirit and happiness the country loved, he found a loud echo and it has
been true all well-known patriotic songs. Only a few unstirred journeyman did not care and threw,
as it just pegs ate the herring souls sent up to the eternal Eisfirnen hanging over their heads,
those that remained stuck there.

Here grumbled about the others, and the ideal speaker evildoers their common convictions referred
and said that they had thrown their own souls herring to his country in the face and the pure Alpenfirn
soiled.

"Even herring Souls: But those just laughed and cried! so that it once was disagreement and noise.

Jocundus
put his arms on the table and his head on it and sighed deeply.

Since Jocundus reminded of the beautiful and happy day on which he
first Justine Times had seen, and hid his face even deeper by trouble
with bitter tears held back.

* * * * *

       Meanwhile, Justine remembered with greater longing of the days when
they Jocundus the first was met, and she would have liked him looked
up and made good their injustice, if not always the ratios would have
expired in between.

For the time being was his connection to the people's movement and his special treatment of
the little band lost the impediment, because their whole family and friendship was on the other
side and there is only the darkest views of Case entertained.

She had therefore to employ their thoughts and to satisfy her mind, with renewed Zeal of the pastor
and church activities devoted to nursing and her work on worldly
things extended.

She became head in all possible directions and needed now many good shoes that they make could be
stronger than before, since they always to see on the street was from school to school, from
house to house, from session to session. In all the ceremonies and negotiations, public lectures and
festivities she sat on the front bench, but without that they would have found peace, or the
slightest smile on her pale face had returned. The unrest drove itself into a musical Club,
which they abandoned for a long time, and she sang with serious face and sonorous voice, without
reaching the least happiness. The doctor was even concern and said from, the vibrant melodic
sound of her voice interpreted as an indication of incipient breast disease and one must see to it
that they are beautiful.

All felt well what she misses, she did not help and were suddenly themselves in need of help, because
it broke one of those grim crises from beyond the ocean through the
whole world trade in and shook even the Glorsche house, to stand as
firmly appeared with such sudden fury that it was almost destroyed
and will only with great distress remained.

Blow by blow reports of the accident fell within a few weeks and made the proud people sleepless
nights, the morning to the horror and the long days of incessant Test. Large crowds were tied
goods across the seas, all claims were so good as lost and the accumulated wealth disappeared
from hour to hour with the high percentage Papers in which it was created, so that finally only
the land and some in old land titles existing capital assets was available. But this should dahingeopfert
are to meet their own liabilities, which at the moment when the storm the large traffic just passed.

The men counted and talked pale and quiet days and nights, and the House rules seemed to be frozen.
The servants were working without orders, and prepared the food, but no one ate or knew what
he ate. The clocks went off and were full of grief reared, after she stood still for days. The time
had to be culled, how in the darkness a little light at the other lighting to see can. Some
young Kittens, which until the day of the accident the pastime and
the game of old and young had been, were not seen more suddenly and
retreated with her small jumps so here in a corner back, and when
after some time some peace of mind back into the House had arrived,
all were surprised that the cats under her eyes once grown be.

As it was said that if the honor of the house saved, and all debts will be paid not a penny
earned more in the possession of the family and they remain, destitute entirely of new should
be managed, was the wife Gertrude, who Stauffacherin, and shivering in all their Body, she had
to sit down.

Justine, however, fright and fear of poverty in the heart seized, immediately thought of self-help.
She wanted to, their knowledge instantly into the world and not only themselves, they also get father
and mother, and she designed adventurous plans with feverish haste.

Solo was now the mother again and explained that they have a good portion of the assets Weibergut
as stressful to save the house and make a far existence possible.

The men are to make an agreement with creditors, such as the now almost everywhere done.

The men shook their heads gloomily and said it could do and they did
not want; rather they want to emigrate and work in poor and other
things, the country day and night to to get back to something.

But the Stauffacherin had now recovered its power and eloquence, again, it was on their views
and showed several examples of how such a prudent method survived
the storm, saved the future and, later, any obligation or cheap been
solved, and came to honor was.

All this was to some extent still the mystery of the house.

The many people came to remain with their fabrics and webs and received their wages and new
work, because each Resolution was postponed anxiously. staggered Every day the long hesitation
Men more intent in their strict devotion to duty, at which it as a truly free knock down before
anyone took their eyes.

Even the Stauffacherin was in the act frustrate and with firm conviction that they act only
in the best rights, because they had a Weibergut; since gone down but the Old Man of the Mountains,
the Ehgaumer and his wife to machination against the act and to prevent it. The old man could
not speak because He was attacked by the calamity befallen the children, himself strongly on
suspended possession. He sat on a chair, coughing and talking about the old woman said.

This laid a bundle of yellowed letters pledge on the table and said, as they were bringing the
Old, what they erhauset to help save the good name, but it would have all debts be paid and there
are no business dealings with the women's assets could. She said with so eloquent and powerful
words, that in her white hood, the Zipfel true Stauffacherin seemed
to be, and the latter turned to the window, crying.

Such timidity was expelled from her old, the same time remarked that in the well-furnished
rooms, where the whole family was just the piano and the mirror tables were covered with dust,
and without delay, she began to wipe the same with her handkerchief.

The family decided on the strict and harsh action against himself
and remained in peace and respect.

The free real estate was mortgaged and non-business interrupted, but the time all the members
of the house were poor as church mice, and none had to give a dollar for something unnecessary,
or for a hobby.

Thus fell the Vorsteherschaft and gloss Justin in church and society then and she stayed silent
and ashamed in secret. But she endured this entire destitution and not procured in secret, by type
of impoverished women from the upper layer, all kinds delicate female hand job to earn some pocket
money. She was not aware that them of the very helpless widow, the orphan, abandoned, which
is puny in the same way nourished, took away the bread from the mouth to their instincts to
do enough for possession. The noticeable The modest increase Geldsümmchen, which it acquired in
such a way the more zealous and industrious she was at work, it is their energy and skill in considerable
quantity to be moved and managed, so that the people who sold the goods ordered and, could hardly
enough to turn her from it and they had to withdraw another.

The continual employment was her more so as they work during their heavy Thoughts dwell on either
the same or dispel the faint hopes of a recurrent Happiness could consider. The mother was in the mystery,
they had their pride first, however, fought, but when they acquire for themselves in Justin was
also the means some side issue to deny them the cash for the anxious and angry working men do not longer
dared to speak, she added easily to the sense of the daughter.

Solo father and brothers were finally took notice, they wondered where the many embroidery and knitting
were actually coming incessantly and was finally unable to behind the secret. Now they wanted but
as they all hardships imposed and had their cars, luxury horses and the like, sold everything,
but do not apply for people which would be able not to get a few women, and found it unseemly that
these themselves to manual work proceeded, however, poor workers searched the house and found
this.

The case was therefore suppressed with determination, Justine depend for their needs; as before,
to demand what is needed and no compulsion inflict, because they know that they at that price
is not for sale. Justine was caught, but in her mind does not have the Question to get over.
They had been ruined in the sick addiction to self-employment, which the women of this time
with a fever because of the occurring to any uncertainty in what the men keep the world. She brooded
and brooded and designed modified the plan as a teacher elsewhere a shelter to look for. They make
in the capital with its numerous schools' thought, worked with the secret hope of being able
to meet there rather her husband back than in their parents home, where it was now judged more
harshly than before, although it was known that he is now doing well.

No sooner was this decision that they did not hesitate to execute him, and went to the the priest
to find his advice and mediation. fell first on his way to the vicarage her one and that the clergyman,
who otherwise have been friends of the family, since Accident, which
affected it, never appeared in that was that he lacked even anyone
and no one had remembered to tell him and hear his comfort.

A chilling sensation ran through her when she also suddenly reflected that she herself not been
for several months in the church was decorated by her.

She stood still and looked for the strange state deal down, but it did not succeed in Speed.
The faster they ran forward again, how to win light.

In the rectory garden, she met the wife of the minister, an overlooked woman who left Parsley
picked, and heard from her that he just returned from visiting a
dying man and it seemed a little uncomfortable.

But let Justin go up only, you will certainly visit him . Forward Without delay, they hurried
to his study and came as she was accustomed to vigorous beating fast
one.

He was pale and exhausted in his chair and rested his head on his
hand.

When he turned and got up, he also seemed to her to be emaciated and suffering.

"You see," said the pastor, after he welcomed Justine, "that I can not in good Banana plugs, and you may
explain why I did not have so long seen again. I am in fact, more than you think, in the same
hospital sick as you and yours! "

Justine as a surprise clearer information requested, he continued: "I'm rich want to be and
therefore has in their intercourse with yours, in your home, and listened to me be noted, the
assets used in what kinds of sums of money, I have the trade papers
wrote down what was expected of the largest profit, and I have the
surgery, I saw the make, secretly mocked by even my wife's fortune,
and when I suspected that the house was shaken Glor, I knew at once
that I even lost everything and had squandered the inheritance of
my wife and children and playful.

You do not know yet and I can not tell anyone if I will not dishonor my stand. But you opposite,
since you seem to me so unexpectedly, it pushes me to be frank! "

Justine was shocked; this new loss made her sincere anger and annoyance, and therefore, something
she said indignantly, "But what in the world because you forced into commercial transactions
dare to, because you have a parish and income? "

"I told you," replied the priest with sadness, "that my stand I do not could expose by admitting
my wicked folly, and I am one of the Able inside even more, I left him and therefore will be
rich to live independently can! After that unhappy evening on which I here with your husband argued,
had I had been a thorn in the heart, which I also speak in vain and wegtrotzen wanted. I saw Jocundus
with all the accidents and misfortunes religiously unperturbed blameless and then walked, and
I could not help but think about everything and to consider I, unfortunately,
with reference to the moral aspect of the matter in respect of one's
heart had not done for years.

I found that I'm not religious or Christian more and no priest was more!

"I confess I had that I spend years when I was alone, not the least Engine felt to commemorate
the crucified man, whose name was my calling in life and fed me that my heart and all my senses
only to the world and its amenities if you want, even at their labors and duties go, but without
the slightest shudder own personal devotion, the least dread of that
is handled as our factory Lord and Savior proclaimed, came up to me,
it was day or night.

"Yes, if I still sometimes, without being caused to the professions, the sacred from me for so
issued imaginary person of Christ in solitude, it was more the arrogant
Meaning of a patron, who takes on such a poor devil and trust in him
says: "My dear, you make me much trouble!"

"I finally felt that I had become an acclaimed speaker and well-thirsty babbler, without realizing
it, that I, if I'm not the golden key of a truly otherworldly God's word had, understood the
mystery of my not-men and no more violence had on his mind as a child,
so that I because of the half-truth and the double meaning my words
even a child over in worse situation was.

"I began to be ashamed of the mindless applause, which was taken against me, to I was impossible
because of the craft, my thoughts for my quiet affairs, for the to arrange their own peace, because the loud
with the violence and the requirements the state could not stand,
so I wanted to leave him and my flimsy reformer Rock hang on a nail.

"That to me has now become impossible, at least for now, because I
myself by the Ways wanted to flee the wealth, have even deprived of
the means of existence with a nourishing to establish some security.

"

Justine sat petrified, she had come to seek advice and assistance, and saw another Support,
then a decrease in life, for it flashed like lightning into them, as It was with these things
and why they are not even in their unhappiness stained searched had. A bitter agony rose up in their
working chest, but she was not the same , Yield an even stronger
because compassion was required now, as the minister in tears broke
out and said:

"Today happened to me now the most that I have been
pointed away from a death-bed!

A tough old woman struggling for many hours with the death, which stubbornly all her children hopes
to see again, especially her eldest son died in misery. I get there, full Distracted and worried,
and I think, as I was preparing myself, my self-written, as you know, to do something pantheistic-sounding
prayers for the dying, their questions put to me for the assurance of eternal life untenable, unsafe
speeches, so that the dying woman me Turns her back and the bystanders, the physician support,
take me aside and quietly ask, my pastoral function set here. "

This process told the priest, and covered with broken words at the
end of the face with his handkerchief.

He was so shocked because no one disliked by a professional way can be said of love that he understood
not to exercise according to the rules of art.

On the horrified Justine made the scene an impression as if they fall down a mountain saw. What
seemed to have a rock-solid in hand, she looked shaken and pass away with the Self-confidence
at the sight of this priest and his temple flee. You probably felt the oppressive force, which
in the unassuming, yet hidden process was that there, there, in hundred points may soon be repeated,
but they understood its general meaning and not only felt the painful pressure.

Confused, perplexed, they left without their concern that they brought here to submit or calm
pastor with consolation speeches to do. Only in the streets, the more she's comments the priest
covered and held together with earlier isolated words and incident characteristics, they caught it
right at freezing. They became aware that she had at first no longer a church, and woman in her
senses, through force of habit, it was lost to her courage as a Bee, hovering in the cold autumn
night of endless waves. From the man left, the property lost, and now even without the church community:
it all seemed together you come to an almost infamous outlaw same-making.

The Kirchenlosigkeit so outside their church attendance was, it seemed all the rest Ill luck trap
to seal and, and strangely enough, they now believed the first minister again Word that nothing
was in his tabernacle, while she had her husband's views never us assume, just because he
had no spiritual authority for them.

They walked silently home, took there to spend the next hour and be completed a knitting and
sat down at a gate close to the road, as if to show, that she was still there and does not need
to fear. But she spoke to no one and saw pale on their work, while
her lips mechanically counted the knitting stitches.

The evening drew near, still shining on the sea ships and drove home on the road temporary migrant
workmen without Justine looked up to a very old female, which arduous pilgrimage, therefore,
came before her, stood still, to rest and catch his breath. The essence wearing a high yellow
straw hat on his head, a short red skirt and stockings like these, on the curved back of a white
sack and a stick in his hand and placed so as a pilgrim, which fall
wandered coming from a distant area to the famous pilgrimage sites,
the next few hours was located in the mountains.

As Justine saw that the mother could hardly stand, she said the same thing to her on the Bank
sit. "That will I do like it when your's allowed, beautiful woman," said the pilgrim, and lost
no time to settle down next to her. They also fumbled once in her travel bag and pulled out
a piece of bread by looking around for a fountain, offers her a drink
of water this would open up.

Justine took but a glass of good wine in the old house and gave it to her, and she feasting
pleasure.

"Why do you go at your age alone on the hot, hard road, while all other Pilgrims on the railway and
steamship travel and usually sit together? " asked Justine.

! 'Oh, that would be no merit and no sacrifice for me, poor sinner, "answered the pilgrim; "The
others who travel these days more for pleasure and out of curiosity and do all necessary the
Shrine, a useful prayer. But I walk on my old feet to the Blessed Mary Mother of God, and I am
not only against their holy altar with her, but to the whole long way, they accompanied me on
every step of the way and keeps me if I want to fall, like a good old daughter, her poor mother!
Just now she has me served by your white hand this invigorating drink!

If you only knew how sweet and loving it is, how beautiful, how magnificent! And what power it
has, what wisdom! For all white Council and they all can you! "

While such praise was the mother's rosary is not for a moment hand. Curiously watched her Justine, as
she played constantly with the balls and demanded to know in what way they use him and wrap
around your hand. The old man showed her immediately and wound ball
of string around her poor hands.

Justine gave it a few moments thoughtfully folded and looked so lost in thought to herself, then
she shook but his head slowly and replied the pilgrim woman her rosary, without saying a word.

The
female pilgrims wanted to not rest longer, but still a good short hour to go further, before
he visited the hostel, and it thanked him, promised for the good beautiful woman to make a
prayer, whether you like it or not, and emigrated to the weak in
the dusky evening out, so cheerful and safe as when at home in his
room walked.  From the words which fell from his
mouth it was difficult to ascertain what principles he was inculcating.  He was speaking at
the moment of some wonderful dream with which he had been favoured by Heaven.  He was warning
the people of the dreadful calamities which he knew, in consequence of what he had seen in
his vision, were about to fall upon the land.  He seemed, however, to be dealing out tolerably
even-handed justice towards all other denominations.  He had nothing in its favour to say of
Protestant Episcopacy, and as little of Romanism.  He was hurling abuse at Presbyterianism,
and warning the Independents that their day of grace had passed, that they were no longer holding
up a standard in Israel, while he condemned the Baptists for maintaining unscriptural doctrines.

"Woe! woe! woe!" he shouted, "woe to this country! woe to this people! Listen, ye stiff-necked
and stubborn generation!  A new revelation is about to be vouchsafed to you; will you receive
it, or will you refuse it?  Those who are ready to receive it will hold up their hands, and
shout with joy at the thoughts of their emancipation from the slavery under which ye have hitherto
groaned in the bonds of bitterness and the darkness of despair!  Those who have made up their
minds not to receive it must take their departure from among us, and go back to the place whence
they came, there to await till summoned to go down into the pit full of fire and brimstone,
already boiling up to welcome them!"

No one moved from among the crowd, the greater number of whom held up their hands, as invited
by the speaker, and gave way to a shrill cry, which swelled by degrees into a loud ringing
shout, which was repeated again and again.

Jack, to satisfy himself, asked Pearson if he knew the name of the speaker.

"I know his name, Master Deane," answered his companion: "you must ask the bystanders if they
know it.  They will probably tell you that it's the Reverend Simon Stirthesoul, one of the
newest of new lights who have appeared in the kingdom in this favoured reign.  There are many
such; and of great advantage will they prove to the spiritual welfare of the people.  They
have an especial work, it seems to me, to show that all the old forms of worship are wrong,
and invent as many new ones as their imaginations can devise.  Wherever they spring from, they're
serving the Pope of Rome well, for the more the Protestants are divided, the better will it
be for his faithful children in this realm of England."

Jack wished to stop and hear more of the remarks made by the preacher, but to this Pearson
objected, observing that he did not wish to delay, and that they would bait their steeds a
few miles beyond the town, at a roadside inn.

Pearson expressed a more important truth than he himself was aware of at the time.  From the
time of Elizabeth up to that period, a number of Popish priests, chiefly Jesuits, had been
introduced into the country under various disguises, having received dispensations from the
Pope to act any part they might consider most advisable for the establishment of new and strange
doctrines; thus dividing Protestant interests.  There is undoubted evidence of this.  Most
of these men, well trained in foreign universities, accustomed to the ways of the world, were
admirably fitted for the part they were destined to perform.  Some pretended to be Episcopalians,
others Presbyterians, and others Nonconformists of all denominations.  Many exerted their talents
in the invention of new sects, and they were certain to gain proselytes, being well versed
in the study of human nature.  They knew thoroughly how to adapt the principles they advocated,
and the tenets they taught, to the tastes of their hearers, and there can be no doubt that
the rise of the many strange sects which appeared at different times, from the accession of
Elizabeth, was owing to the efforts of these Popish emissaries.  A considerable number were
from time to time apprehended, and found possessed of treasonable documents, proving that they
were Papists in disguise.  Some indeed were executed in consequence of having been found guilty
of treasonable practices, while others narrowly escaped the same fate.  It seemed but probable,
from his connexion with the Jacobites, that the Reverend Simon Stirthesoul was one of these
disguised plotters.

"I gave you a packet of letters from Mr Harwood," observed Pearson, as they were standing in
the evening at their inn.  "If you look over them, I shall be able to tell you the best route
to take in order to call on the persons to whom they are directed.  Your friend made it a great
point that you should deliver them in person, and I am sure that he is a gentleman you would
wish to oblige."  He fixed his keen glance at Jack as he spoke.  "The greater number are, I
see, directed to gentlemen in Yorkshire.  You may well consider it an honour to be so employed.
Sir Herbert Willington, I see; Colonel Slingsby, Joe Hovingham of Hovingham Hall, Master Haxby
of Haxby Grange, are all good men and true.  In Northumberland too, I see you have a few to
Oxminston, and Widdrington. It will take you some time to get through them all, for they're
not men who let you come to their door and ride away again without showing you hospitality.
It will give more time to Jock McKillock to get the herd together."

Deane made many inquiries of his companion with regard to the character of the people on whom
he was to call, and he was somewhat surprised to find that they were all strong Jacobites,
the greater number indeed being Romanists.  Still, his suspicions were not sufficiently aroused
to make him refuse to deliver them.  This would of course have been the wisest thing to have
done.  He was, in truth, anxious in every way to please Mr Harwood.  He still continued to
indulge in dreams of some day winning the fair Alethea.  He very naturally thought that if
he could please her father, he would have less difficulty in so doing.

The horse Pearson had selected for Deane showed wonderful speed and bottom, and seemed scarcely
fatigued when, between sunrise and sunset, he had gone over the best part of a hundred miles.
When once in Yorkshire they proceeded at a somewhat slower pace, having somewhat longer time
to rest at the houses at which they called.  On these occasions, Pearson assumed the character
of Jack's servant, and invariably accompanied the horses to the stables, and stayed during
the visit with the grooms and other servants.  He was not idle, however, though he might have
appeared to be so.  He lost no opportunity of making inquiries as to what was going on in the
neighbourhood, as well as informing himself of the proceedings of their masters.

Jack had no cause to complain of any want of hospitality on the part of those to whom he delivered
Mr Harwood's letters, but in several instances he was received with an air of stiffness and
formality which showed that full confidence was not placed in him.  Indeed, when on one or
two occasions he was cross-questioned, having really no information to give, he was speedily
again dismissed.  He received, however, several letters in return, which he was especially
directed to deliver in person to Mr Harwood.  On looking at the covers, he was surprised to
find that no superscription was placed on them.

"Never mind," was the answer, "you know for whom they are intended. Keep them securely, and
the object we have in view will be attained."

He mentioned, at length, the circumstance to Pearson.

"It's all right," he replied; "a letter without an address, provided the bearer knows to whom
he is to deliver it, is safer in these perilous times than a letter with one.  Keep them carefully,
Master Deane, and Mr Harwood will be duly grateful to you when you deliver them."

As they advanced north, Pearson invariably left the high-road to seek for quarters at some
distance from it during the night.  Before lying down to sleep on these occasions, he never
failed to visit the stables. Jack observed also that he remained booted and spurred during
the night. Generally before daybreak they were again in the saddle, and proceeding at a rapid
rate on their road.  The Cheviots were already in sight, when one morning Pearson roused up Jack.

"To horse, my lad, to horse!" he exclaimed.  "If you wish to retain your liberty, or your life
indeed, you will put a hundred miles between you and the Cheviots before sundown.  I have just
had the information brought me, that you have been accused of delivering letters to disaffected
persons, and that a plot has been discovered for dethroning the present king and bringing back
King James.  As I did not see the letters which you had to deliver, I cannot say how far the
accusation is just, but to you it will come to the same thing.  I have so far led you into
the scrape by giving you the letters, and I have resolved to bear you company; for I doubt,
without me, that you would manage to escape."

"This is bad news indeed," exclaimed Jack, sitting up in bed, and beginning to dress as rapidly
as he could.

"But if I go south, how shall I be able to execute Mr Strelley's commission?  What will Jock
McKillock do with the cattle he has brought thus far on the way? and what am I to do with the
money with which I was to pay for them?"

"I have thought of all that, my friend," answered Pearson.  "Give me the money, and I will
settle the matter with Jock McKillock, and the cattle shall be driven south as safely as if
you were at their tails."

Jack could not help feeling considerable hesitation as to the propriety of yielding to Pearson's
proposal.  Honest and unsuspicious as he was himself, great doubt had crossed his mind as to
the character of his companion.  To be sure, if he persisted in continuing his journey, and
endeavouring to meet Jock McKillock, he very likely might be apprehended, and in that case
he would certainly lose the money in his possession; but then if Pearson was not honest, it
would equally be lost.  The latter saw by the working of his countenance, the doubts that were
crossing his mind.

"You hesitate to give me the cash," he observed.  "You are perfectly right; at the same time,
I promise you that it shall be properly spent for the advantage of your employer.  Oaths are
like pie-crusts, too often only made to be broken, therefore I will not swear what I will do:
but accept the promise of a man who wishes you well, and you will have no cause to regret having
trusted me."

Jack at length, seeing that there was no help for it, agreed to Pearson's proposal, and, though
not without some reluctance, handed him over the money for the proposed purchase of cattle.

"It is safer in my pocket than in yours, let me tell you, Master Deane," said Pearson, as he
stowed it away in his leathern pouch.  "There breathes not the man on either side of the border
who would attempt to take it from me."

CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

ADVENTURES AT THE HAGG.

"There is ne'er use fashing yourself, my young friend, about the matter," observed Pearson,
in his usual unconcerned manner, "many as pretty a man as yourself has been in a far worse
difficulty, and my advice now to you is to make the best of it.  I could hide you away among
the mountains in the north, where, should every man in Dutch William's army be sent out on
the search, they could not find you; but, I'm thinking, a lad of your spirit would not be altogether
satisfied with that sort of life.  Better far come with me south.  There will soon be work
for you to do in that quarter, such as will be more suitable to your taste, I'm thinking, than
following at the heels of a drove of bullocks.  I own a dairy-farm in the fens of Lincolnshire,
where I have a wife and daughter, and am known as a steady, quiet-going farmer, who, may be,
has a little better notion about horse-flesh than his neighbours, and bestrides occasionally
a fleeter steed than most of them.  No one would think of looking for me there, nor will they
for you, or, if they did, it would be no easy job to find us.  For that matter, indeed (your
vanity will not be offended, I hope, when I say it), your countenance has so little remarkable
about it, and so few people know you, that you might safely go to London without the slightest
risk of detection.  You should understand that some friends of ours may ask you to undertake
a commission of importance in the metropolis, and I would advise you not to refuse it.  All
your expenses will be paid; and if you prove trustworthy and discreet, it will lead to your
further advantage."

"You have proposed so much to me, Master Pearson, that I am rather confused, and must think
a little before I reply," answered Jack.  "You tell me that information has been laid against
me for delivering treasonable letters between persons desirous of overturning the present order
of things and of restoring King James to the throne, and that if I am not very careful I shall
be taken and imprisoned, and perhaps hung. Now, even though I have really been accused, as
you have heard, of treason, I am sure that I can have no difficulty in proving my innocence.
I was not aware of the contents of the letters I delivered, and have certainly no wish to overturn
the present Government."

"Very possibly, my young friend," remarked Pearson; "but it will avail you nothing to say that
you did not know the contents of the letters, or that you did not do this or that.  You must
confess to having delivered the letters, and you cannot prove that you did not know their contents
and are not anxious to support the cause they advocate.  Judges and juries require proofs of
a man's innocence.  Can you give proofs of yours? that is the question, Master Deane.  Besides,
let me ask you, suppose a certain young lady, who shall be nameless, were to promise you the
best reward she can bestow, if you will join heart and hand in the cause her father supports,
what reply would you make--eh, my lad?"

"You seem to know every thing, Master Pearson!" exclaimed Jack, somewhat annoyed at his companion's
familiarity, and not wishing to give a direct answer.  "With regard to the probability of my
being unable to prove my innocence of the accusations which may be brought against me, I acknowledge
that you are right; but with respect to other matters, it is no man's business to interfere."

"Of course, Master John Deane, you are the best judge in your own affairs.  I gave you but
the advice of a friend," answered Pearson: "what motive can I have to speak otherwise?  But
again let me remind you, that if you venture within the lion's jaws it will be no easy matter
to get you out again.  Be wise, then, put yourself under my guidance, and you will be safe.
Go your own gait, and you will find yourself shut up in prison, or, maybe, run your head into
the noose. However, an obstinate man is not to be persuaded."

"But I am not an obstinate man," said Jack; "I believe that your advice is kindly intended,
and I beg that you will understand I do not reject it.  I only ask time to think over the matter,
that I may decide what course I should pursue."

It was not without a considerable amount of vexation and disappointment that Deane found himself
galloping away to the south, instead of proceeding, as he had hoped, over the border into Scotland.
He felt some doubt, also, as to whether he had acted wisely in confiding so completely to Pearson;
and he also regretted having allowed himself to be made a tool, as it appeared too evident
that he had been, of the Jacobite party.  Still he did not blame Mr Harwood, and thought that
probably some of the other gentlemen whom he had visited were the cause of the accusation being
brought against him.  Though Pearson pressed him to proceed south, he did not object to the
proposal Jack made of visiting Harwood Grange on his way.

"It is the best thing you can do," he observed.  "You can then in person deliver the letters
you have received, and he may better be able to explain matters to you than I am, and he will
also advise what steps to take that you may clear yourself from the accusation which has been
brought against you."

Jack's heart beat at the thought of the proposed visit.  The inconvenience and disappointment
which he had gone through, seemed as nothing when he contemplated again seeing Alethea.  It
did not occur to him that he was rushing into a trap in which he was very likely to lose his
liberty altogether.  They had proceeded about forty or fifty miles to the south, when a horseman
was seen approaching them.  He drew up as he reached Pearson, and exchanged greetings with
him.  He then turning round, and allowing Jack to go on out of ear-shot, the two rode alongside
each other.  In the course of ten minutes or so they again overtook Jack.

"Mr Deane," said Pearson, "I have fortunately met a friend who knows the country well, and
will prove a good guide to you.  He is willing to return south, that I may ride to the north
and make the arrangements which you were to have done with our friend Jock McKillock, for the
purchase of the cattle.  There is no time to be lost, and I assure you that you may trust my
friend as you would me."

Without any further remark, Pearson shook Jack by the hand, and, wheeling round his horse,
galloped away to the north, while the stranger rode on alongside Jack.  As Jack glanced at
his companion, it struck him that he had seen him before, but where, or under what circumstances,
he in vain attempted to discover.  He was a strongly-built, active-looking man, considerably
younger than Pearson, with a determined look and expression in his countenance which Jack did
not altogether like.  He did not seem either much inclined for conversation, and answered briefly
all the questions which Deane put to him.

"I think we have met before," said Jack.

"It's very likely," was the reply; "but you have the advantage of me, if you know where it
was, for I see so many people in the course of a day, that it would be a difficult matter for
me to recollect those I have met once in a way.  I will give you a useful piece of advice,
however: remember, the fewer questions you ask, the less likely you will be to have falsehoods
told you.  You have a long ride before you, and you will be wiser if you save your breath,
instead of wasting it in talking."

It is hopeless to enter into conversation with one who is determined not to speak.  Jack found
this to be the case, his companion generally only answering in monosyllables to all the remarks
he made.

When, at length, they stopped at nightfall at a farm-house, similar to those which Pearson
had selected on their way north, his companion pursued the same system, exchanging only a few
words with the people of the house, and scarcely speaking to him all the evening.  As Pearson
had done, he visited the stables several times to see that the horses were well cared for,
evidently considering it as important as did his friend, that they should be in a fit condition
for a hard gallop.  They travelled, indeed, a couple of days before Jack discovered the name
of his companion.  He at length heard him spoken to as Master Burdale.

"Yes, that's my name," he said, when Jack addressed him as such; "I am known here and elsewhere
as Ned Burdale, at your service."

Jack at last became heartily tired of his companion's society: at the same time he had to confess
to himself that there was nothing particularly with which he could find fault about the man,
except his sulky silence.  With great satisfaction Deane at length caught sight of the well-remembered
patches of woodland scenery by which he knew that he was once more within the ancient boundaries
of Sherwood Forest.  He now, for the first time, told Ned Burdale of his intention of visiting
Harwood Grange.

"My directions were to conduct you to Master Pearson's farm in the fens," said his companion.
"I cannot be answerable for your safety if you part company from me."

"I have no desire to do so," said Jack; "but if you will accompany me to the Grange, as soon
as I have delivered my message to Mr Harwood, I shall be ready to set forward to the place
you speak of."

"Remember, then, it's at your own risk," said his companion.  "I have my reasons for not wishing
to go there myself, but I will wait for you at a farm which we shall reach in a couple of hours,
and from thence you can ride over to the Grange.  I would advise you to go there in the evening,
to avoid being seen by the people in the neighbourhood.  We can send a messenger on before
to the Squire, that he may be on the watch for you. Take my advice: don't allow a bright eye
and a rosy cheek to detain you there longer than is necessary."

Jack, being unable to suggest any better arrangement, was compelled to be contented with his
companion's proposal.

Putting spurs to their horses, they galloped on through the forest.  Now they had to pass several
miles of cleared country; then again they came to more forest-land.  Now they passed over a
wild piece of heath; then through dingle and dale, and thick copses, and along the banks of
a stream, avoiding the high-road as much as possible, and making their way wherever they could
across the country.  At length they entered a thicker part of the forest than any they had
hitherto passed through.

"We shall soon be at the farm," observed Burdale.  "We will take a day's rest then for the
sake of our steeds; for though at a push they would have gone twice as far without knocking
up, it's as well to give them a holiday where it can be done."

At length a grey-stone tower, with a building attached to it, round which ran a broad balcony,
appeared in sight.  It had evidently been a hunting-lodge in olden times, and from the balcony
ladies fair used to shoot with cross-bow, or, perhaps, in later times with fire-arms, at the
deer as they were driven past.  An old man and woman, apparently as old as the building itself,
came forth at the sound of the horses' hoofs. They looked somewhat askance at Jack, but welcomed
Burdale as an acquaintance.

"You can give us shelter for the night, Master Rymer, I hope," he said, jumping from his horse.
"Here, I will help look after the steeds, while your dame shows my companion the way into your
house."

The old couple continued to cast somewhat doubtful glances at Jack.

"Have no fear," said Burdale; "he is of the right sort, and no risk of his peaching, even if
he did find out any thing he should not know."

With this assurance, as soon as Jack dismounted, the old man took his horse, and accompanied
Burdale round the tower to the stables.  The dame, meantime, beckoned to Jack to follow her.
A flight of dilapidated stone steps led them up to the entrance-hall, which occupied the whole
of one floor of the tower.  A rough stair led to another floor above it; and Jack observed
the top of a flight of steps of more pretensions, descending apparently to chambers below.

"Sit down, young sir," said the dame, pointing to an old oak chair. "Thou wilt be hungry after
thy long ride; and I will prepare a steak for you and Ned Burdale."

The view from the window of the tower was confined on all sides by the forest, through which,
however, here and there glades opened out for some distance, up which, in former days, the
deer were accustomed to sweep by, and afford an opportunity to fair dames and lords to exercise
their skill with their fowling-pieces.  Already the sun was sinking beneath the tops of the
trees; and Jack began to fear that he should not have time to reach Harwood Grange before the
night altogether closed in. He waited impatiently, therefore, for the return of Burdale, purposing
to set off immediately his horse should have had its food and enjoyed a short rest.  His companion,
however, was longer than he expected, and by the time he arrived the meal prepared by the old
dame was almost ready.

"Take my advice," said Burdale: "remain here quietly to-night, and to-morrow you will be able
to visit the Grange, and give our horses sufficient time to rest, that we may continue our
journey into Lincolnshire.  The distance from this to the Grange is far greater than you suppose:
you could not reach it till an hour or more after dark, and you would scarcely be able to find
your way back through the forest by yourself."

Unwilling as Jack was to give up his purpose of paying a visit to his friends that evening,
he was compelled to comply with his companion's wishes, for Burdale gave him to understand
very clearly that he had no intention of accompanying him.  A substantial meal of venison-steaks,
wheaten bread, and oaten cakes, to which Jack was nothing loath to do ample justice, was soon
placed on the table.

"Come, Master Rymer, you can find us a flagon of wine, too, and of the best, I know that,"
said Burdale.  "Come, man, rummage out your stores, you used not to be niggard of your liquor."

The old man, after some hesitation, pretended or real, took a bunch of keys, and descended
the stairs to the chamber beneath the hall.  He soon returned with a flagon of wine, which
his guests pronounced to be excellent.  Burdale drank freely himself, and pressed Jack to imitate
his example.  Being generally temperate, Jack found at length that he had taken more wine than
was his wont, and began to feel an unusual drowsiness stealing over him.  The old couple kept
up a conversation with Ned Burdale, seemingly somewhat indifferent of Jack's presence. Now
and then they addressed him.

"You belong to these parts, do you?" asked the old man, fixing his keen glance on Jack.

"I was born and bred in Nottingham," answered Jack.

"And never been out here at the Hagg before?"

"No," said Jack, "I never heard of the place before."

"Well, to be sure it's a good long distance from the town, and away from all high-roads.  You
would have a hard job to find it, even if you were looking for it, I suspect."

"You have a bold heart, I hope," said the old woman, "for those who spend a night in this house
require one."

"I am not much given to be afraid," answered Jack, laughing; "but what makes you say that?"

"Why, for a good reason: because the old tower is haunted.  We didn't like it when we first
came here, but we've got accustomed to it.  There was an old family lived here in the time
of Charles, the king whose head was cut off, when all the men of the family lost their lives
in the Civil Wars, and the ladies died of broken hearts, or something of that sort.  At all
events, the old tower was left deserted, and for many years no one came to live in it.  At
length, one family came to try and see how it would suit them, but they very soon gave up;
and then another and another rented the farm, and tried to stop in the tower, but they could
not stand the sights they saw, or the sounds they heard, and threw it up, one after the other.
At last my good man and I came here.  We were told before what we were to expect, and so we
made up our minds for the worst.  Well, the very first night we came, as we were sitting here
at supper, just as we may be now, we heard the ghosts of the family to whom the tower had belonged
all talking away below us.  Sometimes it was an old man's voice, then a young girl's, and then
the voice of a strong man of middle age, and then a youth, maybe, like yourself, and young
children.  It was curious to hear them go on in that way.  We could not make out what they
said exactly, but there was a change in the tone of their voices, just as clearly as if they
had been in the room with us. 

At this moment came with his arms Dietegen home. Since it across the lawn therefore was it
not heard the caressing and he looked in top concern, what he was saw before him. Embarrassed
and blushing, he retired as quietly as possible back and avoided the House to win the back
door. But there he suddenly heard a loud from the forest Screaming and shouting as if people would
be armed or dangerous. Without hesitation, went Dietegen to the noise. Soon he found the solid
so happy society in terrible condition. gone mad by jealousy and general wine, were the young men
on the way back from the bonfire, as it mixes with the women went, and had fallen behind the
other be attacked with daggers, so that more than one bleed. But just as Dietegen arrived, the
crooked town clerk had enraged the young mayor stabbed with his sword, the, also the sword in
hand, the green herb was and just gave up the ghost, while the other is beautiful pairs still packed to
the gurgling stopped and shocked the women screamed for help, except Küngolts, the deathly pale but
curious and open-mouthed staring at the frightful spectacle.

»Küngolt what is said Dietegen to her when he sees rapidly;?

It was the first Words he addressed to them for a long time. She flinched, looked at him but
relieved as at. But he jumped now without residence at the combatants and succeeded with some
vigorous efforts to bring the great young men apart, and the dead to them To show what they
could drop the arms straight and very soon destroyed by the body, soon on the grim Schafürli
watched the staring madly around.

Meanwhile, farmers were at hand and also the returning servants, which Ruechensteiner time being captured
and tied the Schafürli.

That was a bad morning, followed. The woodsman was with the evil Violand engaged, his head
was humming very bothersome, a dead Ruechensteiner was in the home, others had been piled up, and
before it was noon, a delegation from Ruechenstein appeared with the old Mayor himself, to ask
about the accidents and the development and all account to demand.

But already in the tower had caught the town clerk, who knew him as
the murderer of Schultheiss son went to the collar, fierce action
against the women, mainly from Seldwyla Küngolt levied against whom
he accused of sorcery and witchcraft.

That rumbling little girl had the monk, which it now forgave the Fläschlein a few words zuzustecken
known and this is where the Schafürli.

To the horror of the trade Seldwylers turned on the same day against the child of the Forester
and against his family, because everyone in Seldwyla both in Ruechenstein,
believed in the effect of magic potions, and the present Ruechensteiner
appeared so threatening to that the prestige and popularity of the
forester, the imprisonment of Küngolt could not turn away, especially
since he felt paralyzed in his mind as.

She admitted the fact, a
so soon, half unconscious with terror, and with Schafürli his companion
was released.

The Ruechensteiner now demanded that magic witch, which have harmed their families and causes
the death of one of their citizens, they ought to Punishment will be delivered. This was not
granted, and those subjected to rumbling with the corpse son of the mayor from there. But afterwards
when they heard that the Seldwylers the girl were only sentenced to one year's imprisonment mild,
woke the old enmity again, who slept for a number of years, and it was dangerous for anyone Seldwylers,
to enter their spell.

The city Seldwyla now held for crimes that they according to their
view of life of the lesser counted and the circumstances be treated
with leniency, was not a prison but hired the condemned, especially
when it acted to protect women and young people, at some a household
for the detention and care.

Because it should be related to the poor Küngolt Ratstube where they are issued to a public improvement.

The
woodsman, whose happiness was then said to Dietegen sigh, it was a sour Passage for him to
go to the town hall and watch for the child, because it had any of the His family be with him during
this bitter hour. Since Dietegen said: "I want it already What to do if I am good enough for you,
"The forester shook his hand. "Do it," he said, "You shall have you
for that!"

Dietegen went to where the deputies of the Council sat, and some increase Funny and a handful of
curious onlookers gathered. He had looked around a bit and saw his sword valiantly and gloomy
looking out.

Now when Küngolt was brought in, pale and worried, and they should stand before the table, Dietegen
quickly pulled up a chair and left her to sit by himself behind the
Chair turned and leaned his hand on his back.

She had surprised him and looked at saw with a painful smile back at him, but he apparently looked
calm and they strictly overhead.

The first who did a bid on their confinement, was the town piper, a drunk Man who was hergeschickt
by his wife, to the acquisitions of the shattered some circumstances
to improve, had hoped because insonderlich that the prisoners from
their parental home openly or secretly good would accrue to all kinds
of which one to take possession or at least could make partakers.

"Want to town musicians," asked the Dietegen Küngolt short, and they said 'no,' after they watched
the red-nosed beduselten and musician. The laughed and said, "Is all right with me!" fluctuated
up and down.

Then offered an old fur cap maker and Seckler Küngolt on which they bravely for sewing intended
to stop to pull a great benefit from it.

He had an open Damage to the leg, which he anointed the whole day and paved, and a greenhouse
on your head was like a chicken egg, which Küngolt feared as a child when she enters the school
and had passed by his workshop. So when Dietegen asked if she wanted this, "said They turn no,
and he pulled it nagging.

Now emerged a money changer on the one hand because of his usurious
and ugly Avarice, and was notorious for his vile on the other lust.

But scarcely had the his red eyes on the leaning Küngolt and opened my mouth to offer, then
waved Dietegen him, glancing at him menacingly, away with his hand, without the frightened girl
. Ask

Now came only a few ordinary people, against which was not probably
something wrong with that, and these have now been admitted to the
actual auction or Gant.

At least demanded for their inclusion and nutrition of the gravedigger at the city church, a
quiet, respectable man, what a good woman and, in his opinion, had a suitable premises and already
Some convicts had this kind of houses.

This was Küngolt slammed by the Council's delegation and immediately
taken to his house, which Located between the churchyard and a side
street was.

Dietegen went with him to see where they would be accommodated. That was in a small open porch
of the house, which directly in the dead garden and bordered by the same closed by an iron
grating was. There used namely the gravedigger in the warmer months, its prisoners to be, while them
over the winter just in the room and accepted with a light iron chain, Foot of the oven band.

As was Küngolt in their prison, however, and only by a grille of the
graves of the dead looked separately, also noted in the immediate
vicinity of the ancient ossuary was filled with skulls and other bones,
she began to tremble and implored they would not be there if it be
night.

The wife of the gravedigger, however, which just a straw mattress and a blanket dragged cause,
even a kind of curtain could affix to the grid said that could not be serious and would add
the stay only for their charitable penance for their sinful sense.

Since Dietegen said: "Be calm, I am not afraid of the dead and ghosts, and will come in the night so
long here, and watch by the grid until you've also used to it! "

He said to her, but so that the woman could not hear, and then went to Home. There he found the
sad woodsman, as he just agreed with Viola ends was that they wanted
to keep their wedding until Küngolts penalty over and the bad Thing
would be fairly compensated.

Violand in doing so kept quiet as a mouse, satisfied that they got off as the real author of
the unfortunate consequences of witchcraft and its so good was. The rigorous interrogation,
they also have been subjected to, for its statement that they only kept those love potion so that
he is not in the wrong hands, come a need to believe and they fired.

As the dawn was over and the Midnight in the suits now are made Dietegen unseen on, took his
sword and a small bottle of good wine and rose again in the city down, where he without delay
over the churchyard wall and swung fearlessly over the graves went
before Küngolts eerie abode.

She sat silently huddled on their pallets behind the curtain and listened, trembling every noise,
for they had, before the witching hour had already seen some horrors. In the home leg of a cat
was crossed off the bone, so that the same were a bit rattled softly. Then the night wind, the
bushes on the graves moved so that it rustled softly, and turned the tap on the roof turret of the
church, which was a strange sound, the sound was heard in the day before.

So when Küngolt the approaching footsteps heard, she was terrified again, and shuddered, as But
he attacked through the bars and pushed back the curtain, that the full moon lit up the room, and
she called softly as she rose hurriedly, ran to meet him and held
out both hands by the grid.

»Dietegen," she cried, and burst into tears the first to shed it since the fatal day could, for
she had lived until now in a rigid stupor.

Dietegen gave her but the hand does not, but the wine bottle and said, "Take a sip Wine, it will
do you good. "She drank and took on the good bread of her father's house, the he brought her.
So it was better for her courage, and when she saw that he did not continue with it wanted to
talk, she moved silently back to her bed and wept quietly, until they sank into a peaceful
sleep.

Dietegen but she held to his teenage brittle and in terms of his inexperience has become an evil
creature that can not do right, and he woke up with her, as he himself sat on a wall, leaning
on the old grave stone of her dead mother's sake and because He himself
owed his life.

Küngolt slept until the sun rose, and when she awoke, she saw that still left Dietegen was.

In such a way, he came one night after another, to watch over her, for he looked for his faith
the place for, in fact, dangerous for someone who did not have a good conscience and full of
fear was. Every time he brought her some solace to them and asked about what she wanted, and he
taught her everything seemed right.

He also came when it rained and stormed and never missed a night, and if, after the then popular
belief in respect of the dead and their Driver Features infamous nights were, it seemed all the
more timely.

Küngolt in turn directed a so unnoticed that during the day its curtain
moved in order to hide from the curious, she said, when people came
to the churchyard, In fact, however, to sleep, for they loved to be
awake during the night to no Eye of the dark form of her guardian
to use, and over it and and how everything had come to think, as he
imagined them sleeping.

She felt surrounded himself by a new, unexpected happiness, as soon as he came and took them to
their thoughts could indulge in his presence still and silent. His harsh judgments she had no idea
and hoped to win her right to him again, as he proved to be so true. Not as thought her father, who
visited once a week, and if they then almost every time, so here in any a way Dieterich gene
called names and he saw that she turned to him again, sigh it internally, because he probably wished
that the semi-lost child care through the good son would be saved,
but feared that the will hardly an aspiring and already locked want
to buy was a witch.

Meanwhile, still others visit was set at Küngolt. The scribe of Ruechenstein, the violent Krumm
Schafürli hump, could not forget the beautiful creature and felt to be strongly populated by the
curvatures of the body, blood flowing from her image and vehicles,
according to his faith as a witch, which at night alone on a river
then shoot in dark Kahne.

He thought so because he was a daring fellow, instead of the Capuchins, the originator to try his
own healing and deliverance, and wandered in the dark night on the mountain and up to the churchyard,
where she was imprisoned. Since it was not yet the time to which Dietegen appear to be maintained
and his steps sounded strange, so frightened and ducked Küngolt behind
their curtain.

Schafürli but lit a little light he brought, pulled back the cloth and lit into the barred
room until he discovered them.

approach, "Come, young witch," he whispered fiercely, half aloud, "and give me both hands and
your mouth because you have to heal me what you're spoiled!

"

They recognized him by his form, and the memory of all that happened one evil, and the presence
of the man they met with such anxiety that, without letting a sound, shaking like a leaf.

Since the ratchet started Reiber to shake up the grid, and because it is not particularly strong was,
rather, to serve only for weaker prisoners, had he made as if to it by force to lift off its hinges.
At the same moment there came Dietegen, saw the operation and seized the Schafürli on the shoulder.
The screamed wildly and wanted to pull his dagger. But Dietegen held his hands firmly and wrestled
with him until he had defeated him. He thought if he it capture and display, or whether he
should just drive him away, and as he related the the incident did
not know, and wanted to create not a new complication for Küngolt,
he let the crooked man running, helping him to safety of his life
ban from ever again to come to the site.

At the same time he went into the house and caused the death knell the prisoners to take now
in the room, since in any case be the autumn before the door and the nights were too cold for the
previous stay.

Küngolt was so still that night with the conventional light chain at the foot of the Oven bound.
It was the building of a sleek green tiles, which in relief the history
of man's creation and the fall represented, at the four corners the
furnace, the four great prophets preceding winding columns, and the
whole formed a non-structured unzierlich monument attached to it was
now nestled on Küngolt the stove was sitting.

She was glad of the more sheltered location and rescue, which they
thanked the Dietegen, and wrote all his loyal attitude for them, although
he never spoke to that night had spoken to her and go away after a
day case without further notice.

But when the good was such Küngolt installed, we found a new lover of her Beauty in the person
of a chaplain, which all sorts of small shops on the priest Church concerned and to exercise
even the spiritual assistance to the sick and prisoners had. The little priest was now that Küngolt
sat in the warm room, eager to do it to her keep winning bids, their tendency to drive out the
magic of love potions and Spendierung and while enjoying its beautiful sights and lovely nature.
For since the time their suffering was a new kind of beauty come over her, she was a mature,
slim, although become pale image of women, whose eyes in a gentle and lovely fire incident, surrounded
by a funeral shade. It was, apart from the binding, as a member of the House held in which
there were also some children, and when the chaplain came, he was a glass of wine or beer hosts
for which the forester as provided. Now, if the Priest had done his little speech, his refreshment
took them and you can only still remained to be watching the sinner comforted a little, and
modestly about their caressing hand, then left Küngolt an awakening, small graceful serenity by
she thought, what a magnificent lover, in her opinion, this little priest compared possessed Dietegen.

So
it happened that the girl was modest in his joy after the day of
the better future had dreamed of the evening's favorite was the gravedigger
and people they moved her to the table to the stove.

Also in the New Year's night, which now came and went it so, and the priest joined them, so
that the undertaker, his wife and children and sat around the chaplain at the connected Küngolt
around the table, played with nuts and Küngolt just laughed out loud about something that had
said the priest, while he held her hand, entered as Dietegen to his protégé and his master's
child some good things from to bring home. An unconscious train the heart, which had fallen
asleep after her homesickness but let him take the intent to stay for about an hour, so Küngolt
which the first New Year's night of her young life spent outside the house, someone from their
own had with him.
  But what can I now do?  I am in his power; and if I were to go back to Nottingham,
I should be in difficulty about that poaching affair; while, if I offend him, he can at any
moment inform against me for delivering those letters.  Well, I must go through with it, and
wait patiently for the result."

Such thoughts occupied his mind till he reached the clump of trees within which he expected
to find Burdale and the horses.  The shades of evening were already approaching, and a thick
mass of brushwood, which grew outside, prevented him from seeing into the interior of the wood.
He had to walk round some distance indeed before he could find an entrance.  More than once
he gave a whistle, the sign agreed on, without receiving any answer.  The idea occurred to
him that Burdale had turned traitor, or, weary of waiting for him, had gone back with the horses.
At length he shouted, "Master Burdale!  Master Burdale! where are you?"

He was at last relieved by seeing the man leading the horses towards him.

"Why, Mr Deane, you shouted loud enough to wake up Robin Hood and his merry men from their
graves!" said his guide, as he came up.  "It's to be hoped no strangers were passing whom we
should not like to meet!  You forgot the side of the wood where you left me.  However, let
us mount now and be off, for the night promises to be dark, and I should like to get into a
part of the forest I know better than this while we have a little twilight to guide us."

A ride through a forest in the dusk is a difficult matter, and dangerous withal, from the outstretched
boughs overhead, and slippery roots, and holes beneath.  Fully three hours were occupied in
reaching the Hagg.

"Go in!" said Burdale to Jack, as they came in front of the old building.  "I will take the
horses round to the stables; and you will be welcome there."

"I hope I may not see any more of the ghosts!" said Jack: "I had enough of them last night."

"As to that, I don't know," answered Burdale; "but do you follow the old people's example,
and let them alone, and they will let you alone, depend upon that!"

Some loud groans were heard above Jack's head as he spoke, and he could not help starting,
so melancholy and deep sounding were they.  The next instant, however, he recollected the old
woman's description of the haunted oak, and, looking round at the venerable tree, he had little
doubt that the noise was produced by some branches moved by the wind, or else the passage of
air through its hollow trunk.

Jack slept too soundly during the night to hear the conversation of the ghosts; but, on the
following morning at his early breakfast, ere he and his guide took their departure, the old
woman assured him that they had been talking as usual, making, if possible, even more uproar
than she had ever before heard.

"But what was it all about?" asked Jack; "could not you hear that?"

"No, no," she answered; "maybe they spoke in a tongue I cannot understand, for, though often
and often I've listened, not one word could I ever make out!"

CHAPTER SIXTEEN.

RESIDENCE IN THE FENS OF LINCOLNSHIRE.

The raw wind from the fens was driving the mist before it, and bending masses of willows, bulrushes,
and tall sedges all one way--and that way right against the faces of Deane and his guide, when
they commenced their devious course across the marshes, within which Master Pearson's farm
was situated.  A dead level was before them, broken here and there only by a group of willows,
or occasionally a few small trees which had taken root on patches of firmer ground than that
with which they were surrounded, otherwise the horizon was as clear as that of the ocean. The
whole country had a raw, cold, damp, and agueish look about it.  It was any thing but tempting.

"Where is the farm?" asked Jack, as he pulled up for an instant to survey the unpromising country
before him.

"Some miles on," answered Burdale.  "It's lucky you have a man with you who knows the country,
or you would have a bad job to get over it.  If you were to ride straight on now, you would
be up to your horse's ears in slush, with very little chance of ever getting out again alive.
Come, I'll show you the way; follow me.  Don't turn either to the right hand or to the left,
or you will get into trouble!"

Saying this, Burdale spurred on his somewhat unwilling horse, who seemed to understand the
difficulties of the way before him.  Here and there, and scattered thickly on every side, were
large patches of water, sometimes expanding into the size of lakes, while others were mere
pools and puddles.  Now a patch of reeds was to be seen.  In some places soft velvety grass,
growing over, however, the most treacherous spots; now a group of low willows, scarcely six
feet high; now a bed of osiers, barely three feet above the surface.  There was scarcely a
spot which offered any promise of ground sufficiently hard to enable the travellers to move
out of the snail's pace at which they had hitherto been obliged to proceed.

"Well, this is about the worst country I ever rode over!"  Jack could not help exclaiming.

"Now, don't be grumbling, Mr Deane; if it affords you shelter, you may be grateful for it:
and the country's not so bad after all.  You should just see the pike which are caught in the
rivers! they are larger than any you will see in the Trent, I have a notion.  There are sheep
too here: larger and bigger animals, though somewhat awkward in their gait, than you will see
throughout England; but they yield very lusty wool, let me tell you.  And though, perhaps,
you don't think much of the willows, of which you have passed a goodly number, they're very
useful to the people who live here.  There is an old proverb they have got--`A willow will
buy a horse before an oak will buy a saddle.'"

Burdale, indeed, seemed to have a good deal of information to give about the fens; and Jack
could not help thinking that he must belong to the country, or, at all events, have lived a
considerable time in it. Indeed, no one but a person thoroughly acquainted with the nature
of the ground could have managed to find his way across it.  The water was soon over the horses'
fetlocks, and here and there up to their knees.  More than once Jack could not help fearing
that his guide had made a mistake, and that he was leading him into dangerous country; but
he did not wish to show any suspicion of his judgment, and made no remark.  Again the horses
rose up out of the slough across which they had been wading and enjoyed for a short time some
hard ground; but they soon had to leave it, to wade on as before.  On every side was heard
the loud croaking of frogs; their heads poked up in all the shallower marshes, with the object,
it seemed, of observing the travellers, and then their croaking became louder than ever, as
if they were amusing themselves by talking about them.

"We call those animals `Holland-waits,'" observed Burdale.  "Their king must look upon himself
as fortunate, for he has got a large number of subjects; but they're not so bad as the midges.
If you were to cross where we are on a hot day, with the sun broiling down on your head, you
would wish you had a thick net over your face, for they do bite mortal hard!"

Burdale's horse seemed better accustomed to the country than was Jack's. After having gone
a considerable distance, he left Jack some way behind.  The marks of the horse's feet had immediately
been lost, by the spongy ground returning to its former state.  Jack, however, thought there
could be no difficulty in pushing on directly behind him.  He had not, however, gone far before
he found that, instead of following Burdale's direction to turn neither to the right nor left,
he had by some means got off the track.  His horse began to flounder, and the more he floundered
the more difficult it was to extricate himself.  Deeper and deeper he sank into the mire, till
Jack, fearing that he might lose him altogether, shouted out to Burdale.  Burdale heard his
voice at length, and hurried back to his assistance.  Jack had already got off his horse into
the mud, hoping in that way to relieve the poor animal, but it did but little good, and he
himself was also sticking fast!

"Here, catch hold of the end of this rope!" exclaimed Burdale, as he threw one which was secured
to his saddlebow.  "I will haul you out; and then, maybe, we will get the horse free.  You
could not have followed my advice, or this would never have happened."

Happily, Jack soon reached firm ground, and then he and Burdale together managed to get out
the unfortunate horse.

"I must not in future let you get a foot behind me, Master Deane," said Burdale.  "You see
that a man can as easily be lost in this fen-country as he could in a big forest, and now we
must make the best of our way onward; the evening is advancing, and the night is growing desperately
cold.  It will require some good liquor to warm up our veins again."

As soon as they got on dry ground, Burdale, with a whisp of dry hay and grass, wiped down the
horse's legs, and made him look in a more respectable condition than the mud of the marsh had
left him in. Burdale, standing up in his stirrups, looked round in every direction to ascertain
that no one was approaching.

"We're getting near Master Pearson's country," he observed, "and, as there are some sharp eyes
on the look-out for him, we must take care not to betray his abode."

Hour after hour passed by, and still they seemed to have made but little progress across this
inhospitable-looking country.  Now again a few mounds were seen just rising above the ground,
which, Burdale told his companion, were the huts of the inhabitants.

"Well, what sort of people can live here?" asked Jack.

"An odd sort, I must own; something between fish and geese.  They must be waders, at all events.
In some places they have boats in which they can get about: however, every place has its uses,
and so has this, you will find out, before you have been here long!"

At length, as the sun was about to sink beneath the long straight line behind their backs,
Jack saw before them what looked like a clump or two of trees which stood on a piece of ground
a few feet above the dead level which surrounded it.  Objects, too, seemed to be moving about
it, which he at length discovered to be horses and cattle.  A more perfect Rosamond's labyrinth
could scarcely have been contrived than that to which the path they now followed led.  Before,
however, they came in sight of the bower, they heard the lowing of cows and the barking of
watch-dogs, and Jack, who by this time was very hungry, even thought that he sniffed a savoury
odour of cooking in the damp air, that mightily urged him forward.  At length, they saw before
them a large rambling cottage, with dairy-buildings adjoining it, standing on a firm piece
of pasture-land that formed a green peninsula rising above the black fens they had just been
traversing.  A row of poplars behind it, and a plantation on either side, shut it in from any
one passing at a short distance.  There was also a kitchen and flower-garden in front, and
considerable care had evidently been taken to keep the ground around clean and fit for walking.

"You go in, and give your letter to Dame Pearson, while I take the horses to the stables,"
said Burdale.  "You will find it all right, for she will know well that no one could find his
way here without a trustworthy guide."

Jack had expected to find a somewhat rough, and perhaps ill-favoured, dame the wife of Master
Pearson.  Greatly surprised was he, therefore, when, on opening the door, he was received by
a remarkably attractive, neatly-dressed woman, with a pleasant smile on her countenance, and
agreeable manners, superior even to those of many ladies he had met.

"You are welcome here, Mr Deane, as a friend of my husband!" she said. "We live a secluded
life, but shall be glad to see you as long as you can remain.  And perhaps you will find some
amusement in the sports of our fen-country.  Ned Burdale will be able to show them to you as
well as most people; but we are not likely to be alone, for my husband tells me that several
persons are coming here, and I have been making the best preparation in my power to receive
them.  My little girl Elizabeth and I will soon get supper ready for you, and make you as welcome
as we can. After your hard day's ride you will then be glad to go to bed, for it is a trying
country to a stranger.  We came here most of the way by water, but it was bad enough even then;
and I am told that coming across from inland it's still worse."

On entering the sitting-room, Jack found a fair, pretty-looking little girl, of about fourteen
or fifteen years of age, busily employed in spinning, so busy indeed that she did not stop
even when she rose from her seat to make him a courtesy as he entered.

"Ah, yes, Elizabeth is always at work," said Dame Pearson; "it is one of the secrets of her
happiness, never to be idle from morning till night. To be sure we have plenty to do, and not
many people to do it out in this place, and so a good deal falls to our lot--but come, Elizabeth,
we will go and prepare the supper for Mr Deane and Ned Burdale, who has come with him; and,
perhaps before it is ready, others may make their appearance."

Saying this, she, followed by the little girl, glided from the room, leaving Jack to his own
reflections.  He had not been left alone long before a knock was heard at the door, and Dame
Pearson hurried through the room to open it.  As she did so, a tall dark man, in a rough riding-suit,
with pistols in his belt and a sword by his side, entered the house with the air of a person
accustomed to consider himself at home wherever he might be.  After exchanging a few words
with the dame, while she returned to the kitchen he entered the room, and, seating himself
in a large arm-chair, stretched out his legs, without taking any notice of Jack, who sat before
him, while he commenced tapping his boot with the end of his sword, as if lost in thought.
At length he condescended to take a glance at his companion.

"Not long arrived in this part of the world, lad, I suppose?" he said, in a tone which showed
he was very indifferent as to what answer he might receive.  "It is possible that you may pass
your time pleasantly enough here, if you are not troubled with the ague, and are fond of the
music of frogs and wild-ducks.  From what part of the world do you come, I ask?"

"I last came from the borders of Scotland; a pretty long ride too!"

"Ah!" exclaimed the stranger; "what matter brought you south?"

"My own good pleasure," answered Jack, not liking the tone of voice of the speaker.  "You will
excuse me if I do not explain the reason for my movements until we are further acquainted."

"Spoken like a sensible youth!" remarked the stranger.  "I will ask no further questions then,
though I suspect you have no cause to be ashamed of whatever you are about."

The conversation, if so it could be called, was cut short by the entrance of Dame Pearson and
her young attendant, bearing the dishes for supper, which they placed on a table on which the
cloth had already been spread.  The tall stranger took his seat at it with the same self-confident
air with which he had entered the room.  At that moment Ned Burdale came in, and was about
to take his seat at the board, when, seeing the stranger, he stopped short.

"I beg your pardon, sir!  I did not know--"

"Never mind!" said the stranger; "sit down, Ned; say not a word about it, man!" and he gave
him at the same time a significant glance.

Burdale obeyed; but he evidently stood greatly in awe of the person who had spoken to him.
Very little conversation took place during the meal; and Jack had time to examine the countenance
of the young girl who had assisted Dame Pearson in preparing the supper, and who now took her
seat by her side at the head of the table.  There was a bright, intelligent look about her,
and a refinement of expression which Jack scarcely expected to find in a dwelling so remote
from the civilised world.  Her education also had evidently not been neglected, for she had
apparently read a good deal, and her mind was well stored with information on various subjects.
Jack did not find all this out at first; but he very soon began to suspect it.  He discovered
also that she had derived a good deal of her information from the dame herself, who, though
apparently a mere farmer's wife, was evidently a person of superior education, equalled, indeed,
by very few ladies in Nottingham or elsewhere at that period.  The stranger also treated her
with considerable respect; and though he spoke in a rough way to Jack and Burdale, whenever
he deigned to address them, his manner was greatly softened as he turned to the dame or the
young girl.  She was acquainted with most of Jack's favourite authors; could recite many of
the ballads about Robin Hood; and she was also especially well versed in Foxe's "Book of Martyrs,"
a copy of which she exhibited with no little satisfaction to him.  He observed, when she brought
it out, that the tall stranger looked at it askance.

"Ah," she observed, "what fearful accounts Master Foxe gives us of the persecutions which Protestants
have suffered in all lands since the Reformation which Luther was the means of bringing about!
In Germany, in Italy, in Spain, and France, and, oh, I tremble with horror when I read of the
sufferings of the poor Protestants in the Netherlands, under that cruel Alva!  In France also,
how barbarously have the Reformed been treated!  I have reason to know something about it;
and I'll tell you some day, Mr Deane."

This was said after supper, as Jack was seated at a little distance from the rest of the party,
while the fair Elizabeth was nimbly plying her distaff.

"Fictions or gross exaggerations!" muttered the stranger, who overheard some of the remarks
uttered by the little damsel.

At length the dame, who had observed the rising anger of her guest, came over to Elizabeth,
and whispered a few words in her ear; after which she did not again allude to the subject of
which she had been speaking.

"When do you expect your good man?" asked the tall stranger.  "I fancied that I should have
met him here to-day."

"He has sent me word that he will be with us in two or three days, sir," answered the dame.
"He has been longer absent than usual; but he has been busy buying cattle to send over to our
farm; and we expect to have a considerable increase this year."

"Ah, yes! they thrive well on the rich grasses about here," observed the stranger.  "Well,
I must wait his arrival; though how to pass away the time till he comes I scarcely know."

"We can give you some sporting, sir," said Burdale.  "We lack not a variety--as wild-duck shooting,
and fishing; and we have a new decoy establishment not far off.  You may be interested in seeing
that work, for we sometimes catch a great number of wild-fowl in it."

Jack was not sorry to hear arrangements made for the sport next day, hoping that he might be
allowed to join in it, though he thought to himself he would rather have gone in the company
of any body else than in that of the tall stranger.  That he was a person of some consequence
he felt sure, from the way in which he was treated; and when the family prepared to retire
to rest, he observed that the dame herself showed him up-stairs to what was called the best
guest-chamber in the house.  A shake-down was prepared for Jack in a corner of the hall; and
Burdale made off to a room in one of the out-houses.

"We treat you now as we shall have to do while you stay here," said the dame, apologising for
the homely entertainment she had given Jack. "Before long we are expecting several guests,
who come here to transact business with my good man, either to buy cattle or horses, or about
certain affairs abroad.  He was a seaman in his younger days, and visited many strange countries,
and even now is often hankering after the ocean.  However, I hope he will settle down quietly
soon, for I think he must be weary of riding about the country in the way he does; but he's
a good, kind husband to me, and I have reason to be grateful. He saved my life in the time
of the Civil War, and protected me from fearful dangers when all my family were killed, and
I was left penniless; so I have reason, you see, to be grateful to him and love him.  I should
be glad if we could move back to the part of the country we came from, for this fen-district
is trying to the health, though Elizabeth and I keep ours indeed wonderfully, considering the
fogs which so often hang about us.  But the inhabitants of Holland retain their health often
to a green old age, and the country is very similar to this, only there drains have been cut
in all directions, and it is only of late years that attempts have been made to drain our Lincolnshire
fens.  It would seem impossible to carry the water off from around us, and yet, looking to
what has been done in Holland, perhaps too some day we shall see corn-fields and orchards where
now we have only marshes and ponds."

Jack, taking courage from the disposition to talk the good dame exhibited, asked her the name
of the tall stranger who had just arrived.

"That is more than I can tell you, young sir," she answered.  "He calls himself Long Sam, or
Sam Smart, and desires to be addressed by that name alone; but whether that is his real name
or not, I leave you to judge. He is evidently a man who has seen the world, and courtly society
too, though he can be rough enough when he pleases, as you will find if you offend him, and
let me advise you not to do so on any account."

Jack, much interested with the information he had received, at length put his head upon his
straw-stuffed pillow.  As he lay there he heard heavy footsteps pacing up and down the room
overhead, which he concluded to be the one occupied by the gentleman who chose to call himself
Long Sam.

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

A DECOY DESCRIBED.

The following morning, with Burdale as a guide, Long Sam and Jack set off to visit the decoy
which had been spoken of, mounted on rough-looking fen horses, with broad feet which enabled
them to get over the soft ground at a considerable rate, while, they kept the legs of their
riders out of the water.  The horses were left at a hut at a little distance from the decoy,
under charge of one of the persons employed in attending it.  It was situated in the midst
of somewhat higher and firmer ground than any they had before passed over, and was surrounded
also with willow, poplar, and other trees.

The decoy consisted of a pond of a hundred and fifty acres, or more perhaps.  On the surface
of it floated a number of water-lilies, the aquatic ranunculus, and the flowers of other water-plants,
while at the edges for a considerable distance gulfs--or canals, they might be called--had
been cut, about seven yards wide at the mouth, more or less, terminating in a sharp point.
About ten or twelve yards from the entrance of each canal, an arch was formed over the water
of about ten feet in height, a number of other arches succeeding it gradually, as they advanced
towards the inner end decreasing in height and width, the innermost of all not being more than
two feet in height, and about the same in width.  Over these a strong net was thrown and pegged
closely down to the ground, thus forming a complete cage, with a broad entrance opening on
the pool, there being only at the inner end a small door, through which the fowler could insert
his hand to draw out his captives.

"This is what we call a pipe," observed Burdale, as he exhibited the arrangement to Long Sam.

On either side of the pipe, commencing at the pond, and continuing to the farther end, was
a screen formed of reeds, about five feet in height, built in a zig-zag form, and broken into
lengths of about five or six feet, and at about a foot from the edge of the pipe.  While the
party were examining this pipe, the chief fowler, accompanied by a little dog, came up to them.

"This is our piper," he observed; "without him we could not manage to catch any fowls."

He was a little foxy-coloured animal, evidently very obedient and submissive to his master.

"You will see, sir," observed the man, "we have got ten pipes to our decoy, all branching off
in different directions.  The reason of this is that wild-fowl, when they get up from the water,
always fly against the wind, and so, if we only had the pipes on one side, it would only be
when the wind came from that quarter that we could catch any fowl; so you see we have them
from all sides; and thus from whatever point the wind blows, we have the chance of catching
birds.  Now, you see those birds swimming out in the middle of the pond there?  They're our
decoy-ducks; without them we could not catch any wild ones either.  I had a good job to train
them.  You see, the first thing I did was to shut them up by themselves, and pretty nigh starve
them.  I then carried them a little food; and did the same several times every day, till they
knew me.  At last they began to look out for me, and, instead of flying away, they were too
glad to come up and take the food from my hand. Whenever also I fed them, I whistled just a
faint whistle, like this. And so, at last, as soon as they heard my whistle, they knew that
I was going to give them some food, and I kept on whistling all the time they were feeding
in the same gentle tone.  It took me, I suppose, three or four months before I could trust
those birds out; and now, if I did not continue to feed them, and whistle all the time, they
would soon be off with the rest.  I had to train the dog, too; and that took me some time.
You see, his business is to run along the edge of the pipe, show himself now and then, and
then leap through those openings in the screen.  Well, to make him do that, I taught him by
giving him a piece of bread each time he came through; and if he would not jump, then he got
no bread and no cheese, for he is fond of cheese, I can tell you.

"Now, you will understand, that if we are to catch any birds, you must not show yourself; and
you, tall gentleman, if you please, will just keep stooping down all the time.  No disrespect
to you, master; if they caught sight of your face, not a bird would come up the pipe.

"Now there's another thing we shall have to do: we must just each of us carry a piece of lighted
turf, for the birds can smell as well as see; and they don't mind the smoke, and that carries
away any scent by which we might betray ourselves.  Now, we will go round to the side from
which the wind blows directly over the pond.  Stoop down, master, if you please.  I will first
go and fasten the net over the end of the pipe, that the birds may fly into it, as I hope there
will be many of them doing before long.  Here we are, masters: just step softly over the turf,
and keep bending down.  That will do.  Now don't speak any more, but just do as I do.  You
will see a sight of birds in a few minutes."

After going some little distance towards the edge of the decoy, the fowler drew aside a small
shutter, it might be called, in the screen, through which he beckoned Jack and his companions
to look.  A number of birds, ducks, teal, widgeon, and others, were either floating lazily
on the surface of the lake, or rising and circling round it, while others were bobbing their
heads beneath the water, or diving in search of their prey which swam below.  Again the shutter
was closed, and the fowler threw a few handfuls of bruised barley into the centre of the pipe,
which was soon blown down by the wind to the mouth.  He now called the little piper, and sent
him in, in front of the screen, at the same time whistling low--the well-known signal to the
decoy-ducks.  On hearing the sound, they instantly rose and flew towards the mouth of the pipe.
Now the little dog ran along for a few feet in front of the screen, where the birds could see
him, and then suddenly disappeared, by leaping through one of the openings.  On came the wild-fowl,
following the decoy-ducks and fearless of evil.  Seeing the dog, the curiosity of the birds
was excited, and up the pipe they began to swim.  Again the dog was turned in, and again the
birds followed him in his treacherous course up the pipe.  The same trick was played over and
over again, till the birds had been led well out of sight of the entrance of the pipe. The
fowler then stepping forward in front of the screen, without making any noise which might frighten
the birds still outside, waved his cap round and round.  Frightened by this unexpected apparition,
the birds rose from the water, and rushed at headlong speed towards the narrow end of the pipe.
On they went, driven by the fowler, till they reached the very end; where, finding what they
supposed to be an opening, they darted through, to discover, when too late, that they were
hopeless captives within a strong net!

The scene was very exciting, especially to Jack, who had never seen it before, and full forty
birds were captured together.  The decoy-birds, as soon as the fowler ceased whistling, employed
themselves quietly in picking up the grains of barley which floated on the water, instead of
proceeding, like their brothers whom they had treacherously betrayed, up towards the end of
the pipe.

"You see you have no risk of starving, Master Deane," observed Burdale, as he assisted in ringing
the necks of the captive birds.  "We live like princes here, as far as food is concerned; and
when the weather allows it, and we can send across the fens, we could always get a good market
for our game."

"We're not always so lucky as we have just been," observed the fowler; "we have a good many
enemies who try to prevent our success.  Sometimes I have seen a heron sit on the top of the
outermost arch, just waiting to dive down and catch some fish he may see swimming below.  Now
as long as that heron sits there, not a bird will ever come up that pipe, not knowing what
trick he will play them, and our only chance is to try another.  There are some ducks, too,
which nothing will tempt to come up the pipe.  They are the pochard, or, as we call them here,
pokers. Now they're the cunningest birds you ever saw!  If ever they find themselves within
the mouth, they will suddenly dive and swim out again, generally making the other birds follow
them.  At other times they will stop just at the mouth, where the barley is floating about,
and swim backwards and forwards till they have eaten the whole of it up, and then off again
they will go, laughing at the way they have deceived us.  The worst of all, perhaps, is when
an otter builds his house near the mouth. At first we could not find out what was the matter
when no birds would ever come near, and it was not till I caught the gentleman one day, that
I found out the reason why.  No birds are more timid than these wild-fowl.  All the work about
the decoy we have to do at night, for if they hear any sounds they're not accustomed to, they
will keep away from it.  As few people ever come out here we are safe enough; but if strangers
were to come, or any body was to fire a gun, we might not catch a bird for weeks afterwards. Because she held him against the priest for ignorant and inadequate for an unfortunate
man! The evil one Glaubenszwiespaltes in connection with a beginning domestic calamity, suddenly
there was in the middle of the so-enlightened and well-speaking church world.

Hardly come on the road, let Justine drive her husband's arm and went like staggering beside
him, crying softly. Since it was raining and storming autumn, it was believed Jocundus, they
would comfortably go alone and paid no attention to their condition.

By the time she arrived home, had they taken externally; but inwardly she was trembling with
excitement and indignation.

Jocundus the incident was quickly forgotten and filled with other concerns, with her now the common
situation and discuss it show how he believed that his right place is not in this House is that
he still had to try to stand on its own feet, to which probably still great time was, that they
should follow him to the capital, where he had good connections and
friends have.

If she could take some money from the parents for the beginning, just as much as they have spent
about the church worship and other favorite things already, it would
it is not afraid for the future.

He touched this last point, meekly, for nothing because he thought to require and only the
fear of destitution before Justine took the eye.

No sooner was he arrived here, they are no longer silent, and the originality of the rough upstart
folk family, which broke the men sometimes came on, with all the
harshness even at her suddenly to light.

Passionate and reckless, and as reckless she cried, he would go wherever he wanted, it would
not follow him when he was in her house not grow in virtue, where
he had been lacking in nothing and no concessions.

Neither yours nor their fall even an it, even the slightest sacrifice in such a lost to risk
lives and money such a ... nachzuwerfen.

She needed while an expression that they hardly ever out of the mouth,
and which, without It was a real insult now, but bears no real man
on the part of his wife.

No sooner was the word escaped her lips, then turned pale, Justine, and she watched her husband
with big eyes, who was pale before, and now silently went out.

Justine hurried to find her mother, who was still at the house of one of the brothers, and those therefore
went there to find advice and refuge.

Jocundus aroused but his own mother, who was tired already gone to bed, was dress them, then packed
up the essentials, brought in at night, even a Rental car and drove induced unnoticed in the
stormy rainy night with his mother to provided with the little money he left the reserve or
from the sale of that old oak tree and had kept.

From this moment was out of sight of the spouses of that graceful and happy Laughter vanished as
completely as if it had never lived there.

In the dark car, next to the aging mother, who returned to duty, and
sleepiness was asleep, saw the beautiful face Justine Jocundus on,
as it it for the first Times had laughed at.

That smile, he said bitterly, the arts of a muscle are is just so and not otherwise made; cuts
through it with a small light Section and everything is gone forever!

At dawn, was Justine, who had not gone to bed, in front of a mirror
and saw their rigid, pale lips, she tried to smile sadly at the beautiful,
evil Dream of the vanished happiness.

But their lips and both cheeks were stiff and motionless such as marble, the mouth remained
closed from now on, and from morning to evening and a Day after day.

Chapter Three

Jocundus had gone to the state capital, where it was his first care, before Shock and grief
to care for ill mother and buried, for she was not recovering more
because they harbored no hope that the son still be going and what
they do not spun and woven, could hold.

On the way back from her grave, he met a military superiors, who probably knew had seen, but
not long. The asked him about his current circumstances, and as he same, if they were communicable
know, learned, he said to Jocundus, he had just the man he was looking for in his extensive commercial
and entrepreneurial nature of a particular Gap to fill.

He was looking for a reliable quiet man of whom he knew that his Obligations fulfilled on time,
and bluntly, do not look right or left without to lose vigilance, and especially does not undertake
own speculation.

Jocundus allied himself with the man and immediately took its intended location, and it was from
the first moment well. The work assigned to him was such that he does not even to deceive
and to lie, nor the lies others need to believe. He did not need to haggle or ask to be beaten,
or to defend themselves and outsmart outwit. Which requires in addition to human knowledge
and its application was, he was familiar as before, since he disappeared
with the embarrassment it like scales fell from my eyes.

So his days flowed quietly and seriously, so that not the smallest pleasure lit up his eyes.
Justine, he lived without any connection, and he vainly expected a sign from her that she regretted
the happened insult and wish to withdraw, while thereto by the Theirs was prevented, which found
it was better to leave things for the time being, as they were lying,
and await the further good fortune of Jocundus whether the same have
also inventory.

They were not wrong to call it a blessing, for the dark to find his self in Days is usually more
a matter of luck, as people want to admit to usually, and here It was perhaps the only chance
of the encounter with the experienced and insightful stranger hung.

Jocundus' cold and bitter peace did not last long. While he was in his business position proved
useful on a daily basis and also lifted soon instructed by the initial stage was, almost without
anyone's intervention, so that the once-elusive published richer Acquisition and established
views of possession ceased as if by itself, joined in the public Life is a Movement, in which
he more of his embittered state of mind as the actual Inclination was drawn according to passion.

were
in the Republic since the last of the political transformations, by which the people lost rights
to renew or extend existing, passed forty years, and it was in the younger generation the will
of a later time was ripe, without the still prevailing Support the earlier design known or wanted to
acknowledge the same. They held the world and the State as it existed right now, and ready
for good and showed their involvement to any significant change with an insistent "No" from
themselves by themselves in a continuous activity in the gradual training of the existing
order, once extolled withdrew.

This resistance, they gained the appearance of standing behind, yes Enemies of progress, and
aroused an ever more irritated the more violent feelings against themselves. But as she shops objectively
and honestly worried and all sorts of trouble on things used what looked to be nothing short
of regression, it was the beginning of a major action to find. For if the people hiebei not the
impetus for violent incidents gains, resulting in one day saying
what you want designed, so it requires a tremendous moral excitement
to the way law and order to his goal to go and a self-imposed constitution
to remove elected officials and even put in place the new.

This excitement, which in the violent upheaval of a few drops of blood smoking produced will reach
the people on the other ways to be conclusively only by that it commits
the first wrong means of a false accusation and then, true to the
Proposition that the Unrechttuende tracks the affected part with a
growing hatred, no more lies, to the bone of contention cleared away
and the new legal ground which it will, is achieved.

But also to a full round main accusation that for such a general order overall emotion would
have been enough right there was no handle.

Each individual the unfulfilled desire was not a question of dishonesty or fraud of the people, but
only a matter of expediency, which was denied.

But as a nation or a republic, if they look quite Handel with their leaders and Managers, not
embarrassed in the long run because of the beginning and are always discovering new resources,
This is how you last just in front of the people and said, your face like no longer with us.

This
was done by means of a strange demonic movement that more terror and persecution torture hid
in himself, than some bloody revolution, though not a hair was bent and no one cheek fell.

It first created a Ausspotten some non-important person at any point,
then a mockery of some others who have had more significance, because
semi-ridiculous half inadequacies, nevertheless disfigured features.

A dirt-tracking and funny Mood spread to more and more, were formed in the virtuoso and leader
of scorn and Disfigurement, and soon the merry mockery turned into fierce slander, which raced around
the houses of their victims and called on the personal life of the pavement dragged out.

After these victims in a dough of ridicule, consisting of imaginary physical Affliction and habits,
usually only about awkward gestures, were kneaded and so pushed around were presented to them
long ago suddenly committed crimes secret, a horrible Life change, a meanness of thought and action
to load, which by the authority, they previously enjoyed, highlighting all the more glaring and
intolerable. Although were the allegations of certain evil deeds that immediately after all criminal
proceedings had to call out or be dropped at the first cry of those concerned with a smile.
Solo the horror clung to the people and of all other shapeless nonsense
was held was created by the helplessness of the persecuted, and the
general horror and disgust a formal impunity, since any negotiation
process to a feast for the pursuers to be started and was greeted
with the most serious threats.

As I hurried because of all the cracks and hiding places, participants in the general diet of slander
and insult caused. People whose own physiognomic characteristics, Ways of life and deeds themselves
the object of his description, of indignation and derision make appropriate were, lined up straight
in the front row and were raising as right Duke of slander and defamation of her voice, and the louder
the noise was fierce, more quiet and subdued, the reviled. A terrible for those affected commonplace
expressed by the thoughtless onlookers. If only the hundredth part of the allegations were true,
it would be more than enough! it said, and thoughtful hiebei not think so each of them such a
hundredth part wore on their shoulders, when measured just would.

In addition to the honorable and acquaintances in the country was probably around in any angle Unknown
destroyed poor that it was to listen as the screaming of a chicken, which is a Marder night as strangled
lonely. Or a few of the Dukes fell to the raging Animals to each other even on any specific exchange
place, but returned with bitten and bloody noses back to the overall
diet, without them there a little hurt would have.

They licked the disheveled Bellows and took back the naughty word.

The whole appearance was so new and strange way that the history of it with a friend no one knew how
to compare the previous, but also where more than once from an unjust
Occasion or false pretext of the state change and the expansion of
freedom emerged was.

Men standing in their distorted form in the midst of hardship and persecution, but in the not
a drop of blood flowed and no arm was touched saw abandoned by old
friends the undecided Unschuldsbeteurungen their hearing and not for
themselves about all the better lead.

Others who had the decisive word of courage to speak their peace, so as not suffer from the bride
or the wife to have an outrageous smear, and still others silent out of concern for peace and the
innocence of their minor children. Many thanked only God that he spared until now, when he reflected
that this or that human Weakness that it may already be converts, the disaster could provide a
point of attack, and he kept quiet as a mouse. Close by was an obvious bad guy just as quiet, was
too well-but in order to join the chasing pack can, and now with stabbing Gewärtigte eyes,
what would come to him. Also was spared, not only because, as dangerous villain was feared by detractors,
but because the strange movement despite the apparent lack of moderation a certain law of economics
stopped and no casualties demanded that you do not just stand in
the way.

By the way, was not to deny that the consciousness that it was really just a large, rather gross
fun, not wanting. For while the crowd did not hesitate to the country as the Wickedness in
eating, filled and dominated the whole world to present, remained real underground layer of infamy
that is lacking in any country, unchallenged in their rest where they do not voluntarily rose to light
and also to get to the Reichstag and to help rob the hated respectability. The active liar clusters
resembled the popular Dorfklätscherin, which in its humor keeps it
for granted that everyone see what he wanted to believe, and that
each blackened her the fun is not too bad suppose.

From that humor was no Jocundus. The Constitution, in which he was, he was twice disposed to
believe anything if he does not otherwise have due to its simple nature it would have been created.
While he had become more careful in business, was he surprised by this move as a child and believed
any lewdness, such as putting forward, as a gospel beyond measure
astonished, as it did so and what can go in a Republic was possible.

His special citizens who Seldwylers had from the beginning of these events as a golden Ages welcome.
There could be nothing more amusing than laugh at them for slamming are so many troubled long
faces that had for so long do better than other people. They did not exactly distinguished himself
in the invention of atrocities, but were more active in the application of absurdities. Always
got some or entire communities of they see to the capital, what news there was, and at the
higher daily continuous Movement to participate. Because Jocundus the best figure among them was,
they made it to their chief, and he went in the deepest earnestness
before laughing and always carousing guild Seldwylers of her, sad
and worried, but also angry and punitive funny.

For it the world had never seen in this light, it seemed to him to courage, as if the spring
remained the same from escaping and a gray, hot, desolate desert, would be to the distant,
veiled border of the shadow of his wife vanish lonely. If he the clubs and gatherings in addition
to tangible and known agitators from all sorts of dark Holes creeping companions saw the long-standing
evil star in the general deluge to drown them with dirty hands or the upper layer as studied
with poker to be were trying to tear off, he saw that there were no upper church councils,
which he hand pressed. But he now felt more of a deep compassion for those saints who he regarded
as the victim of a world from which he thought he could sing a song. As the St. Elizabeth a
taste for the sick and unclean wretch testified and even put in the bed of a leper, so cherished
and Jocundus a real affection for his mangy and went every day with people he used to, usually
as they say, not with Stecklein could have a touch.

He did this while the popular movement was the beginning of vortex out and the people, run down scale
to its goals, those shadowy figures was noted and the new rights, how produces brilliant colors
and flavors of dark matter and dirt, and this throw it away. He hardly noticed that he lost
with the pile side was already the high road, and when he began to see it, came over him new
sympathy with the poor prophets should be deceived again. It did not help that some wiser Seldwylers
whispered to him, the slanderers and honor are not enemies, more fashion, we consider now to the
purely Political and Moderate State, and he should not expose themselves, they just need again a state
with institutions and honesty, where chauffeured not do with liars
and Schubiaken could.

He believed the poor and outcast, and not those detectors.

To prove his courage and to show clearly that he protect them, he
invited one day a nice selection of his friends to celebrate a feast,
which he them in a guest house admitted and treated them so abundant
that they were in a loads of fun.

Depraved shyster lawyers, unfaithful and punished small officers, fraudulent agents idler summary
merchants and bankrupts, mistook wits and leaders of different sand Art sat gathered around
him and cheered and sang as if the millennium would be there. But the fun they were, the more
seriously looked Jocundus, and not the slightest smile flew over his sad face, he remembered
the day he was glad and harmless be happy in life, and everything was gone! Now when the wine
always the merry fellows longer tongues broke and prudence could die, they began their stories
and to discuss actions and tell the injustice they suffered. It rose, however, because or there
is a contradiction of the one against the other, or the rebellion of a third, the Inlet of a fourth,
more detailed explanation of a fifth, resulting in a confused noise of mutual Allegations and
accusations were and to the impartial listener showed that it a fairly extensive and tangled web
of small little glorious tasks acted on account of which all want each other's highest rogues,
and Although in such an artificial transit and cross-over, that if, for example like the Chladni Sound
figures, a visual image of it could have made this the most beautiful Brussels Peak work had
shown, or the delicate silver filigree Genoese, so wonderful and manifold works of God.

Jocundus sought, first from love, from surprise move to understand the tissue and to unravel, and
his face grew more serious, more clearly and to some it But his time was credulity. When the
serious cross talk louder and was imminent and at different points in violence went on, so that
several pairs is already packed to the throats, or held at the beards pulled, always behind
the Tables seated step, the competent host with a secure a means of breaking out the storm
to summon. He occupied the table with a quick second held by food, which of coarse but ample meal
was salad, made of ox-feet, of beans, potatoes, Onions, herring and cheese.


It was Sunday morning; and Jack, putting on his best garments which he had brought with him,
started on his walk.  He took his way along a very bad road leading to the Strand, with the
fields and cabbage-gardens to the right, and Hyde Park to the left, which then extended nearly
to the Palace of Kensington.  Fortunately the weather was dry for the season of the year, or
he would have been splashed over from head to foot. Besides Saint Paul's, a number of beautiful
churches were already raising their heads by the genius of Wren in various parts of London.
Seeing a number of people collecting before a church, and having never failed at home in attending
Divine Service, he took courage, and followed the crowd within the building.  Although he had
been accustomed occasionally to see people take their eyes off their books to watch the entrance
of a stranger, or to examine the dress of their neighbours, or perhaps to exchange glances
with one another, he was little prepared for the style of behaviour in which the congregation
of the church where he now found himself indulged.  Here were collected many of the beauties,
and a few of the fine gentlemen of the day.  It may have been that they lost little by not
attending to the preacher.  So Jack thought from what he could catch of the discourse, little
of which he could understand, so full of flowers of rhetoric was it.  Most of his neighbours
were, at all events, flirting and ogling all through the service, and as they entered and took
their seats all courtesied and bowed to their acquaintance, as if they had been at a theatre.
Jack could not help feeling thankful when the service was brought to a conclusion.

"If this is the way the great people worship God in this big city, I am afraid the citizens
and poorer ones can pay very little attention to Him at all," he thought.

Jack found himself looked at askance by several persons of ordinary degree, among whom he stood
at the farther end of the building.  At length he made his way into the open air.  He much
admired, however, the coaches and sedan-chairs that came to fetch away all the grand people,
with little negro boys from the Sugar Islands to hold up the trains of the ladies, and pages
who sat on the steps of the gaily-painted coaches, drawn, some by four, and some by six horses.

In a walk along the Mall, where, of course, no one paid the least attention to the open-mouthed
country lad, Jack saw a still greater number of fashionable people.  Among them was a very
stout lady, carried in a sedan-chair with painted panels, and he heard the passers-by remark
that she was the Princess Ann.  Her chair was followed by another sedan, which, he was told,
contained the Lady Churchill, whose beautiful face looked, however, in any thing but a good-humour.
He saw many other sights, some of them curious enough but altogether he was disappointed with
this his first day in London.

"They say that the streets are paved with gold; but that is a mistake. They could only once
have been gilt, and the fine gentlemen I have met must have rolled in them, and the gilding
must have stuck to their clothes."

Jack had been looking out all the day in the hopes of seeing the king, of whose courage, wisdom,
and remarkable clemency, he had often heard his father and cousin Nat speak.  They looked upon
him, indeed, as the bulwark of the Protestant faith in England, and notwithstanding all the
efforts which Mr Harwood and his daughter, and Master Pearson and others had made to eradicate
that notion from Jack's mind, it remained in reality as firm as ever.  The very reason which
the king's enemies brought forward to depreciate him, raised him more and more in his opinion.
His desire was at length gratified, when, on the 8th of February, Long Sam told him, that if
he would go and stand near the gates of the Palace of Kensington he would there very likely
get a glimpse of the king.

"And hark you, my lad," he said, "you must observe carefully all that happens at the time,
and bring me word.  Take your stand, also, with your right foot before the left, and your hand
in the breast of your coat.  A person will then probably come and speak to you, and you will
repeat to me all he says.  If he does not speak, he will give you a note, which you are to
bring immediately to me."

Jack, as directed, took up his post at the gates of the palace at Kensington.  He had not long
to wait, when the gates were thrown open, and some guards appeared, and then a coach with six
horses, within which sat a gentleman with a long nose and prominent features, dressed in a
rich riding-suit.  On either side were more horsemen, who Jack heard were the King's Dutch
guards.  They were followed by several Dutch officers of the court, among whom was the faithful
Duke of Portland, and others of high rank.  Jack had a good view of that clear hawk's eye,
and the large Roman nose and the serious countenance, which expressed little but acute penetration
into the mind and motives of others, with all of which the coinage of the realm had made his
subjects familiar.  The sight of the great warrior and wisest statesman of the day, who knew
himself to be surrounded by plots, and yet went his way with perfect coolness, had great effect
upon Jack's somewhat excitable mind.  He threw up his cap, and shouted, "Hurrah! long live
the King!" in as good faith as any of the many bystanders; and his first impulse was to run
off, following the coach, shouting, as youths and boys are used to do after any great personage.
The king leaned forward over a paper which he held in his hand, so that nearly the whole of
his figure was visible at the window of the coach, which took its way towards Richmond.

Suddenly Jack remembered the direction he had received from Long Sam. Going back to the place
he had before occupied, he put himself in the position in which he had been standing.  Looking
round, he saw a person who had come out of the palace observing him narrowly.  The person,
who was dressed in the livery of the palace, at length passed close to him.

"Are you Long Sam's messenger?" he asked.

"At your service," answered Jack.

"Where does he lodge?" asked the stranger.

"At the Bear," was Jack's answer.

"Take this note, and deliver it quickly," said the stranger; "but do not move from where you
now stand till I have re-entered the palace."

Saying this, the stranger slipped a sealed packet into Jack's hand.  He immediately concealed
it in his doublet, but as he did so a shade of doubt crossed his mind that all was not right.
He waited, however, a few minutes till the person who had given him the packet had re-entered
the gate, and then took his way back to the Bear.  He could not, however, help occasionally
looking round to observe whether his steps were followed.  He felt that he was engaged in some
secret transaction; and from some of the remarks which Long Sam had let drop, as well as the
appearance of the concealed Jesuit in his society, he could not help fearing that the plot
afoot was against the welfare of the king.  He reached the inn, however, in safety, and described
exactly to Long Sam all he had seen.

"But you must tell me honestly," he said, "whether this matter has any thing to do with any
proceeding which may injure the king.  As I watched him just now, I thought of the many brave
actions which he has performed, and his calmness and courage at the present time, and could
not help feeling that I would rather fight for him than against him."

"You are a foolish young man!" answered Long Sam, in a more angry tone than he had ever used
towards Jack.  "Follow my directions, and all will be right.  I do not want to hurt your feelings,"
he added, seeing that Jack's colour came to his cheek.  "And now I must leave you."

"As to that," answered Jack, "I have no wish to quarrel with you, or any other man; but it
strikes me I have been made a `cat's-paw' of, and I tell you frankly I should like to know
our object in coming to London."

"Then as frankly I will tell you--I cannot give it," answered Long Sam. "If you don't know
your own interests, it's your own fault; but remain here a few days longer, and I have no doubt
you will learn all you wish to know, and probably much more than I know now."

CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE CONSPIRACY.

Several days passed by after this conversation, during which Long Sam was constantly absent.
Other circumstances had occurred which made Jack more suspicious than ever.  He had been waiting
all day for his companion, when, as Long Sam had not returned at ten o'clock at night, it being
past the usual time of retiring, Jack went to his bedroom, into which, as the entrance was
in rather a public position, he securely bolted himself.  After he had been asleep for some
time he awoke with a start, and was greatly surprised to hear voices close to him.  At first,
he thought himself transported back to the old house at the Hagg, and that the sounds he heard
proceeded from the ghosts which were said to haunt it.  However, on sitting up, and more perfectly
recovering his senses, he perceived that the speakers were real personages in close proximity
to him.  Although a gleam or two of light came through a partition which separated him from
the room where he supposed them to be, he was unable to find any chink or opening through which
he could observe what the speakers were about.  As he had not been placed there intentionally
for the purpose of hearing the conversation, he did not feel that he was guilty of eavesdropping,
or that it was his duty to refrain from listening to what was spoken.  There appeared to be
a number of persons collected together, two or three of whom took the lead among the others.

"My friends, I have to thank you for meeting me here to-night," were the first words Jack heard
uttered.  "We have an important object to carry out, and it requires all the nerve and courage
we possess to ensure its success.  We have a rightful cause, and that should strengthen our
arms for any deed which may be necessary.  Remember we are not acting for ourselves, but under
the full authority and sanction of our lawful sovereign, King James.  It becomes necessary
for his interests, and for our own, and for that of all England, and moreover for that of the
only true and pure faith, which we profess--the faith of Rome--that the Usurper should be removed.
You perceive, then, that we lift the responsibility off our own shoulders upon those who give
us authority to act.  I should be myself ever far from advocating assassination, or any other
unlawful way of getting rid of a rival, but in this instance it seems that no other mode presents
itself.  I hope, then, that you are prepared to go through with the plan I have to propose,
by whatever way it is to be carried out, or whatever may be the consequences."

"Yes, yes, we are all prepared!" exclaimed several persons.

"Stay, friends!" cried another; "say not that all are prepared.  We are all ready to draw our
swords in a lawful quarrel and in an open manner, such as true soldiers may fight for, but
there are other ways at which Sir George has hinted, and it may be that some of them are not
such as honourable men would desire to engage in."

"What mean you, Captain?" exclaimed the first speaker.  "Do you dare to affirm that I propose
any scheme which is not honourable and lawful? Whatever I do, or whatever I say, I act under
the authority of my true and only sovereign, King James.  I acknowledge no other, and therefore
I feel myself at liberty to draw my sword in opposition to any one who claims the title of
my king."

"How are we to be sure that you have this authority, good sir?" asked the former speaker. 
"I have served under the banners of many leaders, and have always been faithful to those who
trusted me; but before I draw my sword against the Prince of Orange I should like to know that
it is according to the wish of James, late King of England, who by that means may recover his own."

"Here, then, incredulous men," exclaimed the person who had been addressed as `Sir George;'
"listen to the commission I have received from King James himself:--

"`Our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby fully authorise, strictly require, and expressly
command, our loving subjects to rise in arms and make war upon the Prince of Orange, the usurper
of our throne, and all his adherents, and to seize for our use all such forts, towns, and strongholds
within our dominion of England as may serve to further our interest, and to do from time to
time such other acts of hostility against the Prince of Orange and his adherents as may conduce
most to our service.  We judge this the properest, justest, and most effectual means of procuring
the Restoration and their deliverance, and we do hereby indemnify them for what they shall
act in pursuance of this our royal command, given at our court of Saint Germain-en-Laye, the
27th of December, 1695.'

"This will, I hope, satisfy you, gentlemen, that we are not acting without due authority; moreover,
you should be aware that the Duke of Berwick came over to England a few months ago, and visited
many of the principal adherents of King James, who are all ready, on the signal which we shall
make them, to rise in arms, and raise the standard of our lawful king.  He is also at the present
moment prepared to put himself at the head of an army of 20,000 French soldiers, who are drawn
out of the different garrisons of the neighbourhood of Calais.  There is also a fleet ready
to bring them across as soon as they receive the signal which we are preparing to give.  The
French king has promised to support King James, and will follow with another army, which will
be as soon as possible collected."

"That appears a well-arranged, straightforward scheme, such as soldiers and men of honour can
engage in," observed another speaker.

"I am glad you think so, Captain," observed Sir George; "and I feel very sure, that as soon
as the signal I have spoken of is given, we shall have hundreds like yourselves flocking to
the royal standard."

"But what is to be that signal, may I ask?" inquired another, who had not before spoken.  "I
am willing to draw my sword at the command of the King, but I never like to take a leap in
the dark, and am better pleased when all matters are explained clearly beforehand."

"It is not usual for a general to give a sketch of his campaign to his subordinates," answered
Sir George, in a haughty tone.  "There are certain matters of which it is better that as few
as possible should be informed.  I trust that this reply will satisfy you."

"It must, by my faith!" mattered the old officer; "but, for my part, I have no taste for these
secret plots; I would rather a band of brave fellows had been collected together, and that
King James's standard had been raised, and that then we had marched through the country, gathering
strength in our progress."

"To be cut to pieces by Dutch William's soldiers, or to be surrounded and strung up like foot-pads!"
observed another speaker.

"There are difficulties in our way, but they are such as brave men will gladly encounter."

Such was the strain in which the conversation continued.  As yet nothing was said which might
lead Jack to suppose that any immediate outbreak was likely to occur.  Yet his suspicions were
aroused, and he could not help fancying that the voice of the speaker who was addressed as
"Sir George" was very like that of Long Sam.  If so, he felt that he himself would be in some
way implicated in the plot.

At length the party appeared to be breaking up, and most of the persons who had formed it took
their departure.  Still some remained; and at length he heard the door bolted and barred behind
those who had gone out.  Those who remained poked up the fire and drew their chairs round it.

"All will go well!" exclaimed the person who had been addressed as "Sir George."

"And now let us see to the more important part of our work.  While Dutch William lives, or
at all events is at liberty, King James will not move from his present position, and even the
King of France cannot beard the lion in his den.  As long as the Protestants have a leader
they will be united, and a rising of the adherents of King James will be hopeless; but once
let the head of William be laid low, and before they have time to make arrangements to secure
another Protestant sovereign, King James can be brought over, and the Catholic religion again
be established in the land.  The end sanctifies the means, as my excellent father-confessor
assures me, and I therefore have no compunction as to that matter.  King James has sent over
a number of his `gentlemen of the guard' and others, who have come as it were on their private
concerns, but who are all prepared to unite, as soon as they receive directions from me, to
carry out any scheme I may propose.  To those who are squeamish I have suggested merely that
we seize and bring away the Prince of Orange, carry him on board ship, and thence convey him
over to France: but that will never do; before he could be got to the Thames he would be rescued,
and our necks would have to answer for our folly. There is but one safe plan, and that is to
set upon him armed with pistols and strong pushing-swords, and thus at once to put him to death.
As soon as he is dead his own adherents even will be afraid to assault us, not knowing who
may next be at the head of affairs, What say you, gentlemen?--I have spoken plainly to you."

"I have been advised on this matter before," was the answer.  "With you, I feel that which
you propose is the only way of proceeding, especially if by that means we can establish again
our religion in the land.  If once we can gain the upper hand, we may without difficulty so
oppress and keep down these Protestant heretics that we may compel them to come over to the
true faith, or drive them from the country."

"We are all agreed, then, my friends?" said the leader of the plot. "Listen, then, to the plan
which I have arranged.  The king, as you know, frequently drives out from his palace at Kensington
for the purpose of hunting in Richmond Park, and takes boat near Turnham Green to cross the
Thames to the Surrey side.  I have arranged several leaders, each of whom has five men well
mounted to act under him.  They will be well-armed with blunderbusses, musketoons, pistols,
and well-sharpened swords.  There is a spot at Turnham Green where the road is narrow, with
high hedges and ditches on each side, so that a coach and six horses cannot easily turn on
a sudden.  Just about there, also, there are some shrubs and bushes which will afford shelter
to our men. We have spies in the palace who will give us exact information of the hours and
days when the king goes forth in his coach; and as he has but a small body of guards with him,
there will be little risk of a miscarriage.  All we have now to do, is to fix the day for the
carrying out of the scheme.  It is well conceived, and cannot fail; and, moreover, if any of
those engaged in it have qualms of conscience, I am able to promise them full absolution, should
the king fall by their hands."

Jack was horrified at what he heard.  What course was he to pursue? Should he at once make
his way to the palace and give information of the atrocious plot? But he wandered back and forth, back and forth, his hair graying, his legs were tottering; at
the point he went from country to country, but not always, he found the philosopher's stone.
Such were again nine years, when one evening, as he used to do it every night entered into an
inn. As usual Krahirius wiped his glasses and then hopped into the Kitchen to beg for his supper.
Hinzelmeier entered the room and leaned his staff in the lounge area, then sat still and tired
in the big armchair. The host put a jug of wine before him and said gently: "You seem tired,
dear; only drink that will strengthen you! "

"Yes," said Hinzelmeier and took the jug with both hands, "very tired, I'm long wandered a
long time. "Then he closed his eyes and took a train from the thirsty wine pitcher.

"If you are the master of the bird, I almost think it has been asked
for you," said the host.

"As you say, then, sir?"

"My name Hinzelmeier."

"Well," said the host, "your grandchildren, the husband of the beautiful
woman Abel, whom I know very well."

"This is my father," said Hinzelmeier,
"and the beautiful woman Abel is my mother."

The landlord shrugged
his shoulders and as he turned to his tavern, he said at himself:
"Poor old man has become childish." Smiled and said Hinzelmeier softly:
"It was the young wife Rose, now it will soon be better.  I kept a watch
also at the Earl's door, and at length received notice that Captain Pendergrast had also visited
the Earl; and only this very night I have obtained information that he and La Rue have both
been at the palace.  As you know, also, this morning the king gave orders that his coaches
and guards should be made ready to go out hunting as usual, but suddenly, just at the moment
they were to set forth, notice was sent to them that the king was unwell, and could not go
abroad that day. Putting these things together, I am sure that the king has been warned of
our plot, and that those who are in it will ere long be seized.  He probably now only waits
till he has learned the names of our party, and ascertained where each of us are to be found."

"Ellis, you deserve my gratitude!" exclaimed Long Sam.  "It is time then that each of us should
seek his safety in flight.  I shall be off this moment; and I will leave the raw youth I have
brought with me from the north to pay the score as best he can.  He knows nothing; and if he
is taken up and clapped into prison, he can do me no harm.  Will you come with me?  Here's
a horse at your service."

"Thank you, Sir George," answered the other man, "I have business to do which must be done
this night, in London, and I hope to get on board ship before daybreak and be off for France.
I will not delay longer here."

Saying this, Ellis took a hurried departure, uttering but a short farewell to his companion.
Long Sam immediately followed him out of the room.  Jack sat up in bed and rubbed his eyes
to be sure that he had not been dreaming.

"This, then, is the plot in which Mr Harwood has been engaged," he thought to himself.  "I
can serve him best by giving him information that it has been discovered.  If I remain long
here, I shall probably, as Long Sam observes is likely, be seized and sent to prison.  Instead
of paying the score, I will leave the horses to do that, and take the one which will most quickly
carry me along the road to Sherwood Forest."

Jack, on this, quickly dressed himself in a rough riding-habit, and packed his other garments
into his valise.  Having loaded his pistols and seen to their priming, he stuck them in his
belt, and, carrying his valise under his arm, with his boots in his hand, he silently stole
down-stairs.  Without difficulty he found his way into the room where the conspirators had
met; then, putting on his boots, he made his way to the stables.  He dared not strike a light,
but, knowing well the positions of the horses, and the place where the saddles were hung up,
he hoped to find no difficulty in getting off.  He quickly opened the stable-door, and was
about to enter, when a deep voice exclaimed, "Stand, or you're a dead man!"

He felt sure the person who spoke was Long Sam.

"Don't fire," he answered, calmly, "you will gain nothing by so doing!"

"Then tell me what you are about to do, youngster," exclaimed Long Sam, stepping forth, leading
a horse by the bridle.

"I have as much right to take a midnight ride as you have," answered Jack.  "I don't wish to
stop you, but if you go your way, I claim a right to go mine."

"You are crowing loudly, my lad!" said Long Sam, with a curse.

"I have no wish to crow," answered Jack, "but if you have to ride to save your life, I wish
to do the same to save my liberty.  If you attempt to stop me I will give the alarm, and you
well know what the consequences will be.  You wish to make a tool of me--you will find that
if you still attempt to do so, you will cut your own fingers."

"You are a sharp lad," answered Long Sam, or Sir George Barclay, for Jack before long had reason
to know that such was the real name of his late companion.  "You have found out a great deal
more than I supposed. However, I believe you honest: and now make the best of your way out
of this city.  If you can give notice to any of our friends that they are in danger, you will
be rendering them an important service, which, perhaps, some day or other they will be able
to repay; and if not, you may rest satisfied that you have performed a kind action."

Saying this, Sir George led his horse through the gateway of the inn, which was left ajar,
probably by pre-arrangement, and disappeared in the darkness.  Jack quickly saddled the steed
which had been bestowed on him by Master Pearson, and took his way northward by the road along
which he had come to Hammersmith.  As soon as he was at a distance from any houses, he clapped
spurs to his horse and galloped over the ground at as fast a rate as the bad state of the roads
would allow.

CHAPTER TWENTY.

A RIDE FOR LIBERTY.

While Jack is galloping towards Sherwood Forest, we will give a short description of the plot
which had been designed for the overthrow of William of Orange and the restoration of James
the Second to the throne of England, and the re-establishment of Romanism throughout the realm.

The adherents of James, who desired to retain him on the throne of England in spite of his
attempts to establish a despotic government, and to restore the Roman Catholic religion in
the country, were called by their opponents "Jacobites."  A large number of them belonged themselves
to the Church of Rome, and, instigated by their priests, many of whom, in consequence of the
liberality of King William, were allowed to remain in the country, were with other discontented
persons continually plotting for the restoration of King James.  At length, the two plots which
have been hinted at in the previous pages were concocted.  One, in which Mr Harwood and a number
of noblemen and gentlemen of honourable character were engaged, had for its object the rising
of the Jacobites generally throughout England, while Louis the Fourteenth undertook to send
an army of 20,000 men to their assistance.  This was about the year 1693.  At the same time,
another plot of an atrocious character was either proposed to James or suggested by him.  He
had himself, by this time, become thoroughly imbued with Jesuit principles, being surrounded
by priests of that order.  At all events, there is no doubt that the plot met with his cordial
sanction.  The plan proposed was to assassinate William as he was on his way to hunt in Richmond
Park. While the country by his death was thrown into a state of confusion, the Jacobites were
to fly to arms and the French army was to cross the channel.

Towards the end of 1695, the Duke of Berwick, a natural son of Charles the Second, came over
secretly to England to try the temper of the Jacobites, Louis having promised to send his troops
across immediately that they should rise.  The Duke landed in Romney Marsh, where he took up
his abode at the house of a smuggler of the name of Robert Hunt.  By means of this man he was
enabled to transmit the information he received to France.  It appears, however, that the Jacobites
were unwilling to risk their lives by rising while William remained firmly seated on the throne,
dreading the arm of that bold and sagacious monarch.

There is no doubt, that in consequence of the failure of the Duke of Berwick's attempt in England
to induce his friends to rise in arms, James and Louis agreed to the plot which had before
been suggested for the assassination of William.  The king was to be murdered on the 15th of
February, as he was leaving his palace at Kensington to hunt in Richmond Park.  Now it appears
that a few days before this, James left Paris, and journeyed to Calais, where he set himself
at the head of an army of about 20,000 men, who were drawn out of the garrisons which lay near
the frontier.  A considerable fleet also assembled there from Dunkirk and other ports, while
transports, and more men-of-war to convoy them over, were also brought together.  Several regiments
indeed were already embarked while James waited at Calais, and no one can doubt that he remained
there to receive the first notice of the projected assassination.  Louis had communicated to
the various courts in which he had ministers, the facts that he had acknowledged James King
of England, and that he purposed to invade that country to re-establish him on the throne.
At this time William had a large fleet at Spithead, and an army attached to him, while the
larger part of the nation were desirous that he should remain their king.  With all of these
facts Louis was well acquainted, and there can be no doubt that he was himself also aware of
the intended assassination, as he had far too much sense to suppose that while William lived
any invasion of England would have been successful.

The chief promoter of the scheme for the invasion of England was Sir John Fenwick, a baronet
of good family, but it does not appear that he was in any way connected with the assassination
plot.  Sir John Friend, a city knight, was also implicated in this plot.  The Earl of Aylesbury
and Lord Montgomery, with many others, were also connected with it. Charnock, Sir William Parkyns,
Rookwood, Lowick, Cranburn, Knightley were among the chief persons engaged in the assassination
plot.

The conspirators were to be scattered about Turnham Green in taverns and ale-houses, and to
be brought together upon a signal being given.  Each body of them was under a leader, so as
to give the proceeding the air of a military act.  While some were to attack the king's guards,
others had been especially selected to shoot at the king himself.  James had sent over a number
of his own body-guard to be in readiness to support the conspirators.  It appears, however,
that the military men engaged in the work were very unwilling to undertake it, unless they
received a commission from James himself.  This document was therefore drawn up and signed
by the king, and on seeing it, some of them imagined that the undertaking in which they engaged,
although of a somewhat desperate character, was as honourable as that of entering into a campaign
in regular service.  Some, however, felt great doubts about the matter, as they could not help
viewing it in its true light.  Among these were two captains, Pendergrast, an Irish officer,
and Fisher, an Englishman, and a Frenchman named De la Rue, who without any agreement with
each other, at different times gave information to the Earl of Portland of the contemplated
assassination of the king.

William at first was very unwilling to believe in the plot, and it was not without difficulty
that the Earl of Portland could persuade his Majesty not to go forth on his hunting expedition
on that eventful 15th day of February.

The greater number of the conspirators not having received such early information as did Sir
George Barclay, continued to meet, even on that very day, hoping still to carry out their plan
on the following Saturday.  They were nearly all seized, most of them in their beds, before
they had received any notice of the discovery of the plot.

Charnock, who had been a Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, and had become its Popish vice-president,
was an indefatigable agent of the Jacobites.  So completely imbued had he become with Jesuitical
principles, that he had persuaded himself that he had full right to murder the king, having
as he supposed a commission from the person he considered the legal proprietor of the throne.
He offered to disclose all he knew of the consultations and designs of the Jacobites, if his
life were spared, and the reply of King William is worthy of note: "I desire not to know them,"
feeling assured probably, that many were in it whom he hoped still to win over by generosity
and kindness. When the sun unleashed ghosts invisible
on the crystal glass fragrance that even sounded fine, and with every drop the liquid gold
that was brought to the tongue, quickly Blumengärtlein under the nose seemed to grow, as finally
softened the rough sense Kabyssens John and he gave his consent. It was quickly brought the notary
and a wonderful coffee is a very valid will placed. Finally embraced the artificial-natural
son, and the gender-founding Patriarch, but it was not like a warm hug from flesh and blood, but
far more solemn, more like the clash of two great principles that meet their trajectories themselves.

Now
John was sitting in prosperity.

He had to do now nothing more than its pleasant destination held to be a little considerate to
behave against his master and father to a rich pocket money to eat on the way in which they like
best. This all happened on the decent and most peaceful way, and he dressed like a Baron. Valuables
He did not need one more to purchase and it was now his genius by acquired, years ago, yet just
enough and a well-designed scheme adjusted, as approved by the abundance of happiness now
completely covered. The Battle of Waterloo thunder and lightning on a contented breast, chains
and pendants swayed be looked on a well-filled stomach, through the gold-rimmed glasses and
a jolly proud Eye, the floor showed more a wise man, when he supported him, and the beautiful
cigar case was filled with good stems, which he smoked in the Mazepparöhrchen with understanding.
The wild horse was shiny brown, but only on the Mazeppa bright red, almost flesh-colored, so that
the double work of art of the carver and the right of the smoker admiration of the experts excited.
Even Papa Litumlei was greatly taken away and trained with his foster son eagerly light up the sea foam.
It was purchased a whole collection of such pipes, but The old man was too restless and impatient in the
noble art. The boy had to help out anywhere and do well, what inspired that in turn respect and confidence.

But
soon found himself an even more important for activity against the two men, as the dad pressing
to reinventing those jointly novel and write, by which John to his natural son was charged. It
should be a secret family document in the form of fragmentary memoirs.

Of jealousy and anxiety to the woman Litumlei , Preventing it had drafted in secret meetings
and was very quietly in the to be established Family archives are closed to only in the latter
days when sex in bloom distances to connect to light and to speak of the history of Litumleiblutes.

John
had already made, after the death of the elderly is not simply Litumlei, to name but Kabys de
Litumley # # because he for his own name he forged so dainty, a pardonable fondness cherished, just
as he decided to give the document to be constructed, so he should come to his birth and marriage
to a dissolute mother, one day burn easily.

But still he had working on this now, what a silent Turbidity of his well-being caused. But he sent
himself wisely in the matter and concluded one morning with the old one in a garden room to begin the
work. Sat it now at a table opposite and suddenly discovered that its project difficult was
as if she meant by any of them had ever written a hundred lines in succession. You could certainly
find no beginning, and the closer they put their heads together, the more less they wanted
to come up with something. At last the son remembered that they actually first would have a
book strong and beautiful paper to build a permanent document. That makes sense, they set off
at once to buy such things, and roamed amicably the city. When they found what they sought, they
advised each other, as it is a warm Day was to go into a house and Schenk to cool off there, and
to collect. Happy drinking her several pots and ate nuts, bread, sausages, until John suddenly
said he had now the beginning of the story was invented and wanted to go straight home to write
it down, so that he would not lose again. "So only run fast," said the old man, "I will, meanwhile,
invent here to continue, I notice that to me is already on the way! "

John really ran with the book that room for paper and wrote: "It was in the 17th,. when it was a blessed
year. The bucket wine costs seven guilders, a bucket of cider half a guilder and the degree cherry
brandy four silver. A zweipfündiges a chunk of white bread, ditto a chunk of rye bread, a half
a sack of potatoes and eight silver. Nor was the hay well advised, and the bushel Haber cost two
florins.

Nor were the peas and beans well fall and the flax and hemp were advised not good, however again
the oil crops and Tallow or tallow, so that everything took place in all the strange situation
that the civil Society was well fed and watered, dressed scantily, and again well lighted. The year
was easily the end, everyone was curious to find out now legal experience, how to start the
new year would be. Winter testified to be a due and downright Winter, cold and clear, a warm
blanket of snow lay on the fields and protected the young seed. But still, something strange
happened recently. It was snowing, thawing, freezing again during Hornung of the month in such frequent
changes that not only many people were ill, but also an amount icicles was that the whole country
looked like a large glass magazine a small board and everyone was wearing on his head to pierce
not covered by the peaks be. For the rest, claiming the price of food is still, as noted above and
finally swayed towards a strange spring. "

Here came the little old hergerannt eagerly took the bow itself, and without the previously written
to read or say something, he continued: "Well, he came and told Adam Litumlei. He understood not
fun and was born anno 17th .. He came storming like a spring weather. He was one of those. He wore
a red velvet coat, a plumed hat and a sword. He wore a gold vest with the slogan: Young people
are all!

He wore golden spurs and riding a white stallion, he put the same in the first inn and called out: I
care I have to let off steam about the devil, because it is spring and youth! He paid all cash and
all wondered at him. He drank the wine, he ate the roast, he said, the good for me everything
is nothing! He also said: Come, you sweet darling, you are good for me better than wine and Fry,
as silver and gold! What do I care? Think what you want, what must be, must be! "

Here he stopped suddenly stuck and could not quite on. They read together the writing, found
it not bad, and rallied for eight days, taking a loose life led, for they often went into
the beer house to get a new start-up, only the Luck did not laugh every day. John finally
got off a corner again, ran home and continued: "These words the young Litumlei directed namely
at a certain Virgin Liselein Federspiel, who lived in the outermost
houses of the city, where the gardens, and soon a Wood or sticks come.

This was one of the most charming beauties that the city has ever produced, with blue eyes and small feet.
She had grown so beautiful that they did not need a corset and savings from this, because she was
poor, gradually a purple Silk dress could buy. But all this was transfigured by a general
sadness, which not only has the lovely features, but on the whole harmony of the elements Miss
spring game was shaking, that in all the melancholy chords of a wind Aeolian harp listen to believe.
For now it was a memorable month of May even begun, in which the huddle all four seasons seemed.
There was even a snow in the beginning that the nightingales sang with snowflakes on her head,
as if they were wearing white Zipfelmützchen; Then there was a such heat that the children
were bathing in the open and ripened cherries, and the chronicle of which preserves the rhyme:

Ice
and snow, Boys swimming in the lake, Mature and flowering cherry wine Fain would all be in
a Maimond.

"These phenomena made the people think and worked in various ways. The Evening Liselein Federspiel,
which was particularly profound pondering, and was also to for the first time aware that they
their weal and woe, their virtue and their case in his own hand Wear, and by now the balance held
and considered them responsible freedom, she was as sad about it. As she stood now, was that
bold and Redcoat said without delay: Spring game, I love you!

     What are they suddenly
     a strange addition
     to their previous Thought changed
     and burst into laughter. "

"Now let me go," cried the old man, who came running after heated and the boys read over the shoulder,
"it fits me just right now," and continued the story: is "Da nothing to laugh about! said that,
because I do not have fun! In short, it happened as it had come; where the wood was at the
height, my spring game was sitting in the open and laughed again, but even the Knights jumped
on his horse and flew so fast into the distance, that he by the space-border aerial perspective
in a few moments looked quite blue.

He disappeared, did not return, for he was a devil roast! "

"Ha, now it's done," cried Litumlei and threw down his pen, "now I have mine done to bring about
the conclusion you lead now, I am quite exhausted by those infernal inventions! The Styx! I am
therefore not surprising that one of the ancestors of large houses and keeping such a high
life-size painting, I feel, what trouble it cost me the foundation of the mine! But I have not
treated the thing boldly? "

John continued to write now: "The unhappy girl spring game felt a lot of dissatisfaction, as she
suddenly noted that the seductive young man had disappeared, almost simultaneously with the
memorable month of May. But she had the presence of mind quickly what had happened explain
in their interior to undo, so the earlier state of evenly suspended
Wage restore.

But she enjoyed this sequel of innocence but a short time. The Summer came, they cut the grain,
it was a yellow in the eyes, everywhere I looked, before all 'the golden blessing, the prices
went back down significantly, Liselein Federspiel was on the hill and watched everything, but
they saw nothing out of sheer disgust and regret. It was the autumn, each vine was a fountain,
from falling apples and pears drummed it continually on the earth: they drank, they sang,
bought and sold. Each is supplied, the whole country was a carnival, and so abundant and cheap
everything was, but it was Superfluous still praised and pampered and appreciated. Alone the blessing
Liselein brought should be deemed to be worth nothing and no demand, as if in abundance floating
pile of people might not need one more little mouths. Then she wrapped in their virtue, and gave
birth a month early, a lively little boy, which rightly so need it was to be the smith of his
own happiness.

"This son behaved so bravely much moving through a life that he, with wonderful Fate finally united
with his father, pulled by the same honor and in his Rights was established, and this is the
second known head of the house of the family of Litumlei. "

In this document, the old man wrote, "Seen and confirms, Johann Adam Litumlei Polycarp." And John
also signed. Then Mr. Litumlei expressed even at his seal, the coat of arms three half golden
fishing in the blue field and seven white and red squared wagtails
pointed to an inclined rolling green bar.

They wondered, however, that the document does not become larger, because there was little Sheet
of paper the book described.

Nevertheless, they put it in the archive, including it for the time being given an old iron chest,
and were satisfied and happy.

In these and other jobs as time passed most agreeably, and it was the John almost uncannily fortunate
that even to hope and nothing to fear, to forge and to speculate existed. As he so looked for
new activities, it would bedünken him that the wife of the owner somewhat dissatisfied and
suspicious face to show it, and it seemed to him only, he certainly could not claim it. He had
this woman, which almost always asleep, or when they woke up, ate something good about his other
Efforts little attention because they are in no way interfered with, and all seemed satisfied,
when their peace was not disturbed. Now he suddenly feared they could give him any adverse
change of things, prepare swayed her husband, and the like.

He put his finger to his nose and said, 'Stop! There should be advised to the work still the last
file to give! How could I have this important game for so long out of sight ! Share Good is
good, but better is better! "

The old man had just gone to the quiet of the averaging of a suitable wife for his heir to operate,
of which he himself that betrayed nothing. John decided without delay, to go to the lady with
the vague idea that her in any way the to make court, and to ingratiate himself with her to
make up for lost time. He whispered respectable down the stairs to the room where they were
staying, and found as usual, the door half open to, because she was curious at all inertia and loved
always listen to what was going on.

He stepped carefully inside and saw her lying there asleep again, a half-eaten raspberry tarts
in the hand. Without knowing what actually start, he finally went down to the toes, took her
hand and kissed it reverently round. She did not in the least, but opened her eyes halfway,
and saw him without moving his mouth, with a maximum strange look on as long as he stood there. Stunned
and stammering, he retired at last and ran to his room. There he sat in a corner, that look
of narrow Augenzwinkerung always on. He hurried down again, the woman behaved as immobile as before,
and as he stepped closer, the eyes were doing back on halfway. Again, he drew back, again He sat
in the corner of his room, for the third time he jumped up, went
down the stairs slipped in and was now there, until the patriarch
returned home.

There is now hardly a day went by where the two people are not team up and go behind the old knew that
it had a kind.

The sleepy woman was at once cheerful in her manner; John, however, yielded to the most passionate
ingratitude to his benefactor, always with the intention of to consolidate his position and
fortune right to be nailed to the wall.

Both sinners did, however, all the more friendly and devoted to the duped Litumlei, of this is quite
comfortable and felt to have his house in order on the best thought so that one could not distinguish
which of the two men was more pleased with himself. One morning,
however, seemed to carry off the old man the victory following a confidential
conversation, who plowed his wife with him, because he went around
very strange, was not a moment too quiet and looked away while all
sorts of little sentence whistle, but because of lack teeth not.  I have brought him some news, with which
I need not trouble you, which requires him to leave home immediately."

"Why not trust me?" answered Jasper; "surely I would not betray Mr Harwood's secrets!"

"For your own sake it may be better for you not to know them," answered Jack.  "It is time
that we should be on our road.  Bear my duty to my father and mother and my love to our sisters,
and I will write to them of my proceedings as soon as I have an opportunity."

Jack saw that Mr Harwood was impatient to be off, while he himself knew the importance of losing
no time in getting to a place of safety; he had no opportunity, therefore, of asking Jasper
questions as to what had taken place at Nottingham, nor did he himself wish to tell him what
he had been about.  He merely mentioned his letter entrusted to the miller. "That will tell
you more about my intentions," he observed.  If a pang of jealousy crossed his heart when he
saw his brother ride off by the side of Alethea, he quickly banished it, and immediately afterwards
he and Mr Harwood, with their valises strapped to their saddles, were making their way through
the forest to the east.

CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

JOHN DEANE TURNS SAILOR, AND JOINS THE "WEYMOUTH," CAPTAIN JUMPER.

At no time for many years had there been greater activity in the chief naval ports of England
than in February, 1696.  All the ships in the service were ordered to be brought forward, and
as many more as could be obtained were purchased for the Royal Navy.  Officers and men eagerly
offered their services; indeed the enthusiasm of all ranks and professions was very great.
Numerous seamen from the merchant service joined the navy, and there was no lack of volunteers
eager to be employed.  A squadron lay in the Medway, fitting out as quickly as stores could
be brought on board them and the men could be collected. Among them was the "Weymouth," a ship
of forty guns, commanded by the well-known Captain Jumper.  Her sails were bent, and she only
waited for her powder to be brought on board to go to sea, as soon as she could fill up with
her proper complement of men.  A boat had just come alongside, and the first lieutenant reported
that she contained a number of volunteers.

Among the first who stepped on board was a fine, active-looking young man, though, to the nautical
eye, he had not much the look of a sailor.

"Where have you served before, my man?" asked Mr Cammock, the first lieutenant; "and what do
you know of seamanship?"

"I have served nowhere, please you, sir," was the answer, "but I am ready to learn.  And I
know how to handle a cutlass, and shoot a partridge or pheasant flying."

"You are the lad for us then," answered the officer.  "What is your name?  We will enter you
as a landsman; but you will soon make an able seaman."

"John Deane, at your service, sir," answered our friend; for he it was who, having put his
purpose of joining the navy into execution, had volunteered for the "Weymouth."

It was the first time he had ever stood on the deck of a ship.  No wonder then that he gazed
about him with a look of astonishment, at the guns thickly ranged on either side; at the numerous
brass swivels and other pieces which graced her quarters and forecastle, and the high lanterns
of brass astern; at the numberless ropes which led here and there from the masts and spars,
with their ends neatly coiled down on deck; at the seamen, in their loose dresses, shirts,
and trousers, with belts round their waists, contrasting with the officers in their three-cornered
hats and long coats, laced with gold or silver, large embroidered belts by which hung their
rapiers--each dressed rather according to his fancy and means, than to any authorised uniform.

A number of other men were then called up.  Among the first was one whose countenance Jack
thought he knew.  He looked at him several times, till at length it struck him that it must
be the very man who had guided him to Pearson's farm in the fens--Ned Burdale.  There was the
same sturdy, independent look, bold eye, and manner.  What, however, had induced him to enter
on board a king's ship, Jack could not divine.  At all events, he felt it would be wise in
him not to claim acquaintance with a person of so doubtful a character.

He little expected to find any body else whom he had met before; but he had not been long on
board, when a seaman came up to him, and, putting out his hand, exclaimed--

"What, Jack Deane, don't you know me?"

"Yes," said Jack, at last, wringing him by the hand; "but I should not have recognised you
in that dress and with that ugly cut down your cheek, if I did not remember your voice."

"Yes; I have seen some service already," answered the seaman.  "I have a bullet through my
leg, and this pretty little remembrance on my cheek; but it's what we have to expect.  We're
paid for it, you know; and besides, we give as good as we take, and that's a consolation."

"But what made you come to sea?" asked Jack.  "I had no idea you had any fancy that way."

"I may ask the same question of you, friend Deane," said Smedley, for it was Jack's old poaching
acquaintance.  "The honest truth is, I found Nottingham too hot to hold me, and so here I am
come to serve his majesty.  It is a pretty hard life, I will own; but I have brought myself
into it, and so I have determined not to grumble."

"Well, I have my own reasons, too, Smedley, for coming to sea," said Jack, "but you will excuse
me if I don't explain them.  I hope we may both do our duty, and fight bravely for our country.
That's what I have come to sea for, with the hope of seeing a little more of the world than
I should if I had remained at Nottingham, or continued to drive oxen between Scotland and Stourbridge."

Smedley, who had already been some weeks at sea, was able to give Jack a good deal of instruction
in his duties, and found him an apt scholar. Jack was determined to make himself a seaman as
soon as he could.  From morning till night he was employed in picking up information, and he
soon gained some knowledge in the arts of knotting and splicing.  He quickly, too, found his
way aloft; and though at first he felt rather giddy at the mast-head, his eye soon got accustomed
to look down on the deck below, and he could run out on the yards in a short time with any
man on board.  He soon, indeed, surpassed Smedley himself.  The man he took to be Burdale,
from the way he walked the deck, was evidently accustomed to a sailor's life.

So rapidly were the ships got ready for sea, that in a short time a large fleet was collected
in the Downs under the command of Admiral Russell.  He had under him Lord Berkeley, Admiral
of the Blue, and Sir Cloudesley Shovel, Vice-Admiral of the Red; Mr Aylmer, Vice-Admiral of
the Blue, with two Dutch squadrons under two rear-admirals.

As soon as the fleet was collected, they set sail for the coast of France, arriving shortly
afterwards off Dunkirk.  It was here that the celebrated French Admiral, Jean Bart, held the
command of a French fleet.  As the English fleet passed Calais, three or four hundred vessels
of all sorts were seen with their sails bent ready for sea.  As soon as the French saw the
English fleet approaching Dunkirk, several of their men-of-war ran close up to the pier.  Hopes
were now entertained by the English crews that some fighting would take place.  Sir Cloudesley
Shovel, with several captains, stood in towards Dunkirk, to see if there was any possibility
of burning the fleet.  This, however, was declared to be impracticable, and Admiral Russell
therefore sailed back to Dover, leaving a squadron under Sir Cloudesley Shovel, to watch the
movements of the enemy.  A short time after this, Sir Cloudesley Shovel, who had returned to
the Downs, was ordered to take with him the bomb-vessels, and such small ships as he should
think necessary; and attempt the burning of Calais with the transports, and other ships in
that harbour.

Calais was soon in sight.  The English could see the harbour crowded with vessels, which as
they approached, however, ran close up under their batteries where the ships could not get
at them.  The wind was off shore, which gave them smooth water; and the squadron, in gallant
style, beat up as near to the town as the water would allow.  They now anchored, their men-of-war
protecting the bomb-vessels, which instantly commenced throwing shells into the place.  It
was a fine sight to see them, like vast rockets, rising in the air and curling over, until
they fell into the devoted town.

For several hours the fiery shower continued.  Now flames were seen to burst out in one part
of the town, now in another; and now the vessels in the harbour caught fire; several in succession
exploded.  As each of the enemy's vessels blew up, the English crews burst forth with loud
cheers, and redoubled their efforts.  The enemy were not idle, but the English ships were so
placed that not many of the French shot did damage.  The shipping in the harbour suffered most,
as the chief aim of the English was to destroy them, and a large number of privateers were
blown up or burned.  A strong wind was blowing when the action began, and it continued increasing,
till the squadron could with difficulty hold their position before the town.  Still the English
persevered.  A large portion of the town was burnt down, and a considerable amount of shipping
was destroyed.  Such would have been the fate of the whole, had not the gale at length compelled
Sir Cloudesley Shovel to throw out a signal for retiring.  This was done in good order, and
the squadron returned to the Downs.

Soon after this, a squadron of which the "Weymouth" formed one of the ships, was sent to cruise
off Dunkirk, where it was understood that Jean Bart, with several ships of war, was still lying
ready for sea. Rear-Admiral Benbow was placed in command of this squadron; but on his arrival
before the place, he found the number of ships he had with him too small to guard both channels;
the weather, also, proving extremely foggy, Du Bart slipped out, and, steering to the north-east,
fell in with the Dutch Baltic fleet of about a hundred sail, escorted by five frigates, all
of which he took, and above half the merchantmen.  In the midst of Du Bart's victory, he was
surprised by the appearance of the Dutch outward-bound Baltic fleet, under the convoy of thirteen
men-of-war, which so closely pursued him that he was obliged to abandon most of his prizes.
He burned four of the frigates, and putting their crews on board the fifth, turned her adrift,
which, with thirty-five of the merchant-ships, were retaken.  A fast galley brought this news
to Admiral Benbow, who immediately steered in pursuit of the French squadron.  The "Weymouth"
was one of the leading ships.

Jack Deane, who was now rated as an able seaman, was constantly at the mast-head looking out
for the enemy, eager as any on board to come up with them.

"Several sail ahead!" he shouted out one morning at daybreak.

There was no doubt that this was the enemy.  The signal was thrown out accordingly, and the
English crowded all sail in chase.  The wind, however, which was in their favour, began to
fall, and, greatly to their disappointment, it became almost a calm.  The Frenchmen, however,
retained the breeze, and were soon again out of sight.

In vain the English seamen whistled for a wind.  Noon passed by, and still they remained becalmed.
Whether it was their whistling or not produced the breeze, one sprung up towards evening, and
the brave Benbow steered after the French.  Again they were discovered, and again lost sight
of.  Once more their white canvas was seen ahead, and hopes were entertained that they would
be overtaken before they could reach the shelter of Dunkirk, towards which they were steering.
They, however, made good use of their heels, and before a shot could reach them they had run
into Dunkirk.

The fleets of England were, however, enabled to punish the French severely for their audacious
project of invading our "tight little island," and for their still more nefarious plan, which
had been hatched under the sanction of their king, for assassinating the constitutional and
Protestant monarch whom her people had chosen, and imposing on them in his stead a Papist and
a tyrant.

Jack kept his eyes and ears open, and picked up all the information he could as to what was
going forward in all directions.  He had resolved when he joined to become an officer, and
he knew very well that the only way of accomplishing his object was to attend strictly to his
duties, to be obedient to his superiors, and to gain all the information in his power.

Among the novelties which had lately been introduced into the ships of the Royal Navy were
brass box-compasses.  These were placed in front of the steering-wheels, and were a great improvement
upon the former contrivances for the same object.

A register for thirty thousand seamen was established.  They were to be in readiness at all
times for supplying the Royal Navy, and were to receive a bounty of forty shillings yearly.
On the 29th of January of that year, the "Royal Sovereign," built in the reign of Charles the
First, and at that time the largest ship ever built in England, was by accident burned at her
moorings in Gillingham Reach, in the river Medway.

"Well, Deane, and how do you like a sea life?" asked Smedley, after Jack had been some time
on board.

"I will tell you when I've been longer afloat," answered Jack.  "From what I have seen of it,
I am ready to stick to it; that's what I've got to say.  And how do you like it?"

"To confess the truth, I am getting rather tired of it," answered Smedley.  "I thought it would
be an easier life than I find it, but this cruising up and down the Channel and blockading
the enemy's ports is trying work, and often I wish myself on shore again, taking a stroll or
galloping through Sherwood Forest."

"That's because you have not a right object in view," answered Jack. "Now I have made up my
mind to take the roughs and smooths as I find them.  If I get shot or wounded, it is the fate
of many a better man; and if I escape, I hope to fight my way up to wear a cocked hat and laced
coat."

"That's very well for you, Deane, because you were born a gentleman," said Smedley.  "I came
to sea because I could not help it: all about that poaching affair, and the burning of the houses."

"I wish we had never engaged in it, I own," said Jack.  "It has cost me dear; and what I regret
most is the injury it did my character in the place, and the annoyance it must have caused
my family when it was found out."

"What do you mean?" asked Smedley.  "I do not understand you."

"Why, that the man who met us on that night, and showed us how to spear the salmon, told me
that a warrant was out against me for poaching and firing the huts, and that if I went back
to Nottingham I should be sent to prison," answered Jack.

"He told you a lie, then.  Your name has never been mentioned in connexion with the affair;
and to this day, unless you have told any body, I am very sure that no one in Nottingham knows
any thing about it."

"Then what object could Pearson have had for saying so?" said Jack.

"I have an idea," said Smedley; "I may be right or I may be wrong; and from what you have told
me of the man, he has just wanted to keep you from going back to Nottingham.  Why he did so
I cannot exactly say, except that he probably wanted to make use of you in some way or other."

The light at length burst on Jack's mind, and at once he saw the danger of getting into bad
company.  Had he refrained from joining in that fatal expedition, he would not have met Pearson;
and if he had not met Pearson, he would never have been drawn into the plot which had so nearly
cost him dear.  Perhaps even his life might have been sacrificed in consequence!  He did not
say this to Smedley, because he had determined not to say any thing to him about the plot in
which he had been unintentionally mixed up.

"It shall be a lesson to me through life," he thought.  "If a person once associates with evil-disposed
people, he knows not how soon he may be led to do as they're doing."

Often he thought of honest Will Brinsmead and his wise sayings, and the advice he had bestowed
on him.  Jack was every day becoming far more thoughtful than he had been hitherto.  He was
living among a wild, careless, rough set of men.  Most of them were brave and honest; but there
were rogues and cowards among them.  The greater number lived only for the present moment,
and were utterly thoughtless about the future. Now, John Deane felt that he must either be
drawn in to act as they were acting, and to become like them, or he must keep himself as much
as possible aloof from them.  This, however difficult it might be, he determined to do.

In former days laws had been passed, not only to maintain a discipline in the navy, but for
regulating the moral conduct of the men.  There were regulations against profane swearing,
or gambling, or fighting, or quarrelling; and orders were issued for the performance of Divine
Service, not only on Sundays, but on weekdays, and on every occasion before going into action
with an enemy. 

They defeated their agitation and saw some moments of modesty and childlike, and as the Women
got up and went about among themselves, while the men were carousing at table, she went on Küngolt,
kissed her and made friends with her. The girl felt honored by this approach of a semi-religious
woman who had traveled widely and fully Knowledge of the world seemed they once led a long and
intimate conversation, as if they have been Years were known, and the general move Küngolt asked
her father, he would like Viola ends in his house called to get the same because they feel themselves
too young and inexperienced to do so. The woodsman, his mood now from a wonderful mixture of sadness
and Wine and spirits was his thoughts were far away at the dead were readily Think in agreement,
although he did not care much for the base and a cord-engined person stopped.

So she moved in a few days into the forest house, and with good grace
and not without emotion on the stove on which she finally, after much
Irrsal the wishes of their earliest years in a quiet meeting seemed
to go.

She opened the cabinets modest its predecessor and saw the linen and supplies in good order and
peace are deep; lined up neatly, she saw the pots and the kettles, the pots and boxes and
cozy hanging the flat bundle under the same roof. In this peace they had all made a couple
of weeks; but then she began gradually the small pots to stand between the big, the screen to clutter,
to ruffle the flax, until they had finished, she had the human things in the house brought in incipient
disorder.

Indicated that it intended finally to be still the forester woman to at least to supply, so
it was important to his child, and the young Dietegen whose position
it soon become aware to bring, apart and separated for ever.

For they thought right that Dietegen if he would get the girl to woman, as the successor to
stay in the house of forester and this, in his devotion to his dead wife, then would no longer
marry, what however, should happen more easily when the two children would continue and he was
in his house isolated in the matter.

How, then every day Küngolt increasingly developed and more beautiful, was she awakened in her
early awareness of the beauty and the spirit of a though still childish
Buhlsucht by without anyone noticing, the girl with a few words to
all young to bring people into a relationship knowing entangled, so
that the child got to see each drum, whether it's beauty, feel and
acknowledge its turn, and each pretended that he was the young pretty
girls in particular caught my attention.

Violand then moved induce other young women, because more often that good company together was and
was always gentle courtoisiert under their leadership.

So it happened that Küngolt, even before they had fully sixteen years,
has a circle restless Minds saw gathered around him.

There were all sorts of small and large celebrations, stories, disputes, noise and song, and as
often happens, made be cheeky or stupid folks uncomfortable and were
it suffered the most.

About Dietegen here was not happy.

At first he looked with a certain sadness fear to which adolescent boys is due not sent special,
but when the company it seemed more amused than agitated and Küngolt even noticed it was cold, he wanted
to defend against such displeasure with linkischem sulking and defiance. That alone brought
him more believed less on a green branch and ended by saying that to one day see how Küngolt
alone in a circle of mocking-looking young men sat with pleasure Mißreden with the listening,
they seem to have led him.

As he turned away and avoided from now on in silence society. He was already in the Age entered
in which the boys began to make itself stronger wehrbar. On the Land of the Forest District
rested from ancient times, the obligation for the holding of three or four men, armor, and
the woodsman had always seen on his own people to to be able to provide. With delight, he found
that growing up Dietegen, slim and well built, are good in a dainty armor would soon, in which
it once to see his own son had hoped.
  Still
this in no way daunted the courage of the British seamen, but only made them the more eager
for the attack.  Most of them had already engaged in many a hard-fought battle with superior
numbers, and come off victorious.  They knew what British pluck and British muscle could do,
and that if they could handle their guns twice as fast as the enemy could haul in and out theirs,
that even should they have only half the number of their antagonist, they might still hope
to beat her.

Jack had frequently spoken to the man whose countenance he thought he knew when he first came
on board, but the latter denied ever having seen him before.  Jack now saw him standing at
a gun not far from the one where he was stationed.  The man looked very pale, and, like Smedley,
was not joining in the jokes of his shipmates.  Jack watched his countenance, and now was more
convinced than ever that he was Burdale.

As the "Weymouth" drew near, the stranger hoisted French colours, and finding that escape was
impossible, hauled up her courses, and fired a gun in defiance, which was answered by one from
the "Weymouth."  Both of the shots, however, fell short of their aim.  The combatants, without
again firing, now rapidly drew near each other, with their flags and streamers flying and their
trumpets loudly sounding.  Men armed with muskets were stationed in the large heavy round-tops,
each holding a dozen or more soldiers, while others were stationed in the topgallant forecastle,
and others at the poop.  Guns were also placed inside the forecastle, as also under the poop,
with their muzzles turned in-board, so that should the enemy attempt to board, the decks might
be swept by their fire.  These guns, however, were not loaded with round-shot, but with langrage,
which, by scattering around, might kill a number of persons at each discharge.  The wind was
moderate, the sea tolerably smooth.  Captain Jumper stood in the mizen-rigging directing the
movements of his ship, while the other officers were stationed in different parts in command
of the guns, some on the upper and main-deck, others on the forecastle and poop.  The surgeons
were below in the cock-pit, getting ready their instruments, and lint, and bandages, and preparing
the tables on which amputation when necessary might be performed.  Here also were restoratives
arranged, for those who might faint from loss of blood.  They had taken a look at the enemy,
and aware from her superior size that the fight would be a desperate one, were coolly talking
over the amount of work in store for them.  Not a word was now spoken along the decks, for
all jokes were silenced by command of the officers.  The captains of the guns stood ready with
their slow-matches in their hands, prepared to fire at the signal being given. Already the
two antagonists were within range of each other's artillery, but both waited to get still nearer
that the greater effect might be produced by their fire.  John Deane could not help holding
his breath, as did many a brave man on board, not from any sensation of fear, but from intense
eagerness for the moment when the combat was to begin.  They had not long to delay.  Captain
Jumper had contrived to place his ship in the position which British officers of all ages have
wished to hold with regard to the enemy--that is, broadside to broadside; and now he saw that
the wished-for moment had arrived. "Fire!" he shouted.  The word was echoed along the decks.
The trumpets now brayed out their loudest sounds of defiance.  The captains of the guns applied
their matches, and the loud roar of artillery broke the silence which had hitherto reigned
over the water.  The Frenchmen were not slow to answer, and their shot came crashing on board
with terrible effect.  Many a fine fellow who had been laughing and joking with the rest was
laid low.  The white splinters were flying on either side, and ropes which had just before
been trim and taut hung in festoons or flew out in the breeze, while many a shot-hole was seen
through the sails. Without a moment's delay the guns were hauled in.  The powder-boys sprang
up from their tubs and handed out the powder, which being quickly rammed home, the shot was
thrown into the muzzle.  Again the guns were run out.  No order was now required for firing,
but as rapidly as the guns could be loaded they were discharged towards the enemy.

Thus for some time the English ship ran alongside her huge antagonist. Her name painted on
her stern was the "Fougueux," and thirty ports were counted on each side.  Jack Deane stood
at his gun, hauling it in with right good will, and running it out still more eagerly as fast
as his arms and those of his mates could work it, thinking of nothing else, and not looking
round, even to see what had become of any of those near him. Now and then he heard a groan
or a cry, and as he turned round to hand on the powder or the shot, he saw perchance a poor
fellow amidst the smoke struggling on the deck.  Next moment there was a loud crash close to
him, and he found himself sprinkled over from head to foot with blood.  He felt no pain, and
scarcely knew whether it was his own or that of a shipmate.  No sound was heard, but he saw
that the man who had stood next to him the moment before was no longer there, but a few feet
off a human being lay stretched on the deck.  He was about to stoop down to help the man during
the interval that the charge was being rammed home.

"Let him alone," said the captain of the gun; "he has drunk his last glass of grog.  See, that's
his blood which has turned you into a red Indian.  Hurrah, lads! we'll revenge him, and all
those who lose the number of their mess to-day!"

All this time the small-arm men were not idle.  Showers of bullets were flying from the tops
and forecastle, returned from those of the enemy.

Now an attempt was made by the "Fougueux," by bracing up her yards, to cross under the stern
of the "Weymouth."  This, however, was quickly prevented by Captain Jumper, by a similar manoeuvre,
as he had no intention of giving up the advantageous position he held.

It was impossible to ascertain the effect which the fire of the British ship was producing
among the French crew, but Jack could not help fearing that a considerable number of his shipmates
were either killed or wounded.  Those who were wounded were immediately carried below, while
the killed were borne to the other side of the deck, and slipped overboard through the ports,
in order to avoid discouraging the survivors.  Still the fight continued with unabated fury.

"Fire away, my lads!" cried Captain Jumper; and his words were echoed by the officers in all
directions.  "We will sink the enemy or go down with our own colours flying.  Never let it
be said that the `Weymouth' had to strike to a Frenchman!"

The speech was a very short one, but it had its effect in encouraging the crew.  Scarcely a
minute afterwards a fearful sound was heard.  It was that of an explosion.  And the ship trembled
from stem to stern, while those on the quarter-deck saw the poop lifting up into the air, sending
some of those on it overboard, and killing several others.

"Fire, fire!" was shouted; "the ship's on fire!"

"We have water enough alongside, my lads, to extinguish it!" cried the captain, in an undaunted
tone; and in an instant those of the crew not actually working the guns were hurried up with
buckets, with which they soon put out the flames.  The Frenchmen shouted, thinking that they
were about to gain the victory, but they were answered by a loud cheer of defiance from the
British seamen.

It became now absolutely necessary for the "Weymouth" to stand away from the enemy for a short
time to repair damages.  The only fear of the British sailors was that in the meantime the
enemy might attempt to escape.

"No fear of that, lads!" cried the brave captain, who knew what they were speaking of.  "See,
we have made too many shot-holes between `wind and water,' and in a few minutes the main-mast
will go by the board, if the wind increases."

This was very evident, for while the "Weymouth" put her helm down, to stand away from the "Fougueux"
for a short distance, the other immediately ceased firing.  The survivors of her crew were
probably engaged in attempting to repair the damages she had received.  This gave the English
leisure to perform their own work without interruption.

Jack as he was leaving his gun to go aloft, looked round him.  Of those who had stood but lately
by his side, several were missing.  Smedley was nowhere to be seen.  He inquired among the
crew of his gun.

"Yes; a shot struck him and he was carried below, but whether mortally wounded or not, no one
could tell."

As he passed up the hatchway, the man whom he took to be Burdale lay on the deck.  A bullet
which had found its way through a port had struck him down.  He was bleeding also from a wound
in his shoulder.  Jack sprang forward to assist him, but just at that instant the men who were
appointed to carry the wounded below, lifted him off the deck, and bore him from his sight.

The decks now presented a very different scene to that which they did a short hour ago.  Fore
and aft they were covered with blood, and in many places they were blackened and torn up by
the shot which had ploughed its way across them.  The beams and stanchions in every direction
were shattered and broken, and the whole ship showed the severity of the action in which she
had been engaged.

"We may be in a bad state enough," Jack heard an old seaman say, "but if you were to go on
board the enemy, you would see matters ten times worse.  Their decks, depend upon it, are slippery
with gore all over, and for one man we have lost, they have lost five."

There was little time, however, for talking.  The officers were shouting here and there, giving
their directions, and the men were springing aloft to obey them, or running wherever they were
summoned.  In a short time the ropes were knotted, the yards braced up, the damage done to
the poop partially repaired, and the "Weymouth" again stood towards her opponent.  As she approached
she was received with a hot fire, which she returned with interest, while the big guns once
more with loud roars sent forth their shot.  The soldiers and small-arm men rattled away with
their musketry, and the swivels, culverins, and other small guns, in rapid succession added
to the uproar by their sharper reports.  Bullets, round-shot, and langrage were flying thickly
around.

"Depress your guns and fire at her hull!" cried the captain, seeing the effect that had already
been produced on the enemy.

As the Frenchmen's fire grew slacker, that of the English became more and more brisk.  Scarcely
had a gun been discharged when it was again hauled in and once more sent forth its deadly missile
into the hull of the enemy.  Just as the action re-commenced, the enemy's main-mast went by
the board.  A loud shout burst from the throats of the British seamen.  Scarcely had it died
away when the mizen-mast followed; and now the stout ship was seen to be heeling over.  A cry
ran along the decks, "She's sinking, she's sinking!"  Still her guns continued to send forth
her shot, though with far less frequency than at first.  Another and another broadside was
fired into her; and now it became evident that there was truth in the belief that she was about
to go down.

"Cease firing!" cried the English captain.  "Not another shot will she discharge at us."

As he spoke the bow of the "Fougueux" was seen to rise out of the water. Loud shrieks and cries
rose from her decks.  Her stern gradually sank.

"Lower the boats!" cried the English captain.  "Be smart, my lads: we must save the poor fellows'
lives."

Unhappily, several of the English boats had been almost knocked to pieces.  Those which could
yet swim were immediately lowered.  John Deane jumped into one of the first that reached the
water.  Ere, however, they could get up to the foundering ship, the sea had washed over her
deck.  Down--down she went, carrying with her all her wounded and a large number of those who
had escaped unhurt.  The rest had thrown themselves into the water, some to swim, some holding
on to planks or broken spars: but of these, many who had delayed leaving to the last, were
drawn down in the vortex of the sinking ship.  As the first English boat reached the spot,
the streamer at her fore-royal-mast-head was alone to be seen fluttering for a moment above
the eddying waters, and then downwards it was drawn after the mast to which it had been attached.
Some were still striking out bravely towards their late antagonists.  The boats were soon among
them, taking up all they met. Many, however, sunk before the very eyes of the English sailors,
as they pulled towards them.  The boats were soon loaded, and returned to the "Weymouth," fearing
lest they should be swamped should they take on board any more of the struggling wretches.
Having handed up those they had saved, they once more returned; but, in the meantime, many
of those they desired to help had sunk beneath the waves: and out of a crew of six or seven
hundred who had lately manned that tall ship, scarcely three-score remained alive.  They confessed
that upwards of a hundred had been killed and wounded since the commencement of the action,
owing, as they acknowledged, to the rapidity with which the English fired at them.  Thus the
hard-won prize was lost.

CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

AFTER THE BATTLE.

The brave crew of the "Weymouth" had enough to do to repair their own damages to escape a similar
fate.  As it was, the "Weymouth" was in a perilous condition from the number of shot-holes
she had received in her hull, and probably had a gale sprung up, she also would have gone to
the bottom of the ocean.  Exhausted by the action as the men were, they still laboured away,
as British seamen are ever ready to do, to repair damages, and to keep the ship afloat.  A
course was then shaped for Plymouth Sound.

As soon as Jack was able to go below, he inquired anxiously for Smedley. He had been carried
to the cock-pit.  Jack went there.  It was the first time he had ever entered that place of
horrors, and his heart sank, and he almost fainted at the sickly odour which reached him. 
As he approached it, cries and groans reached his ears.  On the table lay a poor fellow stripped
naked, looking already a corpse, on whose leg the surgeons had been operating.  His leg, with
several other limbs, lay in a basket of sawdust beneath the table.  The blood had completely
left his face, which still bore the marks of the agony he had suffered, which in those days
there were few means of alleviating.  One of the surgeons was pouring brandy-and-water down
his throat, while another was applying burnt feathers and other restoratives to his nose.

"It's of little use, I'm afraid," said the elder surgeon: "he has slipped through our fingers
after all!"

At first Jack did not recognise the countenance of the sufferer.  He looked again: the features
were those of Smedley!  The surgeon spoke too truly; the previous loss of blood, and the agony
he had suffered during amputation, had been more than his system could bear, and the lamp of
life was already flickering in its socket.  For an instant he returned to consciousness.  Jack
went up to him and took his hand, while the surgeons continued to apply their remedies.

"Shall I bear any message to your friends at Nottingham, poor Jem?" he asked.

A slight pressure of the hand was the only answer the sufferer could make.  A sigh escaped
his bosom.  The surgeon put his hand upon his wrist.

"He has gone, poor fellow! there's no calling him back!" he observed. "Here, take the body
away, and put Ned Jones in his place.  His arm must come off, if I mistake not!"

Jack turned away with a sad heart.  In the cots around were numerous forms.  He was about to
return on deck, when he recognised among them the countenance of Burdale.  The man's eyes followed
Jack, and seemed to ask him to return.  He went up to him.

"Can I do any thing for you?" he asked.  "We have met before, I think?"

"We have; but you cannot help me much, I suspect.  Still, I thank you kindly for the offer.
I knew you also when you came on board, and was glad to find that you had escaped the trouble
into which I thought you would have fallen."

The ice was thus broken, and Jack, while wishing to be of use to the wounded man, whose time
on earth he thought was likely to be short, determined to gain all the information he could
from him respecting Pearson, and the circumstances which had brought them together.  As soon
as the ship had been put to rights, those who could be removed were carried to the main-deck,
and placed in a part screened off, called the sick-bay.  Here Jack had an opportunity of visiting
his wounded acquaintance whenever he chose.  The man grew weaker and weaker, and seemed indeed
to suspect that his own end was approaching.

"Deane," he said, "there's nobody on board this ship I can trust but you; for though you know
little about me, I know you to be an honest young gentleman, and very different from the greater
number of wild blades on board.  I have a wife and child living at Carlisle, and the poor girl
does not know what has become of me, and never will, unless you will undertake, should you
ever get on shore, to inform her.  I had to leave the country in a hurry to save my life: for
when they took to hanging a poor trumpeter for that affair of Sir George Barclay's, I felt
very sure if I was caught hold of they would not spare me."

"What! were you engaged in that fearful plot?" asked Jack.

"Ay, lad, was I: you may well call it fearful!" answered Burdale.  "And I should think you
were too, Master Deane, whether you knew it or not."

"I am afraid that I was, though I did not know it," said Jack.  "Still no man could have hated
the thoughts of what was proposed to be done more than I did.  But how were you mixed up with
it, Burdale?"

"Why, just in this way," was the answer.  "The man whom you know as Master Pearson, though
he has as many different names as there are days in the week, was once one of the most noted
smugglers on the coast, and I for several years served under him.  We also took two or three
trips to the Spanish Main, where we had varied fortune; Master Pearson on all occasions got
the lion's share.  I was a youngster, and could not look after my own interests in those days.
We came back with a couple of chests of gold, and plate, and jewels.  Somehow or other my master
seemed to think that he had had enough of the sea.  He met a lady, a real lady she was too,
though I don't know her name, and he married her, and for the sake of her company he determined
to remain on shore.  He knew better how to make money than to keep it; and so did I for that
matter, and in a short time the greater part of it was gone.  However, he promised his wife
not to go to sea, or we should soon have replenished our coffers.  He set up, therefore, as
a farmer and drover, though he did other turns of business as occasion offered.  He understood
as much about horses as he did about ships; and, as he had been accustomed to levy taxes on
all merchantmen he met, with very little regard for the flag they carried, he now took to levying
black-mail on shore.  I, of course, joined him.  What else could I do? Pearson also hoped to
make friends at court; and as he fully believed that King James would come back to rule over
the land, he heartily entered into the Jacobite plot, which has so signally failed."

"Then was it he who stopped our cattle as we were bound for Stourbridge Fair?" exclaimed Jack,
suddenly.

"There's no doubt about it!" answered Burdale.  "He made old Will pay pretty dear for his protection."

"Then were you the horseman I met, who advised me to offer payment?"

"Ay, my lad, that I was," was the answer.  "I wonder you did not know me again when I came
to you as a guide to conduct you to Pearson's farm in the fens."

"I thought it was you, and I was right."

"Yes; but I had good reason for not telling you so," said Burdale.

"Then who is Master Pearson?" asked Jack.

"Did you ever hear of the famous northern cateran, Ben Nevis?" asked Burdale.

"Indeed have I!" answered Jack.

"Ay, and you know him well," said Burdale; "your friend and he are the same.  I would not tell
you this, even though it would not matter to me, but I feel sure that you and he are not likely
to meet again.  In the fens he is known as Master Pearson, but he has gone by a dozen different
names at various times, and taken up almost as many different characters. So he came to himself, let go of all the folly and turned themselves
with diligence and love his children at school. But the best part was just his term of office
over, because he was only acting head and not employed fixed. As it is now selected again should
the pastor knew as head of the school board's confirmation from the authorities to hinder it,
as he gave an account of William's involvement in a questionable Before trading, and the young
offenders a salutary punishment recommended. He hated the school master because of his infidelity
and his mythological manipulations, for he did not know that William converted to the sole and true
God had, as soon as he felt loved. Thus, he set for two years except office and stood there
bread and erwerblos.

He packed his bags so to seek a shelter elsewhere, and that decided he was in his Reumut, to
go into the darkness and poor as a field worker the farmers to earn his bread, for when the
son of a peasant family missing from the neighborhood he knew the rural work, which he had from
childhood must undergo. In this view, he wandered on a cloudy March morning on the mountain;
but when he came on the air, the damp mist turned into a heavy rain; William looked around for
a shelter, so he hoped the rain would soon pass. He noticed in the distance a Rebhäuschen,
which in a large vineyards to Top stood on the edge of the woods. The canopy of this wine cottage
afforded good protection, and he went to sit on the stone steps below. It was a picturesque
old Little house with a weather vane and round windows. The canopy resting on two wooden Columns,
the staircase was fitted with an iron railing and was also a balcony, of which one, if it was beautiful,
far into the country saw in the south and west Snow mountains. The woodwork and shutters were
painted in bright colors, all but weathered a bit and faded.

As he sat there, be stimulated's in the little room, the door opened,
and the owner of the vineyard came out and invited William to come
inside and shared with him waiting for the rain.

There was a bottle of cherry brandy on the table, the man took another a glass from a wall cabinet
and filled it for his guest. "I have no bread up here, "he said," but we want to smoke a pipe together,
"He got so out of the Cupboard, two new long clay pipes, together with good Knaster, for it was
with the men of Seldwyla because they were disgusted with the cigars, has just become fashionable
again gracefully from ancient clay pipes to smoke, such as Dutch merchants.

This Seldwylers, although he was a Tuchscherer, had got the idea of ​​agriculture to drive because
their products were high in price and the operation of many walks
caused.

The vineyard was formed with several large mountain meadows and some arable land, a former State
domain, which bought the Tuchscherer, and he was now ascended to the state to examine the vines, because
the spring labor should start in the same. He asked Wilhelm, where he was going, what he have in
mind, for he knew nothing of his deposition. Wilhelm said that he would look at land people make
a living by giving them in particular to the hand go, what to do, because he needed not much,
so he hoped to push through in silence. The Tuchscherer wondered about this and pressed him further,
until he the cause of the Schoolmaster statement read. "That," he said, a rather spiteful trick
"by the Priests, the childishness can not be distinguished from a wickedness. We want him Incidentally,
his eternal Gehätschel Getätschel and with his instruction students once abolish, the pretty
ones and the fine he keeps allfort dense in the area, the hunchback However, the one-eyed and
miserable he is in the background and hardly speaks to them, and that's more annoying than your
whole letter writing. When this style appropriate exercises blame him seemed so to us is his sense
of beauty even less in the right place! But do you understand some of the fields and rural things
in general? "

"Oh yes, quite," answered Wilhelm, "I took during the illness of my late parents done everything
and am only in the eighteenth year, when she died and our property
was sold, with the small fortune remains went to teacher training,
there are only five years since then, and in the seminar we had to
operate and field work.

"Why do not you prefer your Knowledge use and seek a better activity than to serve the farmers asked
that?; but Wilhelm had made up his mind and was in no mood to continue with the man embark on its
location.

Meanwhile the rain had subsided and the sun shone even really the wide area. The owner sent it to
himself, the vineyard is "asked Wilhelm to him yet to make one hours society because he would come
far enough for today.

In the vineyards of Seldwylers saw that William as these things just as good knowledge of safe
Mind possessed, and when he cut a branch here and there and aufband
to show his opinion, also proved to be a practiced hand.

He therefore went with him into the mat and lands and questioned him to begin his opinion. Wilhelm
told him bluntly, the fields also re-create turn in mats, what they had previously been well, for
what might grow in arable crops up here is not the Mention it, while from the forest was enough moisture
there to water the lawns. This would a cattle receive the promise of milk and sale to benefit animals beautiful;
even the autumn pasture alone was pure profit. That made sense to the Tuchscherer, he changed
his mind a short while, after which he antrug the teacher to enter into his service. It should
work, what he might easily, and keep the rest of the estate in order and supervise everything.
What some were thinking he earn, he would give him also, and it also still with Regardless of
treatment. William thought for several minutes and took it, but under on condition that he must
live in the Rebhäuschen on the mountains and not in the city intercourse need. It was that
love even, and so the refugees had been at the beginning his travels found a shelter.

The Tuchscherer could still bring up the same day, a bed and some food, which should be renewed
from time to time. A small kitchen was present at the time of the Vintage fry boil and can,
also contained the ground floor of a storage space, and under the
stairs with little effort made was a goat barn for such milk wearer.

Thus was William suddenly became a reclusive man work and complied with skill and diligence in
his position. He left the field from the day laborers who hired the Tuchscherer, carefully
prepare and carry out the very stones and strewn it with fenugreek seeds. The Vines, he worked
almost entirely alone, and came to the end before we realized it, as indeed often happens that
those who begin an exception or a work after a long interruption, in the first zeal to bring
more going on than are everywhere. In a few weeks ago, he won Time to first create a vegetable garden
to the house to get some cabbage and beets be able to cook the meat, which you sent him twice
a week. In a dark Night he picked up even in the city shoots from his carnations and stocks
and put they where offered a space, to the little garden ago he pulled a hedge of wild roses on
railing and wind around columns he honeysuckle, and as the summer there was the whole thing
looked almost so colorful and delicate as an album leaf.

Even before the sun rose up in the East, he was a day on their feet and sought his peace faded
in restless motion until the last rose glow in the mountains was. This his time was extensive
and plentiful, that he was free to use the hours without neglecting his duty. In order to collect
his demand for wood, he made wide Walks through the forest from which
got together almost a burden by itself.

He used to the hot days to be in the shade and also for the gravity of the hand an edifying counterweight
to search. For the forest was now his classroom and his study room, though not in great erudition,
but through peaceful application of what little he knew. He overheard the goings of birds
and other animals, and he never returned, without the gifts of nature, well guarded in his fagot
bring them back, it was a beautiful moss, an artful, abandoned bird's nest, a strange stone, or
a marked deformity of trees and shrubs. From a derelict quarry he knocked some pieces of ancient
Remains out of herbs and animals. He also presented a complete set of the Bark of forest trees in different
ages by beautiful squares of of which, covered with mosses and lichens cut out, or thoughtfully
composed, the conifers even with the shiny beads of resin, so that each piece gave a pretty picture.
With all adorned it lacking any other area the walls and ceiling of his little room. Just nothing
Living it a home; more beautiful and less of a butterfly, was fluttering he saw and it was on these
heights that several species, the more devout, he let him fly. For, he said to himself, I know if
the poor guy has been married? And if that were not, how disgusting, the genealogy of such
a beautiful, innocent animal which an ornament the country and is a joy to the eyes, wipe with
a train! Dismiss from dead and the sex of a delicate flower flying, characterized by so many thousands
of years received from the very beginning and what may be the last of her sex in the whole could
be around! After all, who is one of the enemies and dangers lie in wait for her?

For this piety he was rewarded by an extinct race by using a Erderhöhung middle of the forest,
which seemed to him suspicious and he dug up the grave of a Celtic warrior revealed. A long
frame with jewelry and weapons showed the right his eyes. But he carefully built the grave
again, without telling anyone about it because He did not come out of his concealment. However,
he explored the woods attention discovered several such increases with scattered stones and
it reserved the right to in later times to make it display. The found jewelry and weapons,
he said things the oddities of his hermitage at.

In this way he learned how the green ground comfort and Kurzweil for the Forsaken and the solitude
of a blessed school is for everyone who's not quite raw and empty.

The faster he made himself invisible when the Tuchscherer such a large company came up to them to
host you in the funny little house wine and jump around on the mats to leave. In particular,
the funny ladies of the reclusive young man looked curiously sight to be, was preparing so
well and in freedom, sunshine and mountain air is a pretty Society
has become brown.

It seemed worth the trouble at once, the refugees not to independently to make the power of
her eyes. Individually expanded and then a prying their walks up
to this amount, and haunted as if by accident around the house.

But Wilhelm was transformed. Rather than lower his eyes and secretly to be, he looked calm
and the Streifzüglerinnen half quizzically and went his way without any challenge. This was a
new miracle, and increased the talk about him in the city.

The Tuchscherer was pleased with his property. In the plains, where he also owned a piece of land
He had built a spacious stables and a barn. There stood the cattle, whose breeding Wilhelm and
sale conferred with good understanding. The two-time hay, he also brought happy under the roof,
and the vintage, which followed it, showed that the mountain admirably was concerned.

When the Tuchscherer now made his statement, he found that he made
for the future well would, if it went away like that, and instead
of just having fun at his temporary thing; as was customary at the
place, he decided to persevere with it seriously and to seek that
he would gain a good end.

Although he was a funny Tuchscherer, but he retrieved a good investment in her is of some veins,
so he carried the fresh love of work, William's good sense and perseverance became aware, particularly
since he saw that the dreaming schoolmaster and fell all of a sudden turned out these virtues,
as if he set it up the road would be found. What could someone else, he thought that he would
be in a position; and he was ambitious mood, a careful and watchful
man, he got up early and its business after the order was at hand.

Place in all of its Tuchschererei to leave the workers, he himself saw it and encouraged the
work that they did well and was rapidly going on, and he went on to win sufficient time for its
agriculture. Stay in the rallies and taverns, the mocking birds were sitting, he cut more more
now and got used to break out at any time and to break away without just a so-called Leimsieder
become. He noted that the right merriment after work is done, created, and that people who are
in the same inn air at the same Manners, sit, grow the most beautiful Krähwinkelei; that the
dissolute philistine not a Hair is witty, as the solid, and that even men who are perpetually
and see several times a day, talk to each other last stupid. Nevertheless pushed his conversion
to big trouble and he had to make the bravest effort not to fall behind. But if the lure and
the noise was too much, he left the city and fled to Wilhelm up, whom he loved and won and
made his confidant. This was this in turn, fired, that he was in his commendable nature not
mellow. But the devil tried again to sow weeds by the Tuchscherer can not women from the old
way was renewed and the marketing of the idle and always buffoon. The man complained to the Not
his hermit, William thought about it and then advised him, the woman's hair close to the head
Cut away so that they could not go out for a year. For he considered himself a Misogynist, and
rejoiced, inflict a fine one. But the Tuchscherer said it would not the hair of his wife was too
beautiful and because they will not much good-for, a major piece its inventory. As Wilhelm remembered
again and told him then, the woman's milk sales to pass it to have a percentage of profits.
This means that their greed would be tempted they will not fail, water to mix with the milk,
therefore with the whole city hostilities and fall into a charitable insulation. This plan was found
not bad and proved to be so pretty. The woman was delighted with the win and was, especially
the In the evening, the house bound, to monitor the milking of cows and to see that they do
not would be too short.

Meanwhile, the autumn came and Wilhelm nothing to do but to guard the cattle, which has now been
put out to pasture. He did not take the humble office and at least wanted to be an autumn along
with the beautiful animals on pasture alone. Solo this just hyperbole, since he performed
the service of a small shepherd boy, he got sick and deprived him suddenly of freedom and peace
of mind, which he developed himself had. For as he sat there on the sunny hills, the pealing of
bells and the stove City are in the golden autumn smoke, saw the figure Gritli emerged ever more
clearly again up, almost to the proverb: Idleness is the root of all evil! Basically it was
a of the unfinished and broken stories that like a shot down the leg Change of the seasons and
the weather always make noticeable. Any remaining Remnant of hope for a lost happiness again
a thousand pains, once the soul idle and is the sun through leaves.

One day, as it rang in the valleys noon, went to his house to be to
prepare a simple meal, he suddenly saw a petite woman, who under the
canopy stood up and looked out into the distance.

He was barely two hundred yards away, and believed to recognize Gritli. Violently frightening he
stopped and said, What do they want? what looks she there?

He hid behind a wild pear tree, and did probably not five minutes to look. When he finally did,
however, had the appearance is reversed, peeped through the window in the interior of the winery
and cottage seemed the little room to consider carefully the fact she sat on the top step,
pulling, it seemed, a roll or the like from his pocket and began to eat it, and there was no
chance that the lady so soon would pull off. Wilhelm made Kehrtum and went without looking
around, and without eating, to back of his flock, as he watched his house was in such form.
In great excitement He stayed away until the evening, but finally drove him out of hunger again,
cautiously approached he cleared his cell and found the place. The angel with the flaming sword
was removed at the gate.

Wilhelm looked at all well, the window and the stairs, and found everything as it was, still
and harmless. But his rest was gone, although he did not even determined knew whether it was Gritli.

Without
wanting to admit it, he dressed himself from the day care that he for a cattle herders looked
almost too good, and not infrequently approached cautiously to the house; but the appearance did
not return.

In return, the whole mountain populated with its own image, on road and bridge it occurred to him and
looked him through the round windows, it seemed unbearable, as close to live with her, and
yet he would not like to move away, for the Fact that she was now free and alone, increased the
disorder of his thoughts. But last He was again master of this nature, and stood stiffly on his
feet again.

When the first snow fell, it was with the pastoral life over, the cloth was Wilhelm Scherer
now take into the house. The reluctant but against it and asked him to leave on the mountain;
that did not stop him in his mood, he managed to climb a small stove and provided it with all sorts
of work for himself and others. Wilhelm also be bought for the wages he received some books
that got him the Tuchscherer, so he is the care of his can incumbent mental powers, and he was
soon covered with snow and looked lonelier than ever.

Actually, just so lonely as a hermit may be right, for such has all sorts of Encouragement. Including
Wilhelm was now a wonderful clientele. The farmers of the neighborhood, several hours in the
round, spoke of him as a half-sages and prophets, what mainly on his activities in the forest
and the strange outfit stemmed his apartment. Once the farmers detect such a saint, of remorse over
some mysterious False step taken to help in extraordinary ways looking,
goes into solitude and leads an unusual life, so soon so excited their
imagination and write the nerd special insights and forces, to benefit
in which they an insurmountable Pleasurable experience, in contrast
to the townspeople and get enlightened, so her advice to those who
who never deviate from the golden middle road and have never cut the
cord.

First, a beleaguered widow came with a wayward child, who learn nothing at school wanted and
otherwise committed all sorts of pranks, and asked him for advice by the child before their
bitter complaint brought forward. Wilhelm spoke kindly to the sinner, and asked why this and
that do and do not, and urged it to good, by will are better there.

The wide path, the solemn action of the mother, the adventurous body of the Prophet and the friendly
words of such a serious impression on the child that it is in fact, improved, and the widow
spread the fame of William.

Soon after, another woman who complained of a bad neighbor, and then came an old Bauer, who wanted
to wean the cold, because he thought it a sin, Wilhelm said, he should take drugs only continued,
it was no sin, and this commended and praised the guide, where he went. At last, hardly a day went
by where he did not receive such a visit, and all possible moral and domestic afflictions revealed
to him. Most visited him girl and women to have to write secret letters from him, which they
have a particular effect were confident and even superstitious people
came, which it lost or stolen items again give or prophesy secret
agent against physical evil, or even at the end should.



The rescued galley-slave warmly expressed his thanks to Deane for having preserved his life.
He had been struck on the head by a piece of one of the oars shattered by a shot, and stunned.
Little blood having flowed from the wound, his strength was unimpaired.

"You have saved my life by your activity, young sir," he said, in broken English, "and I am
grateful to you; but, alas! when too probably all I once loved on earth, my property, and my
friends, will never again be restored to me, I have, I own, but little to live for!"

"Cheer up, sir," answered Jack; "your Huguenot countrymen are always welcome in England, and
I doubt not that you will find many friends among them; and at all events the English will
receive you as one, if you are, as I conclude, also a Huguenot."

"Yes, indeed I am!" was the answer.  "The faith of the Gospel has sustained me under all the
trials and hardships I have gone through. Though at times I have been cast down and fainted,
I have once more gained courage and determination to await calmly whatever Providence has had
in store for me."

On getting on board, Deane took the Huguenot to the captain, and explained who he was.  He,
therefore, and others whom he named, were separated from the rest of the prisoners, and treated
as friends rather than as captured enemies.  Some of the slaves were, however, ruffians, whom
it was evident it would not be safe to leave at large.  They therefore were treated as the
rest of the prisoners.

As the other galley was taken possession of, a ship was seen standing out from under the land
towards the "Weymouth," attracted probably by the firing, and the English seamen exultingly
hoped that they should have another action to fight, and gain another prize.  The Frenchman,
however, on discerning the fate of the two galleys, again kept away, and ran back towards the
land, taking shelter under the guns of the fort, from which it would have been difficult to
cut him out.  The "Weymouth," with her prize, now stood up Channel.  As she had now been several
years in commission, great hopes were entertained that she would be paid off. Her crew were
not disappointed; and, being ordered into Portsmouth, those who had lived and fought for so
long together were once again separated and scattered in all directions.

CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE GALLEY-SLAVE, AND WHO HE WAS.

Jack took an especial interest in the unfortunate man whose life he had saved on board the
galley.  From his manners and language he guessed at once that he was a gentleman, although
his hair was long and matted, and his countenance had that sickly hue which long confinement
and hard labour had given to it.  He visited him in his hammock, where he lay alongside other
wounded men.  The stranger recognised him at once.

"Ah, my brave friend," he said, "this is indeed kind in you, to come and see me!  I know not
whether my days on earth are already numbered, but as long as I remain here, my heart will
never cease to beat with gratitude to you!"

Jack replied that he should have done the same for any human being, but that he was very thankful
he had been of service in saving the life of one who appeared to be a gentleman and a man of
feeling; especially one who had gone through so many hardships as he had.

"Ah, indeed I have!" he answered.  "Because I loved Protestant truth, and desired to worship
God according to the dictates of my conscience, I was cruelly deprived of my property, and
my wife and child snatched from me--while I was carried off, and after undergoing numberless
hardships, was sent on board a galley, associated with many of the greatest villains and most
hardened wretches in the country!  I was not entirely alone with them, however, for many other
Huguenots were suffering with me, and we were thus enabled to support and console each other.
But, alas!  I might have borne the loss of my liberty, and my property, and the sufferings
and hardships I had to go through, but I could not bear the thought of being separated from
my beloved wife and our sweet daughter, and never being able to gain tidings of them.  Even
now I know not whether they escaped from France, or whether they suffered as did many who were
attempting to fly from the country.  Sometimes I fancy that they are alive, but whether the
child and mother are still together I know not, or whether they have been separated by our
cruel enemies. The fate of our little girl often presses heavily on me.  I think sometimes
she may have been seized by the Romanists and brought up in their faith, as have many children
who have been taken from Huguenots."

Jack did his best to console his new friend, and assured him, as he had done before, that he
would be kindly treated in England, and that perhaps his Protestant countrymen could give him
some tidings of his wife.

"My only hope is that she may have returned to Holland," he said, "to which country she belonged,
though she had resided many years in France. It was also my father's country, but by right
of my mother I inherited a property in France--though little did I think at the time when I
went to take possession of it, that it would have cost me all the suffering I have endured!
As I had become a naturalised Frenchman, so as a Frenchman I was treated; but I love the country
of my ancestors and my wife's country, and would gladly return to that.  Indeed, could I effect
my escape, I would do so, as I have some property there which the French have not been able
to take from me."

Jack listened with great interest to this account.

"I was acquainted a few years ago with an English merchant at Norwich, one Mr Gournay, who
has been very kind to the Huguenots; and as he has correspondents in all parts of the country,
and throughout Holland also, and many other places on the Continent, if you will tell me your
name, and describe your wife and child, I will write to him, and I have no doubt that he will
make inquiries in that direction for you," he said.

"Thank you, thank you, my kind friend!" said the wounded man.  "Your promise gives me hopes
which I dared not before entertain.  My name is De Mertens.  My dear wife was tall and graceful,
and noted for her beauty, and our little girl was called Elise, or, as you would call her in
England, Elizabeth."

"This is indeed very strange!" exclaimed Jack; "for I met a lady at the house of the very gentleman
I spoke of--Mr Gournay--who told me that her name was De Mertens, and that her husband had
been carried off to the galleys, while, I grieve to tell you, for it will pain you much to
hear it, the little girl had been snatched away from her just as she was embarking, and since
then she has been unable to gather any tidings of her.  She begged me to make inquiries, which
I did as far as I was able, but circumstances compelled me to leave the country soon afterwards,
and I was not able to gather any clue to her lost child."

"My wife still alive! and under the charge of kind friends!" exclaimed the wounded man, sitting
up.  "This is indeed joyful news! though alas that it should not be without its alloy!  Yet
the kind Providence which has preserved my wife, may have preserved our child to be restored
to us.  But what do I see, young man?" he exclaimed, seizing Jack's hand. "Let me look at that
ring on your finger.  It is strange that it should be there.  Did my wife give it you?"

"No," replied Jack, somewhat astonished; "I did not receive it till some time after I last
saw Madame de Mertens.  It was given to me by a young girl, the daughter of a farmer and his
wife, at whose house I was residing for some time.  She was a sweet, dear little girl; and
when I came away she told me that she had nothing else to give, and she insisted on placing
that ring on my finger.  She said she had worn it round her own neck since she was a child,
and though she valued it greatly, she should be unhappy if I would not take it.  Directly after
I received it I purposed restoring it to her, as I did not think it right to deprive her of
it, but was unable again to return to the farm before I came away to sea."

"This is indeed wonderful!" exclaimed Monsieur de Mertens.  "Oh, let me entreat you to describe
the little girl to me!"

Jack did so, and did not draw an unfavourable picture.

"The description is indeed like what I should suppose my sweet little girl to be by this time.
Fair, with bright blue eyes, light hair, and gentle, winning manners; but you tell me that
she was the daughter of a farmer and his wife?"

"For such she always passed," answered Jack; "but often I thought so rough a man as the farmer
could not have so sweet and gentle a child; and from what I have since heard, I am inclined
to believe that she was not really their child."

"Oh, no, no, I am sure she was not!" exclaimed Monsieur de Mertens, clasping his hands.  "She
must be my own dear little daughter!  Oh, what joy and happiness it will be to see her again
with her dear mother."

"If I can possibly get leave when we go into port, I will promise to accompany you to Norwich,
where you will, I trust, find Madame de Mertens; and after that we will pay a visit to the
fens and ascertain if little Elizabeth Pearson is really or not your child," said Deane.

"Thank you, thank you!" answered De Mertens.  "But let me look at that ring again.  I cannot
be mistaken about it!"

Jack took off the ring, which De Mertens eagerly examined.

"Yes, yes!" he exclaimed; "it is one I myself gave her mother, telling her that it was an heirloom,
and that she should bestow it upon her daughter.  I doubt not that she fastened it round her
neck before she fled from home, that should she and the child be separated, she might again
recognise her by it.  And you say the little girl you met was called Elizabeth?  That would
be the name of my dear child in English, and as she could speak quite clearly at the time of
our separation, she would certainly have told those into whose hands she fell her Christian
name, though it is possible that she might not have known the name of her parents."

As may be supposed, after this interesting conversation, Jack and Monsieur de Mertens constantly
discussed the subject as they sailed up the Channel.  At length the Isle of Wight hove in sight.
Each well-known point and headland, village and town, was welcomed, as the frigate ran round
the back of that lovely island, and at length anchored at Spithead.

CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

VISIT TO NORWICH AND TO THE FARM AT THE FENS--A BITTER DISAPPOINTMENT.

As soon as the ship was paid off, Jack took his new friend on shore, and procured for him a
proper costume and other necessaries.  He had himself a considerable amount of prize-money
to receive, and instead of spending it as did many of his shipmates, throwing it away lavishly
on every side, he visited the nearest horse dealer's in order to purchase a couple of stout
animals to carry him and Monsieur de Mertens on their way.  The horse dealer was rather astonished
when the naval officer, whom he naturally supposed knew as much about horse-flesh as he himself
did about the management of a ship, indignantly refused a couple of spavined animals which
he offered for sale.  Several others were brought forward, which Jack in like manner rejected.
At length he fixed upon two beasts which, after passing his hands over their shoulders and
down their legs, he thought might suit for the purpose of carrying them safe to Norwich, and
from thence on to Master Pearson's farm.

"The finest animals in my stud!" exclaimed the horse dealer, as Jack ordered them to be led
out.  "Fit for chargers for the Duke of Marlborough himself, or suited to carry any noblemen
as hunters across the country."

"I have not so long ploughed salt water as not to know something about ploughing the land,"
answered Jack; "don't you see the hay-seed still in my hair?  Come, come, Mr Crupper, the horses
will carry us along the roads without coming down on their knees at a decent pace, and if you
like to take the sum I offer, we'll have them, if not, we will soon go and seek another dealer
who is not so ready to pass off his broken-kneed beasts on poor ignorant `Jack-tars.'"

The dealer, seeing that Jack was not to be taken in, at length agreed to the price offered.

In a short time, with their valises strapped to their saddles, their pistols in their holsters,
with serviceable swords by their sides, the travellers took their way towards London.  In those
days not a few highwaymen beset the roads, especially those leading from the chief naval ports
to London, as they were pretty certain of finding seamen and officers travelling up and down--those
travelling towards the metropolis, generally with an ample supply of cash in their pockets.
Hounslow Heath, over which they had to pass, was one of the spots most frequented by those
knights of the highway.  It did not matter much that the horses possessed but little speed,
as De Mertens, not having ridden for so many years, was unable to proceed at a fast rate; and
even Jack found that it was far pleasanter not to attempt going as fast as he would once have
wished to have gone over the road.  They were therefore obliged to sleep at an inn about half-way
between Portsmouth and London, hoping to get into the big city at an early hour the next day.
Jack's chief puzzle was to know where to find a lodging.  As may be supposed, he had no fancy
to go back to the only one he knew of at Hammersmith, although on their way they should pass
not far from it.  He felt very sure, however, that he might do so without any risk of being
discovered, for instead of the rosy-cheeked lad he then was, he now wore a full black beard,
while his countenance was thoroughly well bronzed, and there was a bold, dashing look about
him which often marked the naval officer of those days who had seen hard service.  As De Mertens
had no wish to remain in London, they agreed to pass through the city, and to stop for the
night at Hertford, or some other town to the north of it. On passing across Hounslow Heath
they encountered more than one suspicious-looking gentleman, armed to the teeth, and mounted
on a strong active horse.  But probably Jack's appearance made the highwayman, if such he was,
think it more prudent to allow the travellers to pass unquestioned.  That sort of gentry, even
in those days, in spite of all their boasting, were generally cowards at heart, and took good
care not to attack those whom they did not feel sure they could intimidate or overcome without
difficulty.

Jack did his best to keep up the spirits of poor Monsieur de Mertens, who as he approached
Norwich became more and more-nervous, dreading to hear that some accident had happened to his
wife--that she was ill, or perhaps had died.  Then he dreaded the effect which his sudden return
might have on her; and more than all he pictured to himself her sorrow, when at their meeting
she would be unable to present to him their beloved child.

On reaching Norwich Jack took his companion to the inn at which he had put up with Will Brinsmead,
and begged him to remain there while he himself went on to the house of Mr Gournay, that he
might prepare Madame de Mertens for his appearance.

Jack now began to feel very nervous himself.  He would ten times rather have boarded a French
ship, with pistols flashing and cold steel flourishing round his head, than go through the
necessary interview with the wife of his friend.  He first made his way to Mr Gournay's counting-house,
that he might inquire for his intended brother-in-law Giles Dainsforth.  Mr Gournay himself
had returned home, but the clerks were still there.  Giles Dainsforth was not among them.

"Oh, did you not know that he left us last year to go to Nottingham, to be married to Mr Deane's
daughter?  They sailed some time since for Mr Penn's new colony in America, which they call
Pennsylvania," was the answer.  "Several friends have gone out there from thence, and it's
one of the most flourishing settlements in the New World."

Jack accordingly hastened to Mr Gournay's residence, and first asked to see Mrs Gournay.  She
received Jack very kindly, though she expressed her regret at finding that he was following
a profession in which he was likely to shed the blood of his fellow-creatures.

"Young man, thou hadst better have taken a quill in thine hand, to labour as a clerk in a counting-house,
or have remained a drover to conduct cattle up and down the country, than used a sword to deface
God's image, as I fear too often thou must have done."

Jack did not wish to argue the point, but he assured her that he had no pleasure in killing
his fellow-creatures, and that he had the consolation of believing that the navy had been the
means of preventing a Popish King from coming over and re-establishing papacy in the country;
and that he also in his humble way had been of some benefit to his fellow-creatures.  "For
instance," he said, "I was the means not long since of saving the life of a gentleman, a French
Protestant, whom I have brought with me to see you."

Jack then explained who his companion was.  Good Mrs Gournay was overjoyed.

"Mr Deane," she said, "we must break it gently to dear Madame de Mertens.  She has been, especially
lately, in delicate health, and any sudden surprise might be injurious to her.  I will go and
gradually tell her of what has occurred, and do you return to the inn and bring Monsieur de
Mertens here.  By the time that he arrives, it may probably be safe to allow them to meet."

It was very long since Jack had trod the ground with the elastic step with which he hastened
back to bring his friend to Mr Gournay's house. He felt, indeed, very proud at the thought
that he should thus have been the means of restoring two loving hearts to each other, and still
more proud he felt he should be if he could discover their long-lost child. This he had great
hopes of doing.  And as he thought of Elizabeth Pearson's manner, her way of speaking, and
many other little circumstances, he recollected that her accent was somewhat that of a foreigner.
There was an intelligence and refinement, too, which he should not have expected to find in
a young girl in her position in life, except, however, that Dame Pearson was herself very superior
to any farmer's wife he had ever met, and was evidently a person who had belonged to a higher
rank of society.  He was also sacrificing himself for the good of others, for had he been left
to his own disposal, he would, in the first place, have hastened on to Nottingham to enjoy
the society of his own family, and, more than all, as he thought, to renew his acquaintance
with Alethea Harwood.  Often and often had her lovely countenance risen up before him, and
he had enjoyed the hope that she would one day become his.  At the same time it must be owned
that another sweet face frequently presented itself before him, and though he had never associated
it with the thought of love, yet surely it was one which must of necessity be very dear to
him.  It was that of little Elizabeth Pearson, so gentle, so bright and intelligent, and so
confiding!  He had now arranged to go and visit her, not for his own satisfaction, but for
that of the friends who had hopes of discovering in her their long-lost daughter.

Leaving Mistress Gournay, Jack hurried back through the narrow streets of Norwich to the Bear
Inn, where he found Monsieur de Mertens anxiously waiting for him.  His friend trembled as
he took his arm and led him out of the house.

"A kind friend will inform your wife of your arrival, and by the time we reach her house Madame
de Mertens will, I trust, be prepared to receive you," said Jack.

"But she will, I fear, scarcely know me," said the poor man.  "You cannot tell how anxiety
of mind and physical hardships have changed me. An elegant relaxed warmth brightened the pale face of
the daughter who had not yet enjoyed aristocratic upbringing. Justine noticed that they, too, not
sure on his feet stood, said Agatha, smiling, that this they of course began to ache a little
and sometimes a little would swollen. But she wailed, as little as the mother, with a single
word. Rather, they described with innocent mirth the humorous witch at the door, as Justine
eerie after Release asked, and how one must have patience with the poor creature, which by evil
Spirits inhabited and certainly suffering enough.

As they were astonished, however, as Justine took out their simple gifts. The stockings were Agatha
may be the unwelcome, for it admitted that it still almost no time more think of knitting,
not more, especially since the eyes of the night when lights right wanted to see. For its part,
the mother had already opened the Päcklein fresh snuff and with a nearly filled to satisfy her
lively little horn jars with it. Here was the only point at which ruled the child's mother
a little, giving her not quite come as much of the blackened world was like, how they might,
in return to their Sins of youth, would have been able to consume. But now Agatha smiled even
against Justine out when the mother took the fresh dash so happy to be.

But the cream of Agatha filled once a bowl and cut a piece of the white fragrant bread to bring
it to the poor woman out there. "Not so fast," said the mother softly, "is that they do not
surprised if she listens to the back door! If a bit According to his feet! "

"Oh, they do not hurt me when I stomp it," replied the daughter, and even laughed to the harmless
deception, which should play it. But they coughed before she opened the door, a little, and you could
see right out there in the twilight of the antechamber, the shapeless form the woman hinhuschen,
agile than we expected of her.

When it was quiet again, mother and daughter wanted to know, how the young gentleman came here and
where woman is the way they go, for they were not one that they only
to them but so far away I want to come.

The sun lights, mixed with the shadows of the swaying tree branches, played on the Floor and walls
of the small little room, before the open windows hummed the bee and a green lizard had climbed
up from the meadow and looked curiously into the room; a second joined it and both seemed expecting
the things that come to happen. Justine saw everything and felt this peace, but they found
no real courage, the silence interrupt until she started to cry and then harassed and oppressed
the women confided and told that they had become without religion and look at their advice and insight,
which their luck there and where do you get peace of mind. She hoped a new, yet experienced;
overpowering experience, which they could indulge without further pondering. Once did the Ursula
away their tobacco tins and Agathe down, wondering what she had just been in the hands, both
looked at each other shocked involuntarily clasped hands and Justine saw each for silently prayed,
her lips moving, Agatha with trickling tears, the mother but the quieter version of the age. None dared
to say a word, they were quite shocked of the approach you claim, a learned and brilliant person
for the salvation To win and yet the heavenly dispensation can not
be denied, and to doubt.

Ursula first began to slow, to say a few words as a stool to Agatha Justine hinschob, sat at her
feet and took her hands and stroked.

For Justine had long been her secret love and the chief object of all their good will and
their admiration was.

However, the matter was in the desired course, the tongue was loosed,
and then competed the two beings, the world's child the great matter
and to take each other to demonstrate the word to complement and,
like two children who belonged to one third the just from the grandmother
Tell tale.

But there was nothing new and unheard of, what they were put forward, but the old hard and dry
Story of the fall in the reconciliation of God through the blood of his son, who soon will come
to judge the living and the dead, the resurrection of the flesh and the bones of the hell and
eternal damnation and of the unconditional faith all these things. All told it as something
that nobody knows quite well and, as and their community, and not before they brought it with
the beautiful human grace to them otherwise inherent in everything they did and said but hurried
with a drought, monotonous and colorless, like a memorized. At no point were the words soft and mild,
never the eyes treated warmer and busier, even the suffering and death of Jesus it as a teaching
subject and not as a mind or a matter of feeling. It was an unsubstantial World apart from which
they spoke, and they were even other with their being again a different
world.

This they spoke, in imitation of their simple-minded preachers, awkward and disagreeable, even imperious
with respect to the second at each word again demanded faith.

Since Justine saw that the good women had their peace elsewhere ago, than from their church
doctrine and he could not give away with this, or rather only that she and her special Institute
in this arid soil were able to grow because it is the food from the open air breezes moved.
She had come here in vain, for their heart pulled together her that it threatened to stand
almost still, and she leaned back in her wooden chair, to recover,
while the preachers still continue talking.

She recovered well gradually, but was still white, round about as the whitewashed wall, and tried
to could remember how it without offending the women who quit the thing and get away.

Suddenly the front door came a hideous scream, as if a cat stepped on the tail would. Agatha
frightened ran back and opened the door, so the full light in the dark Chamber penetrated, and
we saw a tall slender man, who at the Ölweib Throat and held a little pushed to the wall.
Ashamed and embarrassed, he was the witch But once again free, as the light fell on the scene, and
also of disgust, because she in fear and anger on the hand drooling, which he wiped now. Now,
however, did a melodious cry hear her side of Justine, that the man in the Lord Jocundus Meyenthal
recognized, and the turned to her and her husband were both immediately
around the neck and held includes a long.

Then they saw themselves closely and carefully the serious sad Faces and both sides that finally
went into the room of the women in the sunlight.

Jocundus was when Justine received her religious education, a happy hour in the cave the witch
arrived.

She had first smiled maliciously, and happy because they thought the pretty nice man and wife
had an illicit tryst with the pious women, and this would offer at last is their weak side,
and a whole jar full of rose oil from going This adventure will be his to win.

But Jocundus pulled out his list to blacken Santander Bieder people
told her what it were, come in whose name and order it, and it pretty
dry and short began to ask what they knew of each or what could be
done, by the same villain to bring to the rumor, and deserved to take
a punishment, she said sullenly: "the know I do not!

They have done nothing to me! "

This animal has at least the instinct to bite only those that affect
or have encountered!

Jocundus thought and asked her what this or that because of the accumulated past have done?

She laughed hoarsely at once, when she heard the names of the victims and the percentage weight
remembered what had been her privilege to the funny chase. However, they did not answer to
the question, but began to describe in more cumbersome eloquence, as in the Depositing and spreading
of nasty gossip and accusations should proceed. As needed First it only a certain property to be
innocent, a state, a hallmark of the person concerned an incident that the coming together of two circumstances
or coincidences, anything which in itself is true, and undoubtedly was, and for the invention
to be made a core of reality FORM AN. Not only inventions are used, but they could also benefit
the from the one committed crimes and atrocities carry-over on the other those outer truly
random, or what we feel to do even more pleasure or perhaps a little've done, add another. In this
way, the often undue Fate, and to ultimately improve, grant a certain extent divine pleasure
such as when one of two people may well suffer the one, the others hate the first but a poor,
ill-killer unsuccessful, the latter an intolerable Rechttuer is that nothing could come in themselves.
Since then we feel quite like a Providence, when If the impurities and defects of the good friend
and the sufferer to lose weight and imposing odious the right partner can understand. Yes,
it was something big, sown with a little word to overthrow a proud home in disgrace and hardship, greater
than when a magician could be cause a storm and sink ships at sea.

In these speeches revealed the woman far more world-aware and person, clumsy as its exterior and
the poor situation would be expected, but all this knowledge was stunted and crippled and proliferated
only around the surface of things, like a moss mesh. They, too, despite possible their cunning
sometimes a child who plays in ignorance with the fire and it ignites a city.

The often-confused words and allusions was found with difficulty, that the woman's own Parents or
grandparents accused verläppert a noble origin and the misery and are exposed to darkness,
that she once was married to a shoemaker, the long- struggled with her, but she was defeated and
driven away, and that they now Peddle fed by now this, now that identify goods made with what
they when she was placed in all the streets prowling, sneaking from house to house and their
dark doings was responsible.

Suddenly, the witch in her speech interrupted and again asked for the names of those to see who
should be vilified recently, for she had suddenly to her speeches Desire to get to act again and
to play Providence.

Jocundus her the note into the hand to return to the past abundance can still be seen, as in
individual went to work after he is satisfied in general, already,
on which Basis of well-publicized prosecution was built.

Right the first name that belonged to an honest citizen, she cried: "Stop the know I am! How could I
have missed that? That is the clean gentleman who I once made the House has rejected, as I said
in his kitchen with the servants! He has quick succession made multiple inheritance and has become rich,
while poor relation gnaw gnaw at! Which will be a legacy-hunter like when the matter more closely
examined in a reasonable and Connection brings. For some old bases from him, which he had inherited,
are unexpectedly died, so what I say?

His own father died a few years ago, without He was very old or sick, very strange! "

But now Jocundus frightened about the consequences of his actions
and he snatched the note for the elderly, when he called out, "still
silent, hideous oil witch! and you is not under a single repeating
word of all that you are lying there, or you have to do with me!

"

"With you?" Replied the sorceress, the anglotzte him suddenly wide-eyed and then hissed, "What
is it with you? What do you want from me, you dog? You are damned
Spy? Want to impress me and abuse wickedness?

Wait, we want you nice take in the making! It knows you already! It knows you already, you
erzschlechter guy! "

From the ugly anger of the woman and the monstrous face she showed,
irritated, grabbed Jocundus, who had already turned to leave, she
for a moment, forgetting himself, the collar and drew her just because
the cry, which brought about the reunion with Justine, so as to violations
of the Eastern bid:

Making the connection between a flower only A
women's picture, you shall not dare!

which occurred to him later,
but finally not repented.

     
     

* * * * *

       

Ursula and her daughter were separated from the meeting of the husband in her apartment touched
and delighted, and regarded it as another providence of God, with them doubt appeared that the doctrine
will have begun its course, because they trusted the Lord Meyenthal not. They thus constitute the
case to a higher prey and now silent modestly from the same, and immediately took her Ursula
tobacco tins and again.

Jocundus and Justine said, however, not much, and make attempts to come into the open. After they
had said about their meeting in this place the necessary security, adopted they differ from the
good Christian women who Jocundus still knew well, and promised them more Message and participate.
As they walked through the back room of the Ölweibes, this was not seen and had to have been
hiding. But once they were on the street, her face appeared under the Gitterfensterchen where
they nachrief them horrible insults and threatening words. But they heard nothing about it, because
they were busy frugal with himself and with a novel Happiness, but
constantly in deep seriousness, side by side were going.

Jocundus had displayed in a guest house of a horse on which he is the rather long distance
was ridden, Justine had arranged to meet a brother, a coming out of the city meet steamboats
at the next landing place for the joint return. You agreed, therefore, to see the next morning
and that with his grandparents on the mountains at Schwanau where Jocundus should leave in the
early morning. There, they would spend all day and speak out.

So they went for each other today and looked it is frankly and intimately in the eye, but always
in the deepest earnestness.

The following day was Sunday, which came up with the most beautiful June morning. Justine was the sun
awake, they upgraded and decorated as if it were up to a feast by comparing their last practice in
rich curls, the hair arranged, a fragrant light summer dress, dressing, also the neck, occurring
to any fine jewelry thoughtful. So they went unseen by the still sleeping Hers, the way to the height,
his face slightly flushed and vigorous step. The grandmother was about her youthful and charming
appearance quite surprised and also pleased with the Turn which seemed to be fate. She forced,
as they sat at breakfast, the granddaughter, enjoyed yet had to drink a cup of coffee. But
Justine rested not long but broke up again to the mountain trails, which had come to Jocundus to
meet him to go. So she walked in happy anticipation anxiously into the Sunday morning silence.
The earth was everywhere you looked, covered with flowers, the trees were blowing just fading
the flowers away, when a breeze arose. Now the church bells began in the Near and far away to
ring, around the lake langhin stretched, in the gleaming white Villages, the deep tones of the mighty
bells full flowed together and met far and wide the air like an endless sea of ​​sound, which
hinanschwoll to the throbbing heart Justine and threatened to withdraw it in its depth. But they
did not return, but hastened, supported by the sounding waves, meet the man who is now in the
light of the morning sun quickly Step came.

As soon as they saw each other, have been lost laughter returned to her Back faces, and they
embraced and kissed each other warmly.

Without caring where they went, they went on a forest path and climbed arm arm in the top level
of the mountain, while in mutual chatter is all told what happened to them and what they lived
and thought about the time of their separation. The bells however, gradually lost through the woods
behind them, and by the finally stop, and died as the last note with a single look-up, were
they hold but the deep silence which occurred now. They were on the verge of a spacious Forest
clearing, which included a beautifully maintained nursery. were in well-ordered rows Thousands
and thousands of tiny Weißtännchen again, Rottännchen, Fichtchen, Lärchlein, hardly three to
four inches high, its bright green head and rose up into a festive Assembly of many infant schools
compared. Then, the crowds were lined up knee high, then breast-high trees, as brave boys' schools,
to an army man high beech, oak and maple in the back of the same young men followed and the
protective community of the old high forest trees the Assembly completed. The whole nursery
was kept so carefully and delicately as the garden of a great lord, but it was only a farming
cooperative, the solemn silence increased the surprising impression which the sight of a loving
Concern brought forth, not more for their own lives, but for a coming
century, prevailed for the grandchildren and great-grandchildren.

In the transparent shadows of the forest Ahornstämmchen young people
was a bench mounted been in what Jocundus and Justine settled, the
comforting sight of silence and peacefully enjoying.

"You see," she said at last Jocundus, as he took Justine's hands, "just as we only have found again,
we see at once that the world is certainly not as bad as they would like to face. All of these
hasty and selfish giving hard actually but all their efforts for
their children and even meet obligations of the pension for them unknown
to future generations!

"

"Did you also tell me a little love?" Said Justine, who at this moment might only provide for
themselves.

Jocundus looked into the distance and looked through a few fir top shine through a range of
the blue horizon with an elongated white building, knowing more than could be seen.

"Can you see that shiny white thing," he said, "it is once a monastery, the has donated seven
hundred years ago a knight in memory of his wife when she he had died. He went into the house
and left it in his life again. You are so dear to me was like his wife, though I would go into
a monastery, if I lost you. But the whole world bright and quiet room would be for me the church
your memory, your church grave! But let us now resolve the small affair of honor, the still pending
between us.

To repentance and atonement you shall be my word that rough again , Say that has divided us,
you grossly love, but with a laughing mouth, so it's wicked sense loses! So fast, it was said?
"

He put his arm around her shoulders hiebei and held her chin with
his other hand.

You shook his head and closed, as close as she could, her mouth. Then he patted her gently on the
cheek, you tried to open your mouth and say: "Quick! out with it,
stir your tipped, "until they complete quickly tenderness and amusement
to speak, but almost inaudible recited: Lumpazi!

Jocundus whereupon they kissed.

As they did then and includes silent for a while, Justine said suddenly: "Jocundus, what we now
want to do with religion or the church? "

"Nothing," he said. After some reflection, he continued: "When the eternal and infinite more so still
holds and conceals, why we should not also been a time quite delighted can keep quiet and peaceful?
I am of the intrusive nature and platitudes all this uninvited tired, but I also know nothing and
do behirten forever. If the personal forms of a religion are being dragged away, so forfeited
their temples and the rest is silence. But the won peace and quiet is not death but life; the
continued blooms and shines like this Sunday morning, and good conscience,
we walk through, of expecting things to come or not come to be.

Good faith and undivided stride we continue, not head knowledge and heart or mind and we allow
ourselves to be known miserable tear apart commonplace, as we need as an indivisible whole
people in the court that each overtaken! "

Justine looked fixedly at her husband during these speeches, and with
blushing face, because she felt that she had long been so open to
listen to her talk when they are rather entrusted to him, would have
as a church man.

Might now Jocundus' words are wise or foolish, they liked in any event,
the Reasonably well, to prove that they now belonged entirely to him.

"Amen," said Jocundus, "I almost think I'm starting to preach also,"

"Not Amen," said Justine, "go on and say more! Think this is your nursery Community and preach
it, like the Holy stones or other fish! "

"No, the church is over! Do you hear the signal? "Jocundus replied, laughing, when really in
the distance here and there, the bells announced the termination of the service.

They rose and walked slowly to the house of the grandparents, so it was noon until they reached
there. The ancients, however, to see a right of Atonement with him, the whole family Schwanau
heraufbeschieden and a simple meal for strong rural Art prepared.

Everything was assembled, as the lovely couple was reconciled. There was but first some tension
and embarrassment, but when we saw that the lost laughter returned
was the sunshine of the old happiness spread throughout the home.

The Stauffacherin shone like a star and took the set back control to the restored ship luck directing
it.

Justine now moved to her husband in the town where he grew well without interruption and its
Credulity in lost business and traffic matters, so even untrue and be deceptive.

They had a son and a daughter who they named Justus and Jukunde and flourishing, smiling beauty
will pass on.
They visited more often pious women, Ursula and Agatha, where she
went for a walk, and there were missing them for nothing. The Ölweib
was gone, since it is the perfect innocence and goodness could not
stand.

The priest had seen his weak moment Justine was sometimes
brought again and trusted the couple to be happy. He led with a heavy
heart for a time his precarious dance on the ropes and was then vary
happy to get through Jukundis Agencies enter into a secular business
to be able, in which he is much more useful and grated proved, as
Jocundus himself had once done in Seldwyla and Schwanau, for he, the
pastor, did not light, which claimed him one. "You
should get yourself, however, trimmed and docked, Jack, and you will be much more presentable
in polite society."

Jack had not come without a few curiosities and trinkets which had been collected on board
the prizes, or taken on shore.  He was thus able to bestow some acceptable presents upon the
intended brides.

Again the old house in the market-place was the scene of festivity.  Two couples were to pledge
their faith to each other, and guests from far and near assembled to do honour to the occasion.
Jack wrung Jasper's hand.

"I wish you every happiness the world can give you!" he exclaimed, though as he spoke his voice
trembled and the tears stood in his eyes.

Alethea looked more beautiful and attractive than she had ever done before, and Polly was more
merry and full of life, not a bit abashed by the ceremony through which she then had to go.
Jack performed his part well throughout the whole of it, and in the evening no one danced more
lightly and merrily, or laughed louder than did he.  At supper he sang some of his best sea-songs;
and every one declared that Jack Deane was one of the finest young fellows who had appeared
at Nottingham for many a long day.

Nottingham at that time could boast of some of the most agreeable society to be met out of
London.  It had been assigned as the residence of Marshall Tallard, the opponent of the great
Duke of Marlborough at the battle of Blenheim, who was now a prisoner of war with a number
of other gallant and polished French officers, who bore their captivity with resignation and
cheerfulness, making themselves perfectly at home, and doing their best to amuse those among
whom they lived.

Several curious traditions of their stay in the town still linger there. It was a French prisoner
who first observed celery growing wild on the rock on which Nottingham Castle stands, Alainon
Franchise, and having cultivated it successfully in his own little garden, he made that pleasant
addition to English tables, from that time forth common every where throughout the kingdom.
French rolls were also introduced from a receipt sent by the Marshall himself to a baker in
Bridlesmith-gate.

It had been arranged that cousin Nat should reside with Jasper Deane, to whom he purposed giving
up his practice when he should retire, which he expected to do in the course of a few years.

Jack was received in a friendly way wherever he went.  The errors and wild pranks of the boy
were entirely forgotten, when it was known that he had been fighting bravely for his king and
country, and that he had by his own good conduct gained the rank he already held in the navy.

Jack, however, very soon got tired of leading an idle life.  Routs and card-parties were not
at all to his taste, and although Nottingham was not destitute of damsels possessed of a fair
amount of beauty, he did not find himself attracted by any of them.  He had speedily taught
himself to think no more of Alethea, but in her stead another young and pretty form often rose
up before him.  He met with no one indeed, in his opinion, to be compared with sweet little
Elizabeth Pearson, or rather, as he believed she should be called, Elise de Mertens.  He made
up his mind, therefore, to leave home at a short notice and hasten down to Portsmouth, where
he saw in the columns of the Post-boy that a fleet was fitting out, under the brave Admiral
Benbow, for the West Indies.

CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

SERVES UNDER BENBOW IN THE WEST INDIES.

It was early in March in the year 1702.  As Jack Deane was approaching London, he heard a postman
shouting, "Sad news! sad news!"

"What is it?" asked Jack.

"The king is dead!" was the answer.  "Our good King William is no more!"

Jack, on making further inquiry, learned that the king had, on Saturday, 21st, gone out to
hunt, as was his custom, near Hampton Court, when his horse fell, and he fractured his collar-bone.
The injury was not considered serious, and he was conveyed to his palace at Kensington. Having
been, however, in a very weak state, he did not rally, and it was evident to those around him
that he was near his end.  On the 8th of March one of the best and most sagacious of English
monarchs breathed his last, holding the hand of the faithful Duke of Portland.  His voice had
gone ere that; but his reason and all his senses were entire to the last.  He died with a clear
and full presence of mind, and with a wonderful tranquillity.

On the accession of Queen Anne, the Jacobites remained quiet, under the belief that she would
leave the crown to the son of James the Second, now known as the Chevalier Saint George.  They
were not aware of the sound Protestant principles of the great mass of Englishmen, and that
any attempt to bring back a Romanist member of the hated House of Stuart, so often tried and
found utterly unfit for ruling, would have produced another civil war.  Those infatuated men,
the Jacobites, did not conceal their joy at the death of the Protestant monarch.  Banquets
were held among them to celebrate the event, and some had the audacity and wickedness, it may
be said, to toast the health of the horse which had thrown William.  Another toast they drank
was to the health of the little gentleman dressed in velvet, in other words, the mole that
raised the hill over which Sorel (the king's favourite horse) stumbled.

Jack Deane on hearing these things felt as if, had he been present, he should have been very
much inclined to challenge those who showed this disrespect to a sovereign whom he had learned
to honour and love.

The fleet had taken its departure some time before John Deane reached Portsmouth, but he found
a fast frigate on the point of sailing to carry despatches to the admiral, the "Venus."  Admiral
Benbow's object in going out to the West Indies had been to detain the Spanish galleons. When
war was declared on the accession of Queen Anne, a French admiral had also sailed from Brest
for the same station, with fourteen sail of the line and sixteen frigates, to meet the galleons
and convoy them to Cadiz.  Although the brave Benbow's squadron was far smaller than that of
the French, he kept a sharp look-out for the enemy.  He had performed many services in the
West Indies to the merchants by capturing privateers and protecting their settlements from
the attacks of the enemy.

Admiral Benbow's ship was the "Breda," of seventy guns, and her youngest lieutenant having
died of fever, Jack Deane, greatly to his satisfaction, found himself appointed to that ship.
Early in July, the admiral sailed from Jamaica, with seven sail of men-of-war, in the hope
of joining Admiral Whitstone, who had been sent from England with a reinforcement to endeavour
to intercept the French squadron which had sailed under Monsieur Du Casse.  The admiral on
the 10th of August, being off Donna Maria Bay, received advice that Du Casse had sailed for
Carthagena and Portobello.  He instantly went in quest of him, and in the evening of the 19th,
discovered off Santa Martha ten sail of ships. On his nearer approach he found the greatest
number of them to be French men-of-war.  Four ships of from sixty to seventy guns, one great
Dutch ship of about thirty or forty guns, and another full of soldiers, the rest being of a
smaller size.  They were steering along shore under their topsails.  The admiral made a signal
to form a line of battle ahead, and bore away under an easy sail, that those to leeward might
the more readily get into their station.  It was the admiral's intention not to make the signal
of battle but only of defiance, when he had got abreast of the enemy's headmost ship.  Before
he reached his station, however, the "Falmouth," which was in the rear, began to fire, as did
also the "Windsor" and "Advance," and soon after the Vice-Admiral was engaged; and now an act
was performed which has rarely happened in the British Navy.  After exchanging two or three
broadsides, the "Windsor" and "Advance" luffed to windward out of gunshot, and left the admiral
exposed to the fire of the two sternmost ships of the enemy, by whom he was very much galled.
Neither did the ships in the rear come up to his assistance with the alacrity he expected.
In spite of this, the brave Benbow continued to engage the enemy from four o'clock until night,
and although the latter then ceased firing, yet he kept sight of them, intending to renew the
action in the morning.  On the following day at daybreak he found himself close to the enemy,
with the "Ruby" only near enough to support him.  Unintimidated by the misconduct of those
who had so shamefully deserted him, he pursued the enemy, who were using every effort to escape.
The "Ruby" in a short time was so dreadfully knocked about that he was obliged to order her
to return to Port Royal.  Two more days passed away, and still the brave old admiral kept up
the pursuit.  On the morning of the 24th, he got up with the sternmost ships of the French,
and although receiving but little assistance from the rest of the squadron he brought them
to close action.  Round-shot, and chain-shot, and langrage came flying on board the "Breda,"
the British seamen sending back much the same sort of missiles as those with which they were
complimented.  Volumes of smoke from the guns rolled out of the ports.  Still undaunted, and
excited by the example of their brave admiral, the British sailors fought on.  At length a
shot swept across the quarter-deck, on which the admiral was standing.  He was seen to fall.
His right leg was shattered by it.  Immediately he was carried below.  He urged the surgeons
to dress the wound as rapidly as they could, and then being placed in his cradle, he directed
himself to be brought once more on the deck.  There, in spite of the agony he was suffering,
he continued to give his orders.  One of the last he issued was to direct the other captains
to "keep the line and behave like men." Great was his grief, vexation, and rage, when the recreant
captains came on board and declared that enough had been done, and that it would be dangerous
to follow the enemy.  In vain the old admiral pleaded with them.  They persisted that by so
doing they would ensure the destruction of their ships and crews.  Wounded and sick at heart
he had at length to yield to them, and he issued the order for the squadron to return to Jamaica.
Here the brave old admiral was carried on shore, and shortly afterwards died of the wound he
had received.  The captains who had refused to support him were tried by a court-martial, and
two of them were carried home and shot on the decks of their ships, as soon as they arrived
in an English port.

To return to John Deane.  Soon after the "Breda" reached Port Royal, as she was likely to remain
there for some time, and he was anxious for active employment, he got re-appointed to the "Venus,"
which was sent to cruise for the protection of British commerce.

As soon as the frigate was clear of the island, a bright look-out was kept for the French privateers
or any other of the enemy's vessels.  The frigate had been cruising for a week or more, and
had already got some distance from Jamaica, having during the time captured several small vessels,
some of which had been destroyed and others sent to Port Royal, when one forenoon a large ship
was descried to leeward.  All sail was crowded in chase, and as the frigate had the advantage
of the wind, the stranger being almost becalmed, she soon came up with her.

As soon as the breeze reached the stranger, without hoisting her colours, she made all sail
in an attempt to escape.  Various opinions were offered as to her character.  Some thought
she was a Spanish galleon, though how she should have come thus far north was a question not
easily answered.  Others believed she was a large French merchantman, and some pronounced her
to be a privateer.  She was a fast craft, at all events, for as soon as she felt the breeze
she slipped through the water at a rate which made it doubtful whether the "Venus" would come
up with her.  This made the English still more anxious for her capture, as, in the first place,
if a merchantman, she was likely to have a rich cargo on board, and at all events she might
be converted into a useful cruiser.

It was a general opinion in those days that the French vessels were faster sailers than the
English, and certain it is that many of the best models of men-of-war were taken from the French.
The Genoese, however, were reputed to be better ship-builders than either.  A stern chase is
a long chase always.  The stranger persevered in her flight, in the hope that some accident
might secure her escape.  The English pursued in the hope that an accident to the chase might
enable them to capture her.

The day wore on, and fears were entertained that the chase would escape during the darkness
of the night.  Every stitch of canvas which the frigate could carry was set on her, while the
sails which could be reached were kept constantly wet, that no wind might pass through them.
The crew cheered with glee when they found that their efforts were not without good effect,
and that the frigate at last was overhauling the chase.  At length she got near enough to fire
a bow-chaser.  The shot took effect, and cut away several of her braces.  This allowed the
sails to fly wildly in the air.  In consequence, the frigate now came up more rapidly, and,
as she did so, continued firing with good effect.  The chase at length let fly all her sheets,
and hauled down the French flag, which had just before been run up.  As soon as the frigate
hove to, Lieutenant Deane was ordered to board the prize with a boat's crew.  She proved to
be a rich merchant vessel outward-bound to the French colonies on the Main, with a large and
valuable assorted cargo, and was evidently a prize worth taking.

The captain of the "Venus" was ordered to send in his prizes, as he should take them, to Port
Royal, but as long as he had sufficient men to fight his ship not to return himself.  It was
important, however, that so rich a prize should be carefully navigated, and he accordingly
ordered his junior lieutenant--John Deane--to take charge of her with a crew of fifteen men,
to carry her into Port Royal.  Ten of her former crew volunteered to assist in navigating her,
and they were allowed to remain, while the rest, with the captain and officers, were carried
on board the "Venus."

Jack now found himself for the first time in his life in command of a large ship.  As may be
supposed, he had not been asleep all the time he had been at sea, and he already possessed
a very good knowledge of seamanship, as well as of navigation.  He had no doubt, therefore,
that he should be able safely to carry his prize to her destined port.

Two midshipmen were sent with him to act as lieutenants, and an old quarter-master to do the
duty of boatswain.  Jack was a great favourite among all with whom he had served, both with
his superiors and with those beneath him.  His two young midshipmen--Dick Lovatt and Ned Hawke--had
become particularly-attached to him, while Will Burridge, the old quarter-master, would have
gone through fire and water to serve him.

On one occasion, Burridge, whether he had had too much Jamaica rum on board or not it was difficult
to say, managed to fall overboard into the harbour swarming with sharks.  As the tide was running
strong at the time, Burridge had already been swept some distance from the ship before he was
perceived.  Jack, regardless of the sharks, leaped overboard, and swimming towards the sinking
seaman, kept him up, splashing about so as to make the monsters of the deep keep at a respectful
distance till a boat arrived to take them both on board.  Jack declared it was not a thing
to be talked about, any body might have done the same, and therefore it was not mentioned at
the time of its occurrence.  It however raised Deane's character among the crew, and made them
all ready to volunteer in any expedition where he was to lead.

As soon as the damages which the prize had received were repaired, the frigate stood on her
course, and Jack made sail for Port Royal.  The prize was called the "Coquille," and carried
twelve guns, so that Jack hoped, should he be attacked by one of the enemy's privateers, or
any small man-of-war, he might make a good fight of it, and beat off his opponent if he could
not take her.

The first day the weather was very fine; the wind then fell, and there was a dead calm.  The
sun struck down with intense heat on the deck of the vessel, making the very pitch in her seams
bubble up.  The crew began to feel the effects of the heat, and moved languidly about the decks,
exhibiting a listlessness very different to their usual activity. Jack with one of his officers
was sitting below at dinner, when Hawke, the other, who had the watch on deck, entered the cabin.

"I thought it as well to tell you, sir," he said, "that I don't quite like the way the Frenchmen
are carrying on.  I have observed them for some time past whispering together, and I cannot
help thinking that they expect to find us napping, and to set on us and try to retake the vessel."

"It's as well to be prepared," answered Jack.  "Thank you for your forethought.  But it will
scarcely be right to put them in irons, unless we have evidence of their intention.  I will
tell Burridge, and hint to the men to be on the look-out, so that we shall be even with the
Monsieurs if they make the attempt which you fancy they purpose."

Burridge soon made his appearance in the cabin, hat in hand, and receiving his directions hurried
back to speak to the English crew. Jack and his two young officers, having loaded their pistols
and stuck them in their belts, and fastened on their swords, made their appearance also on
deck.  The Frenchmen seemed to be watching them; but if they had any sinister intentions, the
preparations which Jack had made to oppose them compelled them for the moment to keep quiet.

CHAPTER TWENTY NINE.

HURRICANE--CAPTURED BY PIRATES.

Jack had not had much experience with the West India climate; but he had heard enough of the
signs preceding a hurricane to make him somewhat anxious about the state of the weather.  Gradually
a thick mist seemed to be overspreading the sky, while there was not a breath of wind sufficient
to move a feather in the rigging.

"We shall have the wind down upon us presently," he observed to Hawke. "We will clue up every
thing, and strike the topgallant-masts.  If the wind does not come it will be no great harm,
as it will only give the Frenchmen something more to do; and if it does come, and we have all
this gear aloft, it will be carried away to a certainty."

The order was immediately issued, and the hands flew aloft to carry it out.  Before, however,
the canvas was all secured, a white line of foam was seen rushing towards the ship, extending
on either side as far as the eye could reach.  On it came, rising in height, while a loud roar
burst on the ears of the crew.

"Down for your lives, men, down!" shouted Jack, as the ship, struck by the furious blast, heeled
over.

Some obeyed the summons and slid down on deck in time; but others, who did not hear the order,
remained aloft, many in their terror clinging to spars and shrouds, unable to move.  Over heeled
the stout ship.  The masts like willow-wands bent, and then, snapping in two, were carried
away to leeward.  The lower yards dipped in the water, and most of those upon them were torn
away from their grasp, while others were hurled to a distance from the ship.  For a few minutes
she lay helplessly on her beam-ends, then happily feeling the power of her helm, which was
put up, the canvas at the same time being blown away, her head paid off, and righting herself
she flew before the gale.  In vain the poor wretches who had been hurled into the water shrieked
for help.  No human help could reach them!  In a few minutes they were left far behind, while
the ship, lately so trim and gallant, was hurried on, too likely to meet that destruction which
overtook many other stout vessels at that time. More than half the English crew had been lost,
and only one of the Frenchmen, so that their numbers were now more equal.

On flew the ship.  The sea torn and thrown up by the force of the hurricane, loud-roaring billows
foamed and hissed on either side, while darkness soon came on to add to the horrors of the scene.

Undaunted, Jack and his crew exerted themselves to clear away the wreck of the masts and spars.
The fearful working of the ship, however, made it too probable that if not very strongly-built,
she would spring a leak and go down.  Every instant the seas grew higher and higher, and it
was with difficulty that she could be kept before the wind.  Her boats were washed away by
the seas which broke on board, and though often she was in danger of being pooped by those
which dashed against her stern, still she floated on.

When morning at length dawned, the hurricane began to abate.  The wind ceased almost as rapidly
as it had commenced; but the once stout ship, now almost a wreck, rolled heavily in the still
tumbling seas.  As yet little could be done to get her put to rights.  She was still at a considerable
distance from Jamaica, and with his diminished crew, Jack saw that it would take some time
to rig jury-masts, and thus enable him to shape a proper course for Port Royal.  As soon, however,
as the sea went sufficiently down, and the ship became steadier, he ordered the crew to commence
the work.  His own men willingly obeyed; but the Frenchmen walked forward sullenly, declaring
that there would be no use in exerting themselves, and positively refusing to work.  While
they were acting thus, Burridge brought him word that several had, by some means or other,
got hold of fire-arms and hangers, and were evidently prepared for mischief.

"We must watch our opportunity, and try to disarm them," observed John Deane.  "Work they must,
by some means or other, or else they must be put in irons."

To do this, however, was no easy task, considering that there were as many Frenchmen as Englishmen,
and the former were evidently desperate fellows.  Hawke was fortunately able to speak French
very well, and Jack directed him therefore to address the mutineers, and ask them again whether
they would assist in putting the ship into order.  A flat refusal was the answer, and thus
the whole day was occupied.  The following night was one of great anxiety, as it became necessary
to keep a constant watch over the Frenchmen, lest they should suddenly attack the English and
attempt to regain the ship.  Jack did not allow himself a moment's rest, but continued, with
arms by his side, pacing the deck, while a constant watch was kept on the movements of the
mutineers.

Dawn at length broke; and soon after the sun rose above the horizon its bright rays struck
on the sails of a large vessel which was seen standing towards the "Coquille," with a light
breeze then blowing.  Jack anxiously watched her through his glass, hoping, from the cut of
her sails, that she might prove an English man-of-war.  As she came on, he hoisted on the stump
of the main-mast the English ensign reversed, the signal of distress.  On the nearer approach
of the stranger, however, Deane observed that the English flag was not hoisted in return, which
would have been the case had she been a friend.  If she had been at sea during the hurricane,
she had escaped wonderfully well, for her masts and yards were as trim as if she had just come
out of port.  Her decks, too, seemed crowded with men.  In a short time, running under the
stern of the "Coquille," she "hove to," and a man with a speaking-trumpet hailed from her deck,
demanding the name of the vessel, and where she was bound to.

"A prize to Her Majesty's ship `Venus,' and bound for Port Royal," answered Jack.

"And very little chance you'll have of getting there," replied the man with the speaking-trumpet,
"We will send a boat aboard you and see about the matter."

In another minute two well-armed boats were lowered from the stranger, and soon came alongside
the "Coquille."  Their crews jumped on board.

"You have been caught in the hurricane, I see," said the man who seemed to act as the officer.
"What is your cargo?"

Jack told him.

"Lucky for us, then, that you did not go down," was the answer.  "And now set to work and get
the ship in order.  You must understand that you are a prize to the `Black Hawk,' belonging
to a company of gentlemen adventurers.  There's no use grumbling: it's the fortune of war.
And now bear a hand and get your ship to rights as fast as you can.  We will help you, and
carry you safely into port, though not the port maybe you were bound for."

Jack's heart sank within him when he heard this.  Resistance would be utterly useless.  Even
had the Frenchmen remained faithful, the pirates, for such he had little doubt they were, numbered
ten to one of his own diminished crew.  At first he and his young officers felt disposed to
refuse to work, but Burridge, an experienced old seaman, strongly advised them to obey.

"There's no use whatsomever, sir, to quarrel with these sort of gentry," he observed.  "They
would as likely as not make a man walk the plank if they're angry with him, and if we don't
try to please them they will probably send every one of us to be food for the sharks before
another day passes over our heads."

Jack saw the wisdom of this advice, so, putting the best face on the matter he could, he ordered
his own people to commence the work he had been about to carry out when the pirate appeared.
The Frenchmen were quickly made to change their tone, and the pirates, observing that they
did not work with as good a will as the English, kept pricking them on, every now and then,
with the points of their swords, amusing themselves greatly at the sight of the grimaces which
were made in consequence of this treatment.

Poor Jack! this was the greatest trial he had ever gone through in his life.  After having
fully expected to enter Port Royal in triumph with a fine prize, thus to have it snatched from
him by a band of rascally pirates!  Still he did the best to keep up his spirits, hoping that
some opportunity might occur to enable him ere long to make his escape.

"It cannot be helped," observed Burridge, "and `what cannot be cured, must be endured,' as
my old woman used to say when she allowed the porridge to burn on the fire.  It's a long lane
too, you know, sir, which has no turning, and though maybe these gentry will make us do a few
things we shall not like, still, as long as they don't cut our throats, we will manage some
day or other to get clear of them."

The pirates, to do them justice, were not idle themselves.  A considerable number more now
came on board to help get the ship into order, as it was very evident to them that she was
a valuable prize.  As soon as sail could be made on the ship, Jack and his officers were ordered
to keep to their cabins, as he supposed, to prevent them ascertaining the direction which the
ship was steering.  This, so far, proved satisfactory, as it proved that the pirates had no
immediate intention of taking their lives.  Three days thus passed away, when from the perfectly
smooth way in which the vessel glided on, Deane suspected that they were entering some harbour.
The midshipmen were of the same opinion, and Hawke volunteered to try to reach the deck, to
ascertain where they had got to.  On going out, however, he found a sentry at the door, who
ordered him back, telling him, that without the captain's leave they would not be allowed to
leave their cabin.  In a short time longer, the sound of the anchor let go, and the perfect
stillness of the ship, convinced Jack that he was right in his conjectures.  Soon after this
a person they had not before seen came to the cabin.

"Now, friends," he said, "if you are wise men, you will enter with us and cut the service to
which you have belonged.  We don't serve either king or queen, and have only ourselves to obey,
while instead of handing over the profits of our labours to others we keep them for ourselves.
We have a jovial life of it.  No lack of adventure and excitement, and as much gold and silver
as we can pick up, though, to be sure, we now and then have a little fighting for it, but that
only adds to its value. What say you, lads?  Will you join us?"

"Thank you for your polite offer," answered Deane, "but we are well content with the service
in which we're engaged, and have no fancy for changing it.  We, too, have plenty of fighting,
and can generally scrape up as much gold as we want."

"Enough is as good as a feast," observed Burridge; "and I'll tell you what, sir, with due respect
to you, we would rather serve Queen Anne than King Mobb Sogg, or any other king in or out of
Christendom; and though you gentlemen buccaneers are very fine fellows, we have no fancy just
at present of becoming one of your number."

"It would have been better for you if you had made up your minds to follow my advice," answered
the pirate officer; "I should have been able to set you at liberty at once and let you wander
all over our island. Even the name is so ugly. There
is yet so beautiful towns: Babylon or Baghdad or Palmyra ....

                                  His childish longing made his steps and larger QUICKLY.

Soon the lawns in front of him.

II

For a long time he followed the road that lay bare and shadowless, while the white dust they like
a flour-covered layer. The cloudless sky was the sun, and all the land lay: lifeless, sleepy as
it were. Bees and bumblebees buzzed past and the cabbage white and the peacock butterfly fluttering
around. Behind the hills over there arose a village church tower alone in the air, long and
narrow like a lance. A slight haze veiled the distant, and the further removed the boy from the
town, the quieter, more daily celebration was it into the round him.

He could have always wander in this great plain, the so- gave the misleading appearance of
an immeasurable. Nothing fascinated the eye here, and always you could see the heavy, uniform
line of the horizon: but this involves lowland sites, to those of the night are related.

Peter Vogelsang's destination was the forest. And while he weitertrippelte, he gave himself completely
his dreams. How wonderful it would be if he is now leader of an army the road hesitate! Of
course he had to be great and strong - more like household hammer Fritz, yes even stronger than
the father himself, he stood still ..... no, in the end it was much prettier Captain to be
to be a pirate. He put his finger to his nose and thought about busily after what would probably
be more profitable: to field marshal, or pirates? If he but reflected that it did from the field marshal
can easily get to the emperor? It was difficult about to get into the clear. He wanted to count
the trees on the left side of the road until up to the hilltop, and when an even number came out,
he wanted to be emperor, and if an odd out he wanted to be pirates. When the aunt Lina knew she would,
of course laugh again, but what she did because actually something? In general understanding,
the girls nothing at all, "he said darkly to himself. He hated the girl, and although Aunt Lina already
married, she figured Peter but to the girls. She talked of her always just Alfredchen and from their
new net curtains or so and love of God as she understood at all nothing.

She also had not even known that the sun is larger than the Earth. The revolting however, was
that they always said the stork, relating to small children. As if he believed the would have
such a fairy tale!

And he sank into deep brooding. Actually, he was still not finished with the stork. Who should
get one because otherwise, if it was not the stork? But on the other hand, which Interest could
have the stork because the people would get children? Yes, - and
this was the main point: In the fall, but continuing the storks, so
they can bring no children: he knew full well that the children are
even born, when no storks longer there. And what is this mysterious
place where many tiny little children lie?  "However,
as this craft will prove a fine cruiser, we are going to fit her out for sea, and if you don't
choose to go in her, you will have to come on shore."

The pirate continued talking much in this way for some time, but without producing any effect
upon his hearers.  At last he got angry, and, slamming the door after him, went on deck.  He
soon returned, however, with a dozen men, whom he ordered to take charge of the four prisoners
and to convey them on shore.  They were accordingly marched up on deck, where for the first
time Jack was enabled to examine the place into which the ship had been carried.  It was a
large lagoon, the entrance from the sea being so narrow that he could with difficulty make
it out. Cocoanut and palm-trees thickly lined the shore, between which a few huts were seen,
but no rising ground was visible, and Deane conjectured that they were on one of the quays
which are to be found in the neighbourhood of Saint Domingo, and which had been the resort
for many ages of pirates.  The boat in which they were placed proceeded up the lagoon for some
distance, when they were landed on one side of it, and surrounded by their guards and marched
up away from the water.  In a short time some huts of considerably larger dimensions than those
they had already seen were reached, and one of them was pointed out as their future prison.
It was close to the other houses, and was one of the largest in the village.  Being ordered
to go in, the door was closed behind them.  It had, however, the advantage of a window, which,
though strongly grated, gave them light and air, and enabled them to look out. It was, in other
respects, a very undesirable residence, the furniture consisting of merely a couple of rough
stools and a bench, with a rickety table.

"I am afraid, sir, we've fallen out of the frying-pan into the fire," observed Burridge, as
he surveyed the apartment.  "On board we had our beds to sleep on, and decent furniture, but
here we have nothing to boast of, of that sort, while I'm afraid it will be more than ever
difficult for us to get away."

It seemed but too likely that they were to be starved into compliance with the pirates' wishes,
for hour after hour passed away and no provisions were brought them.  At length Burridge, who
had been examining the place, expressed his belief that they might be able to work their way
through the roof, and so get out.

"If they attempt to starve us, it's a thing we must do," he observed; "and it will be hard
if we go foraging about the island and cannot find any food; and then if it's impossible to
get off, we must e'en before morning get back into our present prison, and maybe it will not
be discovered that we have ever left it."

The two midshipmen were delighted with this proposal, though Deane doubted somewhat that it
would be carried out.  Their only amusement was looking out of the window, which there was
room for two of them to do at a time; but it was too small to allow more than that number to
look out of it together.  Now and then people were seen moving about, and passing at a distance
from the prison; but no one came near enough for the prisoners to speak to them.  Jack determined
to do so if he could, however, that he might try to ascertain something more of the character
of the people among whom they had fallen.  He had been looking out for some time when he saw
a person approaching, whom, by his dress and gay sash full of pistols, his hat with a feather,
and the rich, jewelled hilt to his sword, he concluded was an officer.  The man turned his
face for an instant up to the window.  Although his hair was somewhat grizzled and his beard
bushy and long, partly concealing his face, the conviction flashed across Jack's mind that
he was no other than Master Pearson, as he called himself, with whom he had parted in the fens
of Lincolnshire!  The man turned away and passed on; but from his gait and manner, Deane felt
still more convinced that he was not mistaken. Instantly a number of thoughts crowded into
his mind.  Was he there alone, or had he brought with him his wife and reputed daughter?  Robber
and outlaw as he might be in England, Deane still thought he was not debased enough to place
them in so dangerous a position; and yet if they were not with him, where could he have left
them?  The one redeeming quality of the man was his devotion to his wife and the affection
with which he seemed to regard the little Elizabeth.

Jack felt more than ever anxious that he might get out of prison that he might solve this question.
Still, if it was Pearson, he had no wish to make himself known to him.  He felt also a disinclination
to mention the circumstances by which he had become acquainted with the man to his companions.
He thought over and over again how he should act; but at the end of the time had arrived at
no conclusion.

John Deane of Nottingham--by W.H.G.  Kingston

CHAPTER THIRTY.

IMPRISONMENT IN THE PIRATES' ISLAND--THE LOVERS' MEETING.

Notwithstanding the fears of the prisoners, the pirates seemed to have no intention of starving
them, for in a short time a man came to the hut with an ample supply of cooked meat and a basket
containing several bottles of wine.

"There, mates," he said, "our captain sent you these things, and advises you to think over
the matter our chief mate spoke to you about the other day.  You will judge how we fare ourselves
by the way we treat you."

As there was food enough to last for some time they naturally expected they should not receive
another visit during the day.  As soon, therefore, as they had satisfied their hunger, Burridge
continued his examination of the roof, and found, by removing the bamboo rafters, he could
without difficulty force his way out through it.  He proposed, therefore, as soon as it was
dark, to get out and find his way down to the shore, as, in all probability, the island being
but small, he could do so without difficulty.  He thought then that if a boat or a small vessel
could be found, they might all manage to get on board and make their escape without being discovered.

"You see," he observed, "all is fish which comes to the nets of these gentlemen, and they will
take small craft as well as large vessels. They are very likely to have captured a small schooner
or sloop, and to have brought her into the harbour.  They're certain also, if they have done
so, not to keep any strict watch over her, and if we 'bide our time we shall find a way of
getting on board without interruption.  I have heard of the doings of these gentry, and, depend
upon it, some night they will be having a carouse when no one will be on the look-out."

These remarks of the honest boatswain raised the spirits of his companions, and they determined,
at all risks, to take advantage of the opportunity should it occur.  The midshipmen proposed
that the whole party should go together; but this Jack over-ruled, considering that should
any body come to the hut and find it empty, search would be made for them, whereas by only
one being absent, discovery was less likely. As soon, therefore, as it was dark Burridge made
his way through the roof, and they heard him drop gently to the ground on the other side of
the hut.  He immediately afterwards came round to the window.

"All right, sir," he said; "I saw the glimmer of the water when I was on the top of the hut,
and I shall easily find my way to it.  The pirates are carousing down by the huts on the shore,
for I heard their voices singing and shouting, so I shall have a good chance of not being found
out."

Saying this Burridge glided away through the cocoanut grove by which the village was surrounded.

His companions waited anxiously for his return.

"If he is taken, I have a fancy they would not hesitate to send a pistol-bullet through his
head," said Hawke.  "I wish that I could have gone with him, Mr Deane."

"You would only have shared his fate, and so have gained nothing, and done him no good," answered
Jack.  "Let us wait patiently: he has his wits about him, and he will take good care not to
be caught."

Two or three hours passed by and still Burridge did not make his appearance.  His companions
grew more and more anxious, both on his account and on their own.  If he was taken their prospect
of escape would be much lessened.  In Jack's mind also a new difficulty had arisen.  Even supposing
that the opportunity should occur of escaping, he could not bring himself to leave the island
without ascertaining whether Dame Pearson and Elizabeth were residing on it.  Before therefore
he could go he must settle this point, one almost as difficult as that of escaping.

At length a voice was heard under the window.

"All right," said Burridge, in a whisper; "I'll tell you all about it as soon as I'm safe inside
again."

He soon made his way up to the top of the hut, and getting through the hole replaced the thatch
and bamboo rafters before he jumped down to the ground.

"I was right," he said, "and made my way down to the harbour.  It is farther off though than
I supposed; and I heard people moving about, so I had to be cautious; and more than all, they
have two or three of those Spanish bloodhounds with them, and it's a wonder the beasts did
not find me out, and if they had come across my track they would have done so to a certainty.
However I got down to the shore safe.  I counted six or seven vessels in the harbour, besides
two or three small ones, and several boats hauled up on the beach.  So far as a craft is concerned,
we have only to pick and choose.  Then comes the difficulty of getting on board and finding
our way out of the harbour.  If we had been on deck when we came in we might have done that
more easily, but to get out at night without knowing the passage will be a hard job indeed.
However, it must be done by some means or other."

It was agreed at last that they must wait for a moonlight night, when by sounding with a boat
they might hope to get the vessel, in which they finally expected to make their escape, safe
through the passage.  It would also be necessary that the pirates should be indulging in a
carouse and be off the watch, and that the wind should blow down the harbour.  Every time the
men who brought them their provisions came Jack sent a message to the captain, begging that
they might be released, and allowed to wander at their will throughout the island.  Several
days had passed, however, and no answer had been returned.

Deane possessed an iron frame, but the anxiety which he endured began to tell greatly upon
him, and for the first time in his life, he felt that he was becoming seriously ill.  The thought
occurred to him that it might be the yellow fever.  Every day he grew worse and worse.  His
head ached, his limbs were full of pains, still he kept up his spirits as well as he could,
and he and his companions continued to entertain hopes of escaping.  One night Burridge returned
from his usual expedition in high spirits.  He had important information to give.  While wandering
along the shore he came suddenly upon a person seated on a rock, apparently watching the harbour
as he had been.  At first he felt very nervous about approaching the man, doubting who he could
be.  Still it struck him that it was not likely to be one of the pirates.  He therefore cautiously
approached him and, in a low voice, asked him who he was.

"You may suppose, sir," said Burridge, "when he gave me the account my heart did leap with
joy, when I found that he was an old shipmate--the pilot of a vessel I once sailed in!  And
what was more curious, he has been thinking of the same thing that we have, and hoping to make
his escape in the same manner.  He tells me that he has two companions on the island who are
kept at work by the pirates as slaves; but that he has had an opportunity of speaking to them,
and that they're ready to help him make off with a vessel.  If I had not known him, I should
have been afraid of treachery; but he is a true man, and we need have no fear on that score.
There will be moon enough for our purpose about five days hence, and I've arranged that we
should all meet him at the spot where I found him at midnight at that time."

This information raised Jack's spirits, which had become very low in consequence of his illness.
The effect, however, was only temporary, for the following day he became worse, and his companions
began to fear that he would be taken from them.  Their daily visitor, as it happened, remained
in the hut longer than usual, and had thus an opportunity of observing how ill Deane looked.
The midshipmen and Burridge also told him that they were afraid their officer would die if
he had not some help.

"True enough, master," said the man.  "I will tell our captain, and perhaps he will do something
for him.  We have no objection to killing men in fair fight; but it is not our way to put them
out of the world by clapping them into prisons, as they do in some countries."

Saying this the man took his departure, promising to inform his captain of Deane's state of health.

"Whatever happens to me," said Deane to his companions, "you must endeavour to make your escape,
according to the present arrangement.  If you can find your way to Jamaica, you will be able
to tell the authorities whereabouts this island is situated, and they will then probably send
a man-of-war to bargain with the pirates for my release, or if they will not do that, to get
me off by force."

About an hour after their first visitor had left them, footsteps were heard approaching the
door.  It opened, and Jack, as he lifted his head from the bed of straw on which he lay in
one corner, saw standing before him his old acquaintance--Pearson!

"They tell me you have fallen sick," he said, "and want a doctor.  Now I'm none myself, and
there's no one I can send here to cure you; but, as I don't want you to suppose that we are
entire barbarians, if you wish it, I will have you taken to my house, and there are some there
who, maybe, will look after you and help cure you better than any doctor we can find in these
parts."

Under other circumstances, Deane would certainly have declined the offer, which would have
made his escape impossible; but from the remarks made by the pirate captain, he could not help
hoping that the persons he spoke of might prove to be Dame Pearson and Elizabeth.  He felt,
too, that even should he wish to attempt escaping, from his weakness he would be a great burden
to his companions, while he would run the risk of losing his own life.  He therefore replied
that he was thankful for the offer made to him, and gladly accepted it.  At this the captain
summoned a couple of men who were waiting outside with a litter, and lifting Jack upon it,
without allowing him much time to bid farewell to his companions, they carried him off.  The
midshipmen were greatly afraid that he would exact a promise from them not to attempt to escape.
They were therefore greatly relieved when they saw him take his departure, leaving them at
liberty to act as they thought best.  They immediately consulted what should be done, and agreed,
for his sake as well as their own, that they should endeavour to make their way to Port Royal
as soon as possible, and despatch an expedition to destroy the nest of pirates.

Deane's bearers carried him along through the cocoanut grove for some distance, when they came
before a cottage far superior in appearance to any of those he had before passed.  A garden
in front bloomed with flowers, and a wide verandah afforded shade to the rooms within. Deane's
heart beat somewhat quicker than usual as he saw these and other signs of the presence of females.

"Here, dame, is a man who wants looking after.  It will be to your and fair Bessy's taste,
and he will be grateful I doubt not.  He was brought in here some time since on board a prize,
and if it had not been for me, he and his companions would have been food for sharks by this time."

Jack heard these words spoken as his bearers reached the door of the cottage.  He had little
difficulty in recognising the voice of Master Pearson, though perhaps had he not previously
seen that individual he might not have done so.  Pearson, for some reason or other, kept out
of sight, and Deane found himself carried into a room and placed on a couch formed out of bamboos.
The room was, however, in other respects richly furnished, with silk hangings, and gold and
silver ornaments of all descriptions, quite out of character with the general appearance of
the building.

"Dare, massa, you will do well," said one of the negro bearers, with a good-natured expression
of countenance.  "Soon lily-white lady come look after you.  I is 'Tello, you remember me,
massa; I love Englishmen."

Jack was not left long alone.  Scarcely had the negroes taken their departure when he heard
footsteps approaching the door.  His heart beat quickly, for he fully expected to see Elizabeth
Pearson, who he could not help persuading himself was an inhabitant of the island.  Instead
of Elizabeth, however, an old lady entered the room, followed by a black damsel.  He turned
his eyes towards the former, expecting to recognise the features of Dame Pearson.  At first
he could scarcely believe that a few years could have made so great an alteration in her, and
he had to look twice before he was certain that she was the good dame who had treated him so
kindly in the fens, sickness and anxiety having already worked a great change in her; yet Dame
Pearson was the person who had just entered the room, of that he was sure.

"I was told that an English officer is ill, and requires aid," she said. "I therefore desired
that he might be brought here.  I will feel your pulse, sir, that I may judge what remedies
to apply."

Jack was not surprised that she did not recognise him, and he thought it better not to make
himself known to her at first.  He felt however great disappointment at the non-appearance
of Elizabeth; still, till he had told Dame Pearson who he was, he could not ask after her.
From what the negro said, however, he still hoped that she might be in the house.  The dame,
after consulting with her attendant, retired again, saying that she would prepare such remedies
as were most likely to benefit him.  He thanked her, begging that they might be applied soon,
for he felt so ill that, stout of heart as he was, he could not help at times believing that
he should not recover.

"We will do our best for you, but the issue is in the hands of God," answered the dame calmly.
"However, in the meantime I will send my daughter that she may read to you from His Word. 
Thence you will obtain more comfort than man can bestow."

Saying this she left the room.  Jack's eyes kept continually turned towards the door, and in
another minute it opened, and a fair girl entered the room.  She was taller, however, and of
larger proportions than the little Elizabeth he had so often thought of.  She carried a Bible
in her hand, and taking a seat at a short distance from him, scarcely giving him more than
a slight glance, opened the Book.

"You will undoubtedly draw comfort, as we have done, sir, from God's blessed Word.  I will
therefore read to you from the Psalms of David, who was a man tried and afflicted."

She commenced reading in a low, gentle voice.  Jack could with difficulty refrain from making
himself known, for he at once recognised that sweet voice which he had known so well.  She
read on for some short time, and then turned to passages in other parts of the Book which she
thought calculated to bring comfort to one in sickness and distress.

Jack at length could restrain himself no longer.

"Elizabeth," he exclaimed, "Elizabeth de Mertens! do you not know me?"

She flew to his side, and trembling took his hand which he stretched out towards her.

"Who are you?" she exclaimed.  "Yes, yes, I know you, I know your voice! Jack Deane you are--yes,
you must be!  But oh, how did you come here? How do you know me, and that name by which you
call me?  I remember it well.  It was my own name, though I had well-nigh forgotten it.  Have
you come to take me away from this dreadful place? and oh, from that dreadful man too?"

"Yes, indeed I am Jack Deane--and often have I thought of you, Elizabeth!" he answered; "and
it was in consequence of the ring you gave me that I discovered your name.  But sit down, and
I will tell you by degrees what has occurred.  If I was to give the history all at once, I
have so many things to say that I should bewilder you.  But I also want to learn about you--how
you came here, and your adventures; for it seems strange that you have been brought out to
this lonely island, to live among pirates and outlaws!"

"I am afraid you give them but their true name," answered Elizabeth; "but let me hear about
yourself, and those from whom you learnt my name."

Jack could not speak without difficulty, but he managed, however, to give Elizabeth a brief
account of himself, entering more particularly into the way in which he had discovered her
parents.  They were interrupted by the return of Dame Pearson and her black attendant.

"Hush!" said Elizabeth; "say nothing now: I will tell my mother when the girl is not present.
I fear she is not to be trusted."

The discovery Jack had made, instead of increasing his fever, had a beneficial effect, so it
seemed, as it restored his spirits in a way that nothing else would have done.  All his thoughts
were now occupied in devising a scheme for carrying off Elizabeth from the island.

So completely had the fever deprived Jack of strength, that for several days he was unable
to rise from his couch, although, thanks to the kind and constant attention he received, he
was gradually recovering.  He was especially anxious all this time to hear from his companions;
but Dame Pearson could give him no information, nor could Elizabeth, although they believed
that they still remained shut up in their prison.

CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

DAME PEARSON'S HISTORY--ENGAGEMENT BETWEEN THE PIRATE AND QUEEN'S SHIP.

Pearson all this time had never appeared, though Elizabeth told Jack that he was still on the
island.  One day, however, he heard his voice raised to a high and angry pitch, very unlike
the calm tone in which he used generally to speak.

"This is the sort of watch you fellows keep over your prisoners!" Pearson was exclaiming. 
"While you are in your drunken fits the whole island might be attacked and taken, and all our
vessels cut out.  You say you do not know when they got off?  Then why did you not, the instant
you made the discovery, put to sea in the first vessel you could get ready, and make chase
after them?  Go! hasten now, villains! they can scarcely be many leagues away, and are sure
to be steering a course for Port Royal."

Some grumbling remonstrances were heard in return to this address.

"Well, knaves, well, you shall sail in the sloop, and I'll follow in the ship as soon as she
can be got ready for sea," exclaimed the pirate chief.  "If you are afraid of being caught
by a queen's ship, we shall be in time to save you from hanging; why, and if not, you will
only meet the fate which is certain to be yours one of these days!"

"And yours too, captain!" shouted one of the men.  "Why do you bring that up before us?"

"Marry, indeed! because I have a fancy to please you.  There's this difference between us,
however: you are afraid of it, and would do any sneaking thing to avoid the noose!  I have
no fear of that or any thing else, and so would not step out of my way to escape it.  And now
delay no longer, but be off with you all.  I'll be down at the harbour anon, and we'll see
how quickly we gentlemen rovers can get a ship ready for sea."

From the conversation he had overheard, Jack thus knew that his friends had escaped.  At the
same time he dreaded the consequences of their being overtaken, well knowing from the temper
of the pirate and his followers that, should they be captured, they would have but little chance
of preserving their lives.  He earnestly hoped, therefore, that they might escape safely to
Port Royal.  Two days after this he heard from Elizabeth that Pearson and his followers had
left the island in their big ship.

"Now you may, without risk, tell my kind second-mother who you are.  It will make her more
ready, I doubt not, to plead for you with her husband, should such become necessary.  If your
friends escape him, he will probably return in a very bad humour, and be much disposed to wreak
his vengeance on your head," said Elizabeth.

Elizabeth, very naturally, took every opportunity of being with Jack alone, that she might
hear more about her parents, of whom he had so much to tell, as also of his own adventures.
The more he saw of her, the more he was struck by her natural refinement and intelligence,
and the amount of information which she had been able to obtain.  At length the secret was
told to Dame Pearson.  At first she would scarcely believe that Jack was the same youth she
had formerly known, and she had to examine his countenance very narrowly before she would believe
his and Elizabeth's assertions.  At length, however, she was convinced.

"I see no more reason to doubt," she observed, "after all, that you should have changed from
a drover to a naval officer, than that we, after living quiet lives as farmers in old England,
should have become outcasts and wanderers on the earth."

Jack had almost recovered even before Pearson left the island, but he did not wish to appear
so, lest it should be the signal for his being dismissed from the cottage.  Now, however, being
able to leave the house, he rapidly regained his strength, and was able to walk about the island
in company with Elizabeth.  Those were happy days!  He no longer concealed from himself that
he had given her his heart, and he had good reason to suspect that he possessed hers in return.
They took care in their walks to keep at a good distance from the huts; the permanent residents
in the island consisting chiefly of old buccaneers and the wives and families of others away
in the ships.  These latter were, however, chiefly mulattoes or negresses, and it any of them
caught sight of him and Elizabeth, they merely staved, taking him probably for one of the buccaneers. It did not take long, however, so were all women in the
meadow, lured by the jokes, pranks and teasing, which the young man's world under the drive to
attract a sensation. And there was plenty to look and laugh, because Mood and skill of every
hundred little inventions like little bits and brought forth, with the most naive, emerged with a good way
in general happy mood most cordial Applause aroused. Even an unexpectedly beaten somersault found his
patrons and even the unfortunate virtuoso, who on his comb seriously an emotional way had wanted
to blow and it failed, was pleased with the untroubled serenity that he awakened, and did
not do him the more attached straw wreath from his head.

Jocundus just felt a little lonely in the driver because he Justine too far from more saw, in
which he believed to have been a little right, at least for this last day. However, there was
a sweet redemption, as unexpectedly close to the Virgin he was without his knowing where they
came from, and introduced him to his father and brothers as the banner of the Lord's first
winning club. He was also friendly and polite to the men Greetings and welcome welcomed, but not without
that solid cool attitude, which so rich Men had to keep working a little or nothing compared
to owning Seldwylers so far he were thinking about present more than a grand festival visitors.

The
good-natured singer felt the moment and it was a little embarrassed,
including Justine, which further led him to do so to compensate, as
the men left, and him the good show suggested.

Two identically built, villa-like houses latest style, which he first
put the lake in the shade Plants were, she described him as the homes
of two brothers, each of which already established his own family
had to resign without reason from the total family.

Then she rose with him ways and stairs up to the point where the tops of the trees below the house
The parents stood in which they lived themselves, older type of something, but still an impressive
Mansion, surrounded by farm buildings and stables, one could continue long high trade houses
with numerous windows that bordered on the dusty road that led over here. Across the street but
on the rising slope, the extended fields, vineyards and Grasslands with forests of fruit trees and
high above all this, showed him the house of Justin Grandparents as the headquarters of yours, in the
evening sun, far across the country, shimmering, a spacious elegant farmhouse of ancient design,
with bright rows of windows, buntbemaltem white walls and wood roof and barns, with stone staircases
and artificially wrought iron railings. Here lived the grandfather and grandmother with their
servants, both eighty compatriots, both creating more every day and every hour and imperious,
tough and stern old person of simple life and always ready with their verdict on all the disciples,
as described Justine her escort them. "Shall we more quickly go up and greet them as they
despise it, down from its height to and get to see our amusement? It's a great view up there,
"so said the girl. But a kind of awe Jocundus felt before the old man and thanked him politely
for more Effort of its leader, as it also being extended all the more frightened than pleased.

They
returned, therefore, back and mingled with the hard comrades, the longer the funny, were to
the east rose the full moon and looked over to the decline of the sun, so that roses and silver
mingled in the air and on the waters and the vessel for Departure prepared was mounted soon.

There was hiebei a crowd, since each of the hosts, who were on the bank, wanted to shake hands,
while the mariners were urged to hurry. So it happened that Jocundus Meyenthal of its project to take
leave of the beautiful Justine, was pushed and had to follow the stream, as she was not on the
road.

Of course it also shook the hand of his father and brothers, volatile saying: "It pleased us
all," but the one called him Mr. Meyer valley, the other Meier, "Goodbye": the third even Mr. Meier's
home, and said no!

When the ship went out into the evening glow, he saw no more, since with the other Women in the
darkening shadows of the trees stood.

* * * * *

       

At home Jocundus lived with his mother, whose only son and he was Jukundi and their great hope.
Because the father died young, he had been brought from out of town property consume only half of
women and raise the other half to the son, and it was still something there, although he still
made no definite start and still little had acquired. But it was he was too wasted nothing, because
he is the Mother, from whom he had his beauty and health and him with kindness loved, and obeyed
fairly guided by their left.

At a certain professions, it was not stayed. At first it had seemed that he technical nature
for showing affection, and he was therefore a time to the Bureau a Engineer gone. Then the
mood changed, however, in favor of the merchant class, and he went into a store, which broke
out soon after the mishap, without He lost a lot and now he was in the direction to devote to
the military, by He is a teaching and trained staff officer. Since he hiebei most of the Year
had to spend on weapons sites and pay received, so allowed for the time being a stately existence
without it even in his own life large grant funds required.

As it now after the feast beautifully decorated war garb and sword
at his side sat his horse, his mother gazed with approval and noted
that his charming smile had won a small admixture of melancholy or
the like.

He seemed to look as one who has picked up some homesickness, or longing. She thought about it
and also hired some careful research, and as they adventure with the crown of the Virgin heard
and how he was teased by the others about it, it was a light in the They still seem immediately
went to work to create a happiness seems appropriate and sewn well.

After she had noticed more in the mines than from the few comments Jukundis that is the position
would then, as she said, but that he as a modest and the ratios well-looking man barely large
enterprise felt, she said both sides that nothing more.

But when the summer was spent, she proclaimed, for the first time in her life, that it must
start in their years but to do something for health and for some weeks to visit a beautiful resort
pleasures, if Jocundus the cost to her later would jointly by economy recoup. He immediately agreed
to and they went happily from this and in excellent health, laden with their beautiful state.

She
gave her son the instruction, then especially if they would let him know they bring home, and
it set up but so that he could also stay a few days at that place.

Soon after, she appeared in the famous and not without beautifully
situated in a mountainous area Sanatorium on and sat well dressed,
but with an unbiased attitude to the table below, at which top the
rich and highly respected woman of Gertrude Glor Schwanau with her
beautiful Daughter Justine sat and ruled the occasion.

She was as tall as the Jukundi mother, but much firmer, with wise and somewhat severe look, and
was like to understand that they are not only in the circle of her
family, but also in the community, yes probably even in other districts,
a "Stauffacherin call," probably because they also Gertrud hot, like
the rat-and virtuous marriage landlady in Schiller's famous plays
William Tell.

She let etwan but teach them that they very well knew what was the meaning of the name, and that
he call the ideal of a wise and strong Swiss woman, a star and Jewellery the house and comfort
of the country.

Meyenthal heard the woman on the first six days they spent at the place, but kept very quiet and
withdrawn, and not only towards the end of the second day, when Mrs.
Gertrude could tolerate more that a female newcomer had never known
of her, leaving her mother Jukundi tangle of their catch and in a
polite, quick chat.

But she found the course of it quickly to seize the opportunity, the hand of the lady and fixed
in a cordial tone communicate, they feel forced to express their joy that they such a true
Stauffacher internal shape've met!

Was expected at any moment, they crest of a- and to see prominent opposition adorned Schwyzer
home and how it comforting hand on the shoulder of the troubled marriage Lord lay!

While Mrs. Glor of Schwanau pleasing blushed, in turn frightened woman Meyenthal as During her speech,
her eyes flew over the beautiful daughter Justine who stood by and they saw whose sweet smile,
which was that of her son, exactly the same shade of silent longing mixed as his own.

Meyenthal woman was frightened by this wonderful world of nature, this distinctive expression
of the will of fate, and this apparent fact at all, especially as
Justine, who face the Mother of the standard-bearer appeared known
and trusted, not for a moment doubted whom she had before him when
she heard her name and origin, and therefore a brief unguarded While
very pleased with the smile in her eyes was hanging.

As the sun went down, they illumined the three tall female figures, which moves strangely from the
love of self or the love and concern for others, stood together on
the mountain top and seemed to float somewhat confused apart.

The mother took Jukundi in any event, the fastest by the same evening their Son wrote that
he should visit in a week, after a few days' stay return home with her to. Against the women of
Schwanau they did then, as if they do not would encounter on the
idea of ​​the singer driving, and the woman remembered the Gertrud
Hardly matter and had not seen the pretty standard-bearer at the time,
because they Catering mostly because of the inside of a garden house
was left.

Only Justine was caught and in trouble, they did not dare to make
new friends after the son of ask, and yet she did not even like him
absolutely nothing from the hard experiences and should have told
of their home.

Meyenthal woman wanted, however, that the young people entirely unexpected, and unexpectedly saw
back and held back, therefore, without the opportunity to miss, however, conquer the old Stauffacherin
more than a stone in the board by intelligent behavior. Because you could sense that already
call the old Stauffacherin as the beautiful, good Justine life in its fullest flower stand
and she lacked for nothing Dignity and exercise their own Stauffachertums, as a standing in
for the fate of the country concerned Husband.

That such was not already there, was in the strange fortunes, which just excellent Young women
are so often years, by reason of the apparent cold, for which their noble Peace is maintained,
because the jealous guard, that they enjoy on the part of yours, and, above all, by respecting the
right major, they possess only the voice of the heart must be ensured.

But at last a beautiful evening came over the mountains, and with it arrived Jocundus, namely,
because he came from a camp and just had to go back to another, in military dress, with some red
and some gold on dark clothes.

After he had sufficiently refreshed and chatted with the mother, he was walking innocently with her and
she guided the way to where she knew the two swan Auer Interior, through the woods on a lonely
cliff, was fitted with seats and handrails, high above a valley depths blue border.

The sudden happiness of two young people who are in the unexpected
reunion on their faces showed the same homogeneity and the peculiar
childlike Smile that accompanied them were, so all ideas and expectations
of even the mother Meyenthal that of art and by playing a role in
her speech could not be more, she was just happy, so calm and collected
as possible to watch the things.

Gertrud but turned astonished eyes off the children and directed their attention more of a
face to the other. Last lay down but the gentle waves of the general without agitation for a
relaxing and very pleasant chatter and chirping which rose over the moon, in the depths of the valleys
have been hidden streams and ponds illumined, that they come shining
like gold stars.

Gertrud Glor felt a kind of rapture, as if they own-lost youth happiness re-experienced, and
took Mama Meyenthal to the arm than on the way to the Kurhaus, the children side by side and
alternately chatted preceded or were silent.

Mrs. Meyenthal turn was moved and affected by the importance of the fact and uniformly in both
children love and concern both in how it would end now.

At the dinner table, the happy mood may increase, as often happens, when a beautiful Swept hope
the parties concerned and confidants alive and exhausted, the secret
to safely bask in the general merriment.

Gertrud Glor drank a little with Spitzchen Jocundus out of sheer pleasure in his good and great
attitude, and when going to sleep she embraced her daughter and some serious Tears in the
mother lay down collar, like a sour tribute money saved, there was
they wonder at all, but stroked the child sympathetic cheeks.

But hardly the Spitzchen was barely slept all that is done soon after
midnight since it had only been small, as befits a Stauffacherin,
they watched anxiously up and looked at the damage the rest of the
night, while Justine not slept and probably realized that the mother
woke up.

But she kept quiet as mice and was only happy that they lost no time sleeping and was constantly
thinking about the matter.

The mother, however, it was with the growing dawn more clearly that's
impossible should marry a man from Seldwyla in the family, from the
place in which never a come up with a green branch is and where no
one possesses something.

She woke with concern, therefore, but also with determination towards the East to the evils
resulting in the making of suffocation, that it appeared all the greater if they have the
strict attitude of the men of her house thought on this point.

Encouraged, she was still in these resolutions, as at the time of
sunrise a late People sleep, apparently drunk, approached the stairs
and went to a house staff the various doors were bypassed, not before
the one without the Glorschen to stumble over their shoes and women
the same wegzuschleudern with her foot.

The shoes Mum drove one überzwerch, the other in front with the rear part, the entire corridor along,
and the boots of the daughter, however, traveled as a result of shuffling backward shock Betting
as two-propelled shuttles to the stairs and down the same.

"Ah," cried inside the vigilant woman, "because we have the Seldwylers!"

And her heart was already easier in time of these revelations.

Justin was sitting upright in her bed already, and listened with anxious tension; when she heard
a few words of Hinwandelnden outside, she called in turn facilitated yes with sinful pleasure:

"It
is not the main man! It's our Rudolf, judging by the voice! "

The mother looked surprised to search for the daughter and said, almost
angrily: "Are you completely mad?

How should our Rudolf come here and at this hour?

And since when the drunk stumbles around in the guest houses?

And he is now not just far away in a military exercise? "

It was but the younger son of the eyeball and Gertrude, who has just
gone to bed on the high mountains.

It was late at night or with a guide piece arrived, exhausted and apparently loaded with a grief.
He wore the military uniform and was just about his weapons of place
hergeflüchtet, where he had been asked by another officer whom he
had offended.

Since he is more on the books and the exchange list, understood as a duel on matters and a young
woman with two small child and had felt oppressed, so he had to think
taken and was quickly running hither to pull his mother to rate how
he behaved should.

In the dining room he had taken the Jocundus, who, like verspürend no sleeping in pleasant reverie
another hour verwachte alone.

The common path of war on which they walked, forced the two men to greet each other and to open a conversation,
as the lieutenant Glor sat down at the table to still take a dinner.

Because he recently heard from the good reputation, in which the Captain Meyenthal in military
circles was already, like now, he renewed his Acquaintance, and felt
the same confidence attracted to him.

Of some glasses Wine which he drank in his excitement quickly carried away, he told the Jocundus
soon its trade and how he had now come, his mother, namely that a true Stauffacherin must
be called and for all own a piece of advice to ask their opinion.

Jocundus but gave him the advice not to do that if he did not trade would worsen. He explained
to him how, after the once-prevailing view in such matters, he Risk of being an officer to be
impossible, it would soon leaked out that his duel Affairs entrust to the mother and follow their instructions.

Since
Mr. Rudolf sank into new grief, for he wanted no means vernünftigermaßen
, Obvious why he should die off because of such stupid things for
women and children.

Jocundus asked him now about the actual nature of the dispute, and what had happened?

Rudolf had played with three other warriors a game of cards. After finishing a tour had played
in which his partner does not wish to Rudolf, was the course, while
the cards were given new, criticized and subject to the conjugation
of the current Time.

So I play this, it was you and that now he has to play like this
and not so, and I would then keep him and the play, what are you going
to play again that which is But clearly, if we want to win.

No, it is not clear that Rudolph had replied partners but I sting at first and then play the trump
that.

"Then you play like a donkey!" Rudolf had called, immediately after which a general awakening
and takes place the next morning, the claim was in so solemn and harsher form that the good
young man had simply can not take the time to explain satisfactions way.

As Jocundus smiled at this story and learned even the name of the claim, said He: "So, the! Now
the name of God must in all years can a debt from the stack so His honor is not moldy! But
yours, sir, requires, however, that You put your life because of
this incident is not at risk and therefore declare the opponent simply
that he would not have played like a donkey, but in any other property,
which he preferred!



The pirates here made a desperate stand; but the British seamen, again rushing on, cut down
numbers with their hangers.  Just then the house burst out into flames, and, surrounded by
smoke, Deane could not be distinguished from the pirates who stood on the other side of him.
Two or three seamen were on the point of cutting him down, when their officer interposed his sword.

"Hold, lads!" he shouted; "as I live, there is my friend John Deane, and protecting a lady too!"

This timely exclamation saved Deane's life.  He had no time, however, to exchange greetings
with the officer, whom he recognised as the captain of his own ship, as the latter had to lead
on his men in pursuit of the flying pirates.  The good dame now entreated him to look for her
husband; but he remembered that after the commencement of the fight he had nowhere seen him.
What had become of him he could not tell, and all he could do was to assure her he had not
seen him fall.  Jack was anxious to convey her to the boats that she might be carried on board
and placed in safety; but just as he was leaving the village Captain Davis returned, saying
that all the pirates to be found had been killed or made prisoners.

"I am thankful, indeed, to hear it, Captain Davis," said Deane.  "And now I will ask you to
assist me in conveying this lady on board."

"Captain Davis!" exclaimed Mistress Pearson.  "Let me see you, sir. That was my maiden name;
and I had a brother who went to sea, from whom I have been parted for many long years.  Can
you be Richard Davis, the youngest son of Colonel Davis of Knowle Park?"

"Yes, indeed, I am, madame," answered the Captain, coming up to her.  "I was one of a numerous
family, all of whom, to the best of my belief, have long since been dead."

"One of them is still alive," answered Mistress Pearson, "though a most unhappy woman.  Do
you not remember your sister Maria?  Come, let me gaze on your countenance, for my heart tells
me that in you I shall find one of my brothers.  Yes, yes, I recognise your features! though
I scarcely could expect you to know mine, so sadly changed as they must be."

She had taken the captain's hand, and gazed into his face as she spoke.

"No, I should not remember you," he answered; "but yet I remember the voice of the kind sister
who was always ready to suffer for the sake of her wild brothers.  Yes, Maria, I know that
you are my sister, and I am thankful that I have been the means of rescuing you from this place.
How you came here you must tell me by and by.  And now I would wish you to go at once on board
the frigate, under the charge of Mr Deane, while we make a further search round the island
for any fugitives who may have concealed themselves."

Mistress Pearson trembled as her brother spoke these words.

"There is one for whom I would intercede," she said.  "Mr Deane will tell you about him.  He
has ever been a kind husband to me, and never till lately did I suspect his occupations.  If
he has escaped death, let me entreat you not to hunt him down, and I feel sure that he will
turn to some nobler course, where he will redeem the crimes he has committed."

Captain Davis very wisely made no answer to this appeal; but directed Deane, with a party of
the seamen as a guard, to convey his new-found sister down to the boats, and to place her at
once on board the frigate. He, meantime, having collected his men, commenced a further search
for the pirates, some of whom, he was convinced, must have concealed themselves.  The day was
thus spent, though with no further success, and as night was coming on, a large party being
placed on board the captured ships, the remainder returned in the boats to the vessels outside.
The next day the search was continued; but no signs were discovered of the chief and other
officers and men who were supposed to have escaped with him.  The numerous prizes were carried
out of the harbour, while all the huts, and storehouses, and other buildings were set on fire
and destroyed, so that in a short time the whole island was reduced to that state of desolation
in which the pirates had found it.

While the rest of the squadron returned to Jamaica, one vessel was left to cruise off the island,
on the chance of Pearson and his followers, should they have been concealed on it, attempting
to make their escape. When Jack arrived on board the "Venus," he found the two young midshipmen,
Hawke and Lovatt, and the old quarter-master Burridge, who welcomed him warmly.  They told
him that they had managed to make their escape exactly as they had proposed while the buccaneers
were carousing; and had, fortunately, fallen in with the squadron which had been despatched
on purpose to try and discover their haunts.

CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

SIR GEORGE HOOKE TAKES THE SPANISH GALLEONS IN VIGO BAY.

Elizabeth's joy at seeing Mistress Pearson was very great; and she did her utmost to comfort
her in her affliction, aided by Captain Davis and Deane.  As soon as they arrived at Port Royal,
Captain Davis took a house for her on shore, where she and Elizabeth went to reside till a
plan for their future proceedings could be arranged.  Deane immediately wrote to Monsieur de
Mertens, and told him of his recovery of his daughter, saying that she was still with her kind
guardian, in whose company he hoped that he should, without delay, be able to escort her to
England.

In those days the climate of the West Indies was as dangerous to Europeans as at the present,
and ships seldom remained long on the station without losing many of their officers and men.
The honest old Admiral Benbow was still alive, although rapidly sinking from the effects of
his wounds and his annoyance at the conduct of his officers in the action with the French.
Hearing of Jack's conduct, he appointed him second lieutenant of the "Ruby," in the place of
an officer who had died.  He was sorry to leave Captain Davis, especially as he expected now
to have fewer opportunities of meeting Elizabeth.  He had, however, the consolation to know
that Captain Davis expected immediately to be sent home, and proposed taking his sister and
Elizabeth with him.  John Deane met with no adventures worth recording during his next cruise.

On the return of the "Ruby" to Port Royal, our hero found that the "Venus" had already sailed,
and his ship was shortly afterwards also ordered home.  On reaching England, he was immediately
appointed to the "Lennox," of seventy guns, commanded by his old friend Captain Jumper. She
formed one of the squadron under Admiral Sir George Rooke just on the point of sailing for
the coast of Spain.  Being unable to obtain leave of absence, he wrote to Nottingham and Norwich;
but before he received answers to his letters his ship put to sea.  Sir George Rooke had his
flag flying on board the "Royal Sovereign."

On board the fleet were a large number of troops, under the command of the Duke of Ormond.
On the 12th August they anchored before the harbour of Cadiz next day the Duke of Ormond sent
in a trumpeter with a letter requiring the governor to surrender.  The brave governor replied
that as he had been appointed to the command of the place by his lawful sovereign, he would
not yield it up as long as he could hold it.  On the 15th the Duke of Ormond therefore landed
with the troops, and in a few days took possession of the forts of Saint Katharine and Saint
Mary.  It being found difficult to approach Cadiz while the Spaniards were in possession of
Matagorda Fort, an assault was ordered.  The Spaniards defended the place bravely, and it was
found that the English force was far too small to hope for success.  The troops were therefore
re-embarked with the intention of returning home.  Soon after this, while the fleet was off
the coast of Portugal, Captain Hardy of the "Pembroke" brought the intelligence that the galleons
from the West Indies had put into Vigo Bay, under convoy of a French squadron.  Sir George
Rooke immediately called a council of war, and it was resolved to make an attack at once on
the enemy in the port of Vigo.  A strong gale of wind, however, drove the fleet to the north
of Cape Finisterre, which prevented their getting off Vigo before the 11th of October.  The
passage into the harbour was extremely narrow, and well defended by batteries on both sides.
Across the entrance a strong boom also was laid, at each end of which was moored with chains
a seventy-four-gun ship.  Nearer the boom were laid, also moored, five ships, each carrying
sixty to seventy guns, with their broadsides to the sea to defend the passage.  The shoals
and sand-banks, and the shallowness of the water within the harbour, made it dangerous for
ships of the first and second rates to enter without a leading wind.

Notwithstanding the strong force opposed to them and the batteries on either side of the harbour,
the English admirals resolved to attempt the capture of the galleons, and it being considered
impossible for the larger ships to get up the harbour, they shifted their flags on board smaller
vessels.  A boat was then despatched up the harbour to gain intelligence respecting the disposition
of the French and Spanish ships. The frigates and the bomb-vessels were directed to follow
this detachment, and the larger ships were to proceed in afterwards, should their assistance
be found necessary.  It was arranged that the troops should at the same time land and attack
the forts on either side of the harbour.  Vice-Admiral Hopson was ordered to lead the van,
followed by Vice-Admiral Vandergoes, Sir George Rooke commanded the centre division, and Rear-Admiral
Graydon brought up the rear.  Sir George Rooke spent the greater part of the night going from
ship to ship in his own boat to ascertain that each captain understood clearly the plan of
the attack and the part he was to take in it.

The following morning, the 12th of October, the squadron got under weigh and stood in for the
harbour.  Great was the disappointment of all on board, when just as the van division had almost
reached within gunshot of the batteries the wind died away, and it was necessary to anchor.
A strong breeze, however, shortly afterwards sprang up, when Vice-Admiral Hopson, in the "Torbay,"
cutting his cable, crowded every sail his ship could carry and bore down upon the boom.  The
velocity gained by the ship gave her such power that the boom was snapped in two, and the "Torbay"
was instantly placed between the two French line-of-battle ships, the "Bourbon" and "Esperance."
These two ships immediately opened a desperate fire upon the "Torbay," which gallantly replied
to them, though most of her men were falling, killed and wounded from the fierce fire to which
she was exposed.  Scarcely had the breeze carried her into this post of danger, than it again
fell, and the other ships of the squadron had considerable difficulty in following her.  While
they were endeavouring to get up the harbour, a fire-ship was seen descending directly for
the "Torbay."  On it came.  The destruction of the "Torbay" seemed inevitable.  Now the flames
burst out on either side from the fire-ship.  The brave crew of the "Torbay" instantly lowered
their boats for the purpose of towing her off, but two of the boats were struck and swamped,
and many of those in them were drowned before help could be rendered by those on board.  Just
as the flames seemed about to catch the "Torbay" they suddenly decreased, and were deadened.
It seemed almost like a miracle; but when the men afterwards examined the fire-ship, she was
found to be loaded with snuff, which immediately the fire reached it completely deadened the
flames.

While this event was taking place, Vice-Admiral Vandergoes and the rest of the squadron made
their way through the passage which the brave Hopson had opened up, and directed their fire
upon the "Bourbon," which in a short time was captured.  The "Torbay," however, suffered very
severely, losing a hundred and fifteen men killed and drowned, besides many wounded, including
among the latter Captain Moody, her brave captain.  While the troops were advancing, Captain
Beckenham in the "Association," of ninety guns, laid his broadside against a battery of seventeen
guns on the left side of the harbour, and Captain Wyvill in the "Barfleur" was sent to batter
the fort on the other side, while there was a considerable firing from great guns and small-arms
on both sides.  The other ships defending the harbour were now attacked.  They replied to the
fire of the English with considerable vigour, though they in vain attempted to resist their
advance.  Meantime the Duke of Ormond had landed in a sandy bay about two leagues distant from
Vigo.  His Grace, meeting with no opposition, ordered the grenadiers, under Lord Shannon and
Colonel Pierce, to march directly to the forts which guarded the entrance to the harbour where
the boom lay.  This they executed with much courage and alacrity, and so furious was their
attack, that they soon made themselves masters of this important fort.  The Duke himself, at
the head of the rest of the forces, in the meantime marched on foot over craggy mountains to
support the first detachment.  As they advanced, they saw before them about eight thousand
Spaniards prepared apparently to contest their advance between the fort and the hills. These,
however, only engaged in a little skirmishing at a distance, and as the grenadiers advanced
they retired.  The batteries having been taken, the enemy retreated into an old tower, or stone
castle.  From thence, for some time, they fired briskly upon the English.  It was said that
there were nearly twenty thousand French and Spanish troops in and about Vigo at that time;
but, undaunted by the superiority of the enemy, the British troops pushed on.  They plied the
defenders of the tower so warmly with their grenadoes, and pelted them so sharply with their
fusees that they soon made the place too hot for them.  Finding this, Monsieur de Sorel, the
valiant captain of a French man-of-war, who commanded in the fort, having encouraged his men
to make a daring push for their lives, opened the gates, intending to force his way through
the English, sword in hand.  The grenadiers, however, rushed immediately into the castle, made
themselves masters of it, and took nearly three hundred French seamen and fifty Spaniards,
with their officers, prisoners at discretion.  A small party of the enemy endeavoured to make
their escape through the water, but were stopped by a detachment of the Dutch.  As soon as
this was done, the boats of the squadron pushed up the harbour to take possession of the galleons.
The French admiral, however, finding that all hope of defending the place was gone, gave orders
for setting the shipping on fire.  Before these orders could be executed, a considerable number
of the ships were taken possession of by the boats.  Besides seventeen ships, carrying between
them nine hundred and sixty guns, destroyed or captured by the English and Dutch, three Spanish
men-of-war, carrying a hundred and seventy-eight guns, were destroyed, and fifteen galleons
were found there.  Four of them were taken by the English, five by the Dutch, and four destroyed.

The brave Admirals Rooke, Hopson, and Vandergoes, were still furiously attacking the French
ships placed across the harbour behind the boom. Suddenly flames were seen to burst forth from
the French admiral's ship. This was soon discovered to be done on purpose, for immediately
afterwards they burst forth from the other French ships, from which boats were at the same
time seen putting off towards the shore.  The French admiral, indeed, finding that the forts
were in the hands of his victorious enemies, his fire-ship spent in vain, the "Bourbon" captured,
the boom cut, and the confederate fleet pouring in upon him, so that the battle was lost, hoped
by burning his ships to prevent their falling into their hands.  The order he issued, however,
was not punctually obeyed, in consequence of the haste of the French to get on shore. Immediately
this was perceived, the boats of the squadron were ordered in to take possession of the galleons.
John Deane found himself in one of the leading boats.  Onward they dashed, amid the burning
ships.  On one side the "Torbay" lay with her fore-top-mast shot away, her sails burnt and
scorched, her fore-yard burnt to a coal, and her larboard shrouds, fore and aft, burned to
the deadeyes, so that indeed it appeared surprising that she had not been burned altogether.
The leading boats dashed alongside some of the largest ships, which were so imperfectly set
on fire that the confederates were enabled to extinguish the flames before they had spread
far.  They then pulled, as fast as they could bend to their oars, up the harbour towards the
galleons which lay at the farther end.  Every man had heard of the vast amount of wealth reputed
to be on board these vessels, and all were eager to capture them, therefore, before they were
destroyed by the enemy. Already flames were bursting out from some of them, and the French
and Spanish boats were alongside, preparing for their destruction.  The Dutch and English joined
each other in the race.  They rowed past the town, which the British troops, having captured
the forts, were already entering.  Now the boats got alongside the long-looked-for galleons.
Already some were in flames, which had extended too far to allow of their being extinguished,
but many others were saved.  So rapid had been the movements of the allies, that the Spaniards
had not had time to remove the cargoes of several of the galleons.  These were in truth real
prizes, and the wealth found on board them stimulated the crews of the boats to make desperate
attempts to save the rest.  Several, however, just as the flotilla approached them, went down
at their anchors, but altogether the larger number were saved.

Great was the disappointment of the allies when they found that the Spaniards had landed the
larger portion of the money with which the galleons had been freighted.  Seldom, however, has
a naval expedition been more judiciously planned and more completely carried out.  This glorious
and memorable victory, too, was obtained with a very inconsiderable loss on the side of the
British; for, with the exception of the loss on board Vice-Admiral Hopson's ship, as already
described, very few seamen were either killed or wounded, nor did the ships receive more than
a slight damage.  Of the land forces, two lieutenants and about forty rank and file were killed,
and five officers and about thirty men wounded.  Of the French, about four hundred officers
and men were taken prisoners, among whom was the Spanish Admiral Don Joseph Checon, several
French captains, and other officers of note.

The result of this victory was a vast booty, both of plate and other things, the value of which
cannot well be computed.  The rest was either taken or left in the galleons that were burned
and sunk.  The goods were valued also at twenty millions of pieces of eight, one fourth part
of which was saved by the Spaniards, nearly two parts destroyed, and the other fourth taken
by the confederates.  Besides the property already mentioned, there was a great deal of plate
and goods on board belonging to private persons, most of which was taken or lost.

The prize-money which thus fell to John Deane's share was very considerable, and it induced
him to begin setting up a castle in the air, which he hoped to commence in a more substantial
manner on his return to England, as he expected by the time he should get there to find Elizabeth
restored to her parents, as he had left with her and Captain Davis full directions by which
they could be found.

One thing most remarkable with regard to this victory, was not only the courage and sagacity
of Sir George Rooke and the other admirals, but their readiness to sacrifice themselves and
to risk their safety to ensure the success of the undertaking.  This was shown by the way in
which they left their large ships and placed themselves on board the smaller ones, as also
by their leading the way into the midst of the enemy, strongly posted as they were.  Great
credit was also due to the land forces, for the mode in which they co-operated with the navy.
Scarcely had the action concluded, when Sir Cloudesley Shovel with a large squadron hove in
sight.  The Duke of Ormond proposed to keep possession of Vigo for Don Carlos, considering
it a safe place for the army to take up their quarters in, having a naval force to assist them.
Sir George Rooke, however, thought that it was necessary to return home for want of stores
and provisions.  He left, therefore, Sir Cloudesley Shovel, to whom was entrusted the task
of fitting out the prizes.  He succeeded also in rescuing a large portion of treasure from
the sunken galleons, and he recovered the "Dartmouth," an English fifty-gun ship which had
been captured in the previous war.  He also took out of some of the French ships lying aground
partially destroyed, fifty brass guns and about sixty from the shore, and before sailing from
the port he completed the destruction of every ship that he could not bring away.

The importance of this success was very great, as not only did the Spaniards suffer a heavy
loss, but the naval power of France was considerably crippled by it, nor indeed did she during
the war recover from its effects.  Jack remained with the fleet under Sir Cloudesley Shovel.
All hands were busily employed in fitting out the captured ships and preparing them for sea.
At length, in a week, all those fit for sea were got ready, when the rest, amounting to a considerable
number, were set on fire, and the squadron, as the flames bursting fiercely forth sent them
to the bottom, sailed away down the harbour.

On the 25th of October Sir Cloudesley got clear of Vigo, but it proving calm, he anchored in
the channel in the port of Bayonne, where, with a flag of truce, he sent several prisoners
on shore, receiving some English who had been captured by the Spaniards.  The next day he got
under sail again, with the intention of going through the north channel, but the wind taking
him short, he was obliged to drop anchor.  Here a galleon, a prize to the "Monmouth," struck
upon a sunken rock. Immediately the water rushed into her, and before it could be pumped out
she foundered.  Fortunately several frigates were on each side of her, and their boats putting
off, all her crew were saved, with the exception of two who were below.  The same day the fleet
was joined by the "Dragon," a fifty-gun ship lately commanded by Captain Holyman.  One of the
officers came on board and gave an account of an engagement she had just had with a French
man-of-war of seventy guns.  In spite of the vast superiority of the enemy, Captain Holyman
defended his ship with the greatest resolution.  His crew worked their guns in a way British
seamen have ever known how to do when alongside an enemy.  At length the captain was killed,
when his First Lieutenant, Fotherby, continued the defence, urging his men not to strike as
long as they had a cartridge remaining and a shot in the locker.  At length, although themselves
greatly crippled, they had the satisfaction of seeing the enemy brace up her yards and stand
away. They read the most serious
Books and led a confused conversation about it, they played their theater the Faust and Wallenstein,
Hamlet, Lear and Nathan, they made difficult Concerts and read aloud dreadful essays, short, there
was nothing to which they dared not move.

Of these, brought back the love viggi Störteler for education and literacy for Seldwyla; virtue
of this inclination, but he felt too well the habits and customs of his fellow citizens to share, but
he acquired books, subscribed to all lending libraries and reading groups the capital held,
the "gazebo" and signed on all deliveries in appeared, as there is a continuous, well distributed
program was offered. He held In his home life and his circumstances at the same time keep
them from harm. If his Day management carried out cheerfully and carefully, so he lit his pipe,
extended the nose and sat down behind his reading material, in which he drove around with great agility.
But he went further. Soon, he wrote several papers, which he and his wife as "essays" called,
and he often said that he believed he was an essayist for its investment. But when his essays from
the journals to which he sent them were not printed, he began to write novels, which he called "Kurt
the Grove" for all possible Sunday Papers instradierte. Here it was better for him, things seemed
really solemn under the wonderful pen-name in different parts of the German Empire, and soon began
Roderich here from the valley, there a Hugo from the island and there again a to feel goose from
the meadow a sharp pain on the new intruder. He also competed in all secretly advertised price
novellas and thereby increased not the pleasant little emotion of his recovered life. Revival,
he won always be shorter or longer business trips, where he then some in the inns Disposition
relatives met which could be used to speak a word formed, the visit the friendly little room
editorial in the various provinces granted in addition to the trading activities an educated
recovery, although this cost here and there a bottle of wine.

A major event he celebrated one day to the evening's host table in
an average German City, on which sat together with some old regulars
of the place, several young travelers.

The dignified old men with white hair, a leisurely conversation led to all sorts of writing, speaking
of Cervantes, Rabelais, Sterne and Jean Paul and Goethe and Tieck, and praised the stimulus,
which interfere with the composition and the style secrets, grant without the joy may be affected in
the pre-bear. They placed inlets Comparisons, and searched the red thread running through all
'like going through it, and soon she laughed amicably about any memory, sometimes they enjoyed
with a straight face a new-found beauty, all without noise and heat, and finally, after the one
his tea drunk, the others are empty Schöppchen, they knocked the long From clay pipes and went
to something gouty feet to their night's sleep. Only one set be ignored in a corner to still read
the newspaper and drink a glass of punch.

Now, however, developed among the younger guests, who had been sitting there listening, the call.
One started with a sarcastic remark about the old-fashioned entertainment
these ancients, who certainly played forty years ago even the wits
of this nest had.

This remark was taken lively, and by a word the other was developed But once a discussion of fiction
in nature, but of quite different kind From the barred Old items that they knew not much to report,
as this and that out of print Buzz bad literary history, however, developed the most extensive
and accurate knowledge of the daily emerging phenomena of lighter nature or any the person and little
person, which refer to the thousands of gray leaves every hour on beautiful Name romp around. It
soon became apparent that this was not ignorant of those old court councils and scholar, but
people from the craft were. Because it was not long before heard you only have the words fee,
publishers, clique, coterie, and what more the wrath of such People excited and engaged his
imagination. Even rang and buzzed it, as if eight p.m. People speak, blink mastered the treacherous
little eyes and a glorious general recognition was inevitable any longer. Since debunked this as
Guido of jet home, as those Oskar North Star, a third as Lloyd from the sea. Since viggi hesitated
no longer, the yet little is said, and did it with some diffidence initiate that he, as Kurt
was recognized by the forest. He was known by all, and he also knew all, for these Men who
could not read a good book for decades, devouring everything from their kind, came on the spot,
looking it up in all the coffee stalls and not, from participation, but from a peculiar vigilance.

Are
you Kurt the Grove? It was booming, ha! welcome! And now, several bottles a spurious inexpensive
and acidic wine ordered the cheapest under seal, of the house was, and it raised only to a vigorous
life. The next step was to show that you on the hair Have teeth! All the men who brought it
to some success and at this moment Hundreds of miles away may have slept the sleep of the
just, were most thoroughly demolished, everyone wanted the most accurate news of their doings
have been no outrage there, which was not attributed to them, and
refrain from any was finally an end should be dry: it is the way a
Jew!

What is in the choir as well dry said: Yes, he should be a Jew!

Viggi Störteler rubbed his enchanted hands and thought: "There you are again in front of the
right Mill come! A writer among writers! Ei! what kind of grated spirits are! Which understanding
and what moral anger! "

was that night and the sulfur wine now, in order to help the poor world from office and bring
a new dawn, the formal and solemn foundation of a "new Sturm und Drang period, "decided, with
full intention and plan execution to that of fermentation to produce
artificial, resulting from which alone the classics of the new age
would.

However, when she made this huge dispute, they could not continue,
but reduced soon their heads, and had to find the camp, for not even
the prophets suffered good, much bad wine and lost any small riot
with high attenuation and nausea.

When they were gone, "said the old gentleman, who had remained behind and greatly delight in the activities,
had the waiter, what would they?

"Two of them," said the latter, 'Are business travelers, a gentleman and a gentleman Störteler
Huberle; is the third ruler Stralauer, but only the fourth mark, I detail who calls himself
a doctor has Mewes and past Winter few weeks here stopped. He was in the ballroom at the blue pike,
where I was was, lectures on German literature, which he copied verbatim
from a book.

The same had from any library to have been stolen, to judge by the cover, and was full of dog-eared,
ink and oil stains. Besides this book he still had a disheveled Guide to French conversation and
a game of cards with obscene images in it when it was up to the light. He used that book in bed to
tender to the heating to save, as he finally spilled the inkstand over quilt and sheet, and
as him to put a fair compensation in the bill, he threatened, the blue pike in his Writings
and 'feature pages' to bring into disrepute. Otherwise it will all sorts of nasty habits had on
him, he was finally taken out of the house. He writes the way, under the name of Lloyd from
the sea, all kinds of sweet and fake things. "

"What the devil," said the old man, "You know how a man of the trade to talk about these things
Master George, "The waiter blushed, hesitated a little and then said," I will confess, that I
was even half years writers! "-"! egg of thousands, "said the Old, "and what have you got written"
- "I know little to report thoroughly," went that continues, "I was waiter in a cafe, where
a number of people from the genus today's guests stayed almost all day. That was around, strolled,
grumbled, rummaged through the papers, was angry over someone else's
happiness, was delighted with foreign disaster and was occasionally
home to the biggest folly quickly to lubricate a dozen pages; for
since they had learned nothing, so we also had no idea of ​​any responsibility.

I soon became a confidant of these gentlemen, her life seemed to me my subservient position far
preferable, and I was also a writer. hid on my bedroom I have a well-thumbed pack numbers of French
newspapers, which I in the different Collected economies, where I had served earlier, originally,
to me is a little hineinzubuchstabieren in the language, as befits a young waiter. For these missing
Leaves I translated a mishmash of stories and gossip of all kinds, including on Personalities,
which I did not know in the least. kept from knowing the German language I not only more often,
the French word and sentence structure, but also all possible Gallicisms at, and the twaddle which
I added from my own brain, I wrote also in this gibberish, which I thought was really a writer. When
I was a had greased paper book in this way, I confided to it as an original work of my Gentlemen and friends,
and behold, they took it forward with all the cheering and knew it immediately be transported
to the pressure. There is something peculiar about the poor scribes. Although they are incompatible
and hateful people in the world, they nevertheless an invincible inclination to come together
and grow into the bulk, so to speak in order to exert a mechanical pressure to the upper layer.
My book was immediately when the proclaimed to be observed very first work of a clever young author,
who sharpness of the German ruling associate with French elegance, which is more probably years
of its Stay in Paris due. I was in fact in fact half a year in this city a German restaurant owner
was. Since under the translated witness several spicy, but forgotten Anecdotes, so they circulated,
under the command of my book, at once through a lot of leaves. I was on the cover of George d'Esan,
which is a reversal of my honest George is called the nose, called. Now it was everywhere: George
Desan in his interesting book tells of the following train or by that, and I became so inflated
and bold, I ran away to the beaten track without further delay, like a downed Cannonball. "

"But
the devil," said the old man now, "what you had for it is only for writing material? You could
but not always by your pack of old newspapers consume? "

"No! I just had no substance as it were, the letter itself As I ink in the Spring was, I wrote
about this ink. I wrote that I am hardly a writer appointed saw on the dignity, the obligations,
rights and needs of the writer object, about the necessity of its holding together against the other
classes, I wrote about the word writer himself, ignorant that it is a genuine German and old
word, and wore on to its abolition, while I others, as I said, much more intelligent and more correct
Hatched and suggested names for consideration, such as Schriftner, Dinterich, writing man Buchner,
feather artists, book Master and so on. I also pushed for unification of all writers, to achieve
to ensure a beautiful and safe livelihood for each participant, in short, I suggested with all
this nonsense of a major dust and was for a time a devil among the other lubricating Petern.
Anything and everything, we moved to our Question and kept returning to the 'interests' of
the writing.

I wrote, I though the company was unbelesenste of the world, exclusively on writers, without knowing
their character from their own experience, composed 'an hour at X.'
or 'a visit to N.', or 'an encounter with Father', or 'an evening
at the Q.' and the like more, which I endowed with all wisdom unspeakable
nose, cheek and childishness.

Moreover, I operate an enterprising industry with so-called 'Reported' to all corners of out,
as I spread all sorts Neuigkeitskram and gossip. If nothing out of the Presence was there,
I translated the Sesenheimer idyll probably for the twentieth time from Goethe's beautiful language
in my church jargon, and sent them as new research in any angle leaves. I also drew from well-known
authors such agents through which they had spoken little lately, at least not to my knowledge,
and left them with some silly comments go around as a discovery. Or I probably wrote a very ties have
come out a letter, a poem and set it as the hand-written message in circulation, and I always had the
satisfaction of the thing cheerfully circulate through the whole press to see. In particular, the poet
Heine gave me the most awesome food, I thrived on its Bedside formally as the carrot in the hotbeds.
"

"But you are always been an arrant scoundrel," cried the old gentleman with astonishment, and
Master George replied: "I was not a scoundrel, but just a poor wretch, which his Kellner habits
in an activity and transferred into conditions of which he neither moral or an immoral, but
had no idea. Moreover brought my Process a real damage to anyone. "

"And how are you ready to come because of the good life again," asked the old man.
  In the meantime, however, Captain Jumper, who saw
what was necessary to be done, and Captain Hicks, who both lay next the Mole, had pushed on
shore with their pinnaces and some other boats before the rest could come up.  John Deane and
two other lieutenants accompanied their captain.  They, rushing forward as British seamen always
will do when led by their officers, took possession of the fort with great bravery, but not
without sustaining a considerable loss. As they, with swords and pistols in their hands, were
rushing on, suddenly a fearful noise was heard.  The earth seemed to lift up beneath their
feet, and forty men and two lieutenants were carried up, fearfully burned and shattered.  The
survivors, among whom was John Deane, undaunted by this disaster, fought their way on and took
possession of the grand platform, where they remained until reinforced by a body of seamen
who had come in the boats under Captain Whitaker.  The whole body then advanced and took a
redoubt half-way between the Mole and the town, possessing themselves also of many of the enemy's
cannon.  The admiral then sent in a letter to the governor, and at the same time a message
to the Prince of Hesse, directing him to send a peremptory summons, which His Highness accordingly
did.

While this was taking place, John Deane, who had previously surveyed the rock, got leave from
Captain Juniper to lead a body of men up a part of the cliff which the Spaniards had never
thought it possible any human beings could climb.  Deane, however, had often scrambled over
the nearly perpendicular rock on which Nottingham Castle stands, and up its old rugged towers
which yet remain.  He had no lack of volunteers, with two or three midshipmen, ready to accompany
him.  Stealing away unperceived by the enemy, they got to the foot of the cliff.  With their
pistols in their belts and swords between their teeth they commenced the perilous ascent. 
Many who saw them thought they would never succeed, but they had resolved to persevere.  Slowly
but surely they proceeded up, hanging on by each craggy projection, aided by the shrubs which
here and there grew from between the crevices of the rock.  At length, when one after the other
they reached the summit, they saw before them a chapel filled with women, with a vast number
of others coming in and going out of it. These poor creatures had come out of the town, prompted
by their superstitious notions, to implore the protection of the Virgin, to whom the chapel
was dedicated.  Jack and his followers, springing forward, threw themselves between the chapel
and the road which led to the town. By gestures more than by words, he endeavoured to persuade
the frightened matrons and damsels that he and his followers would do them no harm.  With difficulty,
however, he could make them understand this, though he signified by signs that they were all
to get inside the chapel again.  Their fears were somewhat overcome when they found that no
insult was offered to any of them.  He allowed, however, one of them to go back into the town
to inform the governor that they had fallen into the hands of the English.  The governor, finding
that the forts were in possession of the English and that a large number of women had also
fallen into their hands, consented to agree to the terms proposed by Admiral Rooke.  Hostages
were accordingly exchanged, and the capitulation being concluded, the Prince of Hesse marched
into the town in the evening and took possession of the land and North Mole gates and the outworks.
The Spanish troops were allowed to march out with all the honours of war, and provisions for
a six days' march.  Such inhabitants and soldiers who were willing to take an oath of fidelity
to Don Carlos the Third were allowed to remain.  The Spaniards were also to discover all their
magazines of powder and other ammunition or provision and arms in the city.  All subjects of
the French King were, however, excluded from any part of the terms of this capitulation.

The town was found to be extremely strong, with a hundred guns mounted facing the sea and the
narrow pass towards the land.  It was well supplied with ammunition, but the garrison consisted
of only a hundred and fifty men.  However, in the opinion of officers who examined the works,
fifty men might have defended them against thousands, so it was acknowledged that the attack
made by the seamen was brave almost beyond example.

The British lost sixty men killed, including two lieutenants and one master, and two hundred
and sixteen wounded, including one captain, seven lieutenants, and a boatswain.  It is but
justice to the naval part of the expedition to remark that as this design was contrived by
the admiral, so it was executed entirely by the seamen, and therefore the whole honour of it
was due to them.  Nothing, indeed, could have enabled the seamen to take the place but the
cannonading of it in a way which obliged the Spaniards to quit their posts.  Immediately the
fleet had watered, it stood out again towards Gibraltar, when on the lath of August about noon,
the enemy's fleet and galleys were discovered to the westward, near Cape Malaga, going free.
The allied fleet accordingly bore after them in a line of battle.  On the morning of the 13th
of August they were within three leagues of the French, and then brought to, with their heads
to the south, the wind being east, and lay in a posture to receive them.  In the English line,
Sir George Rooke, with Rear-Admirals Byng and Dilkes, were in the centre.  Sir Cloudesley Shovel
and Sir John Leake led the van, and Vice-Admiral Calemburg and Rear-Admiral Vanderdosen commanded
the ships in the rear.

The English fleet consisted of forty-five ships of the line, and eighteen smaller vessels.
The Dutch had only twelve ships of the line, while the French fleet consisted of fifty ships
of the line, eight frigates, and eleven smaller vessels, the line-of-battle ships alone carrying
3530 guns, while the English ships together only carried 3154 guns, and the Dutch ships about
1000 guns.

Though the French endeavoured at first to avoid the battle, yet they had the advantage over
the combined fleet, as they were superior in force, and all their ships were clean and fully
manned.  They had also the advantage of fighting on the coast, and near a harbour of their
ally, and had the benefit of a large number of galleys.  The confederates, on the contrary,
besides being away from any friendly port, were thinly manned, and had a great deficiency of
stores and provisions, while the foulness of their ships was greatly to their prejudice in
the day of battle.  Notwithstanding this they were eager for the engagement.

The action which was about to commence was likely to prove of far more importance than any
in which Deane had hitherto engaged, and his heart beat high as he saw the ships of England
bear down upon the enemy.  His own ship the "Lennox" was among those under the command of the
brave Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovel.

At about 10 o'clock, when nearly half-gunshot from the enemy, the French set all their sails
at once, and seemed to intend to stretch ahead and weather the English fleet.  Admiral Shovel,
on discovering the enemy's intention, hauled his wind, and Sir George Rooke, seeing what would
be the consequence if the van was intercepted, bore down upon the enemy with the rest of the
confederate fleet, and put out the signal for a fight, which was immediately begun by Admiral
Shovel.  The battle raged with great fury on both sides till about two in the afternoon, when
the enemy's van gave way.  The Dutch engaged the enemy with the greatest courage and alacrity,
and being provided with ammunition, continued firing something later than the rest, but night
coming on put a stop to the engagement.  Several of the French ships were compelled to quit
the fight, long before it was over, to repair damages, some of them to stop leaks which would
otherwise have caused them to founder.  The French main body being very strong, and several
ships of the admiral's and Rear-Admirals Byng and Dilke's divisions being also forced to go
out of the line for want of shot, the battle fell very heavily on the admiral's own ship the
"Saint George," as also on the "Shrewsbury."  This being observed by Sir Cloudesley Shovel,
he, like a good and valiant officer, immediately backed astern and endeavoured to reinforce
the admiral. This act of valour and of good seamanship had two useful effects.  First it drew
several of the enemy's ships from the British centre, which was so hard pressed by a great
superiority of strength and numbers, and secondly it drove them at length out of the line,
for after they had felt the effects of the guns of others of the ships of Sir Cloudesley Shovel's
division, which were astern of him, they considered it more prudent not to advance along his
broadside.  Being clean and better sailers, they set their split-sails, and with their boats
ahead, towed away from him, without giving him the opportunity of exchanging a single broadside
with them.

There can be no doubt that the British would have gained a complete victory had they not have
been in want of shot.  This had been expended by the vast number of guns fired at Gibraltar,
though every ship had been furnished with twenty-five rounds the day before the battle, which
would have been sufficient had they got as near the enemy as the admiral intended.  As it was,
every ship had expended her ammunition before night. 

"What does our excellent Frank about the case," asked Cajetan.

"As a real woman she would have to make the saying: if you love me
best to keep the mirror"

Borsati said.

"So the king female Lear," Frank said softly. "This is the worst Cordelia away. If you are in
the hair is, my dear friends, I must really believe that my gift was a folly. But I know you,
you are like the lawyers who insult to justice and murderous comfortable then go for breakfast
together. Should I make a suggestion? Very well. You do have experienced so many things, heard so much
and seen, but you have every time we talked together, have all sorts of funny and strange to
report known. People tell yet! It tells stories! We have at least eight or ten evenings in front of
us, but it will remain so long, I trust, and who is the best story told, or the strangest or
most human, a feel for all of us, that we can take nothing deeper that will get the mirror. Perhaps
I love the most, of the most beautiful story, who knows. And maybe, someday, who knows, maybe There
is a story that also brings me to tell - "She paused and looked with quivering Face up.

All were silent. "I think 'it' to me wonderfully, Frank went away with some haste, as would they
drown out her last words; "always speaks a voice that speaks of the world, from the People
of things that are far away and gone. I lie there and listen, and it conjures I have exciting events
before, enjoy it, irritating each other, on the other offers, - let ask you not yet said yes!
Begin to! "

Again was a silence.

"I think this is a desperate undertaking," muttered Hadwiger finally, with the air of a man
who will be claimed from the impossible.

"Do not despair, however, somewhat problematic," curtailed Borsati, "who will present think
of the mirror? "

"When you think of the mirror, we can have nothing to tell," said Lamberg, adding added, with meaning:
"For such occasions we must never think of the mirror."

"Bravo, George," cried Cajetan.

"I see you already caught fire. paint in your eyes even the pictures of miraculous stories.
Do not think of the mirror, this is it! As We will not judge the same to the audience in the
theater, where an idle hands clapping sensed a clear impression of time helps, but we crown
the preacher of a destiny as a witness.

I see no difficulty, not even an embarrassment. There is much be what we aneifert and the word
makes a big seducer. "

The plague of Vintschgau

The servant Emil brought the coffee, and after everyone had finished his cup, said Borsati:
"When I look back in the spirit, yes I remember this and that, which of reporting would be worth,
but where I am myself involved, the closeness bothers me, and where
it is not the case is, I am uncertain whether I can be convincing
or true.

"

"We are not even true, if we tell incidents out of our own lives, how much less if there are
external events is, "said Lamberg. "Yes, you lie more if one tells
the truth about themselves than when other is in fictional destinies.
"

"We want objectivity and" no sentiment, Cajetan said disapprovingly.
"Everyone is then as surely as his eyes or his memory are true. I'm
not bigger than my Growth. Anyone who does will be bigger, hissed.
The world is filled to the edge of reason with the most bizarre events,
and the strangest thing is true when you see a face, a living one.
"

"Famos. I want to see beautiful faces as much as possible, "said
Frank, and took a muscle Already at the one. 

"Every face is beautiful
in the suffering of the peculiar fate to be determined the carrier
is, "said Lamberg.  He could scarcely restrain his eagerness as he passed over the Trent bridge once
more, and took his way through the well-known streets which led to the market-place.  It was
early in the day, but no one knew him in his richly-laced coat, his countenance well bronzed
by sun and wind, and his whiskers and beard of no mean growth.  At length he stopped before
the door of the old house and threw himself from his horse, calling to a boy passing at the
moment to hold it.  Not till then did it occur to him how long he had been absent, and what
great changes might have taken place.  His heart sank, for he expected almost to see his mother
hurrying to the door, with his old father's fine countenance peering behind her; but the door
remained closed, and he had to knock more than once before it was opened.  His voice trembled
as he inquired of the serving-damsel who opened the door whether Mr and Mistress Deane were
at home.

"Ay," was the answer, "they are in the parlour at the back of the house."

He pushed past her and hurried on.  The old gentleman and lady rose from their seats as he
threw open the door, at first not knowing him.

"To what cause do we owe the honour of this visit, sir?" said old Mr Deane, taking Jack to
be an intruder, or one of the officers quartered in the town engaged in a frolic.

"He is our son--our son Jack!" exclaimed Mistress Deane, who, knowing him at a second glance,
threw her arms round his neck.

Old Mr Deane hurried forward, and grasping his hand, almost wrung it off.  Then his mother
bestowed her kisses on his bronzed cheeks. Thus, reported
by an elegant marquise, whose name escapes me, and the aged twenty-seven years died of consumption,
that it the last months of her life on a couch and spent consistently held a mirror in hand,
the devastation observed that produced the disease in its face. Finally, they left the window impose
tight, no one was allowed more to her, and she suffered no other light than the Lamp of a teakettle.
"

"Even the people had a real enthusiasm for the beauty of high-ranking women," said Cajetan. "In
1750, a London shoemaker earned a lot of money in that it for a penny could see the shoe that
he had made for the Duchess of Hamilton. And traveled the same as Duchess of their goods remained
in front of a pub in Yorkshire, where they lived several hundred people all night on the street
to the next Morning rise in their body to see and the best places you go. "

"Accordingly, said then the love of men," was George Vincent again the word, "a young man was
in a Burgundian town by the beauty of his beloved so taken that after the first rendezvous,
which they had granted him, in particular Ernst said that he would cut out the eyes, as do
the pilgrims from Mecca sometimes when they saw the tomb of the Prophet to protect their eyes
from now on desecration to protect. "

been "This is a boaster must be" asserted Borsati, I do not think it a syllable. "

"Why?" Replied Cajetan.

"We can not reflect an understanding of the energy and fervor , Which
one do with that time gave a passion. "

Borsati shrugged his shoulders.
 Cousin Nat and other friends,
however, so earnestly petitioned the Government, that it was preserved for the sake of his
daughter, and Jasper, after poor Harwood's death, became the Squire of Harwood Grange."

"And have you heard from Kate and Dainsforth, mother?" asked Jack.  He had another question
which he was eager to ask, but he wished first to inquire about his own family.

"Oh, yes! they're flourishing in their new plantation; and glowing are the accounts which they
send us of the country.  It must be a wonderful place, and although the free Government we
now enjoy makes fewer people wish to go over there, yet many are tempted, from time to time,
from the accounts they receive from their friends settled there."

Jack's next inquiry was about Mr Gournay at Norwich.  He could only learn that a foreign lady
and gentleman were residing at his house, but not a word about Elizabeth could they tell him.
He concluded that they alluded to Monsieur and Madame de Mertens, but they were not aware even
that they had a daughter, nor could they give him any account of the arrival of their supposed
daughter.

Jack's visit to Jasper and Alethea and to cousin Nat must be briefly passed over.

Having spent a few days at Nottingham he became eager to visit Norwich. He found Will Brinsmead,
who, in spite of his age, continued his journeys through the country, about to set off in that
direction.  Will begged that he would give him the honour of his company, but Jack laughingly
assured him, that though he should have great delight in talking over old days, his eagerness
to reach Norwich would not allow him to jog along behind the cattle.  He, however, rode a few
miles with him, when just as the old man was beginning one of his lectures on the "Pilgrim's
Progress," Jack, shaking him warmly by the hand, pushed on his steed in advance of the herd.

On making himself known to Mr Gournay, he was received in the kindest way by him and his wife;
but Jack's astonishment and disappointment was very great when he found that they had not received
the accounts he had sent home of his discovery of Elizabeth, and of her proposed return with
Mistress Pearson, under charge of Captain Davis, to England.  Monsieur and Madame de Mertens
were residing, he found, in a small house in Norwich, and they also had not received either
his letter or one from Captain Davis.  His heart sank within him.  What was he now to do? 
The more he had of late thought of Elizabeth, the more completely he found that she had entwined
herself round his heart, and he had anticipated the delight of meeting her again and receiving
her as his bride from the hands of her parents.  All these delightful visions had now vanished.
Monsieur and Madame de Mertens received him with every expression of regard and affection. On lilies place sounded the hammers and that was a bright, almost plaintive Loud. Peter
stopped, because this sounds very tied him up. It does not sound as if the old and famous
warriors with their swords together loshieben? Surely, if the Eyes closed, so could not believe
it, Laurin fight in its tusks to Dietrich of Bern. Then he looked even more like a horse shoe
were replaced, and was so anxious to be Heart at the spectacle, that he not drive the evil stench
of singed hoof could. He was surprised only that a horse could be as nice quiet while he nails proposed
in the feet. He went on, but wonder about this strange circumstance was it does not leave.
  On entering the house,
the excellent quaker met him with a letter in his hand.

"I have just received this," he said, "from your brother-in-law Giles Dainsforth.  He mentions
a curious circumstance which occurred some time ago, which may tend to solve the mystery concerning
the fate of Elizabeth de Mertens and her friend.  He writes me word that information had been
received in the plantation of the wreck of a ship on an island off the American coast, with
several passengers, among whom were said to be some ladies.  A small boat which had left the
island, had, after a long voyage, the people undergoing great hardships, reached the mainland.
They had come in the hopes of obtaining relief for those left behind.  As soon as the information
was received, a meeting of the inhabitants of Philadelphia was held, and it was resolved to
send out a vessel for the rescue of the sufferers.  Unfortunately, friend Giles does not mention
the name of the vessel or the passengers, except casually he refers to the loss of a queen's ship."

This was indeed important information.  It raised Captain Deane's hopes of the possibility
of discovering Elizabeth; at the same time he was well aware that there were many probabilities
of the wreck being that of some other vessel.

"Friend Dainsforth is very anxious that we should send out a vessel with a cargo of which he
may dispose. But the Ruechensteiner had a dozen gray-bearded weathered
town servants, who contributed to the new ropes Schwertgehängen, the vanguard asked what took
the Seldwylers such awe that they moved back and almost lost were, had not a good idea they saved
because they led half the fun "Friendly neighbor" with him and held a long banner of the enormous
brush. This plunged the institution filled with the Spirit's presence in the black spunk, courage
sprang from the front Against enemies, and covered their faces quickly, so that all generated
first by the blackness abhorred, were threatened, run away and took no longer be the foremost
wanted. In their crowd began to sway, a vague terror seized the butt while the Seldwylers encouraged
again penetrated by wild laughter and Ruechensteiner pushed back against their city. Where they
are put on the defensive, pushed the dreaded brush caused by the long stems, which are not without
serious heroism was received, even twice the bold brush carrier of arrows fell pierced, and each
time had taken a different the strange new weapon and carried into the enemy.

In the end, but were beaten back Ruechensteiner completely and fled
with their banner in crowds through the forest back to Seldwylers
on their heels.

They could with Not to save the city and close the gate that their pursuers, including the drawbridge
Sun jizz long black brush with the haunted, until that is something to be gained and noisy
painter Kalktöpfen threw.
  A third, of whom
in his despair he made further inquiries, told him that she had been sunk; and another, that
she was on her passage home.  He had just left the office, and was taking his way disconsolately
along the street, when he met an old shipmate.

"My dear fellow," he exclaimed, "you did not employ a golden key, I suspect, to unlock the
mystery!  Just go back with a doubloon in your band, and cross the palm of Master Dick Greedifist,
and you will soon find that he knows more about the matter than you supposed."

Jack, though indignant that such a proceeding should be necessary, did as he was advised.

"Oh, certainly, Captain Deane!" answered Dick.  "It was about the `Venus' you were inquiring.
Oh, ah, let me see! she was ordered home in 1702, and immediately afterwards the order was
countermanded and she remained on the station for some time longer.  Since then, she was sent
to visit the plantations on the mainland of North America; and, in consequence of her not having
been heard of for some time, it is feared that she must have met with some disaster.  As soon
as she had executed her mission she was to return home; and I know that some months ago she
was expected."

This was all the information Jack required.  He did not tell Master Greedifist the opinion
he had formed of him, but, hastening out of the office, took his way to his inn.  Jack as has
been seen was a man of action.  He took care of the minutes, well knowing that the hours would
take care of themselves.  As soon as he had sufficiently fortified the inner man, he again
mounted his horse, and leaving all the wonders of London unvisited, spurred back northward
towards Nottingham.

At the inn where he rested the first night of his journey, he wrote an account of the information
he had gained to his friends at Norwich, saying that he proposed carrying out the plan suggested
by Giles Dainsforth, and that as soon as he could make the arrangements he hoped to sail in
a galley for Pennsylvania.  On reaching home he found that Dainsforth had expressed the same
opinion to his friends at Nottingham. He had, therefore, little difficulty in inducing them
to join in a speculation for the purchase of a galley, to be freighted with goods suitable
for the plantations, he himself having the command of her. Having made all the preliminary
arrangements, he was about to start for London, when he received information from Mr Gournay
that a galley admirably suited for his object was about to be launched at Lynn Regis. Scarcely
had the letter been read, when Jack was on horseback, and spurring forward to that town.  He
was not disappointed in the appearance of the vessel.  She was stoutly built, and roomy, capable
of carrying a large cargo.  As she reached the water she was named the "Nottingham Galley."
John Deane, whose manners were such as to gain the confidence of his fellow-men, soon found
a hardy crew to man her.  By the time she was ready for sea, he had obtained a considerable
share of his prize-money.  His brother Jasper, his cousin Nat, and his father, with several
other influential persons at Nottingham, took shares in the speculation. 

Since it was his heart, as if he were guilty and the conscience of the country alone in the would
have to bear.

       The Seldwylers but survived that night rather sad than funny, as the
tree and the Jukundi were no longer there.

* * * * *

In the beginning of his visit to Schwanau Jocundus spent most of his time with the grandparents
on the mountains he once because of their seemingly unfriendly, bitter and restless character almost had feared.
Over time, he was on good terms with them come and even become the darling of the old, such
as more often happens that people in such country their age-old security like something idle
and suffer them to be unequal like that their laughter wakes. In the young man they saw something
strange impractical, but lovable, that would probably have a good star, and therefore deserve
compassion and sympathy. So thought the Ehgaumers as the people still were called forth by
the lost Ehegaumeramte, the grandfather half a century ago and had once held a kind of moral
and judge had been married. As old as this book was the section of the white hood and the large
white scarf, which the Ehegaumerin adorned herself, and everything still came from that time,
as even Goethe wrote during a visit to the area, giving the place of the most beautiful and highest
cultural ideal and a lovely concept, the buildings are far apart,
vineyards, fields, gardens, orchards spread out between them and so
on, and what do you hear from economists, the highest degree of culture
with a certain Moderate prosperity, which you see here in mind.

This state was now on this high office nor the same up to the house, the walnut units in the
room and the dishes in the cupboards, while the new time changes with its Face, and increased
their ratios against the bank-level down. Jocundus the clean air enjoyed on the level and helped
the elderly and their service people so eager in their work, that
he soon acquainted with all things and an officer was in the patriarchs,
they did not want to dismiss again.

Justine was glad of the good reputation that her husband earned with his grandparents, and came
increased more happily on the mountain to him herunterzuholen evening,
or they rejoiced also, at the top to experience a thunderstorm during
the hay harvest, which forced the young people, there the Night to
spend.  He struck out, struggling bravely for life.  His
feet touched the hard sand, and the next instant he was thrown high upon the beach.  He staggered
forward, and before the following sea had reached him he had escaped from its clutches.  The
despairing shrieks of his crew reached his ears.  In vain he endeavoured to render them assistance.
He rescued two, however, at the risk of being himself thrown back into the foaming surges.
Three others had been thrown as he had been on shore.

When morning at length broke, they were the only survivors of the gallant band which had manned
the "Nottingham Galley."  Captain Deane's first thought was, that possibly this might be the
very island on which the "Venus" had been cast away, supposing it to be an island, of which
he was not yet sure.  A vague feeling that even now Elizabeth and Mistress Pearson might be
living on it, induced him immediately to set forth to explore the country.  He had not gone
far before in front of him he saw several huts, constructed evidently out of the wreck of a
vessel.  He hurried on, eager to communicate with the inhabitants whom he expected to find
within them.  As he reached the huts, however, he soon saw by the open doors and the silence
which reigned on every side, that they were deserted.  On searching around, however, he discovered
signs that they had been inhabited by a considerable number of persons. One of the huts, built
at a short distance from the others, was constructed in a better style.  It was closed by a
door placed on hinges, and there was a window which could be closed by a shutter.  He lifted
the latch.  There were two neat bed-places within, and on the table some small shreds of silk,
and a few other articles such as were used by females met his sight.  This then might possibly
have been the abode of Elizabeth.  He looked eagerly around with tender interest, in the hope
of finding some sign by which he might ascertain the truth. All the articles of value had been
removed, but still it was evident that the hut had been abandoned somewhat suddenly.  At length
he found an object sticking between the crib and the wall, as if it had fallen down between
them.  It was a book.  He opened it eagerly.  On the blank page at the commencement were the
letters "E.P."  He had no longer any doubt that it was the property of Elizabeth.  He placed
it in his bosom and continued the search.  There could be no doubt then, that the vessel which
Giles Dainsforth had mentioned as being on the point of sailing in search of the shipwrecked
crew had reached the place, and carried them off in safety.  For this he was truly thankful,
delighted as he would have been to have found Elizabeth still there, as he had almost expected
to do.

On his return he told his companions what he had discovered.  Their spirits revived as they
began to hope that some vessel might pass that way, and carry them to the plantation.  As they
gazed, however, on the ocean, covered with foaming billows, their condition seemed perilous
indeed.  Of the ship herself, not a plank clung together, though the beach was strewed with
various articles which had formed her cargo.  One of her boats too had been cast ashore, without
receiving any material damage.  Deane immediately summoned his men around him, and pointed
out to them the necessity of saving whatever provisions were washed on shore.  By this time
the gale had considerably abated, and they were enabled to drag up several casks and cases
containing food, which they so much required.  In the same way, numerous bales and other articles
which had formed the cargo of the ship were saved.  They found themselves on an uninhabited
island of small extent, which seemed likely to afford them but scanty means of subsistence.
In the far distance could be seen a long blue ridge of land, which Deane knew must be the continent.
Their great requirement however was water, for without it their stores and flour would have
availed them but little.  They therefore immediately set about searching for it, and at length
a slight moisture was found oozing out from beneath the roots of a large tree. After eagerly
scraping away the earth with their hands for some time, the hole they had formed was filled
with a small portion of the precious liquid.  This encouraged them to hope that a sufficient
supply might be obtained, and with better heart than they had hitherto possessed they took
their first meal on the island.

On examining the boat, Captain Deane was of opinion that if repaired, she would carry them
to the mainland: but as yet there were no tools found by which this could be accomplished.
Thus were all their hopes of escaping frustrated.  Their life on the island was that of most
shipwrecked mariners.  Even when partaking of their meals, they could not but feel that their
store of provisions would in time come to an end, and that thus, unless relieved, famine would
overtake them at last. Several days passed by, when as two of their number were wandering along
the shore a chest was seen fixed between two rocks.  Summoning their companions, not without
difficulty they waded towards it.  It was found to be a carpenter's chest.  After considerable
labour they contrived to break it open, when to their great joy they discovered within it a
supply of tools and nails, with iron hoops and other necessary articles.

They now eagerly set to work to repair their boat, but as none of them were carpenters they
found it a more difficult task than they had expected.  Spars and oars and sails had also to
be formed.  No one, however, was idle, and they made up by diligence what they wanted in skill.
The boat was at last launched and moored between the rocks.  All the provisions they could
collect, with a supply of water in such casks as would hold it were placed on board.  They
had left the island astern when a sail appeared in sight, rapidly approaching them from the
east. Deane, supposing she was some vessel bound up the Delaware for Philadelphia, hove to,
purposing if such was the case to take a passage in her, instead of risking the voyage in their
open boat, still imperfectly repaired.  As she drew nearer, she was seen to be a large ship
carrying several guns, yet she wanted the trim appearance of a man-of-war.  No colours were
flying at her mast-head or peak, and altogether her appearance did not satisfy Captain Deane.
It was now, however, too late to avoid her.  Already the boat must have been seen by those
on board.  Still Deane thought it more prudent to fill his sails, and to stand away towards
the opening which he took to be the mouth of the river of which he was in search.  A shot from
the ship told him that he had been discovered.  It was the signal also for him again to heave
to.  In a short time the ship got up to the boat, and a voice from her decks hailed, ordering
those in the boat to sheer alongside and to come on board.  There was no use attempting to
disobey this order, as they were already under the ship's guns.  Having secured the boat alongside,
Deane and his men stepped on deck.  From the appearance of the officers and the number of men
composing the mongrel-looking crew on board, who seemed to be of all countries and of all shades
of colour, the thought at once occurred to Captain Deane that the vessel was a pirate.

"What have you been about, and where are you going?" asked a man who stepped forward from among
the people on board.  Though considerably older, and knocked about by climate and hardship,
Deane had little difficulty in recognising his former acquaintance Pearson.  The pirate captain
looked at him two or three times, but if he had recognised him for a moment, he soon seemed
to have altered his opinion. 

How Küngolt the beginning of the sixteenth century looked like, is still in the image of a see
good artist, which hangs in a famous gallery and the inscription it Image is. It can be seen
as a slim fine patrician woman whose beautiful face a announce some deep seriousness by flowers,
but of gentle humor wise.

They too died in a good year from a cold, like her mother, the Forest Master, namely, as her husband
in one of Milan's campaigns and finally died in the cemetery a Lombard chapel was buried. They
hurried away, with the intention of him a tomb to build, but in fact to unseen through a long
rainy night on his grave sit, so that a fever wiped out in two days and on the side of their gene
Dieterich Resting place was.

     The lost laugh
     
     First Chapter
     
     Three yards good banner silk, A
     handful of people, honorable, With
     a clear eye, in her Sunday dress, Is
     everything my heart desires!

     Sun end 'I with the Morning Light
     A Midsummer Night's limited peace
     And quickly wander to the fresh source
     The vaterländ'schen joys.
     
     The ships and cars, Garlanded,
     on all paths ago; The airy hall I see
     project, Of stones not even worry heavy; The speaker cornices shines
sweetly Of the solid silver trophy hoard Hail to us, nor is common
in outdoor A passionate free word!

     
     
     And word and song, by word of mouth,
     From heart to heart, it resonates
     out; Sun flower of the Rose Festival
     hours And must flee with golden
     era! And it renews every duty,
     And every power it has steeled And sprinkled a Körnersaat, Who never
concealed their fruit.

     
     
     Drum lingers, where the party dress
     A vigorous nation goes to the
     feast And softly the delicate silk
     banner High above him the sky
     is blowing! In his country the lap of
     luxury, Since the pure joy is sin, And periodic 'I better not go
home, So I'll not be worse!

This song was sung by the standard-bearer of the Seldwylers Male Choir, which on a grand Summer
morning to the song festivals wandered.

After the men the night before and broken part of the way had been transported by rail car,
they had decided to Rest in the cool of the morning to make on foot, as it only went through
beautiful forests.

Already spread the shining sea of ​​colorfully decorated with flags
in front of them with the city on the shore, than the sixty or seventy
young and older men of the society in scattered groups descended through
a magnificent beech forest and the trees behind the large living Echo
resound with singing and the songs all the verses could also continue
as a low-rise Troop responded.

Only the all pre-withdrawing standard-bearer, a slim young man with beautiful grown Face, sang
his songs completely with joy and light but moderate baritone voice. Adorned with a broad range
embroidered sash and stately feather hat, he wore the same rich, heavy silk flag, folded half
down on the shoulder, and its golden Top sparkled now and then in
the green shade, where the rays of the sun through the morning Hardwood
vault broke.

When he finished his song, he looked back with a smile and you could
see the beautiful face in full radiate happiness, the begrudged him
every since a peculiarly pleasant laugh, if it it turned out, each
won for him.

"Our Jukundi," they said to each other behind him goers, "is probably the most beautiful ensign be
at the festival. "He led namely the serene-sounding name and was Jocundus Meyenthal with generalized
tenderness Schlechtweg called the Jukundi.

It also mentioned explicitly in the hope; because when the Seldwylers, arrived at the premises,
to the entry under the long singer droves lined up, caught his appearance, where they had gone
through, across great pleasure.

Those who had already seen several parties, he was already on the
most advantageous known as an exemplary solid appearance. Of constant
joy and endurance from the first until the last moment, was Jukundi
but with the calm and serenity itself, always looked he is sympathetic
to every general joy and at any particular execution, persevering
and helpful, never loud or even drunk.  Eight
streets, each fifty feet wide, were to be built parallel to the High Street, and twenty of
the same width parallel to the rivers.  Mr Penn's great object was to give a rural appearance
to the houses of his new city.  The boat reached the shore before a large building, which from
the sign-board swinging in front of it, on which a large blue anchor was painted, was known
to be a house of entertainment Deane and his companions, hauling up their boat, hastened towards
it, as he hoped there to obtain the information as to where Giles Dainsforth and his sister
were to be found.  This building was then one of the most important in the province.  It was
not only a beer-house, but an exchange, a corn-market, and a post-office.  It was formed of
large rafters of wood, the interstices being filled with bricks, which had been brought in
the vessels from England, in the same manner as houses to be found in Cheshire, and some built
in the Tudor and Stuart periods. Already a magnificent quay of three hundred feet in length
had been formed by the side of the river, and there were also stone houses with pointed roofs,
and balconies, and porches, in different parts.  Although in some portions of the city pine-trees
and pine-stumps still remained, altogether upwards of a thousand houses had been erected. 
Among them was a large building devoted to the purposes of a public school or college.  A printing-press
had long been established in the city by William Bradford, a native of Leicester, who had accompanied
Mr Penn in the "Welcome."  Deane had, however, but little inclination to view the city until
he had found his way to the house of his sister and brother-in-law.  He had no great difficulty
in discovering it, for Giles Dainsforth was already well-known as a man of mark, as sagacious,
steady, and industrious men are sure to be in a new settlement.

"There is friend Dainsforth's house," said a worthy citizen to whom Deane addressed himself;
and he saw before him a fine and substantial stone building, with a broad verandah surrounded
by trees and flowering shrubs.  A gentle voice reached his ears, singing an air he knew well.
The door stood open and he entered.  Passing through the house, he saw seated on a lawn, beneath
the shade of the building, three ladies, while the same number of young children played about
them.  The nearest he recognised as his sister Kate, though grown into more matronly proportions
than when he last had seen her.  Near her was a fair girl. He required not a second glance
to convince him that she was Elizabeth. He hurried forward, forgetting how he might startle
them.  A cry of delight escaped Elizabeth as she advanced to meet him.  In another minute he
found himself in the arms of his sister, while a sob of joy escaped from her companion's bosom. 

For this purpose was derived chiefly Justine, who, to the mild sense of her husband so much as
possible to make good the whimsical works of reform was doubly attached and with both own
rich gifts, with the enthusiastic gathering of foreign donations
went ahead and vigorous intervention.

The sunny, green in summer and the beginning nodding flowers bordered white of the walls had First
paint a colorful decoration of Gothic to have soft hands outsider. The vaulted ceiling of the
ceiling were painted blue and studded with golden stars. Then, for painted windows collected,
and soon the arc with weak Evangelist forms filled out and apostles,
which stained weakly with its large modern space produce no deep glow,
but only a sickly haze could slip.

Then again, had a covered altar table and an altar here, so that the subtle cycle Images of the service
could start again "with the" aesthetic appeal means one day without
fail in the miraculous blood or tears, sweating figuration, even when
the idol Schlechtweg to terminate to future reforms not to leave without
an object.

Finally, the chalices of white maple wood, the neat white bread plate and banned the tin cans and
wine vergabt silver goblets, plates and pitchers Schenk out at every family event in rich houses,
on Justine's debt, the rich proud Mind at the splendor enjoyed, not feeling that they the new
church on the basis of a like old helped the Treasury, which multiply every day so quietly but
persistently could attract and the fields and vineyards and the tenth
of each hand again, especially since an empty tabernacle still has
more room than a busy.  This was indeed glorious
news, especially in those days, when the traffic in negroes was looked upon as lawful, and
when in most instances might made right in all parts of the world.  Altogether the account
which Deane received of the colony was so favourable that he could not help longing to come
and settle in it.  He had, however, promised to bring Elizabeth back to her parents, and poor
Mistress Pearson also was very anxious to lay her bones in her native land.  Captain Davis
likewise desired to return home on the first opportunity, that he might stand his trial for
the loss of his ship, which he considered himself in honour bound to do.  Deane, however, resolved
not to run the risk of again being separated from Elizabeth. She having no legal guardian,
he instituted himself as such, and then gave himself permission to marry her, which she, nothing
loath, consented to do forthwith.  The marriage was celebrated with such religious and legal
ceremonies as were then considered sufficient in Philadelphia.  Colonel Markham, the acting
governor, being one of the witnesses.  Jack and his bride, accompanied by Captain Davis and
his sister, soon afterwards embarked on board a stout ship sailing for England.  They arrived
safely in London, whence Jack wrote to Norwich to announce his safe return.

A few days were spent in the great city, that Elizabeth might recruit her strength after her
voyage.  During his stay there, he met with an old brother officer, Captain Bertrand, who,
hailing him with pleasure, told him that he was the very man he was looking out for.

"I have taken service," he said, "with the permission of the British Government, under the
Czar of Russia, the Great Peter, for such he is indeed.  You will remember his labouring as
a shipwright in England not many years since, to gain a knowledge of ship-building He is now
constructing a large fleet, and he is anxious to secure the services of a number of active
and intelligent officers like yourself.  What do you say?  I can promise you handsome pay,
and the command of a line-of-battle ship."

Deane replied that he must think about it, as he had only lately married a wife, and had no
inclination to leave her.

"Oh, you must bring her with you!" was the answer.  "You can establish her in the new city
the Czar is building on the Neva; and, depend upon it, you will have no long cruises to make. Why I like fall Things do not,
if I write? I'm going crazy, it must come to an end! "

He went out, locked the room and went to the house. met on the stairs
he the maid to the side, which surprised and puzzled examined the
rule.

Full of anger and grief over the wounded vanity and self-love he walked through the dark Roads.
The main thing, the lost love of his wife, did not seem him much complaint to make at least he was
eating a big piece of admirable salmon trout from the city hall office, wherever he went and where
the Prestigious spend the Saturday night and the night durchzuzechen habit. There he sat taciturn
and confused, or he mixed quickly with other objects in conversation, and both he soon moved to
taunts, as he was an unusual phenomenon and disturbed the society. He was still wearing his
newest fashion hat on his head, which the men was not acceptable. Because if they also each mode, once
it was in the course, so soon join in, they could suffer premature first-fruits of the same and
never took care not at all before too delicate and foolish. Now, had recently brought home one
of the Paris joke the high calling round horn man's hat box (boîte à cornes # #), which express
them with Jubilee projects did. Since then, they said take cover, topper, stove pipe, fitter, lice pan
# # Grützmaß noli me tangere, tubs, wit shell, felt and the like for any kind of hat only Horn
rifle and they called Viggis accordingly a hat like Hornbüchschen and thought that his Squirrels
would still be quite young, delicate and small, otherwise he needed a stronger gun. He believed
that his misfortune was so renowned throughout the city and they were aimed straight at what it dermal
move, he pricked his ears, quipped back, to induce them to do more talking, and held several
hours of a painful war, all alone against the whole council chamber, came out without anything
more than that he got drunk in anger and most unfortunate was. When he reached no other goal,
he finally gave them to understand clearly that he one and all to rags guys think, what she now applied herself
greatly, drove out werkt. He pushed his way his poor battered hat and staggered bitterly crying
his house, lay down to bed and slept like a log until the bell rang for church, and he would
have slept much longer, if he had not woken servant and maid the issue and action to the housewife.

Rumour, with her hundred tongues, forthwith spread the report that the fire-eating captain
had killed his brother.  The verdict however of the jury who sat to decide the case was, that
Dr Jasper Deane had died by the visitation of God.  Still Captain Deane was conscious of the
angry feelings which had excited his bosom at the moment, and he felt that the mark of Cain
was upon his forehead.  He could no longer remain at home, and though those who loved him best
knew of his innocence, and did their utmost to console him, he determined to leave the country.
He accordingly wrote to Captain Bertrand, accepting his offer of a naval command under the
Czar of Russia; and in a short time he and Elizabeth sailed for the Baltic.  He rendered great
assistance in organising the navy of that wonderful man Peter the Great, and after serving
with much credit for a few years, he returned to England.

Captain Deane had during this time found a number of friends, and by their means he was soon
afterwards appointed English consul at Ostend, where he lived with his wife Elizabeth till
they were both advanced in life.  As an elderly couple they came back to Nottingham once more,
and went to live in the sweet village of Wilford, on the opposite side of the silvery Trent.
It was the peaceful green retreat that had beckoned him back to England from many a scene of
foreign grandeur, and smiled across many a time of tumult and of battle.  He and his wife both
loved the Dutch home where they had so long lived, and when he built a house for himself in
a thorough English village, he constructed it in the Dutch style, which indeed in his early
youth had been the very height of fashion.  Next to his own, behind the same trim garden and
row of silvery poplars, he built one also for his sister Polly, who was then a widow.  Alethea,
after the death of her husband, had returned to Harwood Grange with her children, and devoted
herself to them, endeavouring so to bring them up that they might love and serve God.  She
by this time had also gone to her rest; so also had most of those who have been mentioned in
the previous history. May be, "that he would have done it," he said, "what we can think, can
also happen. I am fighting only against the fact that one of the great sensations of our time also
speaks to decorate a charming only in the distant past with them.

The tomb of John Deane, Captain RN, and of Elizabeth his wife, is to be seen on a little green
promontory above the sparkling Trent and near the chancel of the parish church, where sweet
strains of music, accompanying the sound of human voices and the murmurs of the river, are
wont to mingle in harmonious hymns of prayer and praise.  A more fitting spot in which to await
in readiness for the last hour of life than Wilford can scarcely be imagined, nor a sweeter
place than its church-yard in which the mortal may lie down to rest from toil till summoned
by the last trump to rise and put on immortality.

THE END.

