However that was, about midnight, to my great surprise, Peters opened his eyes, and smiled.
By noon the next day, his fine vitality, which so fitted him for an Arctic expedition, had
re-asserted itself. He was then leaning on an elbow, talking to Wilson, and except his pallor,
and strong stomach-pains, there was now hardly a trace of his late approach to death. For the
pains I prescribed some quarter-grain tablets of sulphate of morphia, and went away.

Now, David Wilson and I never greatly loved each other, and that very day he brought about
a painful situation as between Peters and me, by telling Peters that I had taken his place
in the expedition. Peters, a touchy fellow, at once dictated a letter of protest to Clark;
and Clark sent Peters' letter to me, marked with a big note of interrogation in blue pencil.

Now, all Peters' preparations were made, mine not; and he had six days in which to recover
himself. I therefore wrote to Clark, saying that the changed circumstances of course annulled
my acceptance of his offer, though I had already incurred the inconvenience of negotiating
with a locum tenens.

This decided it: Peters was to go, I stay. The fifth day before the departure dawned. It was
a Friday, the 15th June. Peters was now in an arm-chair. He was cheerful, but with a fevered
pulse, and still the stomach-pains. I was giving him three quarter-grains of morphia a day.
That Friday night, at 11 P.M., I visited him, and found Clodagh there, talking to him. Peters
was smoking a cigar.

'Ah,' Clodagh said, 'I was waiting for you, Adam. I didn't know whether I was to inject anything
to-night. Is it Yes or No?'

'What do you think, Peters?' I said: 'any more pains?'

'Well, perhaps you had better give us another quarter,' he answered: 'there's still some trouble
in the tummy off and on.'

'A quarter-grain, then, Clodagh, 'I said.

As she opened the syringe-box, she remarked with a pout:

'Our patient has been naughty! He has taken some more atropine.'

I became angry at once.

'Peters,' I cried, 'you know you have no right to be doing things like that without consulting
me! Do that once more, and I swear I have nothing further to do with you!'

'Rubbish,' said Peters: 'why all this unnecessary heat? It was a mere flea-bite. I felt that
I needed it.'

'He injected it with his own hand...' remarked Clodagh.

She was now standing at the mantel-piece, having lifted the syringe-box from the night-table,
taken from its velvet lining both the syringe and the vial containing the morphia tablets,
and gone to the mantel-piece to melt one of the tablets in a little of the distilled water
there. Her back was turned upon us, and she was a long time. I was standing; Peters in his
arm-chair, smoking. Clodagh then began to talk about a Charity Bazaar which she had visited
that afternoon.

She was long, she was long. The crazy thought passed through some dim region of my soul: 'Why
is she so long?'

'Ah, that was a pain!' went Peters: 'never mind the bazaar, aunt--think of the morphia.'

Suddenly an irresistible impulse seized me--to rush upon her, to dash syringe, tabloids, glass,
and all, from her hands. I must have obeyed it--I was on the tip-top point of obeying--my body
already leant prone: but at that instant a voice at the opened door behind me said:

'Well, how is everything?'

It was Wilson, the electrician, who stood there. With lightning swiftness I remembered an under-look
of mistrust which I had once seen on his face. Oh, well, I would not, and could not!--she was
my love--I stood like marble...

Clodagh went to meet Wilson with frank right hand, in the left being the fragile glass containing
the injection. My eyes were fastened on her face: it was full of reassurance, of free innocence.
I said to myself: 'I must surely be mad!'

An ordinary chat began, while Clodagh turned up Peters' sleeve, and, kneeling there, injected
his fore-arm. As she rose, laughing at something said by Wilson, the drug-glass dropped from
her hand, and her heel, by an apparent accident, trod on it. She put the syringe among a number
of others on the mantel-piece.

'Your friend has been naughty, Mr. Wilson,' she said again with that same pout: 'he has been
taking more atropine.'

'Not really?' said Wilson.

'Let me alone, the whole of you,' answered Peters: 'I ain't a child.'

These were the last intelligible words he ever spoke. He died shortly before 1 A.M. He had
been poisoned by a powerful dose of atropine.

From that moment to the moment when the Boreal bore me down the Thames, all the world was a
mere tumbling nightmare to me, of which hardly any detail remains in my memory. Only I remember
the inquest, and how I was called upon to prove that Peters had himself injected himself with
atropine. This was corroborated by Wilson, and by Clodagh: and the verdict was in accordance.

And in all that chaotic hurry of preparation, three other things only, but those with clear
distinctness now, I remember.

The first--and chief--is that tempest of words which I heard at Kensington from that big-mouthed
Mackay on the Sunday night. What was it that led me, busy as I was, to that chapel that night?
Well, perhaps I know. She had apparently lifted an old Bible by the front cover to fling it
on the table, for as I threw myself into a chair my eye fell upon the open print near the beginning.
The print was very large, and a shaded lamp cast a light upon it. I had been hearing Mackay's
wild comparison of the Pole with the tree of Eden, and that no doubt was the reason why such
a start convulsed me: for my listless eyes had chanced to rest upon some words.

'The woman gave me of the tree, and I did eat....'

And a third thing I remember in all that turmoil of doubt and flurry: that as the ship moved
down with the afternoon tide a telegram was put into my hand; it was a last word from Clodagh;
and she said only this:

'Be first--for Me.'

       *       *       *       *       *

The Boreal left St. Katherine's Docks in beautiful weather on the afternoon of the 19th June,
full of good hope, bound for the Pole.

All about the docks was one region of heads stretched far in innumerable vagueness, and down
the river to Woolwich a continuous dull roar and murmur of bees droned from both banks to cheer
our departure.

The expedition was partly a national affair, subvented by Government: and if ever ship was
well-found it was the Boreal. She had a frame tougher far than any battle-ship's, capable of
ramming some ten yards of drift-ice; and she was stuffed with sufficient pemmican, codroe,
fish-meal, and so on, to last us not less than six years.

We were seventeen, all told, the five Heads (so to speak) of the undertaking being Clark (our
Chief), John Mew (commander), Aubrey Maitland (meteorologist), Wilson (electrician), and myself
(doctor, botanist, and assistant meteorologist).

The idea was to get as far east as the 100°, or the 120°, of longitude; to catch there the
northern current; to push and drift our way northward; and when the ship could no further penetrate,
to leave her (either three, or else four, of us, on ski), and with sledges drawn by dogs and
reindeer make a dash for the Pole.

This had also been the plan of the last expedition--that of the Nix--and of several others.
The Boreal only differed from the Nix, and others, in that she was a thing of nicer design,
and of more exquisite forethought.

Our voyage was without incident up to the end of July, when we encountered a drift of ice-floes.
On the 1st August we were at Kabarova, where we met our coal-ship, and took in a little coal
for emergency, liquid air being our proper motor; also forty-three dogs, four reindeer, and
a quantity of reindeer-moss; and two days later we turned our bows finally northward and eastward,
passing through heavy 'slack' ice under sail and liquid air in crisp weather, till, on the
27th August, we lay moored to a floe off the desolate island of Taimur.

The first thing which we saw here was a bear on the shore, watching for young white-fish: and
promptly Clark, Mew, and Lamburn (engineer) went on shore in the launch, I and Maitland following
in the pram, each party with three dogs.

It was while climbing away inland that Maitland said to me:

'When Clark leaves the ship for the dash to the Pole, it is three, not two, of us, after all,
that he is going to take with him, making a party of four.'

I: 'Is that so? Who knows?'

Maitland: 'Wilson does. Clark has let it out in conversation with Wilson.'

I: 'Well, the more the merrier. Who will be the three?'

Maitland: 'Wilson is sure to be in it, and there may be Mew, making the third. As to the fourth,
I suppose I shall get left out in the cold.'

I: 'More likely I.'

Maitland: 'Well, the race is between us four: Wilson, Mew, you and I. It is a question of physical
fitness combined with special knowledge. You are too lucky a dog to get left out, Jeffson.'

I: 'Well, what does it matter, so long as the expedition as a whole is successful? That is
the main thing.'

Maitland: 'Oh yes, that's all very fine talk, Jeffson! But is it quite sincere? Isn't it rather
a pose to affect to despise $175,000,000? I want to be in at the death, and I mean to be, if
I can. We are all more or less self-interested.'

'Look,' I whispered--'a bear.'

It was a mother and cub: and with determined trudge she came wagging her low head, having no
doubt smelled the dogs. We separated on the instant, doubling different ways behind ice-boulders,
wanting her to go on nearer the shore, before killing; but, passing close, she spied, and bore
down at a trot upon me. I fired into her neck, and at once, with a roar, she turned tail, making
now straight in Maitland's direction. I saw him run out from cover some hundred yards away,
aiming his long-gun: but no report followed: and in half a minute he was under her fore-paws,
she striking out slaps at the barking, shrinking dogs. Maitland roared for my help: and at
that moment, I, poor wretch, in far worse plight than he, stood shivering in ague: for suddenly
one of those wrangles of the voices of my destiny was filling my bosom with loud commotion,
one urging me to fly to Maitland's aid, one passionately commanding me be still. But it lasted,
I believe, some seconds only: I ran and got a shot into the bear's brain, and Maitland leapt
up with a rent down his face.

But singular destiny! Whatever I did--if I did evil, if I did good--the result was the same:
tragedy dark and sinister! Poor Maitland was doomed that voyage, and my rescue of his life
was the means employed to make his death the more certain.

I think that I have already written, some pages back, about a man called Scotland, whom I met
at Cambridge. He was always talking about certain 'Black' and 'White' beings, and their contention
for the earth. We others used to call him the black-and-white mystery-man, because, one day--but
that is no matter now. Well, with regard to all that, I have a fancy, a whim of the mind--quite
wide of the truth, no doubt--but I have it here in my brain, and I will write it down now.
It is this: that there may have been some sort of arrangement, or understanding, between Black
and White, as in the case of Adam and the fruit, that, should mankind force his way to the
Pole and the old forbidden secret biding there, then some mishap should not fail to overtake
the race of man; that the White, being kindly disposed to mankind, did not wish this to occur,
and intended, for the sake of the race, to destroy our entire expedition before it reached;
and that the Black, knowing that the White meant to do this, and by what means, used me--me!--to
outwit this design, first of all working that I should be one of the party of four to leave
the ship on ski.

But the childish attempt, my God, to read the immense riddle of the world! I could laugh loud
at myself, and at poor Black-and-White Scotland, too. The thing can't be so simple.

Well, we left Taimur the same day, and good-bye now to both land and open sea. Till we passed
the latitude of Cape Chelyuskin (which we did not sight), it was one succession of ice-belts,
with Mew in the crow's-nest tormenting the electric bell to the engine-room, the anchor hanging
ready to drop, and Clark taking soundings. Progress was slow, and the Polar night gathered
round us apace, as we stole still onward and onward into that blue and glimmering land of eternal
frore. We now left off bed-coverings of reindeer-skin and took to sleeping-bags. Eight of the
dogs had died by the 25th September, when we were experiencing 19° of frost. In the darkest
part of our night, the Northern Light spread its silent solemn banner over us, quivering round
the heavens in a million fickle gauds.

The relations between the members of our little crew were excellent--with one exception: David
Wilson and I were not good friends.

There was a something--a tone--in the evidence which he had given at the inquest on Peters,
which made me mad every time I thought of it. He had heard Peters admit just before death that
he, Peters, had administered atropine to himself: and he had had to give evidence of that fact.
But he had given it in a most half-hearted way, so much so, that the coroner had asked him:
'What, sir, are you hiding from me?' Wilson had replied: 'Nothing. I have nothing to tell.'

And from that day he and I had hardly exchanged ten words, in spite of our constant companionship
in the vessel; and one day, standing alone on a floe, I found myself hissing with clenched
fist: 'If he dared suspect Clodagh of poisoning Peters, I could kill him!'

Up to 78° of latitude the weather had been superb, but on the night of the 7th October--well
I remember it--we experienced a great storm. Our tub of a ship rolled like a swing, drenching
the whimpering dogs at every lurch, and hurling everything on board into confusion. The petroleum-launch
was washed from the davits; down at one time to 40° below zero sank the thermometer; while
a high aurora was whiffed into a dishevelled chaos of hues, resembling the smeared palette
of some turbulent painter of the skies, or mixed battle of long-robed seraphim, and looking
the very symbol of tribulation, tempest, wreck, and distraction. I, for the first time, was sick.

It was with a dizzy brain, therefore, that I went off watch to my bunk. Soon, indeed, I fell
asleep: but the rolls and shocks of the ship, combined with the heavy Greenland anorak which
I had on, and the state of my body, together produced a fearful nightmare, in which I was conscious
of a vain struggle to move, a vain fight for breath, for the sleeping-bag turned to an iceberg
on my bosom. Of Clodagh was my gasping dream. I dreamed that she let fall, drop by drop, a
liquid, coloured like pomegranate-seeds, into a glass of water; and she presented the glass
to Peters. The draught, I knew, was poisonous as death: and in a last effort to break the bands
of that dark slumber, I was conscious, as I jerked myself upright, of screaming aloud:

'Clodagh! Clodagh! Spare the man...!'

My eyes, starting with horror, opened to waking; the electric light was shining in the cabin;
and there stood David Wilson looking at me.

Wilson was a big man, with a massively-built, long face, made longer by a beard, and he had
little nervous contractions of the flesh at the cheek-bones, and plenty of big freckles. His
clinging pose, his smile of disgust, his whole air, as he stood crouching and lurching there,
I can shut my eyes, and see now.

What he was doing in my cabin I did not know. To think, my good God, that he should have been
led there just then! This was one of the four-men starboard berths: his was a-port: yet there
he was! But he explained at once.

'Sorry to interrupt your innocent dreams, says he: 'the mercury in Maitland's thermometer is
frozen, and he asked me to hand him his spirits-of-wine one from his bunk...'

I did not answer. A hatred was in my heart against this man.

The next day the storm died away, and either three or four days later the slush-ice between
the floes froze definitely. The Boreal's way was thus blocked. We warped her with ice-anchors
and the capstan into the position in which she should lay up for her winter's drift. This was
in about 79° 20' N. The sun had now totally vanished from our bleak sky, not to reappear till
the following year.

Well, there was sledging with the dogs, and bear-hunting among the hummocks, as the months,
one by one, went by. One day Wilson, by far our best shot, got a walrus-bull; Clark followed
the traditional pursuit of a Chief, examining Crustacea; Maitland and I were in a relation
of close friendship, and I assisted his meteorological observations in a snow-hut built near
the ship. Often, through the twenty-four hours, a clear blue moon, very spectral, very fair,
suffused all our dim and livid clime.

It was five days before Christmas that Clark made the great announcement: he had determined,
he said, if our splendid northward drift continued, to leave the ship about the middle of next
March for the dash to the Pole. He would take with him the four reindeer, all the dogs, four
sledges, four kayaks, and three companions. The companions whom he had decided to invite were:
Wilson, Mew, and Maitland.

He said it at dinner; and as he said it, David Wilson glanced at my wan face with a smile of
pleased malice: for I was left out.

I remember well: the aurora that night was in the sky, and at its edge floated a moon surrounded
by a ring, with two mock-moons. But all shone very vaguely and far, and a fog, which had already
lasted some days, made the ship's bows indistinct to me, as I paced the bridge on my watch,
two hours after Clark's announcement.

For a long time all was very still, save for the occasional whine of a dog. I was alone, and
it grew toward the end of my watch, when Maitland would succeed me. My slow tread tolled like
a passing-bell, and the mountainous ice lay vague and white around me, its sheeted ghastliness
not less dreadfully silent than eternity itself.

Presently, several of the dogs began barking together, left off, and began again.

I said to myself; 'There is a bear about somewhere.'

And after some five minutes I saw--I thought that I saw--it. The fog had, if anything thickened;
and it was now very near the end of my watch.

It had entered the ship, I concluded, by the boards which slanted from an opening in the port
bulwarks down to the ice. Once before, in November, a bear, having smelled the dogs, had ventured
on board at midnight: but then there had resulted a perfect hubbub among the dogs. Now, even
in the midst of my excitement, I wondered at their quietness, though some whimpered--with fear,
I thought. I saw the creature steal forward from the hatchway toward the kennels a-port; and
I ran noiselessly, and seized the watch-gun which stood always loaded by the companionway.

By this time, the form had passed the kennels, reached the bows, and now was making toward
me on the starboard side. I took aim. Never, I thought, had I seen so huge a bear--though I
made allowance for the magnifying effect of the fog.

My finger was on the trigger: and at that moment a deathly shivering sickness took me, the
wrangling voices shouted at me, with 'Shoot!' 'Shoot not!' 'Shoot!' Ah well, that latter shout
was irresistible. I drew the trigger. The report hooted through the Polar night.

The creature dropped; both Wilson and Clark were up at once: and we three hurried to the spot.

But the very first near glance showed a singular kind of bear. Wilson put his hand to the head,
and a lax skin came away at his touch.... It was Aubrey Maitland who was underneath it, and
I had shot him dead.

For the past few days he had been cleaning skins, among them the skin of the bear from which
I had saved him at Taimur. Now, Maitland was a born pantomimist, continually inventing practical
jokes; and perhaps to startle me with a false alarm in the very skin of the old Bruin which
had so nearly done for him, he had thrown it round him on finishing its cleaning, and so, in
mere wanton fun, had crept on deck at the hour of his watch. The head of the bear-skin, and
the fog, must have prevented him from seeing me taking aim.

This tragedy made me ill for weeks. I saw that the hand of Fate was upon me. When I rose from
bed, poor Maitland was lying in the ice behind the great camel-shaped hummock near us.

By the end of January we had drifted to 80° 55'; and it was then that Clark, in the presence
of Wilson, asked me if I would make the fourth man, in the place of poor Maitland, for the
dash in the spring. As I said 'Yes, I am willing,' David Wilson spat with a disgusted emphasis.
A minute later he sighed, with 'Ah, poor Maitland...' and drew in his breath with a tut! tut!

God knows, I had an impulse to spring then and there at his throat, and strangle him: but I
curbed myself.

There remained now hardly a month before the dash, and all hands set to work with a will, measuring
the dogs, making harness and seal-skin shoes for them, overhauling sledges and kayaks, and
cutting every possible ounce of weight. But we were not destined, after all, to set out that
year. About the 20th February, the ice began to pack, and the ship was subjected to an appalling
pressure. We found it necessary to make trumpets of our hands to shout into one another's ears,
for the whole ice-continent was crashing, popping, thundering everywhere in terrific upheaval.
Expecting every moment to see the Boreal crushed to splinters, we had to set about unpacking
provisions, and placing sledges, kayaks, dogs and everything in a position for instant flight.
It lasted five days, and was accompanied by a tempest from the north, which, by the end of
February, had driven us back south into latitude 79° 40'. Clark, of course, then abandoned
the thought of the Pole for that summer.

And immediately afterwards we made a startling discovery: our stock of reindeer-moss was found
to be somehow ridiculously small. Egan, our second mate, was blamed; but that did not help
matters: the sad fact remained. Clark was advised to kill one or two of the deer, but he pig-headedly
refused: and by the beginning of summer they were all dead.

Well, our northward drift recommenced. Toward the middle of February we saw a mirage of the
coming sun above the horizon; there were flights of Arctic petrels and snow-buntings; and spring
was with us. In an ice-pack of big hummocks and narrow lanes we made good progress all the summer.

When the last of the deer died, my heart sank; and when the dogs killed two of their number,
and a bear crushed a third, I was fully expecting what actually came; it was this: Clark announced
that he could now take only two companions with him in the spring: and they were Wilson and
Mew. So once more I saw David Wilson's pleased smile of malice.

We settled into our second winter-quarters. Again came December, and all our drear sunless
gloom, made worse by the fact that the windmill would not work, leaving us without the electric
light.

Ah me, none but those who have felt it could dream of one half the mental depression of that
long Arctic night; how the soul takes on the hue of the world; and without and within is nothing
but gloom, gloom, and the reign of the Power of Darkness.

Not one of us but was in a melancholic, dismal and dire mood; and on the 13th December Lamburn,
the engineer, stabbed Cartwright, the old harpooner, in the arm.

Three days before Christmas a bear came close to the ship, and then turned tail. Mew, Wilson,
I and Meredith (a general hand) set out in pursuit. After a pretty long chase we lost him,
and then scattered different ways. It was very dim, and after yet an hour's search, I was returning
weary and disgusted to the ship, when I saw some shadow like a bear sailing away on my left,
and at the same time sighted a man--I did not know whom--running like a handicapped ghost some
little distance to the right. So I shouted out:

'There he is--come on! This way!'

The man quickly joined me, but as soon as ever he recognised me, stopped dead. The devil must
have suddenly got into him, for he said:

'No, thanks, Jeffson: alone with you I am in danger of my life....'

It was Wilson. And I, too, forgetting at once all about the bear, stopped and faced him.

'I see,' said I. 'But, Wilson, you are going to explain to me now what you mean, you hear?
What do you mean, Wilson?'

'What I say,' he answered deliberately, eyeing me up and down: 'alone with you I am in danger
of my life. Just as poor Maitland was, and just as poor Peters was. Certainly, you are a deadly
beast.'

Fury leapt, my God, in my heart. Black as the tenebrous Arctic night was my soul.

'Do you mean,' said I, 'that I want to put you out of the way in order to go in your place
to the Pole? Is that your meaning, man?'

'That's about my meaning, Jeffson,' says he: 'you are a deadly beast, you know.'

'Stop!' I said, with blazing eye. 'I am going to kill you, Wilson--as sure as God lives: but
I want to hear first. Who told you that I killed Peters?'

'Your lover killed him--with your collusion. Why, I heard you, man, in your beastly sleep,
calling the whole thing out. And I was pretty sure of it before, only I had no proofs. By God,
I should enjoy putting a bullet into you, Jeffson!'

'You wrong me--you, you wrong me!' I shrieked, my eyes staring with ravenous lust for his blood;
'and now I am going to pay you well for it. Look out, you!'

I aimed my gun for his heart, and I touched the trigger. He held up his left hand.

'Stop,' he said, 'stop.' (He was one of the coolest of men ordinarily.) 'There is no gallows
on the Boreal, but Clark could easily rig one for you. I want to kill you, too, because there
are no criminal courts up here, and it would be doing a good action for my country. But not
here--not now. Listen to me--don't shoot. Later we can meet, when all is ready, so that no
one may be the wiser, and fight it all out.'

As he spoke I let the gun drop. It was better so. I knew that he was much the best shot on
the ship, and I an indifferent one: but I did not care, I did not care, if I was killed.

It is a dim, inclement land, God knows: and the spirit of darkness and distraction is there.

Twenty hours later we met behind the great saddle-shaped hummock, some six miles to the S.E.
of the ship. We had set out at different times, so that no one might suspect. And each brought
a ship's-lantern.

Wilson had dug an ice-grave near the hummock, leaving at its edge a heap of brash-ice and snow
to fill it. We stood separated by an interval of perhaps seventy yards, the grave between us,
each with a lantern at his feet.

Even so we were mere shadowy apparitions one to the other. The air glowered very drearily,
and present in my inmost soul were the frills of cold. A chill moon, a mere abstraction of
light, seemed to hang far outside the universe. The temperature was at 55° below zero, so that
we had on wind-clothes over our anoraks, and heavy foot-bandages under our Lap boots. Nothing
but a weird morgue seemed the world, haunted with despondent madness; and exactly like that
world about us were the minds of us two poor men, full of macabre, bleak, and funereal feelings.

Between us yawned an early grave for one or other of our bodies.

I heard Wilson cry out:

'Are you ready, Jeffson?'

'Aye, Wilson!' cried I.

'Then here goes!' cries he.

Even as he spoke, he fired. Surely, the man was in deadly earnest to kill me.

But his shot passed harmlessly by me: as indeed was only likely: we were mere shadows one to
the other.

I fired perhaps ten seconds later than he: but in those ten seconds he stood perfectly revealed
to me in clear, lavender light.

An Arctic fire-ball had traversed the sky, showering abroad, a sulphurous glamour over the
snow-landscape. Before the intenser blue of its momentary shine had passed away, I saw Wilson
stagger forward, and drop. And him and his lantern I buried deep there under the rubble ice.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 13th March, nearly three months later, Clark, Mew and I left the Boreal in latitude 85° 15'.

We had with us thirty-two dogs, three sledges, three kayaks, human provisions for 112 days,
and dog provisions for 40. Being now about 340 miles from the Pole, we hoped to reach it in
43 days, then, turning south, and feeding living dogs with dead, make either Franz Josef Land
or Spitzbergen, at which latter place we should very likely come up with a whaler.

Well, during the first days, progress was very slow, the ice being rough and laney, and the
dogs behaving most badly, stopping dead at every difficulty, and leaping over the traces. Clark
had had the excellent idea of attaching a gold-beater's-skin balloon, with a lifting power
of 35 pounds, to each sledge, and we had with us a supply of zinc and sulphuric-acid to repair
the hydrogen-waste from the bags; but on the third day Mew over-filled and burst his balloon,
and I and Clark had to cut ours loose in order to equalise weights, for we could neither leave
him behind, turn back to the ship, nor mend the bag. So it happened that at the end of the
fourth day out, we had made only nineteen miles, and could still from a hummock discern afar
the leaning masts of the old Boreal. Clark led on ski, captaining a sledge with 400 lbs. of
instruments, ammunition, pemmican, aleuronate bread; Mew followed, his sledge containing provisions
only; and last came I, with a mixed freight. But on the third day Clark had an attack of snow-blindness,
and Mew took his place.

Pretty soon our sufferings commenced, and they were bitter enough. The sun, though constantly
visible day and night, gave no heat. Our sleeping-bags (Clark and Mew slept together in one,
I in another) were soaking wet all the night, being thawed by our warmth; and our fingers,
under wrappings of senne-grass and wolf-skin, were always bleeding. Sometimes our frail bamboo-cane
kayaks, lying across the sledges, would crash perilously against an ice-ridge--and they were
our one hope of reaching land. But the dogs were the great difficulty: we lost six mortal hours
a day in harnessing and tending them. On the twelfth day Clark took a single-altitude observation,
and found that we were only in latitude 86° 45'; but the next day we passed beyond the furthest
point yet reached by man, viz. 86° 53', attained by the Nix explorers four years previously.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our one secret thought now was food, food--our day-long lust for the eating-time. Mew suffered
from 'Arctic thirst.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under these conditions, man becomes in a few days, not a savage only, but a mere beast, hardly
a grade above the bear and walrus. Ah, the ice! A long and sordid nightmare was that, God knows.

On we pressed, crawling our little way across the Vast, upon whose hoar silence, from Eternity
until then, Bootes only, and that Great Bear, had watched.

       *       *       *       *       *

After the eleventh day our rate of march improved: all lanes disappeared, and ridges became
much less frequent. By the fifteenth day I was leaving behind the ice-grave of David Wilson
at the rate of ten to thirteen miles a day.

Yet, as it were, his arm reached out and touched me, even there.

His disappearance had been explained by a hundred different guesses on the ship--all plausible
enough. I had no idea that anyone connected me in any way with his death.

But on our twenty-second day of march, 140 miles from our goal, he caused a conflagration of
rage and hate to break out among us three.

It was at the end of a march, when our stomachs were hollow, our frames ready to drop, and
our mood ravenous and inflamed. One of Mew's dogs was sick: it was necessary to kill it: he
asked me to do it.

'Oh,' said I, 'you kill your own dog, of course.'

'Well, I don't know,' he replied, catching fire at once, 'you ought to be used to killing,
Jeffson.'

'How do you mean, Mew?' said I with a mad start, for madness and the flames of Hell were instant
and uppermost in us all: 'you mean because my profession----'

'Profession! damn it, no,' he snarled like a dog: 'go and dig up David Wilson--I dare say you
know where to find him--and he will tell you my meaning, right enough.'

I rushed at once to Clark, who was stooping among the dogs, unharnessing: and savagely pushing
his shoulder, I exclaimed:

'That beast accuses me of murdering David Wilson!'

'Well?' said Clark.

'I'd split his skull as clean----!'

'Go away, Adam Jeffson, and let me be!' snarled Clark.

'Is that all you've got to say about it, then--you?'

'To the devil with you, man, say I, and let me be!' cried he: 'you know your own conscience
best, I suppose.'

Before this insult I stood with grinding teeth, but impotent. However, from that moment a deeper
mood of brooding malice occupied my spirit. Indeed the humour of us all was one of dangerous,
even murderous, fierceness. In that pursuit of riches into that region of cold, we had become
almost like the beasts that perish.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the 10th April we passed the 89th parallel of latitude, and though sick to death, both in
spirit and body, pressed still on. Like the lower animals, we were stricken now with dumbness,
and hardly once in a week spoke a word one to the other, but in selfish brutishness on through
a real hell of cold we moved. It is a cursed region--beyond doubt cursed--not meant to be penetrated
by man: and rapid and awful was the degeneration of our souls. As for me, never could I have
conceived that savagery so heinous could brood in a human bosom as now I felt it brood in mine.
If men could enter into a country specially set apart for the habitation of devils, and there
become possessed of evil, as we were so would they be.

       *       *       *       *       *

As we advanced, the ice every day became smoother; so that, from four miles a day, our rate
increased to fifteen, and finally (as the sledges lightened) to twenty.

It was now that we began to encounter a succession of strange-looking objects lying scattered
over the ice, whose number continually increased as we proceeded. They had the appearance of
rocks, or pieces of iron, incrusted with glass-fragments of various colours, and they were
of every size. Their incrustations we soon determined to be diamonds, and other precious stones.
On our first twenty-mile day Mew picked up a diamond-crystal as large as a child's foot, and
such objects soon became common. We thus found the riches which we sought, beyond all dream;
but as the bear and the walrus find them: for ourselves we had lost; and it was a loss of riches
barren as ashes, for for all those millions we would not have given an ounce of fish-meal.
Clark grumbled something about their being meteor-stones, whose ferruginous substance had been
lured by the magnetic Pole, and kept from frictional burning in their fall by the frigidity
of the air: and they quickly ceased to interest our sluggish minds, except in so far as they
obstructed our way.

       *       *       *       *       *

We had all along had good weather: till, suddenly, on the morning of the 13th April, we were
overtaken by a tempest from the S.W., of such mighty and solemn volume that the heart quailed
beneath it. It lasted in its full power only an hour, but during that time snatched two of
our sledges long distances, and compelled us to lie face-downward. We had travelled all the
sun-lit night, and were gasping with fatigue; so as soon as the wind allowed us to huddle together
our scattered things, we crawled into the sleeping-bags, and instantly slept.

We knew that the ice was in awful upheaval around us; we heard, as our eyelids sweetly closed,
the slow booming of distant guns, and brittle cracklings of artillery. This may have been a
result of the tempest stirring up the ocean beneath the ice. Whatever it was, we did not care:
we slept deep.

We were within ten miles of the Pole.

       *       *       *       *       *

In my sleep it was as though someone suddenly shook my shoulder with urgent 'Up! up!' It was
neither Clark nor Mew, but a dream merely: for Clark and Mew, when I started up, I saw lying
still in their sleeping-bag.

I suppose it must have been about noon. I sat staring a minute, and my first numb thought was
somehow this: that the Countess Clodagh had prayed me 'Be first'--for her. Wondrous little
now cared I for the Countess Clodagh in her far unreal world of warmth--precious little for
the fortune which she coveted: millions on millions of fortunes lay unregarded around me. But
that thought, Be first! was deeply suggested in my brain, as if whispered there. Instinctively,
brutishly, as the Gadarean swine rushed down a steep place, I, rubbing my daft eyes, arose.

The first thing which my mind opened to perceive was that, while the tempest was less strong,
the ice was now in extraordinary agitation. I looked abroad upon a vast plain, stretched out
to a circular, but waving horizon, and varied by many hillocks, boulders, and sparkling meteor-stones
that everywhere tinselled the blinding white, some big as houses, most small as limbs. And
this great plain was now rearranging itself in a widespread drama of havoc, withdrawing in
ravines like mutual backing curtsies, then surging to clap together in passionate mountain-peaks,
else jostling like the Symplegades, fluent and inconstant as billows of the sea, grinding itself,
piling itself, pouring itself in cataracts of powdered ice, while here and there I saw the
meteor-stones leap spasmodically, in dusts and heaps, like geysers or spurting froths in a
steamer's wake, a tremendous uproar, meantime, filling all the air. As I stood, I plunged and
staggered, and I found the dogs sprawling, with whimperings, on the heaving floor.

I did not care. Instinctively, daftly, brutishly, I harnessed ten of them to my sledge; put
on Canadian snow-shoes: and was away northward--alone.

The sun shone with a clear, benign, but heatless shining: a ghostly, remote, yet quite limpid
light, which seemed designed for the lighting of other planets and systems, and to strike here
by happy chance. A great wind from the S.W., meantime, sent thin snow-sweepings flying northward
past me.

