Her husband watched her, half smiling--his shrunken face flushed, his eyes full of a curious
excitement. She had grown stout in the last five years, poor Laura!--she had lost her youth
before the crash came. But she was still very pleasant to look upon, with her plentiful fair
hair, and her pretty mouth--her instinct for beautiful dress--and her soft appealing manner.
He suddenly envisaged her in black--with a plain white collar and cuffs, and something white
on her hair. Then vehemently shaking off his thought he rose and went to her.

"Dear--didn't Duggy want you to ask somebody for the shoot? I thought I heard him mention somebody?'

"That was ages ago. He doesn't want anybody asked now," said Lady Laura resentfully. "He can't
understand why you want a party."

"I thought he said something about Lady Constance Bledlow?"

"That was in June!" cried Lady Laura. "He certainly wouldn't let me ask her, as things are."

"Have you any idea whether he may have wanted to marry her?"

"He was very much taken with her. But how can he think about marrying, Arthur? You do say the
strangest things. And after Dagnall's behaviour too."

"Raison de plus! That girl has money, my dear, and will have more, when the old aunts depart
this life. If you want Duggy still to go into Parliament, and to be able to do anything for
the younger ones, you'll keep an eye on her."

Lady Laura, however, was too depressed to welcome the subject. The gong rang for dinner, and
as they were leaving the room, Sir Arthur said--

"There are two men coming down to-morrow to see the pictures, Laura. If I were you, I should
keep out of the way."

She gave him a startled look. But they were already on the threshold of the dining-room, where
a butler and two footmen waited. The husband and wife took their places opposite each other
in the stately panelled room, which contained six famous pictures. Over the mantelpiece was
a half-length Gainsborough, one of the loveliest portraits in the world, a miracle of shining
colour and languid grace, the almond eyes with their intensely black pupils and black eyebrows
looking down, as it seemed, contemptuously upon this after generation, so incurably lacking
in its own supreme refinement. Opposite Lady Laura was a full-length Van Dyck of the Genoese
period, a mother in stiff brocade and ruff, with an adorable child at her knee; and behind
her chair was the great Titian of the house, a man in armour, subtle and ruthless as the age
which bred him, his hawk's eye brooding on battles past, and battles to come, while behind
him stretched the Venetian lagoon, covered dimly with the fleet of the great republic which
had employed him. Facing the Gainsborough hung one of Cuyp's few masterpieces--a mass of shipping
on the Scheldt, with Dordrecht in the background. For play and interplay of everything that
delights the eye--light and distance, transparent water, and hovering clouds, the lustrous
brown of fishing boats, the beauty of patched sails and fluttering flags--for both literary
and historic suggestion, Dutch art had never done better. Impressionists and post-impressionists
came down occasionally to stay at Flood--for Sir Arthur liked to play Mæcenas--and were allowed
to deal quite frankly with the pictures, as they wandered round the room at dessert, cigarette
in hand, pointing out the absurdities of the Cuyp and the Titian. Their host, who knew that
he possessed in that room what the collectors of two continents desired, who felt them buzzing
outside like wasps against a closed window, took a special pleasure in the scoffs of the advanced
crew. They supplied an agreeable acid amid a general adulation that bored him.

To-night the presence of the pictures merely increased the excitement which was the background
of his mind. He talked about them a good deal at dinner, wondering secretly all the time, what
it would be like to do without them--without Flood--without his old butler there--without everything.

Douglas came down late, and was very silent and irresponsive. He too was morbidly conscious
of the pictures, though he wished his father wouldn't talk about them. He was conscious of
everything that meant money--of his mother's pearls for instance, which she wore every evening
without thinking about them. If he did well with the pictures on the morrow she might, perhaps,
justly keep them, as a dowry for Nelly. But if not--He found himself secretly watching his
mother, wondering how she would take it all when she really understood--what sort of person
she would turn out to be in the new life to which they were all helplessly tending.

After dinner, he followed his father into the smoking room.

"Where is the catalogue of the pictures, father?"

"In the library, Duggy, to the right hand of the fire-place. I paid a fellow a very handsome
sum for making it--a fellow who knew a lot--a real expert. But, of course, when we published
it, all the other experts tore it to pieces."

"If I bring it, will you go through it with me?"

Sir Arthur shrugged his shoulders.

"I don't think I will, Duggy. The catalogue--there are a great many marginal notes on it which
the published copies haven't got--will tell you all I know about them, and a great deal more.
And you'll find a loose paper at the beginning, on which I've noted down the prices people
have offered me for them from time to time. Like their impudence, I used to think! I leave
it to you, old boy. I know it's a great responsibility for a young fellow like you. But the
fact is--I'm pumped. Besides, when they make their offer, we can talk it over. I think I'll
go and play a game of backgammon with your mother."

He threw away his cigar, and Douglas, angry at what seemed to him his father's shirking, stood
stiffly aside to let him pass. Sir Arthur opened the door. He seemed to walk uncertainly, and
he stooped a great deal. From the hall outside, he looked back at his son.

"I think I shall see M'Clintock next time I'm in town, Duggy. I've had some queer pains across
my chest lately."

"Indigestion?" said Douglas. His tone was casual.

"Perhaps. Oh, they're nothing. But it's best to take things in time."

He walked away, leaving his son in a state of seething irritation. Extraordinary that a man
could think of trumpery ailments at such a time! It was unlike his father too, whose personal
fitness and soundness, whether on the moors, in the hunting field, or in any other sort of
test, had always been triumphantly assumed by his family, as part of the general brilliance
of Sir Arthur's role in life.

Douglas sombrely set himself to study the picture catalogue, and sat smoking and making notes
till nearly midnight. Having by that time accumulated a number of queries to which answers
were required, he went in search of his father. He found him in the drawing-room, still playing
backgammon with Lady Laura.

"Oh Duggy, I'm so tired!" cried his mother plaintively, as soon as he appeared. "And your father
will go on. Do come and take my place."

Sir Arthur rose.

"No, no, dear--we've had enough. Many thanks. If you only understood its points, backgammon
is really an excellent game. Well, Duggy, ready to go to bed?"

"When I've asked you a few questions, father."

Lady Laura escaped, having first kissed her son with tearful eyes. Sir Arthur checked a yawn,
and tried to answer Douglas's enquiries. But very soon he declared that he had no more to say,
and couldn't keep awake.

Douglas watched him mounting the famous staircase of the house, with its marvellous rampe,
bought under the Bourbon Restoration from one of the historic chateaux of France; and, suddenly,
the young man felt his heart gripped. Was that shrunken, stooping figure really his father?
Of course they must have M'Clintock at once--and get him away--to Scotland or abroad.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The two gentlemen are in the red drawing-room, sir!" Douglas and his father were sitting together
in the library, after lunch, on the following afternoon, when the butler entered.

"Damn them!" said Sir Arthur under his breath. Then he got up, smiling, as the servant disappeared.
"Well, Duggy, now's your chance. I'm a brute not to come and help you, my boy. But I've made
such a mess of driving the family coach, you'd really better take a turn. I shall go out for
an hour. Then you can come and report to me."

Douglas went into the red drawing-room, one of the suite of rooms dating from the early seventeenth
century which occupied the western front of the house. As he entered, he saw two men at the
farther end closely examining a large Constable, of the latest "palette-knife" period, which
hung to the left of the fire-place. One of the men was short, very stout, with a fringe of
grey hair round his bald head, a pair of very shrewd and sparkling black eyes, a thick nose,
full lips, and a double chin. He wore spectacles, and was using in addition, a magnifying glass
with which he was examining the picture. Beside him stood a thin, slightly-bearded man, cadaverous
in colour, who, with his hands in his pockets, was holding forth in a nonchalant, rather patronising
voice.

Both of them turned at Douglas's entrance, surveying the son of the house with an evident and
eager curiosity.

"You are, I suppose, Mr. Douglas Falloden?" said the short man, speaking perfect English, though
with a slight German accent. "Your father is not able to see us?"

"My father will be pleased to see you, when you have been the round of the pictures," said
Douglas stiffly. "He deputes me to show you what we have."

The short man laughed.

"I expect we know what you have almost as well as you. Let me introduce Mr. Miklos."

Douglas bowed, so did the younger man. He was, as Douglas already knew, a Hungarian by birth,
formerly an official in one of the museums of Budapest, then at Munich, and now an "expert"
at large, greatly in demand as the adviser of wealthy men entering the field of art collecting,
and prepared to pay almost anything for success in one of the most difficult and fascinating
chasses that exist.

"I see you have given this room almost entirely to English pictures," said Mr. Miklos politely.
"A fine Constable!"--he pointed to the picture they had just been considering--"but not, I
think, entirely by the master?"

"My great-grandfather bought it from Constable himself," said Douglas. "It has never been disputed
by any one."

Mr. Miklos did not reply, but he shook his head with a slight smile, and walked away towards
a Turner, a fine landscape of the middle period, hanging close to the Constable. He peered
into it short-sightedly, with his strong glasses.

"A pity that it has been so badly relined," he said presently, to Douglas, pointing to it.

"You think so? Its condition is generally thought to be excellent. My father was offered eight
thousand for it last year by the Berlin Museum."

Douglas was now apparently quite at his ease. With his thumbs in the armholes of his white
waistcoat, he strolled along beside the two buyers, holding his own with both of them, thanks
to his careful study of the materials for the history of the collection possessed by his father.
The elder man, a Bremen ship-owner,--one Wilhelm Schwarz--who had lately made a rapid and enormous
fortune out of the Argentine trade, and whose chief personal ambition it now was to beat the
New York and Paris collectors, in the great picture game, whatever it might cost, was presently
forced to take some notice of the handsome curly-headed youth in the perfectly fitting blue
serge suit, whose appearance as the vendor, or the vendor's agent, had seemed to him, at first,
merely one more instance of English aristocratic stupidity.

As a matter of fact, Herr Schwarz was simply dazzled by the contents of Flood Castle. He had
never dreamt that such virgin treasures still existed in this old England, till Miklos, instructed
by the Falloden lawyer, had brought the list of the pictures to his hotel, a few days before
this visit. And now he found it extremely difficult to conceal his excitement and delight,
or to preserve, in the presence of this very sharp-eyed young heir, the proper "don't care"
attitude of the buyer. He presently left the "running down" business almost entirely to Miklos,
being occupied in silent and feverish speculations as to how much he could afford to spend,
and a passion of covetous fear lest somehow A----, or Z----, or K----, the leading collectors
of the moment, should even yet forestall him, early and "exclusive" as Miklos assured him their
information had been.

They passed along through the drawing-rooms, and the whole wonderful series of family portraits,
Reynolds', Lawrences, Gainsboroughs, Romneys, Hoppners, looked down, unconscious of their doom,
upon the invaders, and on the son of the house, so apparently unconcerned. But Douglas was
very far from unconcerned. He had no artistic gift, and he had never felt or pretended any
special interest in the pictures. They were part of Flood, and Flood was the inseparable adjunct
of the Falloden race. When his father had first mooted the sale of them, Douglas had assented
without much difficulty. If other things went, why not they?

But now that he was in the thick of the business, he found, all in a moment, that he had to
set his teeth to see it through. A smarting sense of loss--loss hateful and irreparable, cutting
away both the past and the future--burnt deep into his mind, as he followed in the track of
the sallow and depreciatory Miklos or watched the podgy figure of Herr Schwarz, running from
side to side as picture after picture caught his eye. The wincing salesman saw himself as another
Charles Surface; but now that the predicament was his own it was no longer amusing. These fair
faces, these mothers and babies of his own blood, these stalwart men, fighters by sea and land,
these grave thinkers and churchmen, they thronged about him transformed, become suddenly alien
and hostile, a crowd of threatening ghosts, the outraged witnesses of their own humiliation.
"For what are you selling us?"--they seemed to say. "Because some one, who was already overfed,
must needs grab at a larger mess of pottage--and we must pay! Unkind! degenerate!"

Presently, after the English drawing-rooms, and the library, with its one Romney, came the
French room, with its precious Watteaus, its Latours, its two brilliant Nattiers. And here
Herr Schwarz's coolness fairly deserted him. He gave little shrieks of pleasure, which brought
a frown to the face of his companion, who was anxious to point out that a great deal of the
Watteau was certainly pupil-work, that the Latours were not altogether "convincing" and the
Nattiers though extremely pretty, "superficial." But Herr Schwarz brushed him aside.

"Nein, nein, lieber freund! Dat Nattier is as fine as anything at Potsdam. Dat I must have!"
And he gazed in ecstasy at the opulent shoulders, the rounded forms, and gorgeous jewelled
dress of an unrivalled Madame de Pompadour, which had belonged to her brother, the Marquis
de Marigny.

"You will have all or nothing, my good sir!" thought Falloden, and bided his time.

Meanwhile Miklos, perceiving that his patron was irretrievably landed and considering that
his own "expert" dignity had been sufficiently saved, relaxed into enthusiasm and small talk.
Only in the later Italian rooms did his critical claws again allow themselves to scratch. A
small Leonardo, the treasure of the house, which had been examined and written about by every
European student of Milanese art for half a century, was suavely pronounced--

"A Da Predis, of course, but a very nice one!" A Bellini became a Rondinelli; and the names
of a dozen obscure, and lately discovered painters, freely applied to the Tintorets, Mantegnas
and Cimas on the walls, produced such an effect on Herr Schwarz that he sat down open-mouthed
on the central ottoman, staring first at the pictures and then at the speaker; not knowing
whether to believe or to doubt. Falloden stood a little apart, listening, a smile on his handsome
mouth.

"We should know nothing about Rondinelli," said Miklos at last, sweetly--"but for the great Bode--"

"Ach, Bode!" said Herr Schwarz, nodding his head in complacent recognition at the name of the
already famous assistant-director of the Berlin Museum.

Falloden laughed.

"Dr. Bode was here last year. He told my father he thought the Bellini was one of the finest
in existence."

Miklos changed countenance slightly.

"Bode perhaps is a trifle credulous," he said in an offended tone.

But he went back again to the Bellini and examined it closely. Falloden, without waiting for
his second thoughts, took Herr Schwarz into the dining-room.

At the sight of the six masterpieces hanging on its walls, the Bremen ship-owner again lost
his head. What miraculous good-fortune had brought him, ahead of all his rivals, into this
still unravaged hive? He ran from side to side,--he grew red, perspiring, inarticulate. At
last he sank down on a chair in front of the Titian, and when Miklos approached, delicately
suggesting that the picture, though certainly fine, showed traces of one of the later pupils,
possibly Molari, in certain parts, Herr Schwarz waved him aside.

"Nein, nein!--Hold your tongue, my dear sir! Here must I judge for myself."

Then looking up to Falloden who stood beside him, smiling, almost reconciled to the vulgar,
greedy little man by his collapse, he said abruptly--

"How much, Mr. Falloden, for your father's collection?"

"You desire to buy the whole of it?" said Falloden coolly.

"I desire to buy everything that I have seen," said Herr Schwarz, breathing quickly. "Your
solicitors gave me a list of sixty-five pictures. No, no, Miklos, go away!"--he waved his expert
aside impatiently.

"Those were the pictures on the ground floor," said Falloden. "You have seen them all. You
had better make your offer in writing, and I will take it to my father."

He fetched pen and paper from a side-table and put them before the excited German. Herr Schwarz
wrinkled his face in profound meditation. His eyes almost disappeared behind his spectacles,
then emerged sparkling.

He wrote some figures on a piece of paper, and handed it to Douglas.

Douglas laughed drily, and returned it.

"You will hardly expect me to give my father the trouble of considering that."

Herr Schwarz puffed and blowed. He got up, and walked about excitedly. He lit a cigarette,
Falloden politely helping him. Miklos advanced again.

"I have, myself, made a very careful estimate--" he began, insinuatingly.

"No, no, Miklos,--go away!--go away!" repeated Schwarz impatiently, almost walking over him.
Miklos retreated sulkily.

Schwarz took up the paper of figures, made an alteration, and handed it to Falloden.

"It is madness," he said--"sheer madness. But I have in me something of the poet--the Crusader."

Falloden's look of slightly sarcastic amusement, as the little man breathlessly examined his
countenance, threw the buyer into despair. Douglas put down the paper.

"We gave you the first chance, Herr Schwarz. As you know, nobody is yet aware of our intentions
to sell. But I shall advise my father to-night to let one or two of the dealers know."

"Ach, lieber Gott!" said Herr Schwarz, and walking away to the window, he stood looking into
the rose-garden outside, making a curious whistling sound with his prominent lips, expressive,
evidently, of extreme agitation.

Falloden lit another cigarette, and offered one to Miklos.

At the end of two or three minutes, Schwarz again amended the figures on the scrap of paper,
and handed it sombrely to Falloden.

"Dat is my last word."

Falloden glanced at it, and carelessly said--

"On that I will consult my father."

He left the room.

Schwarz and Miklos looked at each other.

"What airs these English aristocrats give themselves," said the Hungarian angrily--"even when
they are beggars, like this young man!"

Schwarz stood frowning, his hands in his pockets, legs apart. His agitation was calming down,
and his more prudent mind already half regretted his impetuosity.

"Some day--we shall teach them a lesson!" he said, under his breath, his eyes wandering over
the rose-garden and the deer-park beyond. The rapidly growing docks of Bremen and Hamburg,
their crowded shipping, the mounting tide of their business, came flashing into his mind--ran
through it in a series of images. This England, with her stored wealth, and her command of
the seas--must she always stand between Germany and her desires? He found himself at once admiring
and detesting the English scene on which he looked. That so much good German money should have
to go into English pockets for these ill-gotten English treasures! What a country to conquer--and
to loot!

"And they are mere children compared to us--silly, thick-headed children! Yet they have all
the plums--everywhere."

       *       *       *       *       *

Falloden came back. The two men turned eagerly.

"My father thanks you for your offer, gentlemen. He is very sorry he is not able to see you
as he hoped. He is not very well this afternoon. But I am to say that he will let you have
an answer in twenty-four hours. Then if he agrees to your terms, the matter will have to go
before the court. That, of course, our lawyers explained to you--"

"That will not suit me at all!" cried Herr Schwarz. "As far as your father is concerned, my
offer must be accepted--or rejected--now."

He struck his open hand on the polished mahogany of the table beside him.

"Then I am very sorry you have had the trouble of coming down," said Falloden politely. "Shall
I order your carriage?"

The great ship-owner stared at him. He was on the point of losing his temper, perhaps of withdrawing
from his bargain, when over Falloden's head he caught sight of the Titian and the play of light
on its shining armour; of the Van Dyck opposite. He gave way helplessly; gripped at the same
moment by his parvenu's ambition, and by the genuine passion for beautiful things lodged oddly
in some chink of his common and Philistine personality.

"I have the refusal then--for twenty-four hours?" he said curtly.

Falloden nodded, wrote him a statement to that effect, ordered whisky and soda, and saw them
safely to their carriage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then pacing slowly through the rooms, he went back towards the library. His mind was divided
between a kind of huckster's triumph and a sense of intolerable humiliation. All around him
were the "tribal signs" of race, continuity, history--which he had taken for granted all his
life. But now that a gulf had opened between him and them, his heart clung to them consciously
for the first time. No good! He felt himself cast out--stripped--exposed. The easy shelter
fashioned for him and his by the lives of generations of his kindred had fallen in fragments
about him.

"Well--I never earned it!"--he said to himself bitterly, turning in disgust on his own self-pity.

When he reached the library he found his father walking up and down deep in thought. He looked
up as his son entered.

"Well, that saves the bankruptcy, Duggy, and--as far as I can see--leaves a few thousands over--portions
for the younger children, and what will enable you to turn round."

Douglas assented silently. After a long look at his son, Sir Arthur opened a side door which
led from the library into the suite of drawing-rooms. Slowly he passed through them, examining
the pictures steadily, one by one. At the end of the series, he turned and came back again
to his own room, with a bent head and meditative step. Falloden followed him.

In the library, Sir Arthur suddenly straightened himself.

"Duggy, do you hate me--for the mess I've made--of your inheritance?"

The question stirred a quick irritation in Falloden. It seemed to him futile and histrionic;
akin to all those weaknesses in his father which had brought them disaster.

"I don't think you need ask me that," he said, rather sharply, as he opened a drawer in his
father's writing-table, and locked up the paper containing Herr Schwarz's offer.

Sir Arthur looked at him wistfully.

"You've been a brick, Duggy--since I told you. I don't know that I had any right to count upon it."

"What else could I do?" said Douglas, trying to laugh, but conscious--resenting it--of a swelling
in the throat.

"You could have given a good many more twists to the screw--if you'd been a different sort,"
said his father slowly. "And you're a tough customer, Duggy, to some people. But to me"--He
paused, beginning again in another tone--

"Duggy, don't be offended with me--but did you ever want to marry Lady Constance Bledlow? You
wrote to me about her at Christmas."

Douglas gave a rather excited laugh.

"It's rather late in the day to ask me that question."

His father eyed him.

"You mean she refused you?"

His son nodded.

"Before this collapse?"

"Before she knew anything about it"

"Poor old Duggy!" said his father, in a low voice. "But perhaps--after all--she'll think better
of it. By all accounts she has the charm of her mother, whom Risborough married to please himself
and not his family."

Falloden said nothing. He wished to goodness his father would drop the subject. Sir Arthur
understood he was touching things too sore to handle, and sighed.

"Well, shake hands, Duggy, old boy. You carried this thing through splendidly to-day. But it
seems to have taken it out of me--which isn't fair. I shall go for a little walk. Tell your
mother I shall be back in an hour or so."

The son took his father's hand. The strong young grasp brought a momentary sense of comfort
to the older man. They eyed each other, both pale, both conscious of feelings to which it was
easier to give no voice. Then their hands dropped. Sir Arthur looked for his hat and stick,
which were lying near, and went out of the open glass door into the garden. He passed through
the garden into the park beyond walking slowly and heavily, his son's eyes following him.

CHAPTER XIV

Out of sight of the house, at the entrance of the walk leading to the moor, Sir Arthur was
conscious again of transitory, but rather sharp pains across the chest.

He sat down to rest, and they soon passed away. After a few minutes he pursued his walk, climbing
towards the open stretches of heathery moor, which lay beyond the park, and a certain ghyll
or hollow with a wild stream in it that cleft the moor high up--one of his favourite haunts.

He climbed through ferny paths, and amid stretches of heather just coming to its purple prime,
up towards the higher regions of the moor where the millstone grit cropped out in sharp edges,
showing gaunt and dark against the afternoon sky. Here the beautiful stream that made a waterfall
within the park came sliding down shelf after shelf of yellowish rock, with pools of deep brown
water at intervals, overhung with mountain ash and birch.

