And in a week's time the sound of her loud but yet pleasant voice, and the step of her heavy
but yet active foot, and the glow of her red cherry cheek were as well known on the esplanade
as though she were a Littlebathian of two months' standing. Of course she had found friends
there, such friends as one always does find at such places--dear delightful people whom she
had met some years before for a week at Ems, or sat opposite to once at the hotel table at
Harrowgate for a fortnight. Miss Todd had a very large circle of such friends; and, to do her
justice, we must say that she was always glad to see them, and always treated them well. She
was ready to feed them at all times; she was not candid or malicious when backbiting them;
she never threw the burden of her pleasures on her friends' shoulders--as ladies at Littlebath
will sometimes do. She did not boast either of her purse or her acquaintance; and as long as
she was allowed to do exactly what she liked she generally kept her temper. She had an excellent
digestion, and greatly admired the same quality in other people. She did not much care what
she said of others, but dearly liked to have mischief spoken of herself. Some one once had
said--or very likely no one had said it, but a soupçon of a hint had in some way reached her
own ears--that she had left Torquay without paying her bills. It was at any rate untrue, but
she had sedulously spread the report; and now wherever she ordered goods, she would mysteriously
tell the tradesman that he had better inquire about her in Devonshire. She had been seen walking
one moonlight night with a young lad at Bangor: the lad was her nephew; but some one had perhaps
jested about Miss Todd and her beau, and since that time she was always talking of eloping
with her own flesh and blood.

But Miss Todd was not a bad woman. She spent much in feeding those who perhaps were not hungry;
but she fed the hungry also: she indulged a good deal in silk brocades; but she bought ginghams
as well, and calicos for poor women, and flannel petticoats for motherless girls. She did go
to sleep sometimes in church, and would sit at a whist-table till two o'clock of a Sunday morning;
but having been selected from a large family by an uncle as his heir, she had divided her good
things with brothers and sisters, and nephews and nieces. And so there were some hearts that
blessed her, and some friends who loved her with a love other than that of her friends of Littlebath
and Ems, of Jerusalem and Harrowgate.

And she had loved in her early days, and had been told and had believed that she was loved.
But evidence had come to her that her lover was a scamp--a man without morals and without principle;
and she had torn herself away from him. And Miss Todd had offered to him money compensation,
which the brute had taken; and since that, for his sake, or rather for her love's sake, she
had rejected all further matrimonial tenders, and was still Miss Todd: and Miss Todd she intended
to remain.

Being such as she was, the world of Littlebath was soon glad to get about her. Those who give
suppers at their card-parties are not long in Littlebath in making up the complement of their
guests. She had been there now ten days, and had already once or twice mustered a couple of
whist-tables; but this affair was to be on a larger scale.

Miss Baker she had not yet seen, nor Miss Waddington. The ladies had called on each other,
but had missed fire on both occasions; but with Sir Lionel she had already renewed her intimacy
on very affectionate terms. They had been together for perhaps three days at Jerusalem, but
then three days at Jerusalem are worth a twelvemonth in such a dull, slow place as London.
And Sir Lionel, therefore, and Miss Todd had nearly rushed into each other's arms; and they
both, without any intentional falsehood, were talking of each other all over Littlebath as
old and confidential friends.

And now for Miss Todd's party. Assist me, my muse. Come down from heaven, O, Calliope my queen!
and aid me to spin with my pen a long discourse. Hark! do you hear? or does some fond delusion
mock me? I seem to hear, and to be already wandering through those sacred recesses--the drawing-rooms,
namely, at Littlebath--which are pervious only to the streams and breezes of good society.

Miss Todd stood at her drawing-room door as her guests were ushered in, not by the greengrocer's
assistant, but by the greengrocer himself in person. And she made no quiet little curtsies,
whispered no unmeaning welcomes with bated breath. No; as they arrived she seized each Littlebathian
by the hand, and shook that hand vigorously. She did so to every one that came, rejoiced loudly
in the coming of each, and bade them all revel in tea and cake with a voice that demanded and
received instant obedience.

"Ah, Lady Longspade! this is kind. I am delighted to see you. Do you remember dear Ems, and
the dear Kursaal? Ah, me! Well, do take some tea now, Lady Longspade. What, Miss Finesse--well--well--well.
I was thinking of Ostend only the other day. You'll find Flounce there with coffee and cake
and all that. You remember my woman, Flounce, don't you? Mrs. Fuzzybell, you really make me
proud. But is not Mr. Fuzzybell to be here? Oh, he's behind is he? well--I'm so glad. Ha! ha!
ha! A slow coach is he? I'll make him faster. But perhaps you won't trust him to me, I'm such
a dangerous creature. I'm always eloping with some one. Who knows but I might go off with Mr.
Fuzzybell? We were near it you know at the end of that long walk at Malvern--only he seemed
too tired--ha! ha! ha! There's tea and cake there, Mrs. Fuzzybell. My dear Sir Lionel, I am
delighted. I declare you are five years younger--we are both five years younger than when we
were at Jerusalem."

And so forth. But Sir Lionel did not pass on to the tea-tables as did the Finesses and the
Longspades. He remained close at Miss Todd's elbow, as though his friendship was of a more
enduring kind than that of others, as though he were more to Miss Todd than Mrs. Fuzzybell,
nearer than Miss Ruff who had just been assured at her entrance that the decks should be made
ready for action almost at once. A lion-hearted old warrior was Miss Ruff,--one who could not
stand with patience the modern practice of dallying in the presence of her enemies' guns. She
had come there for a rubber of whist--to fight the good fight--to conquer or to die, and her
soul longed to be at it. Wait but one moment longer, Miss Ruff, and the greengrocer and I will
have done with our usherings, and then the decks shall be cleared.

But we must certainly do the honours for our old friend Miss Baker. Miss Todd, when she saw
her, looked as though she would have fallen on her neck and kissed her; but she doubtless remembered
that their respective head-dresses might suffer in the encounter.

"At last, dear Miss Baker; at last! I am so delighted; but where is Miss Waddington? where
is the bride-elect?" These last words were said in a whisper which was not perhaps quite as
plainly audible at the other side of the Paragon as were the generality of Miss Todd's speeches.
"Indisposed! Why is she indisposed? you mean that she has love-letters to write. I know that
is what you mean." And the roar again became a whisper fit for Drury Lane. "Well, I shall make
a point of seeing her to-morrow. Do you remember Jehoshaphat, dear Jehoshaphat?" And then having
made her little answers, Miss Baker also passed on, and left Miss Todd in the act of welcoming
the Rev. Mr. O'Callaghan.

Miss Baker passed on, but she did so slowly. She had to speak to Sir Lionel, who kept his place
near Miss Todd's shoulder; and perhaps she had some secret hope--no, not hope; some sort of
an anticipation--that her dear friend would give her the benefit of his arm for a few moments.
But Sir Lionel did nothing of the kind. He took her hand with his kindest little squeeze, asked
with his softest voice after his dear Caroline, and then let her pass on by herself. Miss Baker
was a bird easily to be lured to her perch,--or to his. Sir Lionel felt that he could secure
her at any time. Therefore, he determined to attach himself to Miss Todd for the present. And
so Miss Baker walked on alone, perhaps a little piqued at being thus slighted.

It was a strange sight to see the Rev. Mr. O'Callaghan among that worldly crowd of pleasure-seeking
sinners. There were, as we have said, three sets of people at Littlebath. That Miss Todd, with
her commanding genius and great power of will, should have got together portions of two of
them was hardly to be considered wonderful. Both the fast and heavy set liked good suppers.
But it did appear singular to the men and women of both these sets that they should find themselves
in the same room with Mr. O'Callaghan.

Mr. O'Callaghan was not exactly the head and font of piety at Littlebath. It was not on his
altars, not on his chiefly, that hecatombs of needlework were offered up. He was only senior
curate to the great high-priest, to Dr. Snort himself. But though he was but curate, he was
more perhaps to Littlebath--to his especial set in Littlebath--than most rectors are to their
own people.

Mr. O'Callaghan was known to be condescending and mild under the influence of tea and muffins--sweetly
so if the cream be plentiful and the muffins soft with butter; but still, as a man and a pastor,
he was severe. In season and out of season he was hot in argument against the devil and all
his works. He was always fighting the battle with all manner of weapons. He would write letters
of killing reproach to persons he had never known, and address them by post to--

   "John Jones, Esq.,
   The Sabbath-breaker,
   5 Paradise Terrace,
   Littlebath."

or--

   "Mrs. Gambler Smith,
   2 Little Paragon,
   Littlebath."

Nothing was too severe for him. One may say that had he not been a clergyman, and therefore
of course justified in any interference, he would have been kicked from Littlebath to London
and back again long since. How then did it come to pass that he was seen at Miss Todd's party?
The secret lay in Miss Todd's unbounded power. She was not as other Littlebathians. When he
unintentionally squeezed her hand, she squeezed his in return with somewhat of a firmer grasp.
When, gently whispering, he trusted that she was as well in spirit as in body, she answered
aloud--and all the larger Paragon heard her--that she was very well in both, thank God. And
then, as her guests pressed in, she passed him on rapidly to the tea and cake, and to such
generous supplies of cream as Mrs. Flounce, in her piety, might be pleased to vouchsafe to him.

"What, Mr. O'Callaghan!" said Sir Lionel into Miss Todd's ear, in a tone of well-bred wonder
and triumphant admiration. "Mr. O'Callaghan among the sinners! My dear Miss Todd, how will
he like the whist-tables?"

"If he does not like them, he must just do the other thing. If I know anything of Miss Ruff,
a whole college of O'Callaghans would not keep her from the devil's books for five minutes
longer. Oh, here is Lady Ruth Revoke, my dear Lady Ruth, I am charmed to see you. When, I wonder,
shall we meet again at Baden Baden? Dear Baden Baden! Flounce, green tea for Lady Ruth Revoke."
And so Miss Todd continued to do her duty.

What Miss Todd had said of her friend was quite true. Even then Miss Ruff was standing over
a card-table, with an open pack in her hands, quite regardless of Mr. O'Callaghan. "Come, Lady
Longspade," she said, "we are wasting time sadly. It is ever so much after nine. I know Miss
Todd means us to begin. She told me so. Suppose we sit down?"

But Lady Longspade merely muttered something and passed on. In the first place, she was not
quite so eager as was Miss Ruff; and in the next, Miss Ruff was neither the partner nor the
opponent with whom she delighted to co-operate. Lady Longspade liked to play first-fiddle at
her own table; but Miss Ruff always played first-fiddle at her table, let the others be whom
they might; and she very generally played her tunes altogether "con spirito."

Miss Ruff saw how Lady Longspade passed on, but she was nothing disconcerted. She was used
to that, and more than that. "Highty-tighty!" was all she said. "Well, Mrs. Garded, I think
we can manage without her ladyship, can't we?" Mrs. Garded said that she thought they might
indeed, and stood by the table opposite to Miss Ruff. This was Mrs. King Garded, a widow of
great Littlebathian repute, to whom as a partner over the green table few objected. She was
a careful, silent, painstaking player, one who carefully kept her accounts, and knew well that
the monthly balance depended mainly, not on her good, but on her bad hands. She was an old
friend, and an old enemy of Miss Ruff's. The two would say very spiteful things to each other,
things incredible to persons not accustomed to the card-tables of Littlebath. But, nevertheless,
they were always willing to sit together at the same rubber.

To them came up smirking little Mr. Fuzzybell. Mr. Fuzzybell was not great at whist, nor did
he much delight in it; but, nevertheless, he constantly played. He was taken about by his wife
to the parties, and then he was always caught and impaled, and generally plucked and skinned
before he was sent home again. He never disported at the same table with his wife, who did
not care to play either with him or against him; but he was generally caught by some Miss Ruff,
or some Mrs. King Garded, and duly made use of. The ladies of Littlebath generally liked to
have one black coat at the table with them. It saved them from that air of destitution which
always, in their own eyes, attaches to four ladies seated at a table together.

"Ah, Mr. Fuzzybell," said Miss Ruff, "you are the very person we are looking for. Mrs. Garded
always likes to have you at her table. Sit down, Mr. Fuzzybell." Mr. Fuzzybell did as he was
told, and sat down.

Just at this moment, as Miss Ruff was looking out with eager eyes for a fourth who would suit
her tastes, and had almost succeeded in catching the eye of Miss Finesse--and Miss Finesse
was a silent, desirable, correct player--who should walk up to the table and absolutely sit
down but that odious old woman, Lady Ruth Revoke! It was Mrs. Garded's great sin, in Miss Ruff's
eye, that she toadied Lady Ruth to such an extent as to be generally willing to play with her.
Now it was notorious in Littlebath that she had never played well, and that she had long since
forgotten all she had ever known. The poor old woman had already had some kind of a fit; she
was very shaky and infirm, and ghastly to look at, in spite of her paint and ribbons. She was
long in arranging her cards, long in playing them; very long in settling her points, when the
points went against her, as they generally did. And yet, in spite of all this, Mrs. King Garded
would encourage her because her father had been Lord Whitechapel!

There was no help for it now. There she was in the chair; and unless Miss Ruff was prepared
to give up her table and do something that would be uncommonly rude even for her, the rubber
must go on. She was not prepared at any rate to give up her table, so she took up a card to
cut for partners. There were two to one in her favour. If fortune would throw her ladyship
and Mr. Fuzzybell together there might yet be found in the easiness of the prey some consolation
for the slowness of the play.

They cut the cards, and Miss Ruff found herself sitting opposite to Lady Ruth Revoke. It was
a pity that she should not have been photographed. "And now, Mr. Fuzzybell," said Mrs. King
Garded, triumphantly.

But we must for awhile go to other parts of the room. Lady Longspade, Mrs. Fuzzybell, and Miss
Finesse soon followed the daring example of Miss Ruff, and seated themselves with some worthy
fourth compatriot.

"Did you see Miss Ruff?" said Lady Longspade, whose ears had caught the scornful highty-tighty
of the rejected lady. "She wanted to get me at her table. But no, I thank you. I like my rubber
too, and can play it as well as some other people. But it may cost too dear, eh, Mrs. Fuzzybell?
I have no idea of being scolded by Miss Ruff."

"No, nor I," said Mrs. Fuzzybell. "I hate that continual scolding. We are playing only for
amusement; and why not play in good temper?"--nevertheless Mrs. Fuzzybell had a rough side
to her own tongue. "It is you and I, Miss Finesse. Shillings, I suppose, and--" and then there
was a little whispering and a little grinning between Lady Longspade and Mrs. Fuzzybell, the
meaning of which was, that as the occasion was rather a special one, they would indulge themselves
with half-a-crown on the rubber and sixpence each hand on the odd trick. And so the second
table went to work.

And then there was a third, and a fourth, and a fifth. Miss Ruff's example was more potent
than Mr. O'Callaghan's presence in that assembly. That gentleman began to feel unhappy as there
was no longer round him a crowd of listening ladies sufficient to screen from his now uninquiring
eyes the delinquencies of the more eager of the sinners. The snorting of the war-horse and
the sound of the trumpet had enticed away every martial bosom, and Mr. O'Callaghan was left
alone in converse with Mrs. Flounce.

He turned to Miss Todd, who was now seated near enough to the door to do honour to any late
arriving guest, but near enough also to the table to help herself easily to cake. His soul
burned within him to utter one anathema against the things that he saw. Miss Todd was still
not playing. He might opine that she objected to the practice. Sir Lionel was still at her
back; he also might be a brand that had been rescued from the burning. At a little distance
sat Miss Baker; he knew that she at any rate was not violently attached to cards. Could he
not say something? Could he not lift up his voice, if only for a moment, and speak forth as
he so loved to do, as was his wont in the meetings of the saints, his brethren?

He looked at Miss Todd, and he raised his eyes, and he raised his hands, but the courage was
not in him to speak. There was about Miss Todd as she stood, or as she sat, a firmness which
showed itself even in her rotundity, a vigour in the very rubicundity of her cheek which was
apt to quell the spirit of those who would fain have interfered with her. So Mr. O'Callaghan,
having raised his eyes considerably, and having raised his hands a little, said nothing.

"I fear you do not approve of cards?" said Miss Todd.

"Approve! oh no, how can I approve of them, Miss Todd?"

"Well, I do with all my heart. What are old women like us to do? We haven't eyes to read at
night, even if we had minds fit for it. We can't always be saying our prayers. We have nothing
to talk about except scandal. It's better than drinking; and we should come to that if we hadn't
cards."

"Oh, Miss Todd!"

"You see you have your excitement in preaching, Mr. O'Callaghan. These card-tables are our
pulpits; we have got none other. We haven't children, and we haven't husbands. That is, the
most of us. And we should be in a lunatic asylum in six weeks if you took away our cards. Now,
will you tell me, Mr. O'Callaghan, what would you expect Miss Ruff to do if you persuaded her
to give up whist?"

"She has the poor with her always, Miss Todd."

"Yes, she has; the woman that goes about with a clean apron and four borrowed children; and
the dumb man with a bit of chalk and no legs, and the very red nose. She has these, to be sure,
and a lot more. But suppose she looks after them all the day, she can't be looking after them
all the night too. The mind must be unbent sometimes, Mr. O'Callaghan."

"But to play for money, Miss Todd! Is not that gambling?"

"Well, I don't know. I can't say what gambling is. But do you sit down and play for love, Mr.
O'Callaghan, and see how soon you'll go to sleep. Come, shall we try? I can have a little private
bet, just to keep myself awake, with Sir Lionel, here."

But Mr. O'Callaghan declined the experiment. So he had another cup of tea and another muffin,
and then went his way; regretting sorely in his heart that he could not get up into a high
pulpit and preach at them all. However, he consoled himself by "improving" the occasion on
the following Sunday.

For the next fifteen minutes Sir Lionel stood his ground, saying soft nothings to Miss Todd,
and then he also became absorbed among the rubbers. He found that Miss Todd was not good at
having love made to her in public. She was very willing to be confidential, very willing to
receive flattery, attentions, hand-pressings, and the like. But she would make her confidences
in her usual joyous, loud voice; and when told that she was looking remarkably well, she would
reply that she always did look well at Littlebath, in a tone that could not fail to attract
the attention of the whole room. Now Sir Lionel would fain have been a little more quiet in
his proceedings, and was forced to put off somewhat of what he had to say till he could find
Miss Todd alone on the top of a mountain. 'Twas thus at least that he expressed his thoughts
to himself in his chagrin, as he took his place opposite to Mrs. Shortpointz at the seventh
and last establishment now formed in the rooms.

The only idlers present were Miss Baker and Miss Todd. Miss Baker was not quite happy in her
mind. It was not only that she was depressed about Caroline: her firm belief in the grammatical
axiom before alluded to lessened her grief on that score. But the conduct of Sir Lionel made
her uncomfortable; and she began to find, without at all understanding why, that she did not
like Miss Todd as well as she used to do at Jerusalem. Her heart took Mr. O'Callaghan's side
in that little debate about the cards; and though Sir Lionel, in leaving Miss Todd, did not
come to her, nevertheless the movement was agreeable to her. She was not therefore in her very
highest spirits when Miss Todd came and sat close to her on the sofa.

"I am so sorry you should be out," said Miss Todd. "But you see, I've had so much to do at
the door there, that I couldn't see who was sitting down with who."

"I'd rather be out," said Miss Baker. "I am not quite sure that Mr. O'Callaghan is not right."
This was her revenge.

"No; he's not a bit right, my dear. He does--just what the man says in the rhymes--what is
it? you know--makes up for his own little peccadilloes by damning yours and mine. I forget
how it goes. But there'll be more in by-and-by, and then we'll have another table. Those who
come late will be more in your line; not so ready to peck your eyes out if you happen to forget
a card. That Miss Ruff is dreadful." Here an awful note was heard, for the Lady Ruth had just
put her thirteenth trump on Miss Ruff's thirteenth heart. What Littlebathian female soul could
stand that unmoved?

"Oh, dear! that poor old woman!" continued Miss Todd. "You know one lives in constant fear
of her having a fit. Miss Ruff is horrible. She has a way of looking with that fixed eye of
hers that is almost worse than her voice." The fact was, that Miss Ruff had one glass eye.
"I know she'll be the death of that poor old creature some of these days. Lady Ruth will play,
and she hardly knows one card from another. And then Miss Ruff, she will scold. Good heavens!
do you hear that?"

"It's just seven minutes since I turned the last trick of the last hand," Miss Ruff had said,
scornfully. "We shall have finished the two rubbers about six in the morning, I take it."

"Will your ladyship allow me to deal for you?" said Mr. Fuzzybell, meaning to be civil.

"I'll allow you to do no such thing," croaked out Lady Ruth. "I can deal very well myself;
at any rate as well as Miss Ruff. And I'm not the least in a hurry;" and she went on slobbering
out the cards, and counting them over and over again, almost as each card fell.

"That's a double and a treble against a single," said Lady Longspade, cheerfully, from another
table; "six points, and five--the other rubber--makes eleven; and the two half-crowns is sixteen,
and seven odd tricks is nineteen and six. Here's sixpence, Mrs. Fuzzybell; and now we'll cut
again."

This was dreadful to Miss Ruff. Here had her rival played two rubbers, won them both, pocketed
all but a sovereign, and was again at work; while she, she was still painfully toiling through
her second game, the first having been scored against her by her partner's fatuity in having
trumped her long heart. Was this to be borne with patience? "Lady Ruth," she said, emitting
fire out of her one eye, "do you ever mean to have done dealing those cards?"

Lady Ruth did not condescend to make any answer, but recommenced her leisurely counting; and
then Miss Ruff uttered that terrific screech which had peculiarly excited Miss Todd's attention.

"I declare I don't like it at all," said the tender-hearted Miss Baker. "I think Mr. O'Callaghan
was quite right."

"No, my dear, he was quite wrong, for he blamed the use of cards, not the abuse. And after
all, what harm comes of it? I don't suppose Miss Ruff will actually kill her. I dare say if
we were playing ourselves we shouldn't notice it. Do you play cribbage? Shall we have a little
cribbage?" But Miss Baker did not play cribbage; or, at any rate, she said that she did not.

"And do tell me something about dear Caroline," continued Miss Todd. "I am so anxious to see
her. But it has been a very long engagement, hasn't it? and there ought to be lots of money,
oughtn't there? But I suppose it's all right. You know I was very much in love with young Bertram
myself; and made all manner of overtures to him, but quite in vain; ha! ha! ha! I always thought
him a very fine fellow, and I think her a very lucky girl. And when is it to be? And, do tell
me, is she over head and ears in love with him?"

What was Miss Baker to say to this? She had not the slightest intention of making Miss Todd
a confidante in the matter: certainly not now, as that lady was inclined to behave so very
improperly with Sir Lionel; and yet she did not know how to answer it.

"I hope it won't be put off much longer," continued Miss Todd. "Is any day fixed yet?"

"No; no day is fixed yet," replied Miss Baker, blushing.

Miss Todd's ear was very quick. "There is nothing the matter, I trust. Well, I won't ask any
questions, nor say a word to anybody. Come, there is a table vacant, and we will cut in." And
then she determined that she would get it all out from Sir Lionel.

The parties at some of the tables were now changed, and Miss Baker and Miss Todd found themselves
playing together. Miss Baker, too, loved a gentle little rubber, if she could enjoy it quietly,
without fear of being gobbled up by any Ruff or any Longspade; and with Miss Todd she was in
this matter quite safe. She might behave as badly as had the Lady Ruth, and Miss Todd would
do no worse than laugh at her. Miss Todd did not care about her points, and at her own house
would as soon lose as win; so that Miss Baker would have been happy had she not still continued
to sigh over her friend's very improper flirtation with Sir Lionel.

