"No, I won't promise that. You don't know how Kutuzov is pestered since his appointment as
Commander in Chief. He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies have conspired to give him
all their sons as adjutants."

"No, but do promise! I won't let you go! My dear benefactor..."

"Papa," said his beautiful daughter in the same tone as before, "we shall be late."

"Well, au revoir! Good-by! You hear her?"

"Then tomorrow you will speak to the Emperor?"

"Certainly; but about Kutuzov, I don't promise."

"Do promise, do promise, Vasili!" cried Anna Mikhaylovna as he went, with the smile of a coquettish
girl, which at one time probably came naturally to her, but was now very ill-suited to her
careworn face.

Apparently she had forgotten her age and by force of habit employed all the old feminine arts.
But as soon as the prince had gone her face resumed its former cold, artificial expression.
She returned to the group where the vicomte was still talking, and again pretended to listen,
while waiting till it would be time to leave. Her task was accomplished.

CHAPTER V

"And what do you think of this latest comedy, the coronation at Milan?" asked Anna Pavlovna,
"and of the comedy of the people of Genoa and Lucca laying their petitions before Monsieur
Buonaparte, and Monsieur Buonaparte sitting on a throne and granting the petitions of the nations?
Adorable! It is enough to make one's head whirl! It is as if the whole world had gone crazy."

Prince Andrew looked Anna Pavlovna straight in the face with a sarcastic smile.

"'Dieu me la donne, gare a qui la touche!' * They say he was very fine when he said that,"
he remarked, repeating the words in Italian: "'Dio mi l'ha dato. Guai a chi la tocchi!'"

     * God has given it to me, let him who touches it beware!

"I hope this will prove the last drop that will make the glass run over," Anna Pavlovna continued.
"The sovereigns will not be able to endure this man who is a menace to everything."

"The sovereigns? I do not speak of Russia," said the vicomte, polite but hopeless: "The sovereigns,
madame... What have they done for Louis XVII, for the Queen, or for Madame Elizabeth? Nothing!"
and he became more animated. "And believe me, they are reaping the reward of their betrayal
of the Bourbon cause. The sovereigns! Why, they are sending ambassadors to compliment the usurper."

And sighing disdainfully, he again changed his position.

Prince Hippolyte, who had been gazing at the vicomte for some time through his lorgnette, suddenly
turned completely round toward the little princess, and having asked for a needle began tracing
the Conde coat of arms on the table. He explained this to her with as much gravity as if she
had asked him to do it.

"Baton de gueules, engrele de gueules d'azur--maison Conde," said he.

The princess listened, smiling.

"If Buonaparte remains on the throne of France a year longer," the vicomte continued, with
the air of a man who, in a matter with which he is better acquainted than anyone else, does
not listen to others but follows the current of his own thoughts, "things will have gone too
far. By intrigues, violence, exile, and executions, French society--I mean good French society--will
have been forever destroyed, and then..."

He shrugged his shoulders and spread out his hands. Pierre wished to make a remark, for the
conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna, who had him under observation, interrupted:

"The Emperor Alexander," said she, with the melancholy which always accompanied any reference
of hers to the Imperial family, "has declared that he will leave it to the French people themselves
to choose their own form of government; and I believe that once free from the usurper, the
whole nation will certainly throw itself into the arms of its rightful king," she concluded,
trying to be amiable to the royalist emigrant.

"That is doubtful," said Prince Andrew. "Monsieur le Vicomte quite rightly supposes that matters
have already gone too far. I think it will be difficult to return to the old regime."

"From what I have heard," said Pierre, blushing and breaking into the conversation, "almost
all the aristocracy has already gone over to Bonaparte's side."

"It is the Buonapartists who say that," replied the vicomte without looking at Pierre. "At
the present time it is difficult to know the real state of French public opinion."

"Bonaparte has said so," remarked Prince Andrew with a sarcastic smile.

It was evident that he did not like the vicomte and was aiming his remarks at him, though without
looking at him.

"'I showed them the path to glory, but they did not follow it,'" Prince Andrew continued after
a short silence, again quoting Napoleon's words. "'I opened my antechambers and they crowded
in.' I do not know how far he was justified in saying so."

"Not in the least," replied the vicomte. "After the murder of the duc even the most partial
ceased to regard him as a hero. If to some people," he went on, turning to Anna Pavlovna, "he
ever was a hero, after the murder of the duc there was one martyr more in heaven and one hero
less on earth."

Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile their appreciation of the vicomte's epigram,
Pierre again broke into the conversation, and though Anna Pavlovna felt sure he would say something
inappropriate, she was unable to stop him.

"The execution of the Duc d'Enghien," declared Monsieur Pierre, "was a political necessity,
and it seems to me that Napoleon showed greatness of soul by not fearing to take on himself
the whole responsibility of that deed."

"Dieu! Mon Dieu!" muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper.

"What, Monsieur Pierre... Do you consider that assassination shows greatness of soul?" said
the little princess, smiling and drawing her work nearer to her.

"Oh! Oh!" exclaimed several voices.

"Capital!" said Prince Hippolyte in English, and began slapping his knee with the palm of his hand.

The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders. Pierre looked solemnly at his audience over his
spectacles and continued.

"I say so," he continued desperately, "because the Bourbons fled from the Revolution leaving
the people to anarchy, and Napoleon alone understood the Revolution and quelled it, and so
for the general good, he could not stop short for the sake of one man's life."

"Won't you come over to the other table?" suggested Anna Pavlovna.

But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her.

"No," cried he, becoming more and more eager, "Napoleon is great because he rose superior to
the Revolution, suppressed its abuses, preserved all that was good in it--equality of citizenship
and freedom of speech and of the press--and only for that reason did he obtain power."

"Yes, if having obtained power, without availing himself of it to commit murder he had restored
it to the rightful king, I should have called him a great man," remarked the vicomte.

"He could not do that. The people only gave him power that he might rid them of the Bourbons
and because they saw that he was a great man. The Revolution was a grand thing!" continued
Monsieur Pierre, betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth
and his wish to express all that was in his mind.

"What? Revolution and regicide a grand thing?... Well, after that... But won't you come to
this other table?" repeated Anna Pavlovna.

"Rousseau's Contrat social," said the vicomte with a tolerant smile.

"I am not speaking of regicide, I am speaking about ideas."

"Yes: ideas of robbery, murder, and regicide," again interjected an ironical voice.

"Those were extremes, no doubt, but they are not what is most important. What is important
are the rights of man, emancipation from prejudices, and equality of citizenship, and all these
ideas Napoleon has retained in full force."

"Liberty and equality," said the vicomte contemptuously, as if at last deciding seriously to
prove to this youth how foolish his words were, "high-sounding words which have long been discredited.
Who does not love liberty and equality? Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality. Have
people since the Revolution become happier? On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Buonaparte
has destroyed it."

Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the vicomte and from the vicomte
to their hostess. In the first moment of Pierre's outburst Anna Pavlovna, despite her social
experience, was horror-struck. But when she saw that Pierre's sacrilegious words had not exasperated
the vicomte, and had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him, she rallied her
forces and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator.

"But, my dear Monsieur Pierre," said she, "how do you explain the fact of a great man executing
a duc--or even an ordinary man who--is innocent and untried?"

"I should like," said the vicomte, "to ask how monsieur explains the 18th Brumaire; was not
that an imposture? It was a swindle, and not at all like the conduct of a great man!"

"And the prisoners he killed in Africa? That was horrible!" said the little princess, shrugging
her shoulders.

"He's a low fellow, say what you will," remarked Prince Hippolyte.

Pierre, not knowing whom to answer, looked at them all and smiled. His smile was unlike the
half-smile of other people. When he smiled, his grave, even rather gloomy, look was instantaneously
replaced by another--a childlike, kindly, even rather silly look, which seemed to ask forgiveness.

The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this young Jacobin was
not so terrible as his words suggested. All were silent.

"How do you expect him to answer you all at once?" said Prince Andrew. "Besides, in the actions
of a statesman one has to distinguish between his acts as a private person, as a general, and
as an emperor. So it seems to me."

"Yes, yes, of course!" Pierre chimed in, pleased at the arrival of this reinforcement.

"One must admit," continued Prince Andrew, "that Napoleon as a man was great on the bridge
of Arcola, and in the hospital at Jaffa where he gave his hand to the plague-stricken; but...
but there are other acts which it is difficult to justify."

Prince Andrew, who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of Pierre's remarks, rose
and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go.

Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend, and asking them all
to be seated began:

"I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it. Excuse me, Vicomte--I must
tell it in Russian or the point will be lost...." And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story
in such Russian as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia. Everyone
waited, so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his story. 

I will transcribe a sonnet suggested to William by this place, and written in October 1803:—

Six thousand Veterans practised in War’s game, Tried men, at Killicrankie
were array’d Against an equal host that wore the Plaid, Shepherds
and herdsmen.

Like a whirlwind came The Highlanders; the slaughter spread like
flame, And Garry, thundering down his mountain road, Was stopp’d,
and could not breathe beneath the load Of the dead bodies.

’Twas a day of shame For them whom precept and the pedantry Of cold mechanic battle do enslave. Oh!
for a single hour of that Dundee Who on that day the word of onset
gave: Like conquest might the men of England see, And her Foes find
a like inglorious grave.

We turned back again, and going down the hill below the Pass, crossed
the same bridge we had come over the night before, and walked through
Lady Perth’s grounds by the side of the Garry till we came to the
Tummel, and then walked up to the cascade of the Tummel.

The fall is inconsiderable, scarcely more than an ordinary ‘wear;’ but it makes a loud roaring over
large stones, and the whole scene is grand—hills, mountains, woods, and rocks. --- is a very pretty
place, all but the house.

Stoddart’s print gives no notion of it. The house stands upon a small plain at the junction
of the two rivers, a close deep spot, surrounded by high hills and woods. After we had breakfasted
William fetched the car, and, while we were conveying the luggage to the outside of the gate,
where it stood, Mr. ---, mal apropos, came very near to the door, called the woman out, and
railed at her in the most abusive manner for ‘harbouring’ people
in that way.

She soon slipped from him, and came back to us: I wished that William
should go and speak to her master, for I was afraid that he might
turn the poor woman away; but she would not suffer it, for she did
not care whether they stayed or not.

In the meantime, Mr. --- continued scolding her husband; indeed,
he appeared to be not only proud, but very ignorant, insolent, and
low-bred.

The woman told us that she had sometimes lodged poor travellers who were passing along the road,
and permitted others to cook their victuals in her house, for which Mr. --- had reprimanded her
before; but, as she said, she did not value her place, and it was no matter. In sounding forth the
dispraise of Mr. ---, I ought not to omit mentioning that the poor woman had great delight in
talking of the excellent qualities of his mother, with whom she had been a servant, and lived
many years. After having interchanged good wishes we parted with our charitable hostess, who,
telling us her name, entreated us, if ever we came that way again, to inquire for her.

We travelled down the Tummel till it is lost in the Tay, and then,
in the same direction, continued our course along the vale of Tay,
which is very wide for a considerable way, but gradually narrows,
and the river, always a fine stream, assumes more dignity and importance.



Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she contemplated between
Anatole and the little princess' sister-in-law.

"I rely on you, my dear," said Anna Pavlovna, also in a low tone. "Write to her and let me
know how her father looks at the matter. Au revoir!"--and she left the hall.

Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and, bending his face close to her, began to
whisper something.

Two footmen, the princess' and his own, stood holding a shawl and a cloak, waiting for the
conversation to finish. They listened to the French sentences which to them were meaningless,
with an air of understanding but not wishing to appear to do so. The princess as usual spoke
smilingly and listened with a laugh.

"I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador's," said Prince Hippolyte "-so dull-. It has
been a delightful evening, has it not? Delightful!"

"They say the ball will be very good," replied the princess, drawing up her downy little lip.
"All the pretty women in society will be there."

"Not all, for you will not be there; not all," said Prince Hippolyte smiling joyfully; and
snatching the shawl from the footman, whom he even pushed aside, he began wrapping it round
the princess. Either from awkwardness or intentionally (no one could have said which) after
the shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time, as though embracing her.

Still smiling, she gracefully moved away, turning and glancing at her husband. Prince Andrew's
eyes were closed, so weary and sleepy did he seem.

"Are you ready?" he asked his wife, looking past her.

Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak, which in the latest fashion reached to his very
heels, and, stumbling in it, ran out into the porch following the princess, whom a footman
was helping into the carriage.

"Princesse, au revoir," cried he, stumbling with his tongue as well as with his feet.

The princess, picking up her dress, was taking her seat in the dark carriage, her husband was
adjusting his saber; Prince Hippolyte, under pretense of helping, was in everyone's way.

"Allow me, sir," said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold, disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte
who was blocking his path.

"I am expecting you, Pierre," said the same voice, but gently and affectionately.

The postilion started, the carriage wheels rattled. Prince Hippolyte laughed spasmodically
as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte whom he had promised to take home.

"Well, mon cher," said the vicomte, having seated himself beside Hippolyte in the carriage,
"your little princess is very nice, very nice indeed, quite French," and he kissed the tips
of his fingers. Hippolyte burst out laughing.

"Do you know, you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs," continued the vicomte. "I
pity the poor husband, that little officer who gives himself the airs of a monarch."

Hippolyte spluttered again, and amid his laughter said, "And you were saying that the Russian
ladies are not equal to the French? One has to know how to deal with them."

Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew's study like one quite at home, and
from habit immediately lay down on the sofa, took from the shelf the first book that came to
his hand (it was Caesar's Commentaries), and resting on his elbow, began reading it in the middle.

"What have you done to Mlle Scherer? She will be quite ill now," said Prince Andrew, as he
entered the study, rubbing his small white hands.

Pierre turned his whole body, making the sofa creak. He lifted his eager face to Prince Andrew,
smiled, and waved his hand.

"That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the right light.... In my opinion
perpetual peace is possible but--I do not know how to express it... not by a balance of political
power...."

It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract conversation.

"One can't everywhere say all one thinks, mon cher. Well, have you at last decided on anything?
Are you going to be a guardsman or a diplomatist?" asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence.

Pierre sat up on the sofa, with his legs tucked under him.

"Really, I don't yet know. I don't like either the one or the other."

"But you must decide on something! Your father expects it."

Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor, and had remained away
till he was twenty. When he returned to Moscow his father dismissed the abbe and said to the
young man, "Now go to Petersburg, look round, and choose your profession. I will agree to anything.
Here is a letter to Prince Vasili, and here is money. Write to me all about it, and I will
help you in everything." Pierre had already been choosing a career for three months, and had
not decided on anything. It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking. Pierre rubbed
his forehead.

"But he must be a Freemason," said he, referring to the abbe whom he had met that evening.

"That is all nonsense." Prince Andrew again interrupted him, "let us talk business. Have you
been to the Horse Guards?"

"No, I have not; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to tell you. There is a war
now against Napoleon. If it were a war for freedom I could understand it and should be the
first to enter the army; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world
is not right."

Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre's childish words. He put on the air of
one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense, but it would in fact have been difficult
to give any other answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question.

"If no one fought except on his own conviction, there would be no wars," he said.

"And that would be splendid," said Pierre.

Prince Andrew smiled ironically.

"Very likely it would be splendid, but it will never come about..."

"Well, why are you going to the war?" asked Pierre.

"What for? I don't know. I must. Besides that I am going..." He paused. "I am going because
the life I am leading here does not suit me!"

CHAPTER VII

The rustle of a woman's dress was heard in the next room. Prince Andrew shook himself as if
waking up, and his face assumed the look it had had in Anna Pavlovna's drawing room. Pierre
removed his feet from the sofa. The princess came in. She had changed her gown for a house
dress as fresh and elegant as the other. Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a chair for her.

"How is it," she began, as usual in French, settling down briskly and fussily in the easy chair,
"how is it Annette never got married? How stupid you men all are not to have married her! Excuse
me for saying so, but you have no sense about women. What an argumentative fellow you are,
Monsieur Pierre!"

"And I am still arguing with your husband. If you want to know what any of the authors were who
lived before our time, and are still objects of anxious inquiry, you have only to look into
their works.

But the dust and smoke and noise of modern literature have nothing
in common with the pure, silent air of immortality.

When I take up a work that I have read before (the oftener the better) I know what I have to expect.
The satisfaction is not lessened by being anticipated. When the entertainment is altogether new,
I sit down to it as I should to a strange dish,--turn and pick out a bit here and there, and
am in doubt what to think of the composition. There is a want of confidence and security to second
appetite. New-fangled books are also like made-dishes in this respect, that they are generally
little else than hashes and rifaccimentos of what has been served
up entire and in a more natural state at other times.

Besides, in thus turning to a well-known author, there is not only
an assurance that my time will not be thrown away, or my palate nauseated
with the most insipid or vilest trash,--but I shake hands with, and
look an old, tried, and valued friend in the face,--compare notes,
and chat the hours away.

It is true, we form dear friendships with such ideal guests--dearer,
alas! and more lasting, than those with our most intimate acquaintance.

In reading a book which is an old favourite with me (say the first novel I ever read) I not
only have the pleasure of imagination and of a critical relish of the work, but the pleasures of
memory added to it. It recalls the same feelings and associations which I had in first reading
it, and which I can never have again in any other way. Standard productions of this kind are
links in the chain of our conscious being. They bind together the different scattered divisions of
our personal identity.

They are land-marks and guides in our journey through life. They are pegs and loops on which
we can hang up, or from which we can take down, at pleasure, the
wardrobe of a moral imagination, the relics of our best affections,
the tokens and records of our happiest hours.

They are "for thoughts and for remembrance!"

They are like Fortunatus's Wishing-Cap--they give us the best riches--those of Fancy; and
transport us, not over half the globe, but (which is better) over
half our lives, at a word's notice!

 She paused as if she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre,
though the gist of the matter lay in that.

"I still can't understand what you are afraid of," said Prince Andrew slowly, not taking his
eyes off his wife.

The princess blushed, and raised her arms with a gesture of despair.

"No, Andrew, I must say you have changed. Oh, how you have..."

"Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier," said Prince Andrew. "You had better go."

The princess said nothing, but suddenly her short downy lip quivered. Prince Andrew rose, shrugged
his shoulders, and walked about the room.

Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise, now at him and now at her, moved as
if about to rise too, but changed his mind.

"Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here?" exclaimed the little princess suddenly, her
pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace. "I have long wanted to ask you, Andrew,
why you have changed so to me? What have I done to you? You are going to the war and have no
pity for me. Why is it?"

"Lise!" was all Prince Andrew said. But that one word expressed an entreaty, a threat, and
above all conviction that she would herself regret her words. But she went on hurriedly:

"You treat me like an invalid or a child. I see it all! Did you behave like that six months ago?"

"Lise, I beg you to desist," said Prince Andrew still more emphatically.

Pierre, who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all this, rose and approached
the princess. He seemed unable to bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself.

"Calm yourself, Princess! It seems so to you because... I assure you I myself have experienced...
and so... because... No, excuse me! An outsider is out of place here... No, don't distress
yourself... Good-by!"

Prince Andrew caught him by the hand.

"No, wait, Pierre! The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the pleasure of spending
the evening with you."

"No, he thinks only of himself," muttered the princess without restraining her angry tears.

"Lise!" said Prince Andrew dryly, raising his voice to the pitch which indicates that patience
is exhausted.

Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression of the princess' pretty face changed into a winning
and piteous look of fear. Her beautiful eyes glanced askance at her husband's face, and her
own assumed the timid, deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its
drooping tail.

"Mon Dieu, mon Dieu!" she muttered, and lifting her dress with one hand she went up to her
husband and kissed him on the forehead.

"Good night, Lise," said he, rising and courteously kissing her hand as he would have done
to a stranger.

CHAPTER VIII

The friends were silent. Neither cared to begin talking. Pierre continually glanced at Prince
Andrew; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead with his small hand.

"Let us go and have supper," he said with a sigh, going to the door.

They entered the elegant, newly decorated, and luxurious dining room. Everything from the table
napkins to the silver, china, and glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households
of the newly married. Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and,
with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on his face, began to
talk--as one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out.

"Never, never marry, my dear fellow! That's my advice: never marry till you can say to yourself
that you have done all you are capable of, and until you have ceased to love the woman of your
choice and have seen her plainly as she is, or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable mistake.
Marry when you are old and good for nothing--or all that is good and noble in you will be lost.
It will all be wasted on trifles. Yes! Yes! Yes! Don't look at me with such surprise. If you
marry expecting anything from yourself in the future, you will feel at every step that for
you all is ended, all is closed except the drawing room, where you will be ranged side by side
with a court lackey and an idiot!... But what's the good?..." and he waved his arm.

Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face seem different and the good-natured expression
still more apparent, and gazed at his friend in amazement.

"My wife," continued Prince Andrew, "is an excellent woman, one of those rare women with whom
a man's honor is safe; but, O God, what would I not give now to be unmarried! You are the first
and only one to whom I mention this, because I like you."

As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who had lolled in Anna
Pavlovna's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth.
Every muscle of his thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement; his eyes, in which
the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now flashed with brilliant light. It was evident
that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times, the more impassioned he became in these
moments of almost morbid irritation.

"You don't understand why I say this," he continued, "but it is the whole story of life. You
talk of Bonaparte and his career," said he (though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte), "but
Bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward his goal. He was free, he had nothing but
his aim to consider, and he reached it. But tie yourself up with a woman and, like a chained
convict, you lose all freedom! And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down
and torments you with regret. Drawing rooms, gossip, balls, vanity, and triviality--these are
the enchanted circle I cannot escape from. I am now going to the war, the greatest war there
ever was, and I know nothing and am fit for nothing. I am very amiable and have a caustic wit,"
continued Prince Andrew, "and at Anna Pavlovna's they listen to me. And that stupid set without
whom my wife cannot exist, and those women... If you only knew what those society women are,
and women in general! My father is right. Selfish, vain, stupid, trivial in everything--that's
what women are when you see them in their true colors! When you meet them in society it seems
as if there were something in them, but there's nothing, nothing, nothing! No, don't marry,
my dear fellow; don't marry!" concluded Prince Andrew.

"It seems funny to me," said Pierre, "that you, you should consider yourself incapable and
your life a spoiled life. You have everything before you, everything. And you..."

He did not finish his sentence, but his tone showed how highly he thought of his friend and
how much he expected of him in the future.

"How can he talk like that?" thought Pierre. He considered his friend a model of perfection
because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked,
and which might be best described as strength of will. Pierre was always astonished at Prince
Andrew's calm manner of treating everybody, his extraordinary memory, his extensive reading
(he had read everything, knew everything, and had an opinion about everything), but above all
at his capacity for work and study. And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew's lack of capacity
for philosophical meditation (to which he himself was particularly addicted), he regarded even
this not as a defect but as a sign of strength.

Even in the best, most friendly and simplest relations of life, praise and commendation are
essential, just as grease is necessary to wheels that they may run smoothly.

"My part is played out," said Prince Andrew. "What's the use of talking about me? Let us talk
about you," he added after a silence, smiling at his reassuring thoughts.

That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre's face.

"But what is there to say about me?" said Pierre, his face relaxing into a careless, merry
smile. "What am I? An illegitimate son!" He suddenly blushed crimson, and it was plain that
he had made a great effort to say this. "Without a name and without means... And it really..."
But he did not say what "it really" was. "For the present I am free and am all right. Only
I haven't the least idea what I am to do; I wanted to consult you seriously."

Prince Andrew looked kindly at him, yet his glance--friendly and affectionate as it was--expressed
a sense of his own superiority.

"I am fond of you, especially as you are the one live man among our whole set. Yes, you're
all right! Choose what you will; it's all the same. You'll be all right anywhere. But look
here: give up visiting those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It suits you so badly--all
this debauchery, dissipation, and the rest of it!"

"What would you have, my dear fellow?" answered Pierre, shrugging his shoulders. "Women, my
dear fellow; women!"

"I don't understand it," replied Prince Andrew. "Women who are comme il faut, that's a different
matter; but the Kuragins' set of women, 'women and wine' I don't understand!"

Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin's and sharing the dissipated life of his son Anatole,
the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew's sister.

"Do you know?" said Pierre, as if suddenly struck by a happy thought, "seriously, I have long
been thinking of it.... Leading such a life I can't decide or think properly about anything.
One's head aches, and one spends all one's money. He asked me for tonight, but I won't go."

"You give me your word of honor not to go?"

"On my honor!"

CHAPTER IX

It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend. It was a cloudless, northern, summer night.
Pierre took an open cab intending to drive straight home. But the nearer he drew to the house
the more he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night. It was light enough to
see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or evening than night.
On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting the usual set for cards that
evening, after which there was generally a drinking bout, finishing with visits of a kind Pierre
was very fond of.

"I should like to go to Kuragin's," thought he.

But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go there. Then, as happens
to people of weak character, he desired so passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation
he was so accustomed to that he decided to go. The thought immediately occurred to him that
his promise to Prince Andrew was of no account, because before he gave it he had already promised
Prince Anatole to come to his gathering; "besides," thought he, "all such 'words of honor'
are conventional things with no definite meaning, especially if one considers that by tomorrow
one may be dead, or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will
be all the same!" Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort, nullifying all his decisions
and intentions. He went to Kuragin's.

Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards' barracks, in which Anatole lived, Pierre entered
the lighted porch, ascended the stairs, and went in at the open door. There was no one in the
anteroom; empty bottles, cloaks, and overshoes were lying about; there was a smell of alcohol,
and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance. 

Again, we dress up our enemies in nicknames, and they march to the stake as assuredly as in san
Benitos.... Strange, that a reptile should wish to be thought an angel; or that he should not
be content to writhe and grovel in his native earth, without aspiring
to the skies! From the third room came sounds
of laughter, the shouting of familiar voices, the growling of a bear, and general commotion.
Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window. Three others were
romping with a young bear, one pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others.

"I bet a hundred on Stevens!" shouted one.

"Mind, no holding on!" cried another.

"I bet on Dolokhov!" cried a third. "Kuragin, you part our hands."

"There, leave Bruin alone; here's a bet on."

"At one draught, or he loses!" shouted a fourth.

