That she should have brought us together in the fulness and generosity of her heart, and that
we should have taken advantage of the opportunity she afforded us of enjoying one another's
company from morning until night, to plot and plan a speedy escape from her immediate guardianship,
seemed to her a selfish and ungrateful return for so great a favour.

But she was too kind-hearted to wear her pleasant scowl very long. Mr. Nyle would talk of a
time when "somebody" that he "had since had reason to know very well had committed just such
an appalling offence, herself and," he argued, very suggestively, "unless that 'somebody' has
had reason to regret and repent of her own rash ingratitude," he "could not see why she should
interfere with other people, who were tempted to follow in her footsteps."

Zita and Louis laughed merrily at such allusions from their father, whose own eyes sparkled
with the "light of other days," as he spoke them, and Cousin Bessie either bowed her head much
lower than usual over her knitting as she heard them, or looked playfully up at her husband
with a quick revival of the old time love in her pleasant, earnest features, and entreated
him to "have sense, for mercy's sake and not have the children laughing at him."

In the first week of June, while the young summer sunshine was bright and pleasant, Arthur
and I were married, Zita was my pretty bridesmaid and Louis our gallant groomsman; our only
guests were the Rutherbys and Mr. Dalton.

Cousin Bessie gave us a cosy wedding breakfast, and it was amid riotous merry-making and boisterous
good wishes for a long and happy future we drove away from the little gate, where some months
before that we had begun the chapter whose joyful sequel was now in progress.

The rest is an old story, familiar to many homes and hearts, the story of that wedded happiness
which is the outgrowth of two steady, abiding, enduring loves. I have been happier as Arthur
Campbell's wife than I could ever have been as Ernest Dalton's, and I shall state why:

When we are young, we develop a tendency to exalt and idealize the common-place phases of life
beyond all limits of reason or possibility. We flatter our buoyant expectations with the conviction
that there is honey in the heart of every trifling flower we must gather by life's dusty roadside,
and that it needs but the magic touch of our own hand to have it brought to the surface. This
is a pleasant delusion, which, however, is susceptible of being rudely and roughly dispelled
by an impartial experience as we grow older, when this exaggerated tendency creeps into our
loves, and it is there it holds the fullest sway, and does the maddest mischief, the danger
of a disenchanting awakening is still greater and more hazardous. Adagio in B minor. Mozart.

XLIV. First Movement from the Heroic Symphony. Beethoven.
XLV. Sonata in D Major. Beethoven.

XLVI. Finale from Sonata in A-flat
major. Beethoven.

XLVII. Portion of Slow Movement of Seventh Symphony.
Beethoven.

XLVIII. A
love that is all poetry and moonshine dies a sudden death in the face of practical dilemmas.

I have become convinced of this many a time, though my experience of wedded life is necessarily
limited. Arthur and I have counted the grocer's bills, and made out the wash account, with
the pleasantest smiles and most playful manner possible; and I have felt as I leaned upon his
shoulder and scanned the items before us, that he was the dearest and best of husbands, whereas--Mr.
Dalton, oh shades of poetry and song! imagine Ernest Dalton poring over a soapy wash account.
I mention it, and Arthur joins me in the merry laugh the bare thought of it provokes.

Mr. Dalton, however, was always our good, kind friend, while he remained in our town. To the
spirit of emigration that pervaded our cities some years later we owe his loss. He stole away
without letting any one know of his definite purpose, and buried himself in the solitude of
the North-West prairies. 

Reconnaissance from Schumann's Carnaval.
V. Irish Folk Song.

VI. Epilogue of Strauss's Till's Merry Pranks.

VII.
March in Dorian Mode. Guilmant.

VIII. Movement in Lydian Mode. Beethoven.

IX.
Canon. Thomas Tallys.

X. Canon from Études Symphoniques. To the end he had remembered
us, and no one grieved for him more earnestly, more deeply than Arthur and I.

Some weeks after the announcement of his death had been made known to us, I received a little
box which had been found among his personal belongings, addressed to me. It contained the identical
locket which had been in my possession once before, and which was now bequeathed to me with
injunctions to wear it faithfully, in memory of the two departed ones, whose time-worn pictures
lay safely stowed away within.

His money and other properties he bequeathed to the little fair-haired prattler now playing
at my knee. We have called him Ernest Dalton Campbell, but Arthur says we must keep that until
he is big, and in the meantime has christened him "Toddles," which is very absurd to my thinking,
but to which, with all the edifying obedience of a Christian wife I am bound to submit now,
as well as in every matter of greater or less moment.

I thought I had finished my story when I laid down my pen, a few months ago, and gave a long-drawn
sigh of infinite relief. Time has, however, hastened the development of a few more items, that
may be of more or less interest to those readers who have kindly followed the dramatis personae,
that have been flitting through these chapters, with a partial attention.

As I write the closing words my dramatis personae come trooping to the front, to group themselves
for the final tableau--Cousin Bessie and her faithful husband are the central and leading figures;
her hands are folded, and a happy, peaceful smile plays around the corners of her good-humoured
face.

On one side of her stands Zita, a pretty, blushing bride, leaning on Philip Rutherby's arm;
so ardent is the young bridegroom in his admiration that he threatens to spoil the whole effect,
if we keep him before the public eye for very long. Louis is not with them, he has been sent
away to college.

On the other side of the leading figures, Dr. and Mrs. Campbell, with a roguish gray-eyed darling,
are grouped affectionately together; they all look very happy, but I think Mrs. Campbell is
the most so of any. At a little distance from this last small circle stands our old friend,
Girly, now grown beyond all recognition into a pleasing and promising womanhood; and away in
the misty background a long-forgotten trio loom out in sombre sullenness; they are Mrs. Hampden,
and Fred and the 'solicitous brother.' Fred is a hopeless dyspeptic, who can give his mind
to nothing else but his digestion, which unfortunate circumstance frets his new disenchanted
parent and provokes his no longer solicitous uncle.

They are all in apparent ill-humour, so we will screen them off from our laughing, happy band,
as we rise to make our final curtsey and retire behind the curtain of our private, domestic lives.