The seventh year of her marriage with Mr. Judson, was a year of peculiar trial to Mrs. J. All
her four children were attacked by whooping-cough followed by one of the diseases of the climate,
with which she also was so violently afflicted that her life was for a time despaired of. She
felt sure, as she afterwards said, that her hour of release was come, that her master was calling
her; and she blessed God that she was entirely willing to leave all, and go to him. The only
hope of recovery for any of them was a sea-voyage, and they embarked for Bengal, but their
passage was stormy, and they derived little benefit from their stay at Serampore, where they
had taken up their residence. A voyage to the Mauritius was recommended, and the alarming situation
of three of the children, as well as Mrs. Judson's feeble state, determined them to try it.
But before they embarked, it was her melancholy lot to lay one of her darlings in the grave,
and he, the very one about whose health she had felt the least uneasiness. He sleeps, says
his mother, in the mission burial-ground, where moulders the dust of Carey, Marshman and Ward.
Her tears at his burial flowed not only for him that was dead, but for another who she expected
would soon follow him. To avert this calamity she hastened her voyage, which though fearfully
tempestuous, proved beneficial to the sufferers, and after a short sojourn in the soft climate
of the Isle of France, the family returned to their home in Maulmain, restored, with the exception
of one son, to sound health. This son, who bore the name of his father, was called by the natives
Pwen, which signifies "a flower," a name adopted by his parents. After a long illness he too
was restored to health.

Mrs. Judson's labors during the latter part of her life, are recorded by her husband; and it
may well excite the wonder of those women who consider the care of their own families a sufficient
task, that she could find time and strength for such an amount of labor. It has been said that
her translation of Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress is a work worth living for. Her husband says,
"It is one of the best pieces of composition we have published." She also translated a tract
written by her husband; edited a "Chapel hymn book," and furnished for it twenty of its best
hymns; and published four volumes of Scripture Questions for use in the Sabbath Schools. When
we consider that she was the mother of a rapidly increasing family; and the head of an establishment,
which like all in the East require constant and vigilant superintendence; and that she was
exemplary in the discharge of her maternal and domestic duties, we are led to fancy she must
have possessed some secret charm by which she could stay the hurrying feet of time; and "hold
the fleet angel fast until he blessed her." Such a secret was her untiring zeal, which prompted
an incessant industry. The sands of time are indeed numerous, and when each is valued as a
sparkling treasure, they form a rich hoard, laid up where neither moth nor rust corrupt; but
if we let them escape unheeded, or sit and idly watch their flow, and even shake the glass
to hasten it, they will gather into a millstone weight to sink us in endless, unavailing regret.
Though she is dead, Mrs. Judson's works still live; and generation after generation of Burmans
will associate her name with that of her honored husband, as benefactors to their race.

In December, 1844, the health of Mrs. Judson began to decline. Her anxious husband, determined
to leave no means untried, to save a life so precious to the mission and so invaluable to himself
and his family, decided to quit for a while his loved labors in Burmah and accompany his wife
to America. They in May 1845 sailed, and on reaching the Isle of France, she found herself
so far restored that she could no longer conscientiously detain her husband from his duties
in India, and she resolved to let him go back to their home there, while she with her children,
should complete the journey that still seemed necessary for her entire restoration. One of
the sweetest of her poems was occasioned by this resolution.

    "We part on this green islet, Love,
      Thou for the Eastern main,
    I, for the setting sun, Love--
      Oh, when to meet again?

    My heart is sad for thee, Love,
      For lone thy way will be;
    And oft thy tears will fall, Love,
      For thy children and for me.

    The music of thy daughter's voice
      Thou'lt miss for many a year;
    And the merry shout of thine elder boys
      Thou'lt list in vain to hear.

    When we knelt to see our Henry die,
      And heard his last faint moan,
    Each wiped the tear from other's eye--
      Now, each must weep alone.

    My tears fall fast for thee, Love,--
      How can I say farewell!
    But go;--thy God be with thee, Love,
      Thy heart's deep grief to quell!

    Yet my spirit clings to thine, Love,
      Thy soul remains with me,
    And oft we'll hold communion sweet,
      O'er the dark and distant sea.

    And who can paint our mutual joy,
      When, all our wanderings o'er,
    We both shall clasp our infants three,
      At home, on Burmah's shore.

    But higher shall our raptures glow,
      On yon celestial plain,
    When the loved and parted here below
      Meet, ne'er to part again.

    Then gird thine armor on, Love,
      Nor faint thou by the way,
    Till Boodh shall fall, and Burmah's sons
      Shall own Messiah's sway."

But her health still sinking, her husband could not leave her, and she was borne back to the
ship. Her life ebbed away so rapidly, that he feared he must consign her to an ocean grave.
But a kind Providence ordered it, that her death did not occur till the ship anchored at St.
Helena. Her end was as peaceful as her life had been consistent and exemplary.

"No shade of doubt or fear, or anxiety crossed her mind." So writes her husband: "She had a
prevailing preference to depart and be with Christ. I am longing to depart! she would say;
and then the thought of her dear native land, to which she was approaching after an absence
of twenty years, and a longing desire to see her son George, her parents, and the friends of
her youth, would draw down her ascending soul, and constrain her to say, 'I am in a strait
betwixt two; the will of the Lord be done.'

"In regard to her children she ever manifested the most surprising composure and resignation,
so much so that I was once constrained to say, you seem to have forgotten the dear little ones
we have left behind. 'Can a mother forget'--she replied, and was unable to proceed. During
her last days she spent much time in praying for the early conversion of her children.

"On the evening of the 31st of August, ... I sat alone by the side of her bed, endeavoring
to administer relief to the distressed body, and consolation to the departing soul. At two
o'clock in the morning, wishing to obtain one more token of recognition, I roused her attention
and said, 'Do you still love the Saviour?' 'O yes,' she replied, 'I ever love the Lord Jesus
Christ.' I said again, 'Do you still love me?' She replied in the affirmative, by a peculiar
expression of her own. 'Then give me one more kiss;' and we exchanged that token of love for
the last time. Another hour passed,--and she ceased to breathe."

    "So fades the summer cloud away;
      So sinks the gale when storms are o'er;
    So gently shuts the eye of day;
      So dies the wave along the shore."

Arrangements were made to carry the body on shore. The Rev. Mr. Bertram from the Island came
on board, and was led into the state-room where lay all that was mortal of Mrs. Judson. "Pleasant,"
he says, "she was even in death. A sweet smile of love beamed on her countenance, as if heavenly
grace had stamped it there. The bereaved husband and three weeping children fastened their
eyes upon the loved remains, as if they could have looked forever."

The coffin was borne to the shore; the boats forming a kind of procession, their oars beating
the waves at measured intervals, as a sort of funeral knell--The earth received her dust, and
her bereaved husband continued his sad voyage towards his native land, again a widowed mourner.

PART III.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

OF MRS. EMILY C. JUDSON.

Our labor of sketching the lives of the three distinguished women who were permitted to share
the happiness and lighten the cares of one of the most worthy and venerated of missionaries,
now brings us on delicate ground. The last wife of Dr. Judson, happily for her numerous friends
and for his and her children, survives him. Long may she be spared to train those children
in the ways of lofty piety, to gladden the wide circle of friends and relatives now anxiously
expecting her return to her native land, and to gratify the admirers of her genius with the
graceful and eloquent effusions of her pen. Graceful and eloquent they have always been, but
of late--touched by a coal from that altar on which she has laid her best sacrifice, herself--they
have gained a higher and purer flow, awakened by a holier inspiration. The world admired the
brilliancy of "Fanny Forrester." Christians love the exalted tenderness, the sanctified enthusiasm
of Emily C. Judson.

Much as it would gratify us, and her friends to give an extended account of her life, delicacy
forbids us to do more than merely to sketch those features in it, which are already the property
of much of the reading public. Our outline will necessarily be meagre, but we will enrich it
by several of her poems written in India, hitherto scarce published except in perishable newspapers
and periodicals. We might indeed make it more interesting by incidents and anecdotes, drawn
from those of her early associates who love to dwell on the rich promise of her childhood and
youth; but by doing so, we should incur the risk of intruding on the sacredness of the family
circle; and we forbear.

She was born in Eaton, a town near the centre of the state of New York. In her childhood, she
exhibited an exuberance of imagination that enabled her to delight her young associates with
tales, which, according to one of them, she would sit up in bed in the morning to write, and
then read aloud to them. She would, even then, write verses also, but in this gift she was
perhaps inferior to a sister, who died in early life, and whose numerous poems were unfortunately,
and to the grief of her family, accidentally lost. At an early period she embraced religion
and was baptized by the Rev. Mr. Dean, a missionary to China, then in this country. Her interest
was awakened in the heathen, even at that time, and she indulged in many ardent longings to
go as a missionary to them. The late Dr. Kendrick judiciously advised her to pursue the path
of duty at home, and quietly wait the leadings and openings of Providence. This advice she
followed, and as a means of improving the straitened circumstances of her family, she left
home and engaged as a teacher in a seminary in Utica.

Desirous to increase still farther her mother's limited resources, she determined to employ
her pen; and published some short religious tales, which, however, brought her little fame,
and small pecuniary emolument. But in 1844, by a skilful and happy letter to the conductor
of the New York Mirror, she so attracted the attention of the fastidious and brilliant editor
of that magazine, that he engaged her as a constant contributor. This arrangement, though of
great pecuniary advantage, was, in a religious view, a snare to her. As a writer of light,
graceful stories of a purely worldly character, she had in this country, few rivals, and her
name, attached to a tale or a poem, became a passport to popular favor. In a letter to her
aged pastor, written a year after her marriage, she laments her extreme worldliness at that
period, which she says, even led her to be ashamed of her former desire to be a missionary.
Yet her writings are marked by purity, and generally inculcated nothing unfriendly either to
virtue or religion. But it was the religion of sentiment, and the virtue of the natural heart;
of which it must be confessed we find far more in fictitious tales, than in real life. When
we consider the nobleness of the motive that led her to seek a popular path to favor and emolument--to
increase the comforts of her excellent and honored mother--our censure, were we disposed to
indulge any, is disarmed and almost changed to admiration.

During Dr. Judson's visit to America, in 1845, while riding in a public conveyance with Mr.
G., who was escorting him to his home in Philadelphia, a story written by "Fanny Forrester,"
fell into the hands of Dr. J. He read it with satisfaction, remarking that he should like to
know its author. "You will soon have that pleasure," said Mr. G., "for she is now visiting
at my house." An acquaintance then commenced between them, which, notwithstanding the disparity
in their years, soon ripened into a warm attachment, and after a severe struggle, she broke,
as she says, the innumerable ties that bound her to the fascinating worldly life she had adopted,
and consented to become, what in her early religious zeal she had so longed to be--a missionary.

And now the spell of worldliness was indeed broken. With mingled shame and penitence she reviewed
her spiritual declensions, and with an humbled, self-distrusting spirit renewed her neglected
covenant with the God and guide of her youth. In Dr. Judson, to whom she was married on the
2d of June, 1846, she found a wise and faithful friend and counsellor, as well as a devoted
husband. In his tried and experienced piety, she gained the support and encouragement she needed
in her Christian life. Conscious that she had given to the world's service too many of her
noble gifts, she commenced a work of an exclusively religious character and tendency, the biography
of her predecessor, the second Mrs. Judson. In one year it was completed, and in speaking of
it in a letter from India, whither she had accompanied Dr. J. immediately after their marriage,
she playfully remarked that her husband was pleased with it, and she cared little whether any
one else liked it or not.

On her passage to India, Mrs. Judson passed in sight of that island which must ever attract
the gaze of men of every clime and nation,--the rocky prison and tomb of the conqueror of nations,
Napoleon Bonaparte. But to her the island had more tender associations; awakened more touching
recollections. It was as the grave of Sarah Judson, that her successor gazed long and tearfully
on the Isle of St. Helena; and she thus embodied her feelings in song.

    LINES WRITTEN OFF ST. HELENA.

    Blow softly, gales! a tender sigh
      Is flung upon your wing;
    Lose not the treasure as ye fly,
    Bear it where love and beauty lie,
      Silent and withering.

    Flow gently, waves! a tear is laid
      Upon your heaving breast;
    Leave it within yon dark rock's shade
    Or weave it in an iris braid,
      To crown the Christian's rest

    Bloom, ocean isle, lone ocean isle!
      Thou keep'st a jewel rare;
    Let rugged rock, and dark defile,
    Above the slumbering stranger smile
      And deck her couch with care.

    Weep, ye bereaved! a dearer head,
      Ne'er left the pillowing breast;
    The good, the pure, the lovely fled,
    When mingling with the shadowy dead,
      She meekly went to rest.

    Mourn, Burmah, mourn! a bow which spanned
      Thy cloud has passed away;
    A flower has withered on thy sand,
    A pitying spirit left thy strand,
      A saint has ceased to pray.

    Angels rejoice, another string
      Has caught the strains above.
    Rejoice, rejoice! a new-fledged wing
    Around the Throne is hovering,
      In sweet, glad, wondering love.

    Blow, blow, ye gales! wild billows roll!
      Unfurl the canvas wide!
    O! where she labored lies our goal:
    Weak, timid, frail, yet would my soul
      Fain be to hers allied.

  Ship Faneuil Hall, Sept. 1846.

On the birth of an infant, she expressed her first maternal feelings, in verses of such exquisite
beauty, that they can never be omitted in any collection of the gems of poetry--least of all
in any collection of her poems.

The following are the verses alluded to:

    MY BIRD.

    Ere last year's moon had left the sky,
      A birdling sought my Indian nest
    And folded, oh so lovingly!
      Her tiny wings upon my breast.

    From morn till evening's purple tinge,
      In winsome helplessness she lies;
    Two rose leaves, with a silken fringe,
      Shut softly on her starry eyes.

    There's not in Ind a lovelier bird;
      Broad earth owns not a happier nest
    O God, thou hast a fountain stirred,
      Whose waters never more shall rest!

    This beautiful, mysterious thing,
      This seeming visitant from heaven,
    This bird with the immortal wing,
      To me--to me, thy hand has given.

    The pulse first caught its tiny stroke,
      The blood its crimson hue, from mine--
    This life, which I have dared invoke,
      Henceforth is parallel with thine.

    A silent awe is in my room--
      I tremble with delicious fear;
    The future with its light and gloom,
      Time and Eternity are here.

    Doubts--hopes, in eager tumult rise;
      Hear, O my God! one earnest prayer:--
    Room for my bird in Paradise,
      And give her angel plumage there!

  Maulmain, January, 1848.

The following touching lines show that she could skilfully employ her ready pen in consoling
those on whom had fallen the stroke of bereavement:

    LINES

Addressed to a missionary friend in Burmah on the death of her little boy, thirteen months
old, in which allusion is made to the previous death of his little brother.

    A mound is in the graveyard,
      A short and narrow bed;
    No grass is growing on it,
      And no marble at its head:
    Ye may sit and weep beside it
      Ye may kneel and kiss the sod,
    But ye'll find no balm for sorrow,
      In the cold and silent clod.

    There is anguish in the household,
      It is desolate and lone,
    For a fondly cherished nursling
      From the parent nest has flown;
    A little form is missing;
      A heart has ceased to beat;
    And the chain of love lies shattered
      At the desolator's feet.

    Remove the empty cradle,
      His clothing put away,
    And all his little playthings
      With your choicest treasures lay;
    Strive not to check the tear drops,
      That fall like summer rain,
    For the sun of hope shines thro' them--
      Ye shall see his face again.

    Oh! think where rests your darling,--
      Not in his cradle bed;
    Not in the distant graveyard,
      With the still and mouldering dead
    But in a heavenly mansion,
      Upon the Saviour's breast,
    With his brother's arms about him,
      He takes his sainted rest.

    He has put on robes of glory
      For the little robes ye wrought;
    And he fingers golden harp strings
      For the toys his sisters brought.
    Oh, weep! but with rejoicing;
      A heart gem have ye given,
    And behold its glorious setting
      In the diadem of Heaven.

The following letter and beautiful poems need little explanation. The letter is addressed to
some of Dr. Judson's children, who resided in Worcester, Massachusetts, having been sent home
from India to be educated in America. His health having failed, Dr. J. had sailed for the Isle
of Bourbon for its restoration, and it was during his absence that these effusions were penned.

                                             Maulmain, April 11, 1850.

         My very dear Children,

     I have painful news to tell you--news that I am sure will make your
     hearts ache; but I hope our heavenly Father will help you to bear
     it. Your dear papa is very, very ill indeed; so much so that the
     best judges fear that he will never be any better. He began to fail
     about five months ago, and has declined so gradually that we were
     not fully aware of his danger until lately; but within a few weeks
     those who love him have become very much alarmed.

     In January we went down to Mergui by the steamer, and when we
     returned, thought he was a little better, but he soon failed again.
     We spent a month at Amherst, but he received little if any benefit.
     Next, the doctors pronounced our house (the one you used to live
     in) unhealthy, and we moved to another. But all was of no use. Your
     dear papa continued to fail, till suddenly, one evening, his
     muscular strength gave way and he was prostrated on the bed, unable
     to help himself. This occurred about two weeks ago. The doctor now
     became alarmed, and said the only hope for him was in a long
     voyage. It was very hard to think of such a thing in his reduced
     state, particularly as I could not go with him; but after we had
     wept and prayed over it one day and night, we concluded that it was
     our duty to use the only means which God had left us, however
     painful.

     We immediately engaged his passage on board a French barque, bound
     for the Isle of Bourbon; but before it sailed he had become so very
     low that no one thought it right for him to go alone. They
     therefore called a meeting of the mission and appointed Mr. Ranney.
     It was a great relief to me, for he is a very kind man, and loves
     your dear papa very much; and he will do everything that can be
     done for his comfort. The officers of the vessel too, seemed
     greatly interested for him, as did every one else. He was carried
     on board a week ago yesterday, in a litter, and placed on a nice
     easy cot made purposely for him. I stayed with him all day, and at
     dark came home to stay with the children.

     The next day found that the vessel had only dropped down a little
     distance, and so I took a boat and followed. I expected this would
     certainly be the last day with him, but it was not. On Friday I
     went again, and though he did not appear as well as on the previous
     days, I was forced to take, as I then supposed, a final leave of
     him. But when morning came, I felt as though I could not live
     through the day without knowing how he was. So I took a boat again,
     and reached the vessel about 2 o'clock P.M. He could only
     speak in whispers, but seemed very glad that I came. The natives I
     had sent to fan him till he should get out of the river, came to me
     and begged to have him taken on shore again: and so small was my
     hope of his recovery, that my heart pleaded on their side, though I
     still thought it a duty to do as the doctor had ordered. I came
     away at dark, and though his lips moved to say some word of
     farewell, they made no sound.

     I hope that you, my dear boys, will never have cause to know what a
     heavy heart I bore back to my desolate home that night. The vessel
     got out to sea about 4 o'clock on Monday, and last night the
     natives returned, bringing a letter from Mr. Ranney. Your precious
     papa has revived again--spoke aloud--took a little tea and
     toast--said there was something animating in the touch of the sea
     breeze, and directed Mr. Ranney to write to me that he had a strong
     belief it was the will of God to restore him again to health. I
     feel somewhat encouraged, but dare not hope too much.

     And now, my dear boys, it will be three, perhaps four long months
     before we can hear from our beloved one again, and we shall all be
     very anxious. All we can do is to commit him to the care of our
     heavenly Father, and, if we never see him again in this world, pray
     that we may be prepared to meet him in heaven

            *       *       *       *       *

                         Your most affectionate mother,

                                             Emily C. Judson

    PRAYER FOR DEAR PAPA.

    Poor and needy little children,
      Saviour, God, we come to Thee,
    For our hearts are full of sorrow,
      And no other hope have we.
    Out, upon the restless ocean,
      There is one we dearly love,--
    Fold him in thine arms of pity,
      Spread thy guardian wings above.

    When the winds are howling round him,
      When the angry waves are high,
    When black, heavy, midnight shadows,
      On his trackless pathway lie,
    Guide and guard him, blessed Saviour,
      Bid the hurrying tempests stay;
    Plant thy foot upon the waters.
      Send thy smile to light his way.

    When he lies, all pale, and suffering,
      Stretched upon his narrow bed,
    With no loving face bent o'er him,
      No soft hand about his head,
    O, let kind and pitying angels,
      Their bright forms around him bow;
    Let them kiss his heavy eyelids,
      Let them fan his fevered brow.

    Poor and needy little children,
      Still we raise our cry to Thee
    We have nestled in his bosom,
      We have sported on his knee;
    Dearly, dearly do we love him,
     --We, who on his breast have lain--
    Pity now our desolation!
      Bring him back to us again!

    If it please thee, Heavenly Father,
      We would see him come once more,
    With his olden step of vigor,
      With the love-lit smile he wore;
    But if we must tread Life's valley,
      Orphaned, guideless, and alone,
    Let us lose not, 'mid the shadows,
      His dear footprints to thy Throne.

  Maulmain, April, 1850.

    SWEET MOTHER.

    The wild, south-west Monsoon has risen,
      With broad, gray wings of gloom,
    While here, from out my dreary prison,
      I look, as from a tomb--Alas!
      My heart another tomb.

    Upon the low-thatched roof, the rain,
      With ceaseless patter, falls;
    My choicest treasures bear its stain--
      Mould gathers on the walls--Would Heaven
      'Twere only on the walls!

    Sweet Mother! I am here alone,
      In sorrow and in pain;
    The sunshine from my heart has flown,
      It feels the driving rain--Ah, me!
      The chill, and mould, and rain.

    Four laggard months have wheeled their round
      Since love upon it smiled;
    And everything of earth has frowned
      On thy poor, stricken child--sweet friend,
      Thy weary, suffering child.

    I'd watched my loved one, night and day.
      Scarce breathing when he slept;
    And as my hopes were swept away,
      I'd on his bosom wept--O God!
      How had I prayed and wept!

    They bore him from me to the ship,
      As bearers bear the dead;
    I kissed his speechless, quivering lip,
      And left him on his bed--Alas!
      It seemed a coffin-bed!

    When from my gentle sister's tomb,
      In all our grief, we came,
    Rememberest thou her vacant room!
      Well, his was just the same, that day.
      The very, very same.

    Then, mother, little Charley came--
      Our beautiful fair boy,
    With my own father's cherished name--
      But oh, he brought no joy!--My child
      Brought mourning, and no joy.

    His little grave I cannot see,
      Though weary months have sped
    Since pitying lips bent over me,
      And whispered, "He is dead!"--Alas
      'Tis dreadful to be dead!

    I do not mean for one like me,
     --So weary, worn, and weak,--
    Death's shadowy paleness seems to be
      Even now, upon my cheek--his seal
      On form, and brow and cheek.

    But for a bright-winged bird like him,
      To hush his joyous song,
    And, prisoned in a coffin dim,
      Join Death's pale, phantom throng--My boy
      To join that grisly throng!

    Oh, Mother, I can scarcely bear
      To think of this to-day!
    It was so exquisitely fair,
     --That little form of clay--my heart
      Still lingers by his clay.

    And when for one loved far, far more,
      Come thickly gathering tears;
    My star of faith is clouded o'er,
      I sink beneath my fears--sweet friend,
      My heavy weight of fears.

    Oh, should he not return to me,
      Drear, drear must be life's night!
    And, mother, I can almost see
      Even now the gathering blight--my soul
      Faints, stricken by the blight.

    Oh, but to feel thy fond arms twine
      Around me, once again!
    It almost seems those lips of thine
      Might kiss away the pain--might soothe
      This dull, cold, heavy pain.

    But, gentle Mother, through life's storms,
      I may not lean on thee,
    For helpless, cowering little forms
      Cling trustingly to me--Poor babes!
      To have no guide but me!

    With weary foot, and broken wing,
      With bleeding heart, and sore,
    Thy Dove looks backward, sorrowing,
      But seeks the ark no more--thy breast
      Seeks never, never more.

    Sweet Mother, for this wanderer pray,
      That loftier faith be given;
    Her broken reeds all swept away,
      That she may lean on Heaven--her soul
      Grow strong on Christ and Heaven.

    All fearfully, all tearfully,
      Alone and sorrowing.
    My dim eye lifted to the sky,
      Fast to the cross I cling--O Christ!
      To thy dear cross I cling.

  Maulmain, August 8th, 1850

From the sad voyage which drew forth this most touching poem Dr. Judson never returned. He
died on board the ship which was bearing him to more healthful climes; and his body was committed
to the ocean. One of the most excellent of Mrs. Judson's productions is her account of the
closing scenes in her husband's life, contained in a letter to his sister. Long as it is, we
cannot bring ourselves to abridge it. It will convince our readers that if the three whose
lives we have sketched, have been among the first of women, they were united to one who knew
and appreciated their excellence, and who was worthy to share their affection.

CLOSING SCENES IN THE LIFE OF DR. JUDSON.

BY HIS WIDOW.

Last month I could do no more than announce to you our painful bereavement, which though not
altogether unexpected, will, I very well know, fall upon your heart with overwhelming weight.
You will find the account of your brother's last days on board the Aristide Marie, in a letter
written by Mr. Ranney from Mauritius, to the Secretary of the Board; and I can add nothing
to it, with the exception of a few unimportant particulars, gleaned in conversation with Mr.
R. and the Coringa servant. I grieve that it should be so--that I was not permitted to watch
beside him during those days of terrible suffering; but the pain, which I at first felt, is
gradually yielding to gratitude for the inestimable privileges which had previously been granted
me.

There was something exceedingly beautiful in the decline of your brother's life--more beautiful
than I can describe, though the impression will remain with me as a sacred legacy, until I
go to meet him where suns shall never set, and life shall never end. He had been, from my first
acquaintance with him, an uncommonly spiritual Christian, exhibiting his richest graces in
the unguarded intercourse of private life; but during his last year, it seemed as though the
light of the world on which he was entering, had been sent to brighten his upward pathway.
Every subject on which we conversed, every book we read, every incident that occurred, whether
trivial or important, had a tendency to suggest some peculiarly spiritual train of thought,
till it seemed to me that more than ever before, "Christ was all his theme." Something of the
same nature was also noted in his preaching, to which I then had not the privilege of listening.
He was in the habit, however, of studying his subject for the Sabbath, audibly, and in my presence,
at which time he was frequently so much affected as to weep, and some times so overwhelmed
with the vastness of his conceptions, as to be obliged to abandon his theme and choose another.
My own illness at the commencement of the year had brought eternity very near to us, and rendered
death, the grave, and the bright heaven beyond it, familiar subjects of conversation. Gladly
would I give you, my dear sister, some idea of the share borne by him in those memorable conversations;
but it would be impossible to convey, even to those who knew him best, the most distant conception.
I believe he has sometimes been thought eloquent, both in conversation and in the sacred desk;
but the fervid, burning eloquence, the deep pathos, the touching tenderness, the elevation
of thought, and intense beauty of expression, which characterized those private teachings,
were not only beyond what I had ever heard before, but such as I felt sure arrested his own
attention, and surprised even himself. About this time he began to find unusual satisfaction
and enjoyment in his private devotions; and seemed to have few objects of interest continually
rising in his mind each of which in turn became special subjects of prayer. Among these, one
of the most prominent was the conversion of his posterity. He remarked, that he had always
prayed for his children, but that of late he had felt impressed with the duty of praying for
their children and their children's children down to the latest generation. He also prayed
most fervently, that his impressions on this particular subject might be transferred to his
sons and daughters, and thence to their offspring, so that he should ultimately meet a long
unbroken line of descendants before the throne of God, where all might join together in ascribing
everlasting praises to their Redeemer.

Another subject, which occupied a large share of his attention, was that of brotherly love.
You are, perhaps, aware, that like all persons of his ardent temperament, he was subject to
strong attachments and aversions, which he sometimes had difficulty in bringing under the controlling
influence of divine grace. He remarked that he had always felt more or less of an affectionate
interest in his brethren, as brethren--and some of them he had loved very dearly for their
personal qualities; but that he was now aware he had never placed his standard of love high
enough. He spoke of them as children of God, redeemed by the Saviour's blood, watched over
and guarded by his love, dear to his heart, honored by him in the election, and to be honored
hereafter before the assembled universe; and he said it was not sufficient to be kind and obliging
to such, to abstain from evil speaking, and make a general mention of them in our prayers;
but our attachment to them should be of the race, ardent and exalted character--it would be
so in heaven, and we lost immeasurably by not beginning now. "As I have loved you, so ought
ye also to love one another," was a precept continually in his mind, and he would often murmur,
as though unconsciously, "'As I have loved you'--'as I have loved you'"--then burst out with
the exclamation, "Oh, the love of Christ! the love of Christ!"

