
We must, however, bear in  mind, that these general notions are not formed by all men in the
same way, but vary in  each individual according as the point varies, whereby the body has
been most often  affected and which the mind most easily imagines or remembers.  For instance,
those who  have most often regarded with admiration the stature of man, will by the name of
man  understand an animal of erect stature; those who have been accustomed to regard some 
other attribute, will form a different general image of man, for instance, that man is a  laughing
animal, a two-footed animal without feathers, a rational animal, and thus, in other  cases,
everyone will form general images of things according to the habit of his body.

It is thus not to be wondered at, that among philosophers, who seek to explain things in  nature
merely by the images formed of them, so many controversies should have arisen.

*****Note II--From all that has been said above it is clear, that we, in many cases,  perceive
and form our general notions:--(1.) From particular things represented to our  intellect fragmentarily,
confusedly, and without order through our senses (II. xxix. Cor.);  I have settled to call
such perceptions by the name of knowledge from the mere  suggestions of experience.  (2.) From
symbols, e.g., from the fact of having read or heard  certain words we remember things and
form certain ideas concerning them, similar to those  through which we imagine things (II.
xviii. Note).  I shall call both these ways of regarding  things "knowledge of the first kind,"
"opinion," or "imagination."  (3.) From the fact that  we have notions common to all men, and
adequate ideas of the properties of things (II.  xxxviii. Cor., xxxix. and Cor., and xl.);
this I call "reason" and "knowledge of the second  kind."  Besides these two kinds of knowledge,
there is, as I will hereafter show, a third  kind of knowledge, which we will call intuition.
This kind of knowledge proceeds from an  adequate idea of the absolute essence of certain attributes
of God to the adequate  knowledge of the essence of things.  I will illustrate all three kinds
of knowledge by a  single example.  Three numbers are given for finding a fourth, which shall
be to the third  as the second is to the first.  Tradesmen without hesitation multiply the
second by the third,  and divide the product by the first; either because they have not forgotten
the rule which  they received from a master without any proof, or because they have often made
trial of  it with simple numbers, or by virtue of the proof of the nineteenth proposition of
the  seventh book of Euclid, namely, in virtue of the general property of proportionals.

But with very simple numbers there is no need of this.  For instance, one, two, three being
given, everyone can see that the fourth proportional is six; and this is much clearer, because
we infer the fourth number from an intuitive grasping of the ratio, which the first bears to
the second.

XLI.  Knowledge of the first kind is the only source of falsity, knowledge of the second  and
third kinds is necessarily true.

>>>>>Proof--To knowledge of the first kind we have (in the foregoing note) assigned all  those
ideas, which are inadequate and confused; therefore this kind of knowledge is the  only source
of falsity (II. xxxv.).  Furthermore, we assigned to the second and third kinds  of knowledge
those ideas which are adequate; therefore these kinds are necessarily true (II.  xxxiv.).  Q.E.D.

XLII. Knowledge of the second and third kinds, not knowledge of the first kind, teaches us
to distinguish the true from the false.

>>>>>Proof--This proposition is self-evident.  He, who knows how to distinguish between  true
and false, must have an adequate idea of true and false.  That is (II. xl., note ii.), he 
must know the true and the false by the second or third kind of knowledge.

XLIII. He, who has a true idea, simultaneously knows that he has a true idea, and cannot  doubt
of the truth of the thing perceived.

>>>>>Proof--A true idea in us is an idea which is adequate in God, in so far as he is  displayed
through the nature of the human mind (II. xi. Cor.).  Let us suppose that there is  in God,
in so far as he is displayed through the human mind, an adequate idea, A.  The  idea of this
idea must also necessarily be in God, and be referred to him in the same way as  the idea A
(by II. xx., whereof the proof is of universal application).  But the idea A is  supposed to
be referred to God, in so far as he is displayed through the human mind;  therefore, the idea
of the idea A must be referred to God in the same manner; that is (by  II. xi. Cor.), the adequate
idea of the idea A will be in the mind, which has the adequate  idea A; therefore he, who has
an adequate idea or knows a thing truly (II. xxxiv.), must at  the same time have an adequate
idea or true knowledge of his knowledge; that is,  obviously, he must be assured.  Q.E.D.

*****Note--I explained in the note to II. xxi. what is meant by the idea of an idea; but we
may remark that the foregoing proposition is in itself sufficiently plain.  No one, who has
a  true idea, is ignorant that a true idea involves the highest certainty.  For to have a true
idea  is only another expression for knowing a thing perfectly, or as well as possible.  No
one,  indeed, can doubt of this, unless he thinks that an idea is something lifeless, like
a picture  on a panel, and not a mode of thinking--namely, the very act of understanding. 
And who,  I ask, can know that he understands anything, unless he do first understand it? 
In other  words, who can know that he is sure of a thing, unless he be first sure of that thing?
Further, what can there be more clear, and more certain, than a true idea as a standard  of
truth?  Even as light displays both itself and darkness, so is truth a standard both of  itself
and of falsity.

I think I have thus sufficiently answered these questions--namely, if a true idea is  distinguished
from a false idea, only in so far as it is said to agree with its object, a true  idea has
no more reality or perfection than a false idea (since the two are only distinguished  by an
extrinsic mark); consequently, neither will a man who has a true idea have any  advantage over
him who has only false ideas.  Further, how comes it that men have false  ideas?  Lastly, how
can anyone be sure, that he has ideas which agree with their objects?   These questions, I
repeat, I have, in my opinion, sufficiently answered.  The difference  between a true idea
and a false idea is plain:  from what was said in II. xxxv., the former is  related to the
latter as being is to not-being.  The causes of falsity I have set forth very  clearly in II.
xix. and II. xxxv. with the note.  From what is there stated, the difference  between a man
who has true ideas, and a man who has only false ideas, is made apparent.   As for the last
question--as to how a man can be sure that he has ideas that agree with  their objects, I have
just pointed out, with abundant clearness, that his knowledge arises  from the simple fact,
that he has an idea which corresponds with its object--in other words,  that truth is its own
standard.  We may add that our mind, in so far as it perceives things  truly, is part of the
infinite intellect of God (II. xi. Cor.); therefore, the clear and distinct  ideas of the mind
are as necessarily true as the ideas of God.

XLIV. It is not in the nature of reason to regard things as contingent, but as necessary.

>>>>>Proof--It is in the nature of reason to perceive things truly (II. xli.), namely (I. Ax.
vi.), as they are in themselves--that is (I. xxix.), not as contingent, but as necessary.   Q.E.D.

<<<<<Corollary I--Hence it follows, that it is only through our imagination that we  consider
things, whether in respect to the future or the past, as contingent.

*****Note--How this way of looking at things arises, I will briefly explain.  We have  shown
above (II. xvii. and Cor.) that the mind always regards things as present to itself,  even
though they be not in existence, until some causes arise which exclude their existence  and
presence.  Further (II. xviii.), we showed that, if the human body has once been  affected
by two external bodies simultaneously, the mind, when it afterwards imagines one  of the said
external bodies, will straightway remember the other--that is, it will regard both  as present
to itself, unless there arise causes which exclude their existence and presence.   Further,
no one doubts that we imagine time, from the fact that we imagine bodies to be  moved some
more slowly than others, some more quickly, some at equal speed.  Thus,  let us suppose that
a child yesterday saw Peter for the first time in the morning, Paul at  noon, and Simon in
the evening; then, that today he again sees Peter in the morning.  It is  evident, from II.
Prop. xviii., that, as soon as he sees the morning light, he will imagine that  the sun will
traverse the same parts of the sky, as it did when he saw it on the preceding  day; in other
words, he will imagine a complete day, and, together with his imagination of  the morning,
he will imagine Peter; with noon, he will imagine Paul; and with evening, he  will imagine
Simon--that is, he will imagine the existence of Paul and Simon in relation to a  future time;
on the other hand, if he sees Simon in the evening, he will refer Peter and Paul  to a past
time, by imagining them simultaneously with the imagination of a past time.  If it  should
at any time happen, that on some other evening the child should see James instead  of Simon,
he will, on the following morning, associate with his imagination of evening  sometimes Simon,
sometimes James, not both together:  for the child is supposed to have  seen, at evening, one
or other of them, not both together.  His imagination will therefore  waver; and, with the
imagination of future evenings, he will associate first one, then the  other--that is, he will
imagine them in the future, neither of them as certain, but both as  contingent.  This wavering
of the imagination will be the same, if the imagination be  concerned with things which we
thus contemplate, standing in relation to time past or time  present:  consequently, we may
imagine things as contingent, whether they be referred to  time present, past, or future.

<<<<<Corollary II--It is in the nature of reason to perceive things under a certain form of
eternity (sub quadam aeternitatis specie).

>>>>>Proof--It is in the nature of reason to regard things, not as contingent, but as  necessary
(II. xliv.).  Reason perceives this necessity of things (II. xli.) truly--that is (I. Ax. 
vi.), as it is in itself.  We may add that the bases of reason are the notions (II. xxxviii.),
which answer  to things common to all, and which (II. xxxvii.) do not answer to the essence
of any  particular thing:  which must therefore be conceived without any relation to time,
under a  certain form of eternity.

XLV. Every idea of every body, or of every particular thing actually existing, necessarily
involves the eternal and infinite essence of God.

>>>>>Proof--The idea of a particular thing actually existing necessarily involves both the
existence and the essence of the said thing (II. viii.).  Now particular things cannot be 
conceived without God (I. xv.); but, inasmuch as (II. vi.) they have God for their cause, 
in so far as he is regarded under the attribute of which the things in question are modes,
their ideas must necessarily involve (I. Ax. iv.) the conception of the attributes of those
ideas--that is (I. vi.), the eternal and infinite essence of God.  Q.E.D.

*****Note--By existence I do not here mean duration--that is, existence in so far as it is
conceived abstractedly, and as a certain form of quantity.  I am speaking of the very nature
of existence, which is assigned to particular things, because they follow in infinite numbers
and in infinite ways from the eternal necessity of God's nature (I. xvi.).  I am speaking,
I  repeat, of the very existence of particular things, in so far as they are in God.  For although
each particular thing be conditioned by another particular thing to exist in a given way, yet
the force whereby each particular thing perseveres in existing follows from the eternal  necessity
of God's nature (cf. I. xxiv. Cor.).

XLVI.  The knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of God which every idea  involves
is adequate and perfect.

>>>>>Proof--The proof of the last proposition is universal; and
whether a thing be  considered as a part or a whole, the idea
thereof, whether of the whole or of a part (by  the last Prop.),
will involve God's eternal and infinite essence. 
 Q.E.D.

XLVII. The human mind has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite essence of  God.

>>>>>Proof--The human mind has ideas (II. xxii.), from which (II. xxiii.) it perceives  itself
and its own body (II. xix.) and external bodies (II. xvi. Cor. i. and II. xvii.) as actually
existing; therefore (II. xlv. and xlvi.) it has an adequate knowledge of the eternal and  infinite
essence of God.  Q.E.D.

*****Note--Hence we see, that the infinite essence and the eternity of God are known to  all.
Now as all things are in God, and are conceived through God, we can from this  knowledge infer
many things, which we may adequately know, and we may form that third  kind of knowledge of
which we spoke in the note to II. xl., and of the excellence and use of  which we shall have
occasion to speak in Part V.  Men have not so clear a knowledge of  God as they have of general
notions, because they are unable to imagine God as they do  bodies, and also because they have
associated the name God with images of things that  they are in the habit of seeing, as indeed
they can hardly avoid doing, being, as they are,  men, and continually affected by external
bodies.  Many errors, in truth, can be traced to  this head, namely, that we do not apply names
to things rightly.  For instance, when a man  says that the lines drawn from the centre of
a circle to its circumference are not equal, he  then, at all events, assuredly attaches a
meaning to the word circle different from that  assigned by mathematicians.  So again, when
men make mistakes in calculation, they have  one set of figures in their mind, and another
on the paper.  If we could see into their minds,  they do not make a mistake; they seem to
do so, because we think, that they have the same  numbers in their mind as they have on the
paper.  If this were not so, we should not  believe them to be in error, any more than I thought
that a man was in error, whom I lately  heard exclaiming that his entrance hall had flown into
a neighbour's hen, for his meaning  seemed to me sufficiently clear.  Very many controversies
have arisen from the fact, that  men do not rightly explain their meaning, or do not rightly
interpret the meaning of others.   For, as a matter of fact, as they flatly contradict themselves,
they assume now one side,  now another, of the argument, so as to oppose the opinions, which
they consider mistaken  and absurd in their opponents.

XLVIII. In the mind there is no absolute or free will; but the mind is determined to wish 
this or that by a cause, which has also been determined by another cause, and this last by
another cause, and so on to infinity.

