Mr. Tiralla had promised her faithfully, as he yesterday lay in her arms, that he would fill
up the paper to-day and would drive over to Gnesen and fetch the poison for the rats himself.
How was it that she felt so quiet about it? She could not understand it herself. Even if her
heart did beat a little faster, it was not from fear, but only from expectation of something
good, joyful, long hoped for. Fifteen years--ah, fifteen long years.

She continued to murmur words of prayer, whilst her thoughts were with her husband on his way
to the chemist's in Gnesen. But suddenly she pressed her lips tightly together. Her mouth looked
very inflexible. She forgot that she was praying--her heart was filled with fierce curses and
accusations. Her mother, who had sold her--sold her like one sells a young calf (why not call
a spade a spade?)--was dead.

Mrs. Kluge had not long been able to enjoy the thought that the little house which she had
formerly rented at last was hers, and that she had no longer to make dresses at any price for
the farmers' wives, who were everlastingly grumbling. She had not long been able to enjoy the
thought, and that served her right!

The woman's eyes gleamed as though with satisfaction. Her mother had had to leave everything
behind which she had stipulated for as payment for her daughter. Now she had long ago turned
to dust. But the other culprit, the buyer? Oh, Mr. Tiralla had grown stout, he did not look
as though he also would soon be lying under ground.

"Holy saints! Holy Mother!" She raised her hands in prayer. She did not exactly know how she
was to put her prayer into words, it would sound too [Pg 25] awful if she were to say, "Let
him die; he must die!" It was as though she were going to expose herself in her nakedness to
the Holy Virgin and all the saints. No, that would not do.

She let her hands fall in her perplexity. What now? But then it suddenly occurred to her, why
need she tell everything to the saints? Why trouble them? Surely it would be enough if she
secured their help. So she prayed: "Holy Mary, pure Virgin, oh, bring about by means of thy
divine power and that of all the saints that he really goes to Gnesen, that he at last fetches
the poison--the poison for the rats. I entreat thee, I implore thee!"

She wrung her hands and wept bitterly; she hit her breast with such force that she hurt herself.
What she had suffered from her husband, and would suffer again and again. He would not leave
her in peace, and she hated him, she loathed his eager, outstretched hands. If only she could
have gone into a convent, how happy she would have been there. All that filled her once more
with horror. She had been so terrified on her wedding night, when her husband, intoxicated
with joy and wine, had embraced her; so terrified when she felt she was about to become a mother
against her will; so terrified when the nurse had laid the little live girl on her bosom. She
had pulled herself together and endured it when she felt the little seeking mouth at her breast,
although it was as if a stream of icy-cold water were running down her. "An' then Dad fell on
Pete Petrie at the Crossroads' store, whar the critter hed stopped with his mail-pouch, an'
Dad trounced him well afore all the crowd o' loafers thar!"
"Bless the Lord, he did!" the checked apron voiced a melancholy triumph.
 She had uttered a cry, a feeble, plaintive,
yet piercing cry, and had [Pg 26] reared herself up with her last strength, so that the little
creature on her breast had begun to whimper and whine like a young puppy. The nurse had hastened
to the bedside, quite terrified, and had made the sign of the cross--"All good spirits!" No
doubt she thought that the "Krasnoludki," the wicked dwarfs, wanted to steal the new-born child.