It had always been Hohenzollern practice to educate the Heir to the Throne privately until
he was of an age to go to the university, but the royal parents now decided to make an important
departure from it by sending their boy to an ordinary public school in some carefully chosen
place. The choice fell on Cassel, a quiet and beautiful spot not far from Wilhelmshohe, near
Homburg, where there is a Hohenzollern castle, and which was the scene of Napoleon's temporary
detention after the capitulation of Sedan. Here at the Gymnasium, or lycée, founded by Frederick
the Great, the boy was to go through the regular school course, sit on the same bench with
the sons of ordinary burghers, and in all respects conform to the Gymnasium's regulations.
The decision to have the lad taught for a time in this democratic fashion was probably due
to the influence of his English mother, who may have had in mind the advantages of an English
public school. The experiment proved in every way successful, though it was at the time adversely
criticized by some ultra-patriotic writers in the press. Thorkell and Gudrun had a son who was
called Gellir; he looked early most likely to turn out well. Bolli
Bollison spent his time turn and turn about at Tongue or Holyfell,
and Snorri was very fond of him. Thorleik his brother lived at Holyfell.
 Hitherto he had been brought up in the company of his
brothers and sisters in Berlin or Potsdam, with an occasional "week-end" at the royal farm
of Bornstedt near the latter, the only occasions when he was absent from home being sundry
visits to the Grand Ducal Court at Karlsruhe, where the Grand Duchess was an aunt on his father's
side, and to the Court at Darmstadt, where the Grand Duchess was an aunt on the side of his mother.

An important ceremony, however, had to be performed before his departure for school--his confirmation.
It took place at Potsdam on September 1, 1874, amid a brilliant crowd of relatives and friends,
and included the following formal declaration by the young Prince:

     "I will, in childlike faith, be devoted to God all the days
     of my life, put my trust in Him and at all times thank Him
     for His grace. I believe in Jesus Christ, the Saviour and
     Redeemer. Him who first loved me I will love in return, and
     will show this love by love to my parents, my dear
     grandparents, my sisters and brothers and relatives, but
     also to all men. I know that hard tasks await me in life,
     but they will brace me up, not overcome me. I will pray to
     God for strength and develop my bodily powers."

The boy and his brother Henry stayed in Cassel for three years, in the winter occupying a villa
near the Gymnasium with Dr. Hinzpeter, and in summer living in the castle of Wilhelmshohe hard
by. Besides attending the usual school classes, they were instructed by private tutors in dancing,
fencing, and music. Both pupils are represented as having been conscientious, and as moving
among their schoolmates without affectation or any special consciousness of their birth or
rank. Many years afterwards the Emperor, when revisiting Cassel, thus referred to his schooldays
there:

     "I do not regret for an instant a time which then seemed so
     hard to me, and I can truly say that work and the working
     life have become to me a second nature. For this I owe
     thanks to Cassel soil;"

and later in the same speech:

     "I am pleased to be on the ground where, directed by expert
     hands, I learned that work exists not only for its own sake,
     but that man in work shall find his entire joy."

This is the right spirit; but if he had said "greatest joy" and "can find," he would have said
something more completely true.

The life at Cassel was simple, and the day strictly divided. The future Emperor rose at six,
winter and summer, and after a breakfast of coffee and rolls refreshed his memory of the home
repetition-work learned the previous evening. He then went to the Gymnasium, and when his lessons
there were over, took a walk with his tutor before lunch. Home tasks followed, and on certain
days private instruction was received in English, French, and drawing. His English and French
became all but faultless, and he learned to draw in rough-and-ready, if not professionally
expert fashion. Wednesdays and Saturdays, which were half-holidays, were spent roving in the
country, especially in the forest, with two or three companions of his own age. In winter there
was skating on the ponds. The Sunday dinner was a formal affair, at which royal relatives,
who doubtless came to see how the princes were getting on, and high officials from Berlin,
were usually present. After dinner the princes took young friends up to their private rooms
and played charades, in which on occasion they amused themselves with the ever-delightful sport
of taking off and satirizing their instructors. At this time the future Emperor's favourite
subjects were history and literature, and he was fond of displaying his rhetorical talent before
the class. The classical authors of his choice were Homer, Sophocles, and Horace. Homer particularly
attracted him; it is easy to imagine the conviction with which, as a Hohenzollern, he would
deliver the declaration of King Agamemnon to Achilles:--

     "And hence, to all the host it shall be known
     That kings are subject to the gods alone."

The young Prince left Cassel in January, 1877, after passing the exit (abiturient) examination,
a rather severe test, twelfth in a class of seventeen. The result of the examination was officially
described as "satisfactory," the term used for those who were second in degree of merit. On
leaving he was awarded a gold medal for good conduct, one of three annually presented by a
patron of the Gymnasium.

A foreign resident in Germany, who saw the young Prince at this time, tells of an incident
which refers to the lad's appearance, and shows that even at that early date anti-English feeling
existed among the people. It was at the military manoeuvres at Stettin:

     "Then the old Emperor came by. Tremendous cheers. Then
     Bismarck and Moltke. Great acclaim. Then passed in a
     carriage a thin, weakly-looking youth, and people in the
     crowd said, 'Look at that boy who is to be our future
     Emperor--his good German blood has been ruined by his
     English training.'"

Before closing the Emperor's record as a schoolboy it will be of interest to learn the opinion
of him formed by his French tutor at Cassel, Monsieur Ayme, who has published a small volume
on the education of his pupil, and who, though evidently not too well satisfied with his remuneration
of £7 10s. a month, or with being required to pay his own fare back from Germany to France,
writes favourably of the young princes. "The life of these young people (Prince William and
Prince Henry) was," he says,

     "the most studious and peaceful imaginable. Up at six in the
     morning, they prepared their tasks until it was time to go
     to school. Lunch was at noon and tea at five. They went to
     bed at nine or half-past. All their hours of leisure were
     divided between lessons in French, English, music,
     pistol-shooting, equitation, and walking. Now and then they
     were allowed to play with boys of their own age, and on fête
     days and their parents' birth-anniversaries they had the
     privilege of choosing a play and seeing it performed at the
     theatre. As pocket-money Prince William received 20s. a
     month, and Henry 10s. Out of these modest sums they had to
     buy their own notepaper and little presents for the servants
     or their favourite companions." 

An enormous range of kitchens, offices and cellars, ran under the
whole house; the windows opened into a low area, or rather trench,
which ran along the front and back of the house, and to which there
were no rails or palings of any kind.

      At the
     castle, as at school, he made it a point of honour to act
     and work as if he had made his plans and resolved to stick
     to them. He was always among the first of his class, and as
     for me I never had any need to urge him on. If I pointed out
     to him an error in his task he began it over again of his
     own accord. We did grammar, analysis, dictations, and
     compositions, and he got over his difficulties by sheer
     perseverance. For example, if he was reading a fine page of
     Victor Hugo, or the like, he hated to be interrupted, so
     deeply was he interested in the subject he was reading.
     Style and poetry had a great effect upon him; he expressed
     admiration for the form and was aroused to enthusiasm by
     generous or noble ideas. Frederick the Great was the hero of
     his choice, a model of which he never ceased dreaming, and
     which, like his grandfather, he proposed as his own. It is
     easy to conceive that after ten or twelve years of such
     study, regularly and methodically pursued, the Prince must
     have possessed a literary and scientific baggage more varied
     and extensive than that of his companions. And he worked
     hard for it, few lads so hard. To speak the truth, he was
     much more disciplined and much more deprived of freedom and
     recreation of all sorts than most children of his age."

Par paranthèse may be introduced here a reference to Prince Henry, of whom Monsieur Ayme writes
less enthusiastically.

     "One day," the tutor writes, "I was dictating to him
     something in which mention of a queen occurs. I came to the
     words '... in addition to her natural distinction she
     possessed that August majesty which is the appanage of
     princesses of the blood royal....'

     "Prince Henry laid down his pen and remarked, 'The author
     who wrote this piece did not live much with queens.'

     "'Why?' I asked.

     "'Because I never observed the August majesty which attaches
     to princesses of the blood royal, and yet I have been
     brought up among them,' was the reply.

     "William, however," continues Monsieur Ayme, "was the
     thinker, prudent and circumspect; the wise head which knew
     that it was not all truths which bear telling. He was not
     less loyal and constant in his opinions. He admired the
     French Revolution, and the declaration contained in 'The
     Rights of Man,' though this did not prevent his declaiming
     against the Terrorists."

One incident in particular must have appealed to the French tutor. Monsieur Ayme and his Prussian
pupil one day began discussing the delicate question of the war of 1870. In the course of the
discussion both parties lost their tempers, until at last Prince William suddenly got up and
left the room. He remained silent and "huffed" for some days, but at last he took the Frenchman
aside and made him a formal apology. "I am very sorry indeed," he said,

     "that you took seriously my conduct of the other day. I
     meant nothing by it, and I regret it hurt you. I am all the
     more sorry, because I offended in your case a sentiment
     which I respect above any in the world, the love of
     country."

