THE

THEOLOGY OF HOLINESS.

BY

DOUGAN CLARK, M. D.

PROFESSOR OF SYSTEMATIC THEOLOGY AND CHURCH HISTORY IN EARLHAM COLLEGE, RICHMOND, INDIANA.

TO THE MEMORY OF MY FATHER AND MOTHER, DOUGAN AND ASENATH CLARK, BOTH FOR MANY YEARS APPROVED
MINISTERS IN THE FRIENDS' CHURCH, AND BOTH LONG SINCE DEPARTED TO BE WITH CHRIST, THIS BOOK
IS LOVINGLY Dedicated.

CONTENTS.

   I. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION A NECESSITY
  II. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION OBTAINABLE
 III. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION IN PATRIARCHAL TIMES
  IV. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION IN TYPE
   V. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION IN PROPHECY
  VI. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY JESUS CHRIST
 VII. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY PAUL
VIII. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY PETER
  IX. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY JOHN
   X. ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY JAMES AND JUDE
  XI. SANCTIFIED BY GOD THE FATHER
 XII. SANCTIFIED BY GOD THE SON
XIII. SANCTIFIED BY GOD THE HOLY GHOST
 XIV. I enclose a Avertissement bey, which Use the plan
and the boundaries of the Journal will make known.

One more request I would Zweyte to you, what is in them, what a muse Almanac I next Michaelis
editorial Mass, to bless with some Beyträgen. They are not bad society occur in it. Goethe, Herder,
Angels, & c. are Matthisson f. Antheil take it. I would have to ask me within today's date and
August 1 To send your Beyträge, the direct run to me to Jena to.

From Herder, who had schäzt your essay on Dante, I admired very much
and you pretty much to say.

                                                    Come back soon in your country, and live life to the Muses, which
in the service have the same eröfnet so beautiful.

                   

    

Schiller = .=

* * * * *

Jena 14 Sept 95th

I have had it long queue, you, my friend vortreflicher, for your beautiful Beytrag to say thanks to
the almanac. But I did not want to write more when I bit on the fate of the almanac would in itself
be more pure, which by a strange Combination of facts is a long time been very doubtful. You may have
heard that the charge d'affaires of Michaelis Rthl 1000. from the same payments to determined
to beat the post, as all the letters from = to = Michaelis from here,
and = = the same has held back. Since the cause of the incomprehensible
silence impossible suspect left, then caused such a great distrust
against Michaelis, which also informed me and forced me to hand over
the Mscrpts to the same bit to further education the thing move. This
is now done, and the almanac hear as I have in the press. It is true that they
are never able to tell how much sin it takes to have this beneficial effect, but a certain
amount they are bent on having.

Another class takes the opposite view. They regard holiness as very desirable, and a very lovely
thing to gaze upon and think upon, but they also regard it as quite impossible of attainment.
They hope to grow towards it all the days of their lives, and to get it at the moment of death.
Not sooner than the dying hour, do they believe any human being can be made holy. Not till
death is separating the soul from the body can even God Himself separate sin from the soul.
The whole doctrine of entire sanctification, therefore, they regard as a beautiful theory,
but wholly impossible as an experience, and wholly impracticable as a life.

In general terms, we may say that carnal Christians, as described by Paul in I. Corinthians
3:1-4, are opposed to the doctrine of entire sanctification. "The carnal mind is enmity against
God," and the carnal mind is irreconcilably opposed to holiness. This opposition may take one
of the forms already described, or, possibly, some other forms which have been overlooked,
but the root of the hostility is the same in all. Wherever "our old man" has his home in a
Christian's heart, there entire sanctification will be rejected.

But we must not forget that there are many exceptions. There are thousands of sincere, believing
hearts in all Christian denominations, in whom inbred sin still exists, but not with the consent
of the will. They are tired--very tired of the tyrant that rules them, or of the ceaseless
struggles by which, with God's added and assisting grace, they are enabled to keep him under.
They long for deliverance. They are hungering for full salvation, and rejoice to hear the message
of entire sanctification through the baptism with the Holy Ghost and fire. The Lord bless all
these hungering multitudes, and give them the desire of their hearts by saving them to the
uttermost, and may their numbers be vastly increased, so that the banner of Christ's church
may everywhere be unfurled--the banner on which is inscribed the glorious motto of Holiness
to the Lord.

Now we meet all objections to the doctrine of entire sanctification-- whether in the form of
indifference, or dislike, or undesirableness, or impossibility--with the simple proposition,
It is necessary. If this proposition can be established, all objections, of whatever character,
must fall to the ground, and the eager cry of every Christian heart must be, How can I obtain
that priceless blessing which is essential to my eternal bliss, which is indispensable, and
without which I shall never see the Lord?

For this is the language of the Holy Ghost in Heb. This can mean nothing short of entire sanctification,
or the removal of inbred sin. And, surely, it is hardly necessary to argue the question as
to the indispensableness of this blessed experience, in order to gain an entrance into heaven.
Everyone will admit that God Himself is a perfectly and absolutely holy Being, and He has ever
told His followers in all ages, "Be ye holy for I am holy"--making His own perfect and entire
holiness the sufficient reason for requiring the same quality in His people. And, although
the holiness of the highest created being will always fall infinitely short of that of the
Infinite God, as regards quantity, it will be the same <i>in quality</i>, for Jesus tells us,
"Be ye perfect even as your Father in heaven is perfect," not, of course, with the unmeasurable
amount of perfection which appertains to Him, but with the same kind of perfection so far as
it goes. And again in Rev. 21:27, we are told that "There shall in no wise enter into it" (the
heavenly city) "anything that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination or maketh a
lie." Heaven is a holy place, and occupied with none but holy inhabitants.

But if holiness of heart is a necessity in order that we may reach the blissful abode of the
glory land, when is this stupendous blessing to be obtained? It is by no means, thoughtlessly,
that I write obtained and not attained. It is very generally spoken of as an attainment, and
this form of expression has a tendency to discourage the seeker by magnifying the difficulty
of receiving this blessing. The thought contained in the word attainment is that of something
earnestly striven for, struggled after, persistently pursued with much labor and toil and effort,
until, at last, the coveted prize is attained. A very few of the multitudes who went to California,
soon after gold was discovered there, attained fortune; but it was after years of hard labor
and privation and hardship. The majority died on the way, or while mining for the precious
metal, or returned as poor as they went.

On the other hand, the idea of an obtainment is simply that of a gift. And entire sanctification
is precisely a gift, "merely this and nothing more." It is not received by struggle, nor effort,
nor merit of our own; it is not a great and laborious enterprise to be undertaken; not the
fruit of a long journey or a perilous voyage; not by doing, nor trying, nor suffering, nor
resolving, nor achieving, but by stretching out the hand of faith and taking. Praise the Lord.

And, therefore, we ask again when is this indispensable gift to be obtained? The Roman Catholic
and the Restorationist answer, in purgatorial fire, or in some kind of a second probation after
death. But the Holy Scriptures tell us absolutely nothing either of a purgatory or a post-mortem
probation. On the contrary, they clearly teach us that our destiny for all eternity is to be
determined in one probation, which is allotted to us in the present life. Let no one suppose,
for a moment, that he can be made fit for heaven at any time, nor in any place, nor by any
means, after he has left this mundane sphere. "Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now
is the day of salvation."

But all the Calvinistic churches by their creeds, and also a large portion of the membership
of Arminian denominations, without regard to their creeds, if asked when are we to obtain entire
sanctification as an essential meetness for heaven, would answer, at death. The prevailing
idea on this subject, among Christian believers, seems to be as follows: First, through repentance
toward God and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, we are converted. Our past sins are pardoned,
and we are born again. After that, our sole business is to grow in grace, and by this growth
to approach nearer and nearer to the standard of entire sanctification, but never even suppose
that we can reach that standard until the moment of death.

Now, grace is the gift of God, and we cannot, possibly, grow in grace until we receive it.
And we can never grow into grace, but grow in it after we get it. We can grow, it is true,
in the grace of justification to a limited degree and for a limited time. The degree is limited
because of the presence of inbred sin, which is the great, if indeed, not the only hindrance
of growth. The time is limited in most cases, at least, because if the justified Christian
is brought to see the need and the possibility of entire sanctification, and yet fails, as
so many do, to enter into the blessing, because of unbelief, he is very prone either to backslide,
in which case, of course, there will be a cessation of growth, or, like the Galatians, he will
submit to the bondage of legalism, and after having begun in the Spirit, he will seek to be
perfected in the flesh; in which case Paul's verdict to that beloved church was not ye are
growing in grace, but, "ye are fallen from grace."

It is plain, therefore, that we can never grow into the blessing of entire sanctification.
That blessing is to be received by faith, as the gift of God in Christ Jesus and through the
Holy Spirit; and when the grace has once been obtained in this manner, then we can grow in
it indefinitely and for a lifetime, possibly even for an eternity. Growth in grace is a most
blessed thing in its right place, and when rightly understood and experienced, but it can never
bring us to the death of the old man, nor to the experience of entire sanctification.

And as growth cannot do this, neither can death. Death is nowhere mentioned in Scripture as
a sanctifier. Death can separate the soul from the body, but to separate sin from the soul
is a work which God can only do. Jesus Christ is our sanctification, and the Holy Spirit is
our sanctifier, and even if the work is performed in the article of death, it is still the
Holy Spirit and not death that performs it. And if He can perform it in the hour and article
of death, where is the hindrance to His performing it a week, a month, a year, or forty years
before death--if only the conditions are fulfilled on our part. Do we say that He cannot perform
it before death; then where is His omnipotence? Do we say that He will not do it before death;
then where is His own holiness? In either case, we dishonor God and rob ourselves of an inestimable
and indispensable blessing. God save us from such folly.

Scripture, reason and experience, therefore, all unite in the sentiment that entire sanctification
is to be sought and obtained now, and if now, then it is to be obtained instantaneously, and
if instantaneously and now, it follows, also, that it is to be obtained by faith, and from
these premises the further conclusion is logically deducible, that we cannot make ourselves
any better in order to receive it, but that we must take it as we are. And so we arrive at
and adopt the pithy precept of John Wesley, "Expect it by faith--expect it as you are--expect
it now."

In these remarks we have necessarily anticipated some things which belong more accurately to
the next chapter; but we are not seeking so much for a perfectly methodical arrangement, as
for a clear and Scriptural presentation of the subject. And we proceed to affirm now that entire
sanctification is not only essential as the condition of entering heaven, but that it is also
necessary for the highest results of the Christian life on earth. It is not only an indispensable
blessing to die by, but, if we would fulfill our Father's will in this world, it is indispensable
to live by.

But before leaving entirely the subject of growth in grace, having demonstrated, as we trust,
that we can never grow into entire sanctification, we ought, perhaps, to explain what we mean
by the statement that we can grow indefinitely in that precious grace after, and not before,
we receive it. Entire sanctification has two sides or aspects. It has a positive side and a
negative side. Its negative side is the removal of inbred sin, and is, therefore, a matter
of subtraction. And herein, we may remark in passing, is a characteristic difference between
entire sanctification and regeneration. The latter is a matter of addition, because it implies
the impartation of a new life to the soul which has hitherto been "dead in trespasses and sins."
Now in this negative aspect of entire sanctification there can be no growth. If a heart is
pure it cannot be more pure. If it is free from sin it cannot be more free from sin. An empty
vessel, as some one has said, cannot be more empty. There can be no increase in purity.

But the positive side of entire sanctification is perfect love, and this is a relative expression.
It does not mean that all who possess it must have an equal amount of love. Perfect love to
each individual is just his own heart--not some one else's heart--being filled with love. One
individual may have a greater capacity of loving than another, just as he may have a greater
capacity of seeing or of working. Perfect love in a child would not be perfect love in a man;
and perfect love in a man would not be perfect love in an angel. And perfect love may increase
in the same individual so that what is perfect love today may not be perfect love to-morrow.
As we commune with God and work with Him, as we get more and more acquainted with Christ and
With the Holy Spirit, and see more of the infinite attractions of the Triune God, how is it
possible that we should not love Him more and more? "There will never be a time in earth nor
in Heaven," says the late Dr. Upham, "when there may not be an increase of holy love." On the
positive side of entire sanctification, then, there may be and will be growth indefinitely
and everlastingly. And this is the true growth in grace, about which much more could be said,
but we leave it for the present, to resume our main theme of the necessity of entire sanctification
in this life as well as the life to come.

We make a definite statement as follows, viz: No Christian can do all that God would have him
do, nor enjoy all that God would have him enjoy in this world, without the grace of entire
sanctification. And again, "Herein is My Father glorified that ye bear much fruit: so shall
ye be My disciples." Now the abundant fruit requires for its production the abundant life,
and these are both found in the Lord Jesus Christ. "I am come," says He, "that ye might have
life (in regeneration) and that ye might have it more abundantly" (in entire sanctification).
The abundant life and the abundant fruit, therefore, can only be found in connection with purity
of heart.

It is doubtless <i>true</i> that every living branch, that is to say, every justified and regenerated
believer, may and should and must, if he would retain his religion, bring forth some fruit.
And it is precisely these branches that are bearing fruit, whom the Great Husbandman "purges"--sanctifies--that
they may bring forth the more abundant fruit by which He Himself shall be glorified. And here
we might rest our case with a Q. E. D., but another remark or two will be in place.

The late Lord Tennyson could perceive, with the genius of a poet, the intimate connection between
purity and power. He puts into the mouth of Sir Galahad, one of his heroes, these beautiful
words, viz:

 "My strength is as the strength of ten,
  Because my heart is pure."

Now one of the most common complaints among Christians of all denominations, is because of
their weakness and their leanness. And yet nothing is clearer than that God has promised to
make His people strong, that He has commanded them to be strong in the Lord, and that not to
be strong is even blameworthy, not to say criminal in His sight. The reason, then, of our weakness
and our leanness and the meagreness of our fruitage, can be nothing else than because we do
not fulfill the conditions on which He promises to make us strong. One of these conditions,
and an indispensable one, is that we be entirely sanctified. It is they that know their God,
both in conversion and entire sanctification, both in pardon and purity, that shall "be strong
and do exploits." Beloved, if you would accomplish the work that God has given you to do, and
not have to regret its non-accomplishment in eternity, even if you are saved so as by fire,
seek and find that which is the essential condition, and ask at once to be wholly sanctified.

And if you would have the fullness of joy, even the joy of an uttermost salvation, the peace
that passeth understanding, the fellowship with the Father and with His son, Jesus Christ,
the sealing and anointing of the Spirit, the white stone and the new name, the abiding presence
of the indwelling Comforter, then pray that the very God of Peace may here and now sanctify
you wholly. Amen.

CHAPTER II.

ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION OBTAINABLE.

This would seem to follow as a necessary corollary from what has been said in the preceding
chapter. If entire sanctification has been proved to be not a matter of option but a matter
of necessity; if we cannot attain to the highest results in Christian privilege, nor in Christian
enjoyment, nor in Christian service without this blessed experience, and if, at the end, we
cannot be admitted into the celestial city unless we possess it, surely we cannot doubt for
a moment that our gracious Heavenly Father has provided a way by which this indispensable requisite
both for time and for eternity may be received.

But before discussing this proposition in detail let us have a clear understanding of what
is meant by entire sanctification, and, as a preliminary, let us study a few simple theological
definitions.

In the first place, my reader will have no difficulty in believing that I fully accept the
Arminian doctrine of the universality of the atonement. The sacrifice of Christ is sufficient
for the salvation of all mankind, and its benefits are offered to all. "He tasted death for
every man." But it does not follow that all men will be saved, and this for the reason that
the atonement is not unconditional but conditional. It is offered to all, and all are invited
and entreated to accept it. But it is available only in the case of those who believe. "He
that believeth shall be saved, and he that believeth not shall be condemned." A universal atonement,
therefore, does not by any means imply a universal salvation.

Redemption is a term of broad and varied application. It is either general or special. In one
sense it is as broad as atonement. Atonement is for sin; redemption is from sin and from all
the sad results of sin. In its more special meaning it is applicable only to those who accept
the atonement. For these it implies release from the bondage of the will under the law of sin
and death, or justification and regeneration. It brings also release from the power and existence
of depravity or entire sanctification. It promises, in the future, the complete glorification
of the saints in body, soul and spirit at God's right hand, and the deliverance of the creation
itself from the "bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God."

The first condition on which the benefits of the atonement are offered to the sinner is repentance.
Both the Saviour Himself and His forerunner began their public ministry with words of like
import, viz: "Repent ye and believe the gospel." Repentance does not mean penance-- not a voluntary
sacrifice in our own will for an expiation of sin--nor is it merely sorrow for our past sins,
although "godly sorrow" is one of the elements of true repentance. The sorrow of the world
may produce remorse, that continual biting which tortures the soul of the lost; but remorse
is not repentance, and the sorrow of the world worketh not life but death. True repentance
involves a change of mind, a change of purpose, a change of will, and implies not only a godly
sorrow for sin --sorrow not only because the sin has resulted in physical or mental or financial
or reputational disaster--but because it has grieved the Spirit of our God; and it implies
not only sorrow for our sin but the determination to forsake it as well. It is the afterthought,
and involves both regret for what we have done and the purpose to do so no more.

The next, and specially indispensable, condition for receiving the benefits of the atonement
is faith. This means nothing more nor less than taking God at His word. We are assured that
without faith it is impossible to please God, for he that cometh to God must believe "that
He is, and that He is a rewarder of them that diligently seek Him." "Faith is the substance
of things hoped for," because it makes them real. It is "the evidence of things not seen" because
it convinces the mind of their actual existence. It is true that all men believe something,
and, therefore, that all men have faith. It is not true that all men believe God, and, therefore,
not true that all men have saving faith.

And here we must make a distinction. Faith is often said to be the gift of God, and in the
sense of the grace of faith, or the power of believing, this is true. But the act of faith
is the actual exercise of the power of believing, which God has given us. It involves the putting
forth of the choosing power of the human will, that we may accept the salvation which is offered
us. God has given to us all the faith faculty, just as He has given to us the seeing faculty.
In the one case, as in the other, we are responsible for the exercise of the faculty thus given.
The proper object of the seeing faculty is the world around us, with all its multiplicity of
existences. We may open our eyes and see or we may close them and fail to see. The proper object
of the faith faculty is truth, and especially gospel truth, the truth of salvation through
a crucified and risen Lord. We may exercise our believing power and accept this great salvation
or we may close our faith-eyes, and fail to see and believe, and this to our eternal loss.

For God commands us to believe and holds us responsible for obedience to that as to all other
of His commands. The fact of the command involves the power to obey. Our will, therefore, our
choosing power, must be put on the believing side, and not on the side of unbelief. It is not
that we are required to believe without evidence. It is that our depraved hearts are not willing
to believe when the evidence is ample. And, therefore, our eternal destiny is made to hinge
on our obedience to the positive command, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ." The great and
crying sin of our fallen humanity is unbelief. It is this that has sundered us, as a race,
from our union with God, and it is faith which is to be the bond by which we may again be reunited
to Him. "He that believeth not the Son is condemned already."

Repentance and faith are the conditions on which God promises to give us the grace of justification.
This is pardon for all our past sins. God, for Christ's sake, looks upon us as though we had
not sinned. He accounts us just, for Jesus' sake, although we are not just in reality. And
herein it is that gospel justification differs from legal justification. The individual who
is accused of crime and who is brought into court and determined, by a jury of his peers, not
to be guilty, is at once acquitted and released from all penalty. He is justified solely on
the ground of his innocence. But no man ever has been or ever will be justified in the court
of heaven on the ground of his innocence. Every responsible human being has broken the law
of God. "All have sinned and come short of the glory of God." And none of those who have broken
the law can be justified by the law, that is to say, not one. The law justifies those, and
those only, who keep it. None of us have kept it, not one of the race of men save only the
man Christ Jesus. The law condemns all those who break it. All the race of men have broken
it save only the man Christ Jesus. Therefore, all are under condemnation. But condemnation
is incompatible with justification. Therefore, again, "by the deeds of the law shall no flesh
be justified."

Are we not, then, in an absolutely hopeless condition? We should be so but for Christ. But,
blessed be God, "He hath found a ransom." "All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned
every one to his own way, and the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all." Jesus Christ
"Himself bore our sins in His own body on the tree." And so it comes to pass that we can be
freely justified by His grace, not because of our innocency but because He bore the penalty
in our stead. He took the place which was rightfully ours and that is on the cross. He procured
for us the place which was and is rightfully His, and that is at God's right hand. He suffered
what we deserved, and by that very suffering He made us partakers of what He deserves. Glory
forever to His Holy Name!

By the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, therefore, justice is satisfied, and the penalty
of the broken law is removed. God is infinitely merciful, but He is also infinitely just. He
loves the sinner with a boundless love, but He hates the sin with a boundless hate. He is of
purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and will not look upon sin with the smallest degree of
allowance. His mercy and His love may compassionate the sinner, but this will be of no avail
so long as His justice is against him. "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?"

But in the marvelous plan of salvation by a crucified and risen Lord, both the attributes of
mercy and justice are enlisted on behalf of the sinner. The mercy of God pardons Him, the justice
of God justifies Him, and all for Jesus' sake. "Mercy and truth have met together, righteousness
and peace have kissed each other." "God can be just and the justifier of him that believeth
in Jesus." "If we confess our sins He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins." And in
accordance with the way of salvation which He Himself has devised, we can now plead with Him
that He would be unjust not to forgive us when we have complied with these conditions. And
so we arrive at the conclusion that justification is an act of God's grace by which our sins
are pardoned for the sake of Jesus Christ. And this act is instantaneous. God does not pardon
sins gradually, nor one at a time, nor by piecemeal, but to every one who repents and believes,
He utters the gracious language, "Thy sins, which are many, are all forgiven thee." As if by
a single stroke of the recording angel's pen, the whole dark record is blotted out forever.
"As far as the east is from the west so far hath He removed our transgressions from us." Glory.

Regeneration is a work of grace which always accompanies justification. God does not justify
a sinner without, at the same time, giving him a new life. This new life is a spiritual life
imparted to the soul, which before was dead in trespasses and sins, by the Divine energy of
the Holy Ghost. If a sinner should be pardoned, without, at the same time, receiving a new
nature, he would inevitably fall into sin again. His lifetime on earth would be spent in sinning
and repenting. But our merciful Father having for Christ's sake looked upon him as just and
righteous, when he was not so in reality, now bestows upon him a new nature which is just and
righteous. He makes him a partaker, indeed, of the Divine nature, and that is a nature which
is holy and just and good. And this is the new birth. Men may be full of physical life and
of intellectual life, but until they are born from above they are totally destitute of spiritual
life. Regeneration, therefore, is that act of God's grace by which we are born again.

Adoption is the reception of the newly justified and regenerated believer into the family of
God. No longer enemies, nor even strangers and foreigners, those who have accepted Christ as
their Saviour, now receive the adoption of sons. They become the children of God by faith in
Jesus Christ. This is their pedigree and they rejoice to declare it. A human governor or ruler
may pardon a guilty criminal, and grant him a reprieve, but he never takes him into his own
family. He may forgive the guilty one, but he cannot bestow upon him a new nature, nor can
he consent to recognize him as a brother or a son. But God not only remits the sins of those
whom He saves, He not only delivers them from wrath and from punishment, but He gives them
a new nature by which they can respond to His love, and He takes them into His own household
as children and heirs, yea, as joint heirs with Jesus Christ. "Ye are all the children of God
by faith in Jesus Christ."

The witness of the Spirit is something not easily defined, but it is well known by those who
experience it. It is an impression or consciousness wrought into the mind of the believer by
the Holy Ghost, which gives him the satisfactory assurance that he is a child of God. Before
this, he believes, now he knows. This witness, therefore, expels doubt and infuses into the
heart of the new-born child of God, a calm, definite and indisputable persuasion that all is
now right between himself and his Heavenly Father. In the previous section, I particularly or exclusively on the ruling by the Low German language prevented
and therefore missed, despite the lessons in High German Formation of the country's Ru ͤ taken considerate
of [5]. It is also difficult when the tradesmen Class, the great North German Bevo ͤ Lkerung Sta ͤ cities
are mentioned, the suspension and interruption be denied that the Low German language, where
they matched the deal raised ͤ ​​ͤ ta rt, u ͤ over co ͤ heads negotiat ͤ depends. Man sto ͤ SST
at the point where the block is just the Pfa ͤ mill, which the narrow circle of ideas in the
Low German city limit as in the country and umpflo ͤ bridges, more raw here, where more spießbu
ͤ rgerlich off prejudice ͤ lt and u holla ͤ ndisch ͤ berpinselt that is the difference. But
there are particularly large in northern Germany Full-Size ͤ dten Sta ͤ, a welcome Fact to report.
Many of the respectable middle Sta ͤ be, craftsmen, etc., have started in new and recently,
for themselves and their families a different position to the High German to provide language and culture,
as classifiers of their ancestors and Va ͤ was taken. Ru ͤ hmlich is what they do ͤ fu r their
children, how much they are often victims of their favorites opportunity , Give to their fu ͤ r ku
ͤ nftigen state Higen Sun befa ͤ that they do not like now the most from this class, fabric with
empty Ha ͤ be open and Ma ͤ the stream of insights, Ideas, knowledge and aspirations to be exhilarating
Voru ͤ see the Europe, America, the World erfu ͤ filled. Ru ͤ hmlich and amplifier ͤ FULLY
immediately, for it leads them in the correct clock the observation that property and assets
are becoming increasingly mobile ͤ gene in the world that the rapid Change of things, except
the blind Glu ͤ ck expected, what folly ͤ wa re, understanding and Knowledge to be a ͤ want
magnets to the ends of the pockets of working and enjoying it to dress funny back and forth
wandering holding together and to multiply.

       

* * * * *

Wa ͤ during the niedersa ͤ chsische Bauer to u ͤ over head and ears is in Low German, the Bu
ͤ rgersmann but already anfa ͤ depends, to a casual, as before, the German medium to high use, should
be educated on par excellence, the son of the Muses, from officials of the state and the church,
etc, DO what you ͤ, it is possible that vo ͤ lliger freedom and pleasure in High German Language
and education and moved from the Low German dialect and only outside this circle Made use. But the
matter negotiat ͤ lt differently.

I have thoughts in this regard a ußern ͤ, experiences impart what my subject a very owners ͤ
namely u ͤ berraschende Turn give.

That thing is na ͤ namely, that the Low German language home and family language in thousands
officials is of families, favorite language on all North German Universita ͤ th. This language So, I consider
everything as a barrier striving and life, as the enemy of education,
is that so little in the eyes of many of my countrymen, that they
deal with the most familiar their care that they her, the pulpit and
chair and out of good company la ͤ ngst displaced te on a Freista
ͤ herd of her house washed ͤ lead.

Here in the bosom of the family it appears as the most fervent exponent negotiat ͤ ratios. In jest
and Ernst fu ͤ they often carried the word, she is confidant of conjugal love, body of the
child-rearing, Language of the heart, teacher of morality and practical
wisdom of life.

Here it has also usually stored their brutality, returns out the best side and seems to speak through
their UnGlue ͤ ck improved, confidence wu make ͤ worthy of.

Is added, that their patron Ma ͤ men are not rare talent, spirit and
name.

Beru ͤ celebrities of Living ko ͤ me, could I lead anfu ͤ I begnu ͤ GE call me Blessed Johann
Heinrich Voss is not alone in Eutin, but still in Heidelberg up to his death with his wife,
family and North German Ga ͤ best and most o ͤ ftersten spoke Low German.

These are facts. How do I match them with the claim that the Low German language is the enemy
of education, exchange of ideas, intellectual vitality, now that I own could not help Ma ͤ men
of intellect and talent, of learning, restless Tha ͤ moisture, Ma ͤ men like to refer to Voss
as Low German?

Of course, I ko ͤ the adverse influence of the Low German language nnte just limited to the People
and community education restrict ͤ nken. I ko ͤ nnte about me to the educated Low German umen
to all offended by the way ra ͤ as follows daru ͤ over printouts ͤ bridges: the absolute spirit
lethal is the only Low German, where High German, Sanskrit and bo ͤ hmische Thurs ͤ villages
immediately known are, as here and there in Pomerania and Mecklenburg, which because of the
large ͤ ßten friends of the Low German be added mu ͤ SSTE, ugnen as not to la ͤ that in itself
and ͤ fu r is not the same Living and movement specifically, but
stopped himself was dead and the mentally-resistant and la ͤ hmend
but the Low German is still in the stage of society in which he indeed
High German Amplifier ͤ RURAL na ͤ kicked her, but still stands as
something alien about gegenu ͤ; without prejudice ͤ southern influence
and as indifferent fu r ͤ spirit and education was the Low German
language, where they are not of the High German as a foreign gegenu
ͤ is over, but sister to the site goes.

However, I fu ͤ rchte, indifference is an expression of psychological already here out of general
Gru ͤ be inadmissible appears. Two languages ​​on the tongue are two souls in his body. Is a language
the beloved, the language of the heart, so is the other, fu r ͤ what purposes it is also aufgespahrt
to come to their scho ͤ sweetest people share too short. You ra cht ͤ themselves by not Zuru ͤ
ckgiebt what they do not depends ͤ New Tiffany, she closes her innermost
Ordination and not to la SST ͤ to WOL as a ͤ ußeres tool with great
art and Ku ͤ nstelei, but not use it as a second self with love and
freedom.

The High German language owes each low self axis are coated, set it to the People nee orator,
poet, writer and all his reputation and name in the purchase. Can he her his heart for ckschenken ͤ
r not Zuru ͤ, he can not for the language of his ha ͤ uslichen make joys and sorrows, they
must cease as soon as it is gemu ͤ thlich, so might be formed Even in secret and refined contrast to
his intimate self, and it is therefore also in his education, his
poems, speeches, writings this one-sidedness, this contradiction reveal
and demonstrate mu ͤ need.

Menzel's made known to Johann Heinrich Voss. The body in Menzel's literature, Voss betrift is the
bitter, frivolous, one-sided, but it is significant and has the same to subsequent Sensation
produced, as the sentence u ͤ ͤ Go over the, which of course been even more one-sided and is
itself a la la Pustkuchen ͤ cherlich made. When I Menzel's words for the first read fu ͤ I hlt me
​​empo ͤ rt. Show up merely as such a niedersa ͤ chsischen Bauer, as You call the Voss to ridicule,
I cried out in anger, but I had me a moment to even say that these affections to a Su ͤ ddeutschen
neither cheap nor even inviting sound enough, and that at the same time just in my exclamations
a kind of half Zugesta ͤ covenants was. Actually, I had always entertained a view u ͤ about Voss as a
poet and translator, with all the respect for its large, undoubted merit, certainly not after u
ͤ powered on, philological admiration and patriotism niedersa ͤ chsischem smelled. I found
that he the genius the German language from year to year than in coercion, that he too raw and
arbitrary ͤ annually her a deal and losgeha ͤ and takes care that no German, even Voss not
ͤ Where such words, could take phrases and sayings in their mouths, of which his prose and poetic
Writings are full. Current ͤ rtig is my opinion, perhaps even more decisively. I see to Johann
Heinrich Voss besta ͤ account what I just expressed. The High German language had its Love does
not vo ͤ llig held, so they opened up to him not her own heart, their secrets and mysteries, its
bluish jungfra ͤ nature, the Blu ͤ her body and mind, all gifts and gifts that are not found
in za ͤ locational handling voluntarily exchanging of the beloved,
but by voluntary and forced her ͤ hr been able to gain.

While I admit this in mind all educated in Illinois, I am by no means averse to give a patriotic and well-meaning
voice from among their attention that the Conviction of a ͤ ußert, the use of Low German language
in the educated families of Lower Saxony, what influence he also u ͤ be true to the intellectual
or Income on ͤ umten Bedu ͤ rfnisse, on the refined civilization, education, or malformation of
the time - I purposely shading these printouts ͤ bridge with the famous brush that without doubt
of a good intention but restrict ͤ nkter all that the present and the latest time raised against
the good old ͤ rt in Black and Let concern - the use was a good and considerate of treflicher
in Ru ͤ on the character the household, because the language of Va
ͤ ter their honest and faithful old custom, their sincerity, rectitude
and probity propagated to the grandchildren.

Frankly, I always love you voice, as if coming from a simple, patriotic heart, I do not know whether
our Urgroßva ͤ ter so completely matched this flattering syllable. It is so strange, we always
talk about the good old days and dying each sex bequeathed to the legend of it to the aufblu
ͤ prompt and good old time, even before any la ͤ SST mortal eyes see and is always a few years a ͤ container
staircase, as the oldest living a ͤ People. I have to smile la ͤ when I think of the embarrassment
of well-meaning chroniclers and historians think if they order the moral Ma ͤ Hrchen not to
be ashamed to be, worried spa ͤ immediate glimpse into the past to only one corner, a seam of
the to catch the train or the good old good old man. It was only eight, how crafty they are
this act. You can never directly see her face, she did not say, now is them, or because it
is, on the contrary, the bubble swarm ͤ not just rarely leaves its history ago by kla ͤ Competent
ͤ be adjusted, Schwa ͤ Chen, Vice and Erba rmlichkeiten ͤ human Nature, when you approach the
conclusion of a auserwa ͤ hlten, small, shiny gla ͤ period, na ͤ; but when the curtain fa ͤ
filled, bright colors are weak ͤ Chen, bo ͤ sen examples not as lively work against the idea of ​​morality,
when the image subtracting the time then they show on their bordirten hem and call the viewer
to wehmu ͤ thig as she goes as it is towards the good old days and now will increase the time
young, children, but which are degenerate and are very bad old days. This is the history of manners
of a very different point of view, everything has to look at the greats of world phenomena, the
the good people do not realize.

Fu r ͤ everyone is of course always a matter of Pieta ͤ t and a beneficent Gefu ͤ hl his ancestors
imagined as durchga ͤ REGARDLESS respectable people. The dark Bu ͤ rgerliche or Ba ͤ uerliche can
this performance at least without great historical impetus and Opposition SUS ͤ nts, he has this
as an advantage over the BERU ͤ hmtesten noble families ahead. Thus, in High German bu ͤ rgerlichen
families the idea from his grandfather, great-grandfather as Old German sword button, the Herschend
and dearest. Schwa ͤ known books and general , the epithets ornanti ͤ fu r ba ͤ uerliche ancestors
Degenkno ͤ heads are they decently negligible and the farmer joke is not yet come up with the idea
about the Printouts ͤ bridge from the old German pikes, scythes or sheathes apply to them. In
general it should be noted that the word is German only High German, and in the original Low German
common life does not occur, as little as fru ͤ herhin angefu ͤ Companions Where words ͤ Education
and constitution, so that the phrase "the educated and constitutionality
ͤ SSIGE Germany" in Low German language nor less than a figure of
speech and do nothing.

After this Forerunners ͤ Asked Amplifier ͤ Announcement ͤ wa re Zuna ͤ grows the law umen einzura
ͤ, many old custom is through the use of the Low German language to the members of the family u ͤ
over, and - result set - they are bridges life or something printouts ͤ anha ͤ nts, which was
not WOL unite with their other education, are not fu send ͤ for the
time and today's society want - but - Family and admixture - dealing
with the people, interacting with the people to may be appropriate
to facilitate.

The latter, in fact I consider to be unimportant r fu ͤ moment. Here we see the use the Low
German language in preaching and officials among his family and of course natu ͤ most advantageous
terms provided. These families, mostly from the country itself and the country own and often
attract the confidence of the farmer and how other families For example, in the city gives,
among whom he is betrayed ͤ fu r and keep selling ͤ wu rde, he valid in those quasi na ͤ here and sees
in their distant relatives and ha ͤ uslichem life as in a mirror,
which Nert its own with shifted ͤ ͤ to him confidentially gene confronts.

But

no small number of these families, the high ͤ grows urgent warning to impart, before Allma ͤ Monna
Lisa sink to be alert to the ba ͤ uerliche stage of culture. As in the Low German once not
afraid to speak ͤ la SST, so does the Low German Gemu ͤ tlichkeit only slightly the character
of the Tra ͤ Gheit on. The Bedu ͤ rfniß more significant conversation, Beru ͤ more tender currencies, which
are possible only in a cultivated language Mon ͤ excited, always weak ͤ Cher the simple manners turns
into raw, the Best in the La ͤ ppische that's just in Plumpe, Derbe's in the uncouth and it occurs
all too often those sad Ru ͤ ckschritt of civilization one, called Verbauerung. This is also not
helped the farmer, the family, the children even less.

If then in his affection and fondness ͤ fu r the Low German in Ha ͤ uslichen a Heros of German
literature, such as Johann Heinrich Voss or a minister, as Klaus Harms appointed intends that
do well in Zuvo ͤ rderst the questions submitted: are you the turnaround your intellectual Ra
ͤ derwerks so certain and sure as those la ͤ UFST you no risk up fu r ͤ science to blunt, to lose
the movement of time from the eye, allowed to Do not you befu ͤ rchten to bring you and your
family to beggary of thought, your Children a unersa ͤ to rob tzliche time to uneducated to come
into the world and with your whole house at the bottom of the foot herabzugleiten civilization?

The
Mo ͤ GIVE always be issues that are of a conscientious ͤ ngstlich
worth answering.

       

* * * * *

But the Low German language is, as Erwa ͤ North German hnt, favorite language at all Universita
ͤ th and that will at least her boyfriend wa ͤ rmster not endorsing ko ͤ can.

Here she appears as GEFA ͤ annually ally of all those numerous evils and obstacles , which seem
to have conspired from the beginning to our Universita ͤ th to the Humanita ͤ t to nip in the
bud. Here she puts the idyllic honest face, so they is chtern in la ͤ RURAL parsonage wife and To ͤ recommends
informal roughly unceremoniously, gemu ͤ furnishings she wanders into the auditorium and out
the mouth always open and only pausirend if the Professor speaks and the student's philosophy
of religion, metaphysics, physics and other high German sublimia in his notebook registrable
ͤ gt The devil are you Gentlemen Favets linguis! How to get the language Bo ͤ otiens Minerva
in the temple. Your reply ko ͤ NNT of course, as is Minerva temple our ͤ Universita t, which
is only a tottering old ruins from the Middle Ages. Right! but where your foot treads shall be
as Athens, his sacred ground - shall I say, for why otherwise, the Go ͤ leaves the young foot the
tendon of impatience and anger of the holy awarded the ground with a kick, what age do not be with
both Ha ͤ out of the way can do, why other than that you Scho ͤ NERES, better spells, more
sacred from the soil shall. You do not understand? I understand you not, I understand the fine
North German Youth not to use on the seat of the Muses a language that the darkness of the mind,
the barbarism of the past raised ͤ ​​rt. Does it make this joke youth, their own studies, the
academic life, you ͤ rren scholasticism and pedantry of the academic institution to parody,
to travestiren, so I do not see neither great pride in this jokes I still ignorant of how much
the Low German language, already its sound, to this end is suitable [6], with joke joke must,
that is, flu ͤ remain mighty and changing, and if the same jokes
and same travesty is three years old, it must be a very serious and
to make a boring face.

Can not be cheerful, sociable, funny, even if your mood then, crude and funny be the element
of standard German. If the language of our farmers humorous as the language Abraham a Sancta Clara,
Lichtenberg, Jean Paul. Oh, I know the niedersa ͤ chsischen jokes they are all in a small groblo
ͤ schpapiernen book with fine woodcuts that yes ͤ annually will be printed this year. It occurs in
it, "the pay of Lu Ru ͤ ͤ neburg heath," the Repre sentative of ͤ niedersa ͤ chsischen folk humor,
the brilliant Till and the most charming ru ͤ LPST As loud jokes
in front of him, coming from a time where the people only the gross
body open, however, the knights of the arm, the clergy sentirte the
head of state representative ͤ monster.

Or whatever you prefer from the Low German language? I know the answer only too well, "she We enjoy
[7] and is us gemu ͤ thlich chorus of Go ttingen ͤ, Rostock, Greifswald and Kiel. it is fun for
us, it is our gemu ͤ thlich, it is probably us there! Also in Jena, Heidelberg, Berlin, Bonn, where
we come from and where we are two or three together, as it is in the middle among us. They
belong to the essence ͤ rt with the northern German country team
and the wa ͤ re not honest Holsat or Mecklenburg, Oldenburg, or who
is not at least three of the body of the Plattitu ͤ ha ͤ tte, flat
(Mu ͤ places) on his head, flat (folder) beneath their arm, and the
love Platt in his mouth.

O youth, academic, Blu ͤ the North Germans, do not be scentless. Fragrant something after Spirit
of the old - I mean not your own - then your Bethau Blu ͤ and Bla ͤ leaves with slightly wet from
the Hippocrene, they pervade with some oil from the lamp of philosophy,
feel, fu ͤ cave at least only the hot Thra ͤ ne of resentment and
pain that the genius your fatherland ufelt on you herabtra ͤ.

O youth, academic, he is u ͤ furniture, if you is good.

  Mephistopheles laughs and of course spo ͤ shocking
  it and if he sees you in Auerbach's cellar, and sit flat wohlbehaglich
Sun he calls out to his companion:

You see now how easily it can
live?

The little people because, every day for celebration.

How has since the days of Faustus the world MODIFIED ͤ, not what's
all in the past 30 happened in the last 13 in the last 3 years and
this is still Vo ͤ lkchen the old one off?

Where does it come from? Where does it go?

There are exceptions,
as it should not. This vengeance was
not causeless, and Jacob lay down upon the ground with a stone for a pillow, not only distressed
in mind from fear and anxiety, but also, we may well suppose, not altogether free from the
condemnation of a guilty conscience. But Jacob was a man who had faith in God's promises, even
if he did not always obey His commands. And when he lay down to sleep under the open sky, in
a state of mind, sad, forlorn, fearful and contrite, God was watching over him, and when he
awoke from the wondrous vision there vouchsafed to him, he perceived that God was in the place,
and he found that he himself, also, was a new man. Now he could not only believe intellectually
what God had said, but he could and did enter into covenant with Him, taking Jehovah for his
God, and vowing the tenth or his income to be given to Him. This was such a change of mind
and heart as constituted a real conversion.

When, after the many mercies and many trials that fell to his portion whilst dwelling with
his uncle Laban, and after the lapse of two score years, he was returning to his father's house,
no longer poor and lonely, but with flocks and herds and wives and children, again he was encountered
by the fear of his brother Esau who was approaching him with four hundred men. Then it was
that there "wrestled a man with him until the breaking of the day." Note it was the man wrestling
with Jacob--and the man was the angel,--Jehovah, the pre-existent Christ-- and the object of
his wrestling was to get the Jacob nature, the old man, the body of sin, out of Jacob. But
Jacob resisted, until by a touch the Divine wrestler made it impossible for him to resist any
longer. Now he had to cease his wrestling but he could still cling, and he could still cry,
"I will not let thee go until thou bless me." Jacob's will was now firmly set upon the blessing;
he could ho longer resist the will of the Blesser, but one thing more he had to do, and that
was to tell his name. I am Jacob--supplanter, sinner, and then He blessed him there; Jabbok
means extinguishment, and Jacob's self-life was extinguished there. He told his name, and in
the telling lost it. No longer the supplanter--but Israel, the prince, the prevailer, the overcomer,
and Israel was now a wholly sanctified man. Beloved, tell God your name--sinner--seek with
fixed determination for the blessing of holiness, fulfill the conditions, and you also shall
prevail, and your name will be changed from sinner to saint, priest, prophet, king, having
the blessing of entire sanctification, and the Blesser Himself in the person of the Indwelling
Comforter. Praise the Lord!

CHAPTER IV.

ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION IN TYPE.

The Mosaic dispensation was legal, ceremonial and typical. "The law having a shadow of the
good things to come," says the author of the Hebrews. But a shadow always points to a substance;
and so far as holiness is commanded, and so far as it is shadowed forth in the ceremonial law,
we shall find that there is a corresponding substance and reality in the gospel of Christ.

In the first place, if we study carefully the provisions of the Mosaic law, we shall be struck
with the many forms of ceremonial uncleanness described therein, and with the "divers washings,"
not only of the "hands oft," but of the whole body, and of "cups and pots, brazen vessels and
of tables." All these point to the fact that God will have a clean people, and a clean people
is a holy people. The same thing is vividly exhibited in the distinction between clean and
unclean animals, the one kind to be used as food, and the other to be disused. Of land animals,
only such as both chew the end and divide the hoof, might then be eaten. And of aquatic, only
such as have both fins and scales were to be accounted clean. There can be no doubt that this
restriction in regard to food is full of meaning. God help us all as Christian believers to
distinguish between the clean and the unclean in a spiritual sense, and not to forget that
God will have His people now pure in heart, clean in soul, holy both within and without.

The seal of the covenant with Abraham was circumcision, and this became the perpetual rite
by which his descendants were admitted to the rights and privileges of that covenant. "Every
male child shall be circumcised." But this rite was an outward symbol of "a circumcision not
made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ"
(Col. 2: II. Beloved reader, may you and I know what it is to experience the inward circumcision,
made without hands, even the putting off of the body of the flesh. And this is entire sanctification.
In the consecration of Aaron and his sons to the priests' office, not only were they to be
adorned with holy garments for glory and for beauty, not only was the breast-plate to be set
with twelve kinds of precious stones, but the plate for the mitre was to be made of pure gold,
and engraved with the motto "Holiness to the Lord." This was to be always upon the forehead
of the High Priest, and must signify that Aaron was to be the holy priest of a Holy God, and
that the law required a continuous holiness, as most assuredly the gospel does also.

Now, in the most important sense both the priesthood and the sacrifices were typical of Christ.
In the mediatorial work of redemption, he was both the priest and the victim. He offered Himself.
And no one will deny that He was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners. The holy
priest, under the law typified the holy priest, who is a priest forever after the order of
Melchizedek. But under the gospel dispensation all Christians are priests. And every such priest
must needs be continuously holy.

The "spiritual sacrifices" which the Christian priest must offer are, as previously stated,
(1) his body, with all its members and capacities. The heart was given to Christ at conversion.
It is, however, largely through the body that the soul is led into sin, and it is through the
body, also, that the soul must perform its work for Christ, so long as soul and body are united
in probation. The Christian must offer (2) also his continual testimony. He must "hold fast
the confession of his faith without wavering." "By him, therefore, let us offer the sacrifices
of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips giving thanks to His name." And,
finally (3), the Christian priest must offer the sacrifice of a holy life. "But to do good,
and to communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased." Beloved, let
us ask ourselves if we are constantly offering as a holy priesthood, a consecrated body, a
confessing tongue and a godly life. Amen.

This subject has already been alluded to under a different head, but it will bear repetition.

In the ceremonial used under the law for the cleansing of the leper, we find an impressive
type or symbol of holiness. Leprosy is most clearly and strikingly a type of inbred sin. It
is loathsome, unclean, incurable, fatal and hereditary. The leper was driven from society;
he could not dwell in the camp nor in the city. He was an outcast. None must be permitted to
approach him. They must be warned off by the despairing cry "unclean, unclean." Nothing can
be conceived more desolate or more hopeless than the condition of the leper, unless it be,
indeed, the sinner who is an "alien from the commonwealth of Israel, a stranger to the covenants
of promise, having no hope and without God in the world."

But to the leper, in many instances, came the glad "day of cleansing." He might not come into
the camp, until the priest went forth to him. The priest and no one else could pronounce him
clean. And none but Christ has any authority to tell the sinner that he is converted, or the
believer that he is sanctified. A clean bird must be slain over living water, another bird
dipped into this water flies away toward heaven with bloody wing; the leper is sprinkled seven
times, to denote the completeness or perfection of his cleansing, with blood by means of hyssop
and scarlet wool bound to a stick of cedar; he must wash his clothes; he must pass a razor
over his whole body, and bathe the whole body likewise in water. Certainly, all this needs
no explanation. Surely, here is atonement by blood, and cleansing by the washing of water through
the word, as plainly described as symbolic language can utter it.

All the bloody sacrifices of the Jewish law, the daily sacrifice both morning and evening,
the paschal lamb, the Day of Atonement, the offerings at the various feasts, and innumerable
sacrifices offered for individuals or for the whole people, the guilt offering, the sin offering,
one for what we have done, the other for what we are, the peace offering, the burnt offering,
these, also, all point to the Lamb that was slain from the foundation of the world. In all
the sacrifices which we have named, a life was taken and blood was shed. "Almost all things
are, by the law, purged with blood, and without shedding of blood is no remission."

But turn now to the New Testament, and read that "It is not possible for the blood of bulls
and goats to take away sins." Read again, "In Him we have redemption through His blood" --"Having
made peace through the blood of His cross"--"Ye who are far off are made nigh by the blood
of Christ"--"Being now justified by His blood"--"That He might sanctify the people with His
own blood"--and especially "The blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth us from all sin."

Here, I insert a quotation from that saintly man, Dr. Edgar M. Levy. "When an oblation for
sin was offered up under the old dispensation, the priest was commanded to dip his finger in
blood, and to sprinkle it seven times before the Lord. This denoted the perfection of the offering.
Nor would the blessed antitype come short of the type. Seven times, at least, did our Lord
pour forth His precious blood. He was circumcised and there, of necessity, was blood. He was
buffeted on the mouth, and by such brutal hands, that this must needs have been attended with
blood. He was scourged, and from Roman scouring there was, of course, blood. The crown of thorns
was driven into His precious temples and, surely, this was not without blood. The sharp nails
penetrated into His hands and feet, and again there was blood. And one of the soldiers, with
a spear, pierced His side, and forthwith came thereout blood and water."

The blood of Jesus, then, is the procuring cause of our sanctification as it is of our justification.
Glory be to His Name forever for the precious, cleansing blood. And every Christian can heartily
join in the immortal hymn of Toplady on the "Rock of Ages," and especially with the rendering
now frequently given to the conclusion of the first stanza, viz.:

 "Let the water and the blood
  From Thy wounded side which flowed,
  Be of sin the double cure
  Save from wrath--and make me pure."

The pure olive oil is mentioned many times in Scripture, and was used for a great variety of
purposes. In typology, however, it has special reference to the office work of the Holy Spirit.
He is distinctively the Sanctifier, and to be filled with the Spirit is designated by the Apostle
John as "the unction" or "the anointing." The holy anointing oil was to be sprinkled upon the
tabernacle and all its sacred vessels. It was also poured upon the heads of prophets, priests
and kings, as a necessary qualification for the discharge of their respective offices. There
can be no doubt but that this use of the anointing oil and the sweet perfume, which none were
permitted to imitate or counterfeit, has a direct typical reference to holiness. The sacred
writer, indeed, says as much. "That they may be most holy; whatsoever toucheth them shall be
holy." And as all Christians are kings and priests unto God, it is necessary that they also
be anointed with the Holy Spirit, as their types in the Old Testament dispensation were anointed
with the outward oil. "Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord." A priest must be holy.

We have already spoken of leprosy as a type of inbred sin, and of the requirement of blood-shedding
in the cleansing of the leper. But before that cleansing was complete, the anointing oil, also,
was to be applied to the leper, who was healed of his malady. As the priest had already touched
his ear, his thumb and his toe with the blood of the sacrifice, so now he touched the same
parts also with the oil. First, the blood; afterwards, the oil. And thus it is in the wondrous
plan of salvation through the Lord Jesus Christ. First, atonement for guilt and to secure pardon;
afterwards, the Holy Ghost baptism for complete cleansing. First, justification through the
blood; then entire sanctification through the Spirit.

The anointing oil was also to be applied to the ear, the thumb and the toe of Aaron and his
sons in their consecration to the priesthood and, finally, poured upon their mitred heads that
it might reach the beard and the skirts of the garments, but by no means touch the flesh. And
so, beloved, we must be touched with blood and oil as to our spiritual ears, that we may take
heed how we hear and what we hear; and as to our hands that they may do the work of God in
all righteousness, and goodness and truth; and as to our feet, that they may run swiftly and
beautifully upon the errands of redeeming love; and, at last, upon our heads and running down
overall the person to purify and energize the whole man, that we may be "ever, only, all for
Him." Praise the Lord. And this can never happen while the flesh, the carnal mind, is still alive.

Jesus Christ Himself, the Son of God and the Son of Man, He who was holy, harmless, undefiled
and separate from sinners, was, nevertheless, anointed with the Holy Ghost as a needful qualification
for His mediatorial work.

In the synagogue at Nazareth, He read part of the sixty-first chapter of Isaiah. It was now
a day of grace, not a day of vengeance. But to those who will not accept this grace, that terrible
day of vengeance will surely come. Jesus was anointed, and He was holy. His anointed followers
must also be holy. They must seek and find the baptism with the Holy Ghost and fire, they must
be sanctified wholly. To be baptized, and filled and anointed with the Holy Ghost is the privilege
and duty of all God's children. If we would belong to the royal priesthood, we must be cleansed
from the defilement of sin.

Finally, we will allude to the fire symbol. Gold is spoken of in Scripture as tried in the
fire. So of silver. "He" (Christ) "shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver." The precious
metals will endure the fire, but "dross and tin," as well as reprobate silver, will and must
be consumed. The baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire is a sin-consuming baptism. Fire
is a great purifier. It makes the substance which is subjected to it pure through and through,
and not like anything cleansed by water, pure as to its surface only. "Our God is a consuming
fire." Oh, beloved, let us give up to the fire all that is for the fire. Let all depravity,
all inbred sin, all tendency to depart from God and yield to Satan, be burned up in this fiery
baptism. May God put upon all His pardoned children not the blood-mark only, but the fire-mark
also.

CHAPTER V.

ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION IN PROPHECY.

The Major Prophets are Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel. The twelve prophetic books in
the Old Testament following the book of Daniel are called the Minor Prophets. In the writings
of both classes we find many allusions and predictions as to the entire sanctification of believers
in the gospel dispensation and under the reign of Messiah or Christ.

The sixth chapter of Isaiah is usually regarded as his call to the prophetic office. Whether
this be so or not, it records a very wonderful experience of that grand man, and a remarkable
type of the baptism with the Holy Ghost as described in the book of Acts.

It is quite evident that Isaiah was a converted man before he wrote his first chapter. In that
he laments the sins of the Israelites and the Jews, all of them God's chosen people, though
now divided into the two kingdoms and these often at variance, shows the utter futility of
their own efforts to regain the favor of God, by observances and sacrifices and ceremonies,
and then tells them how to be converted as plainly as any gospel minister in our own day would
be able to do. He shows them that the way of salvation is by repentance and faith, and by trusting
to the unmerited mercy of God.

Here are repentance and amendment of life and pardon, the washing away of guilt and committed
sins, symbolical of the New Testament washing of regeneration, symbolical also of John's baptism
of repentance unto the remission of sins.

But now in the sixth chapter, and "in the year that king Uzziah died," a wondrous vision of
the pre-existent Christ, "sitting upon a throne high and lifted up" and the seraphim crying
one to another "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts," was vouchsafed to the prophet. And
the first effect of the glorious things which he saw and heard was not to exalt him and minister
to his pride, but to fill him with despair at his own depravity. He felt just as Peter did
at the first miraculous draught of fishes on the Sea of Galilee, when he exclaimed "Depart
from me for I am a sinful man, O Lord." Ah! beloved, it never fosters spiritual pride, nor
any other kind of pride to get a nearer and clearer view of Christ than we ever had before.
Quite the contrary. Such a vision turns us towards our inner selves, and enables us to behold
by contrast the darkness and sinfulness and pollution of our own souls, and in such a view
we shall find food for the deepest humiliation, but nothing to nourish pride. If we may credit
Jewish tradition, it was for the offence of saying that he had seen the King, the Lord of hosts,
that the prophet was afterwards sawn asunder. But the record of the glorious vision is still
preserved and will, no doubt, be blessed to millions of readers in the future, as in the past,
and until the end of the age.

But the seraph was sent to touch the "unclean lips" of Isaiah--unclean because of innate depravity,
and unclean notwithstanding he had probably been preaching repentance and amendment of life
and forgiveness for two or three years before this wondrous experience--to touch them with
holy fire. And then he was assured not that his sins of commission and omission were forgiven--that
had been done before--but that his iniquity was taken away, and his (inbred) sin purged. This
was a second and a definite experience, and strikingly emblematic of the baptism with the Holy
Ghost and fire under the gospel dispensation, which is also accompanied by "the purifying of
the heart by faith," or entire sanctification.

How wondrous are the prophecies of Isaiah after this experience. He seems to look down the
centuries for seven hundred years and to see the glorious blessings of the gospel dispensation
almost as clearly as if they were already present. And in the fifty-first chapter: "Awake, awake!

To Jeremiah the Lord said, "I sanctified thee; and I ordained thee a prophet unto the nations,"
which must mean not only that he was set apart for the office of a prophet, but also that he
was cleansed from inbred sin, as a necessary preparation for the office itself.

In the thirty-sixth chapter of Ezekiel we have some striking passages on the theme before us.
These were, no doubt, addressed primarily to the outward Israel, but they may very justly be
appropriated by the Israel of God, the Church of Christ, since as Augustine says, "The New
Testament lies hidden in the Old, and the Old is revealed in the New." Committed sin implies
both guilt and pollution. And the pollution that is thus acquired by the practice of sinning
is removed in regeneration. Thus the new convert is brought back again to the state of the
little child. "Except ye be converted," said the blessed Saviour, "and become as little children,
ye cannot enter into the kingdom of God." The little child has neither the guilt nor the pollution
of committed sin; whilst he does have within him the inherited or inbred sin of his nature.

Now in the promise quoted above, allusion is made to the clean water made from the ashes of
a red heifer and sprinkled, under the Mosaic law, upon those who had incurred ceremonial uncleanness.
The thing signified, however, is the precious blood of Christ which cleanseth from all sin,
or possibly the cleansing operation of the Holy Spirit, typified by water, may here be meant.
At any rate the twenty-fifth verse points to nothing less than a full and free justification.
Here we have described certainly the experience of regeneration, if indeed not the still fuller
experience of entire sanctification. But let us admit that it means only the new heart which
is given to the penitent sinner at his new birth. Regeneration implies the impartation of a
new life by the Divine energy of the Holy Ghost. And this new life is comparable to the "heart
of flesh," not, of course, a carnal heart, but a heart tender and teachable, and impressible
to heavenly influences, such a heart as we always find in the new-born babe in Christ.

But listen still further: "And I will put My Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in My
statutes, and ye shall keep My judgments and do them." In this verse we have a pre-figuring
of the Holy Ghost baptism, by which the heart is cleansed from all sin and sanctified wholly,
and also of the subsequent "walking in the Spirit," to which Paul alludes in one of his epistles.
Surely the gospel of Christ has something better for its recipients than a constant daily sinning
and repenting, which is too often the experience of Christian people. The twenty-seventh verse,
therefore, signifies holiness of heart and life through the power of the indwelling Spirit.

How blessed it is thus to be assured that what we cannot do by our own strength, the Holy Spirit
will cause us to do. This doctrine of spiritual causation is indeed glorious. Like the mainspring
of the watch which supplies the power within, by which the hands are moved without, and thus
the fleeting minutes and hours are correctly measured, so the Holy Spirit within supplies the
energy by which the sanctified believer is enabled or caused to adorn the doctrine of Christ,
his Saviour, in all things, and to bring forth the fruit of the Spirit in all righteousness
and goodness and truth.

In the minor prophets, we find numerous allusions to the subject of holiness, though their
language is often highly figurative. Now the word Ishi means my husband; while the word Baali
means my Lord, and the language, therefore, points to an experience or a relation of marriage.
The bride is exalted immeasurably above the servant. While the position of the servant points
to a legal justification and a service for wages and reward, that of the bride must signify
entire sanctification, and the closest possible union with the Heavenly Bridegroom. Again,
the word betrothed points legitimately to a marriage which is always justly expected to follow
if both parties are faithful to the engagement. Beloved, let us get so near to Christ that
we shall not address Him as my Lord, in the spirit of a servant, but as my husband, in the
spirit of a loving and faithful wife. At your conversion, you are, as it were, betrothed to
Him, or in ordinary language engaged to Him. At your entire sanctification, your engagement
is consummated by the marriage union. Engagement must precede marriage, it is true, but, as
a rule, engagements should not be long. Do not needlessly defer your nuptials, but rather hasten
to the embraces of Everlasting Love. Like Rebecca, appreciate your high and holy calling, and
like her say promptly and decidedly, "I will go."

In the book of Joel we find the prophecy which Peter quoted on the day of Pentecost, and assured
the multitude of Jews, out of every nation under heaven, that what they beheld on that day
was the fulfillment of the same.

Now, these words are clearly a foreshadowing of the baptism with the Holy Ghost and fire, designed
for all of God's children without distinction of nation or sex, and intended, first, to purify
their hearts by faith (see Acts 15:9) and, secondly, to endue them with power for whatever
line of service God may call them to. And we may add that this text, as well as many others,
shows that in these gospel days women as well as men may be, as we find in the facts of our
daily experience that they are both called and qualified for the work of the ministry, as well
as other labors in the vineyard of the Lord. To log into the dispute with Rome the support to
save the masses, Huss struck boldly the railways, which already before him Thomas v. Stitny
had entered, gave up the Latin language of scholars and turned in generally comprehensible Czech sermons
and writings to the people. Here he developed the Czech Language is not only practical, but
also underwent the efforts that so far very to regulate fluctuating orthography in a particular
font (see "MJ Husi ortografie ceská. ed. Sembera of 1857). This drive for perfection of the Czech
language were in the 15th and 16 Century continued eagerly by the community of the Bohemian
and Moravian Brothers (qv), which produced the most exquisite Czech stylists and first in Mlada Boleslav
and Litomysl, it docked in Prerau printers. support essential was the rise of Czech literature
and by humanist influences, especially by Vladislav II (1471-1516), as Bohuslaw von Lobkowicz,
which one of the richest Libraries of his time, collected and excellent after him a number of renowned
scholars Latin poems written and another circle of Bohemian humanist, headed Cornelius was the
lawyer v.Vsehrd, the classical studies for the Czech-national literature sought to exploit. However,
it could under the fierce national and religious strife, the Czech poetry discontinued to
the extent develop than would otherwise be their bright beginnings promised. Satire, and war songs
came to the fore. The "Májovy sen "(" Maitraum ") of Prince Hynek Podebrady (1452-91) is only
due to its author mention, the satirical poem "Prostopravda" of Nicholas of Dacicky Heslow (1555
1626) added only for the cultural history value. The most important Czech poets of the time Lomnicky
is Simon (who died after 1622), although he lacked the moral strength to act as to provide
didactic and moralizing poet big. For his major works are: "fairytales naucení mladému Hospodáři
"(" Short Guide to a young landlord), a didactic poem with features of the former customs, and
the satire "Kupidova Strela" ("The pride of life"), which he under Rudolf II, the needle and
a year's salary earned, and he tried to in church plays. Among the numerous religious songs especially
that of the Bishop of the Brethren, Augusta John (1500 to 1572), largely written in prison emphasize
lively songs.

Also in the CzechRepublic prose of this period outweighs the theological and polemical direction,
by Calixtins, Catholics and Protestants in church later literary propaganda competed. The most valuable
are the partly Latin, partly CzechRepublic writings of John Huss,
the founder of Protestantism (1369-1415), of which the latter has
recently published by heirs (Prague, 1865-68, 3 vols).

On the Catholic side, drew Prague Dean Hilary of Leitmeritz (Litomericki, d. 1469) from. By
nuclear-like style rise of the brilliant Peter Chelcicky (sd, 1390-1460) produced writings
which the Bohemian Brotherhood were regarded as indicative. Among the theological writers of
this brotherhood distinguished himself particularly Lukas (1458-1528) by brilliant style.
The first Czech Translation of the New Testament was published by Lupac 1475th the first complete
translation of the Bible 1488; to 1620 published 15 Czech Bibles, the best of these is the 1579-93
in Moravian-Kralitz at the expense of John of Zerotin published ("Bible Kralická"), which today
for the highest pattern of the Czech language is. The founders of the Bohemian law

879

Czech literature (16th-18. Century).

are Victor v. Vshehrd ("Nine Books of the legal and court and the
land board in Bohemia"

1550; ed. of Jirecek, Prague 1874), the country of Marshal Ctibor
Cimburg in the so-called.

"Tobitschau Book "(for Moravia) and where. Koldin v. (1579), whose book" Prava Mestska Kralostvi
Českého " systems for the cities in Bohemia and Moravia was decisive. Zealous care enjoyed the historical
sciences. The transition to the second period are the "Stari letopisove Cesti, "Anna anonymous lists
of the years 1378-1527 (edited by Palacky, 1829). Significant support then received by Adam
v. Czech historians Veleslavín (1546-99), the number of own and others' historical works published
in exemplary language (translation of "Historia Bohemica" by Aeneas Sylvius, "Politia historica",
"Calendar historický" etc.). The Fighting between the Protestants and Calixtinus in Prague from 1524-30
were the eager Lutherans Bartos (d. 1535) described partial, but clearly, the resistance of
the Bohemian estates against Ferdinand I 1546-48, described Sixt von Otter Village (1500-1583)
also from the Protestant point of view, but quite pragmatic, and in classic style. The Bohemian
history treated the entire canon of Vaclav Hajek Libocan (1495-1553), his "Chronicle" a popular
reading, but little reliable historical source. Joh Blahoslaw (1523-71) of the Bohemian Brethren
wrote a valuable history of the . Latter Another one brother, Vaclav Brezan (1560-1619), archivist
of Count Rosenberg, described in a biography of the tycoon events from 1530 to 1592, but does
this work stylistically not the writings Blahoslaws same. Brethren also belongs to the historian
Jaffet (d. 1614), which besides other works, a story about the origin of the Brethren wrote.
Valuable contributions to the political and cultural history of Bohemia contain the letters of Karl
von Zerotin (sd), in addition to the still of the Polish-Czech historian Barthol. Paprocki (1540-1614,
descriptions of the Bohemian, Moravian and Silesian noble families) and Hofhistoriograph of the King
Mathias, George Zaveta, author of a "court school" ("Scholaaulica, Prague mention of 1607) are.
At last, here is the extensive correspondence of the men v. Schlik, Rabstein, Sternberg, Rosenberg,
Cimburk, Wilh. v. Pernstein and King George of Podebrady. - In the Country and customs customer assigns
first the "cosmography ceska" of Siegmund v. Puchov (1520-84) against which the description of
the travels of John von Lobkowicz after Palestine (1493), Vratislav v. Mitrowitz to Constantinople (1591;
ed in the "Staroceska. biblioteka ", Vol 3), Harant of Polžice to Egypt, Jerusalem, etc. (1598,
new ed by Erben, 1854) and others joined. Among the humanists were distinguished: Greg Hruby
Jeleny (1450-1514) as a translator of Cicero and others, Siegmund Hruby Jeleny (d. 1554), author
a "Lexicon symphonum" Greek, Latin, Czech and German language Vaclav Pisecki (d. 1511), translator
of Isocrates. The Czech language research the Brethren church owes multiple funding ("grammaticality
^ eska" by John Blahoslaw, 1571). Scientific journals have left Tadeus Hajek (d. 1600) and
Adam Zaluzanski (D. 1613).

III. Period. The suppression of the Czech language, the exiles (1620-1774). The defeat of Bohemia
in the Battle of White Mountain, the forcible expulsion and emigration of 30.000 Bohemia, including
many excellent position and wealth influential supporter national literature, the destruction of wealth
and the general brutalization during the Thirty Years War seemed the destruction of Czech literature
to bring about.

Against the same old treasures ravaged the winner under the pretext that they are of Hussite or Protestant
tendencies were penetrated. Thus did many of the older plants under; others were extremely
rare. Soon wild for even the Czech language more general than peasant dialect despised and finally
by the Emperor Joseph II by decree of 6 Jan. 1774 was excluded from office and school. This
was the work undertaken in 1620 formally ended, but now a strong reaction came to light. The literary
traditions were continued in the second period, the first of the emigrants or exiles. Karl von Zerotin
was from Breslau, where he had emigrated in 1628, his literary valuable correspondence with his
friends to continue especially with the Brethren. In closely connected with his name appears
the most important Czech writer that time, J. Amos Komensky (called Comenius, 1592-1670), where
t L. the great, if they are sometimes allegorical in Pietism heretical poem "Labyrinth sveta a
raj srdce" ("Labyrinth of the World", 1623) due, in which he the deep pain of his soul in
moving Tones gave expression. testimony from the same unshakable faith in God his excellent metrical
translation of the Psalms. In his educational writings, he went against the prevailing Scholasticism
and the perverted education of classicism (see further Comenius). Besides Komensky distinguished
themselves among the exiles from: Paul Skála (died after 1640), the author of a Church History
in 10 volumes, Martin v. Drazov, Paul Stransky, (died 1657), who in his Amsterdam veröffentlochten
"Respublica bojema" a very clear statement of political Relations and the internal state of Bohemia
designs. Even sparser developed the t. L. after the disaster of 1620 in Bohemia itself Oddly enough,
we owe this the most important work that Count William Slavata (qv), one of the victims of the
famous defenestration, 14bändiges whose historical work ("Spisovani Historické"), a counterpart of
the Protestant Position Skála's written history, an important historical source is. In the sense of
ecclesiastical and political reaction also wrote the Jesuit Balbin Bohuslaw (d. 1688), Thomas
Pesina (d. 1680), whose "Predchudce Moravopisu" the chronological history of Moravia to 1658
includes Beckovsky John (d. 1725), author of a Bohemian Chronicle: "Poselkyne starych pribehuv,
Johann Schmidt Hammer (d. 1737), Franz Kozmanecky, already older Wenzel storm the worst enemies
of the Brethren Church (d. 1601), further the Jesuit fanatic Anton Konias (d. 1760) among others

Period
IV. The Resurrection (1774-1860). The sudden cancellation of the Czech Official language in school and cried
at once serious

880

Czech literature (18th and 19th century).

Protest. Shortly after the appearance of the imperial patent called Graf (1774) Franz Kinsky in
the German magazine "Memories of a highly important subject" the
maintenance and education of the Czech language, and a year then gave
Franz Pelcel a Latin written defense of the Czech language of the
above Balbin ("Dissertatio apologetica linguae Slovenica ") out.

But more important for the revival of the Czech Nationality was the recovery of historical research
in the reign of Maria Theresa and Joseph II first examined fields.

Jak.

Dobner (sd), the ancient historical sources Czech founded in 1769
and a scientific association, which in 1784 the Royal Bohemian Society
of Sciences was charged. awoke under the influence of this exciting
company interest in the language and literature of the Czechs, for
which 1793 F. Pelcel as an ordinary Professor at the University of
Prague was hired, while Joseph Dobrovsky (sd, 1753-1829) the very
basis of modern Czech philology created.

By 1818 Count Sternberg founded National Museum, which was soon a magazine in German and Czech
language and later published the important association of Matice Ceska to approve Dissemination
of Czech writings promoted to day, then was the literary movement the Czechs a solid base. The
transition from these first attempts at revival Czech literature to the considerable growth of this literature
after 1820 is the fruitful activity of young Joseph's (sd, 1773-1847), who notably by two Works,
his "History of Czech literature" (1825) and his "Czech-German Dictionary "(1835-39, 5 vols),
the greatest services purchased. Worked in the field of poetry, after the weak beginnings Puchmajer,
Polak's and Jung's, the discovery of the Queen Hofer Berger and Green manuscript (1817) epoch-making
and stimulating. In the national direction preceded John Kollar (1793-1852) and Vladislav Celakowsky
(1799-1852). Numerous other Poets, like Vaclav Hanka (1791-1864), Vlastimil Kamaryt (died 1833; "Pisen
vesnicanuv") Fri Jaroslav Vacek (d. 1869), also Vinaricky, Chmelenski, Picek, Pravoslav Koubek, Boleslav
Jablonsky, W. Štulc others, joined them. - The epic poetry, particularly excited by the discovery
of those national manuscripts, their care was by the Slovaks John Holly (1785-1849; "Svatopluk"),
the romance writer Erasme. Vocel (1803-71), John Marek (1801-53), Josh. Kalina (1816-47), under
the influence of Byronic standing Karel Hynek Macha (1810-36; "Maj"), the versatile Jaromir Erben
(1811-70), which, however, already the transition to the new Give direction. The satirists, Franz Rubes
recorded (1814-53) and Karl Havlicek (1821-56) from. - The beginnings of modern Czech drama expectations
based on the 1785 of Karl Wenzel and Tham founded in Prague theater lovers. Nep. Stepanek (1783-1844)
created by number of original or translated pieces, the Czech repertoire, higher are the fertile
Klicpera Wenzel (1792-1859) and Josh. Kajetan Tyl (1808-56), whose "Cestmir", "Pani Maryanka" "Strakonicky
dudak", "Jan Hus" and others have survived in the repertory. Still be mentioned: S. Machacek
(d. 1846), Fr Turinský (d. 1852), Ferdinand Mikovec (d. 1862). - Also the territory of the novel
(in the sense of W. Scott) and the amendment was cultivated diligently, as for instance by
Tyl, Rubes, KI Macha and Marek, the founder of a novella, Sabina (1813 1877), Prokop Chocholoušek
(1819-64), J. Ehrenberg (born 1815) and Adalbert Hlinka (Pseudonym Franz Pravda, born 1817), with
the latter particularly in stories from the life of the people.

More important than in the field of poetry designed the newer t. L. on the sciences and especially
the historical. As a historian, are primarily: Pelcel Franz (1734-1801), the author of a number of
historical studies (including biographies of Charles IV, Wenceslas IV, etc.) and a "Nova kronika
ceská" that contribute significantly to creating the Czech national feeling contributed, then Paul,
Josh. Safarik (Schafar, 1795-1861), who in his "Starozitnosti Slovanské" the first modern needs
the attempt, made the Slavic prehistory to 10 Century, illuminate and especially Franz Palacky
(1798-1876), with its monumental "History of Bohemia from the earliest times to 1526", the first Band
appeared in 1836, the Czech Historiography suddenly of a laborious and cumbersome archaeological
research on the heights modern, artistic representation soared. Also acquired at the Slavic language
research After the already mentioned scholars, Dobrovsky and young man, especially by Paul
Safarik his "Pocátkové staroceske mluvnice" great merit. Follow these lines: Martin Hattala (B.
1821), Wenzel Zikmund (1863-73), Josh. Kolar Others

V. Period. The latest time.

With the introduction of the constitutional era in Austria (by 1860) were the last barriers that the
revival of Czech literature had previously prevented many. exceed in number, inward content and form
completion for the earlier period, all of the latest products. This occurs most notably in poetic
Area to light. It should be first, as if the transition to modern times, the hyper-romantic J. poet Vaclav
Fric (pseudonym Brodsky, born in 1829) which grows as a playwright has made a name. In Viteslav Halek
(1835-74) then bought a Bohemian poetry Poet and an excellent atmosphere of thoroughly modern
nature painting. Peppy the lyrical poems of Adolf Heyduk (born 1836), the unusual and in the poetic
narrative Talent expressed. Much appreciated are also the clever, the rest of the poetic Immediacy devoid
of poems by John Nerud a (born 1834). The most important poet Bohemia on lyric-epic territory is,
however, Jaroslaw Vrchlický (actually Frida, born 1853). Yet to be mentioned among the poets: Eliza
Krásnohorská (born 1847), the most popular Bohemian poet of modern times, the predominantly elegiac
Vaclaw Sladek Joseph (b. 1845), Spindler, villager, Mokry, etc. As a poet of epic talent showed
Svatopluk Cech (born 1846), but has a Epes in a big way the newer
Czech poetry not to light so far encouraged.

The most significant successes have been achieved in the drama, especially by Franz Wenzel Jerábek
(born 1836), in the social drama and tragedy of the works of high moral and created artistic
value. Of importance

881

Czech literature - Czech language.

are the comic poet Emanuel Bozdech (1841-1889), the National Vaclav Vlcek (born 1839), but where sometimes
outweighs the epic motif, and the still of the older school belonging fruitful Actor Josh. George
Kolar (b. 1812), the dark hero with peculiar skill or Scheming types brings to bear, Ms. A.
Subert, currently director of the Bohemian National Theatre. Less happy is the above-mentioned
Jaroslaw Vrchlický was in his dramatic experiments. Otherwise have to be mentioned Stroupežnický
("Cerne duse" etc.), Neruda, Zakreys, Durdik (Stanislav i Ludmila "), Stolba, Samberk, Krajnik
etc. - As the founder of the Czech novel is Ms Caroline Svetla (actually Muzak Johanna, born 1830),
the author of many of the People's life stories of removed. In the first series is already
present in the Playwrights mentioned Vaclav Vlcek, whose "Zlatov ohni (umgearb new. Ed, 1883) both
by grand scale plan (natural history of the family from marriage to the family of nations)
as protrudes by masterly detail painting. were in the area of ​​the
historical novel Jos before others.

Staúkovský George (d. 1880 "King and the Bishop", "the patriots of
the Theater Shack" etc.) and the already mentioned among the playwrights
Ms. A. Subert (15th century) on which the Svatopluk Cech social active.

Also be mentioned as a narrator: Gustav Pfleger-Moravsky (D. 1875,
"The small world") and Aloys Smilowski Adalbert (d. 1883), both also
known as a poet and playwright, James Arbes (born 1840), the already
mentioned among the poets Johann Neruda ("Tales of the Town"); Jirásek
Aloys (b. 185l; "The rock dweller"

"The Court of the voivod", "A Philosophical History," etc.); Bohumil Havlasa (died 1877; "In the
wake of an adventurer King," "Still Waters", etc.); Servac Heller, Julius Zeyer, Franz Herites (born
1851), Joseph Stolba (born 1846), etc.

Modern Bohemian historical research was founded by Fr Palacky (see above), his great "History
of Bohemia" came in 1876 and has completed all branches of the public Life, on politics, art and science,
in Bohemia exerted the most lasting influence. His successor as Bohemian Landeshistoriograph,
Anton Gindely (born 1829), has become the large-scale (written in German) "History of the Thirty
Years' War," a name made, while accused of lack of availability of national patriotic warmth.
By Bee industry is characterized Vladivoj Vaclav Tomek (born 1818) whose "History of the City Prague
"(1855 ff) an almost unparalleled in such completeness monograph of the Bohemian Capital and
brings about the same time to a rich material for the history of Bohemia designed. Of the other
historians are especially popular Vladislaw K. Zap (d. 1870), Anton Bocek (d. 1847) and Bede Dudik
(b. 1815, "History of Moravia") designated to . Make A productive activity on literary, linguistic
and historical Area develops Jirecek Joseph (b. 1825), the defender of the Queen Hofer handwriting.
edited Individual epochs of Bohemian history Karl deep trunk, Ms. Dworsky, Rezek, Ferd. Schulz,
Quran, Bilek, inter alia, the history of Slavic peoples W. Kriz (d. 1882) Konstantin Jirecek (b. 1854,
"History of the Bulgarians"), Joseph Perwolf (born in 1841, "The History of the Slavic idea, "etc.).
Important contributions on Bohemian history of law provided, except Palacky, Vorel and Tomek,
in the latest period Hermenegild Jirecek (sd), the Moravian Country archivist Vincent Brandl (born
1834, "The beginnings of the Land Law," etc.), Joseph Kalousek ("The
Bohemian Crown"), Karl Jicinsky, Tornan, Emler, Rybicka including
The Law Randa has (sd) a purchase far beyond the borders of Bohemia-known
name.

Furthermore, be mentioned here: I. Slavin, A. Meznik, J. Skarda, Havelka, A. Pavlicek and
Others

The philosophical literature begins in Bohemia in 1818 with an essay by W. Zahradnik (In the journal
"Hlasitel"). Palacky, Purkyne, Marek, Hanus, Kvet treated in magazines certain branches of philosophy.
First Dastich (born 1834), Professor of Philosophy at the Prague University, has published major
works of philosophical content ("Formal logic", "Empirical logic", "Understanding the system
of Thomas Stitny" etc.). The most important representative the philosophical literature is currently
Durdik I. (qv), who decided to German inspired modern systems and has successfully turned the
aesthetics. In the foreground Lately joined TG Masaryk ("concrete logic"), who with his "Slavonic
Studies" ("Slovanske study "), the Slavonic question for the first time from a purely realistic
and philosophical, of all Romance stripped position addresses, and also the authenticity of
the Queen Hofer manuscript fought. Among the naturalists to draw the pupil of the physiologist
Purkyne (sd): I. Krejci ("geology", 1878), the zoologist A. Fric, the Botanist L. Celakowsky
(sd 2), Br Studnicka ("Out of Nature") and the above-mentioned aesthetic facing Durdik I.
("Copernicus and Kepler, "" arising from the progress of science ", etc.).

The modern history of Czech literature was with F. Prohazka "Miscellaneen the Bohemian and Moravian
literature "(1784) arguments. Rich, although the modern non-critical requirements, has grown
Jung's "History literatury ceske" (1825), only I. Jirecek began publishing in 1874 an exhaustive
history of Czech literature: "Rukovet k dejinam ceske literatury," while the "Dajepis literatury
ceskoslavanske" by Sabina (D

.
 I freely admit that it is not what even a justified
experience ought to be, for God has assured us through His apostle, John, that He that is born
of God doth not commit sin, and, therefore, notwithstanding the presence of inbred sin in the
heart of the justified and regenerated believer, yet such a one, by watchfulness and prayer,
may be kept from acts of sin and from becoming a backslider. But in point of fact, the seventh
of Romans does describe what, in many cases, is the experience of the converted Christian.

For there are many who even after a clear conversion and a joyful sense of God's favor, with
the witness of the Spirit to their adoption, yet do yield to temptation under the pressure
of inbred sin, and so pass weeks, or months or weary years in what is called an up-and-down
experience, not becoming confirmed backsliders, but sinning and repenting, delighting in the
law of God after the inward man, but often yielding to the demands of the law of sin, which
is in their members, not losing their sonship, but losing their communion and their joy, often
like Peter weeping bitterly over their transgressions, but finding that while the spirit is
willing, the flesh is weak.

I said that such a process, unsatisfactory as it is, might go on for years. It ends either
in complete religious declension amounting, sometimes, to apostacy on the one hand, or infinitely
better, in the entire sanctification of the heart and complete deliverance from inbred sin.
And in these days of enlightenment, when the doctrine and experience of holiness are so plainly
taught, and so generally diffused among the children of God, it is, at least, doubtful whether
a soul can continue long in a state of justification, which means that it will either go forward
to the experience of entire sanctification, or else it will fall into back-sliding as did some
of the Corinthians, or into legality as did the Galatians.

Now, legality is nothing more nor less than Judaism. It is seeking salvation after the pattern
of the Old Testament, and not after that of the New. It is a matter of works, and not a matter
of faith. It inquires "What good thing shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" It is the
child of the bondwoman and not that of the free. It is Ishmael and not Isaac. It is Sinai and
not Calvary.

And so it happens that many Christians are simply good Jews. They may even possess circumcised
hearts, and may yet serve the Lord in the spirit of bondage, as did good Jews of old. They
fail to realize that they have been called unto liberty, which liberty does not, by any means,
signify license; it does not signify the liberty of making our own choices, but the liberty
of accepting gladly and submissively God's choices; it does not mean the liberty of doing either
right or wrong as we may prefer, but the liberty of always preferring to do right and never
wrong, and so to spend our years on earth, doing right in all directions, and doing wrong in
none. This, beloved, is the glorious liberty of the children of God.

After the birth of Ishmael, we may well suppose that Hagar's chief employment in Abraham's
house was to look after the said Ishmael, to care for him and to restrain him. Mark, it was
never her business to care for or to restrain Isaac. He was the child of promise, the child
of faith, the son of the lawful wife and the free woman, and when Ishmael's persecuting spirit
broke forth at the weaning of Isaac, then the command was "Cast out the bond woman and her
son." Both must go together or stay together. Ah! beloved, when inbred sin is cast out, there
is no more need of the law either to restrain or constrain. Perfect love casts out fear; it
also casts out sin, and becomes the motive power of the whole spiritual man. "The love of Christ
constraineth us."

So Paul shows us that both Gentiles and Jews had failed to attain unto the law of righteousness,
because of inbred sin, which caused the former to put out the light which they had, and the
latter to fall short of keeping the law, which was their only hope of salvation, but which
was never intended by its Divine Author to save men, but to show them how utterly incapable
they were of saving themselves.

But Paul does not leave them there. After putting both classes of the human family into the
same position of failure and condemnation, and declaring that there is no difference, "for
all have sinned and come short of the glory of God," he adds, "Being justified fully by His
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus." When man's helplessness and inability
have been sufficiently demonstrated, then God comes to his rescue. "For God hath concluded
them all in unbelief, that He might have mercy upon all."

Thus in the Epistle to the Romans, the apostle teaches the great doctrine of justification
by faith and the consequent peace of reconciliation, the "peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ." But he goes farther than justification, and shows us that sanctification, also, is
by faith and not by works. He will not be satisfied with anything less than the death of our
old man, and the death of inbred sin is precisely the experience of entire sanctification.

But we are wholly unable to destroy or do away with the body of sin by any resolution or will-power
or effort of our own. Sin will not go dead at our bidding, nor can we become dead to sin by
wishing or striving to be so. Again, we are brought face to face with our helplessness, but
the apostle solves the problem for us by directing us to resort to the process of reckoning.
Ah! now, our help is laid upon one that is mighty. "The things that are impossible with men
are possible with God." What we reckon, with the sublime reckoning of faith, Christ can make
real and true. We have only, therefore, to reckon ourselves to be dead, indeed, unto sin, and
leave to Him to make the reckoning good. But we must not fail to reckon ourselves alive as
well as dead. And to be alive to God means, in this connection, to be responsive to every intimation
of His will, to love Him perfectly, to be, to do and to suffer joyfully all that He may determine
concerning us, in short, to be sanctified wholly. Oh, beloved, what a blessed reckoning is
the reckoning of faith! How vastly does it transcend all the reckonings of logic or mathematics.
For, by it, we experience a continual deadness to sin, and a continual holiness of heart and life.

For it must be clearly understood that Paul is not asking us to fancy, or imagine, or hypothecate.
He is not telling us that if we believe a thing to be true, the believing will make it true.
He is not persuading us to reckon without factors and with no result. The factors in his direction
are God's promises and commands, alike in the Old Testament and in the New, urging His people
to be holy, and promising to make them so, and our acceptance of the provision He has made
for our cleansing, by faith, and then by the reckoning alluded to, the result is secured.

In foggy or cloudy weather, mariners at sea are often compelled to resort to what they term
dead-reckoning. Sometimes for days together, the sun is hidden by clouds, and no observation
can be taken with the usual instruments for determining latitude and longitude. Then the captain
ascertains by the compass what direction he is pursuing, and by the log, the rate at which
the ship is sailing, and thus by marking out his daily advance on a chart, he is enabled, with
astonishing accuracy, to determine when and at what point he will sight the shore toward which
the voyage is directed. What he reckons becomes real, when he tells the passengers, "Within
five minutes, we ought to see the Irish coast," followed within the specified time by the cry
from the lookout, "Land, ho!"

To the Christian believer, the Bible is both compass and log and chart. Sometimes, he enjoys
the witness of the Spirit clear as the sunshine, assuring him that he is going in the right
direction, and informing him as to his whereabouts in Christian experience, but when not thus
favored, he can still move on by faith, he still has his compass and his chart, and he can
still employ the dead-reckoning, and go forward with a holy trust that in due time he shall
land in the heavenly port. Praise the Lord.

To comment in detail upon all that the great apostle of the Gentiles has written in reference
to entire sanctification would require a volume instead of a single chapter. I must, therefore,
content myself with a few selections, and leave the reader to pursue the subject for himself
in the inexhaustible mine of the Pauline Epistles.

In Romans 6:13, we have the best description of consecration that is to be found anywhere.

Here, the apostle clearly teaches us that consecration is not the same thing as entire sanctification.
The one is an act proceeding from man to God, the other is an act proceeding from God to man.
It is man who consecrates; it is God who sanctifies.

Perfect consecration is an entire surrender of a personal human being to a personal God. The
term members may well be understood to include all bodily organs and powers, all mental faculties
and sensibilities, and all appurtenances, such as time, money, influence, culture, health,
and, in short, the whole personal, individual man, with all his belongings. The surrender must
be complete, absolute, unreserved and forever. Body, soul, spirit, time, talents, possessions,
all that we have and all that we are must be His, wholly His, and His to all eternity.

Such a consecration cannot be made by any one who is not already a Christian believer. Paul
informs us, explicitly, that he is not calling upon sinners "dead in trespasses and sins,"
to consecrate themselves, but upon converted persons, "those who are alive from the dead."
How thankful we ought to be that he has settled that point forever. Sinners may repent, but
only Christians can consecrate. Whatever surrender the sinner may and must make in order to
be saved, the believer must make a broader, deeper, fuller, more complete surrender of a different
character and for a different purpose. In repentance, the sinner gives himself away as a dead
sacrifice, and his purpose is to receive pardon and life. He wants none of these things. All
actual and known sins must be abandoned at conversion. Our consecration is for a deeper work,
that is to say, for the removal of inbred sin, which, after all, is not accomplished by our
consecration, though that is an essential preliminary, but by the baptism with the Holy Ghost
and fire.

The essence of consecration is in the sentence, "Yield yourselves unto God." When you yield
yourselves, you yield everything else. All the details are included in the one surrender of
yourself. Changing the emphasis, we may read again, "Yield yourselves unto God." "Yield yourselves
unto God." Your work, your service, your obedience, your sacrifice, your right place and your
allotted duty will all follow in good time.

Consecration is the willingness, and the resolution and the purpose to be, to do, and to suffer
all God's will. Its essence, already given in the words of Paul, is given also in the words
of the Saviour. "Not My will but Thine be, done," which is beautifully versified by Frances
Ridley Havergal, in the couplet,

 "Take my will and make it thine,
  It shall be no longer mine."

Consecration being a definite transaction, and made once for all, does not need to be repeated
unless we have failed to keep it. To consecrate over and over again is like a husband and wife
marrying over and over again. We are consecrated just as we are married. The vow is upon us,
and in the force of that vow, we walk all our days. All we have to do is to remember day by
day that we are wholly the Lord's, and see to it that nothing is taken from the altar. Those
who have kept their consecration complete should testify to its maintenance upon all suitable
occasions, and never deny it by word, deed or silence.

Many years ago, I saw a form of consecration in an English periodical, which is here given
very slightly modified, and which has been adopted by many. Let all my readers unite with the
author in entering into this personal yielding to God.

  I am willing
  To receive what Thou givest,
  To lack what Thou withholdest,
  To relinquish what Thou takest,
  To suffer what Thou inflictest,
  To be what Thou requirest,
  To do what Thou commandest.
               Amen.

In this connection, we may add that when the consecration is complete, it becomes, comparatively,
an easy matter to believe. Entire sanctification like justification, and, indeed, all other
gospel blessings and experiences, is to be received by faith. But so long as the surrender
to God is not complete, faith refuses to act.

When all obstructions are removed by an act of heartfelt and sincere consecration, then it
becomes as natural and as easy to believe as it is to breathe, after everything that hinders
breathing is removed from the air passages. We hear much complaint among Christians of a want
of faith. If they only had more faith, they imagine that all would be well. When the disciples
of old asked Jesus to increase their faith, He told them, in effect, to use what they had.
If it were only a mustard- seed faith, He assured them that it would remove mountains. And
we may justly conclude that the difficulty with most seekers after entire sanctification is
not in a want of faith so much as in an incomplete surrender. The carnal mind dies very hard.
It attaches itself to one worldly thing or another, and refuses to be sundered from what it
loves, and while this is the case, the individual cannot believe that God gives him the unspeakable
blessing of heart purity. But when all the preliminaries have been attended to, and there is
nothing else needed but to trust in Jesus, then faith can appropriate His promises, and in
so doing realize their fulfillment.

Another class of seekers is very much concerned about the witness of the Spirit to assure them
that the blessing has been received. Probably in these cases the very point that has not yet
been consecrated to God is the feeling, or the witness, which they so much desire. "It often
happens," says Dr. G. D. Watson, "that a patient, who has been cured of some contagious disease,
has to have a certificate on leaving the hospital. In such a case the certificate does not
cure him, but certifies that he is cured. How absurd for a patient just entering the hospital
to clamor for his health certificate before receiving the doctor and taking the remedies. In
like manner, it is useless for a seeking soul to be clamoring for the witness and waiting for
the feeling before receiving Jesus and fully trusting Him for the cure. We are not to trust
in the experience, but the Saviour who imparts the experience."

Let us now return to Paul. In his first epistle to the Corinthians, second and third chapters,
he tells us of three classes of persons: the natural man, the spiritual man, and the babe in
Christ. The natural man, he tells us, receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God; they are
foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Such
is a description of the unregenerate wherever and whenever they are found. Their standard of
judgment is not that of the Holy Spirit. They are blind to the truth of God and deaf to the
story of salvation. Being without spiritual life they are, of course, without spiritual judgment.
And yet, just such persons are in all our churches, and the number is by no means small. And
often it strangely happens that these are the very individuals who are noticeably forward in
expressing their opinions on the right way of managing a church. Fine and costly edifices,
artistic music, entertainments and theatricals, eloquent preaching or lecturing, something
to be proud of and to draw the crowd--these are the things which in their view make the church
of their choice a success; but as for the conversion of sinners, as for the spread of the gospel
at home and abroad, as for the sanctifying of believers, as for the things of the Spirit of
God, they are foolishness unto them. What they need is a deep and pungent conviction, a true
repentance, a living faith and a sound conversion. May God hasten it in His time.

"He that is spiritual," says our apostle, "judgeth or discerneth all things, yet he himself
is judged or discerned of no man." The spiritual man is the man who has been baptized with
the Spirit and filled with the Spirit, and in whom the Spirit abides as an ever-present Guide,
Comforter and Friend. In short, he is the man who is wholly sanctified and saved to the uttermost.
I should not, of course, affirm that such a one is always remarkable for depth or soundness
of judgment, for, as his religion is in his heart rather than in his head, the heart may be
perfect while the head may be weak. And yet holiness, or rather the Holy Spirit dwelling in
the heart, does have a wonderfully illuminating influence upon the understanding. And the spiritual
man, however many things he may be ignorant of, does understand the condition of the natural
man, because he has been there, while he is not understood by the natural man because the latter
has not been where he is. And the same is true of the relation of the spiritual man to the
carnal Christian or babe in Christ. He, also, is understood by one who has the Spirit, while
he is himself incapable of judging or discerning the position of the latter.

Paul assures the Corinthians that they are "yet carnal," and still he asserts that they are
"babes in Christ." Such persons, and their name is legion in all denominations of Christians,
are not wholly natural, neither are they wholly spiritual. They are babes in Christ, and, therefore,
they may thank God that they are in Christ. They are converted, they are believers, they are
disciples, they are justified; but they are not wholly sanctified, and not wholly delivered
from the carnal mind. Their state is a mixed one, partly spiritual, partly carnal.

Oh, let such as these make an immediate and complete and irrevocable consecration to God, and
let them ask for the baptism with the Holy Ghost and receive Him by faith in His sanctifying
and empowering offices, that so they may become, not partly, but wholly spiritual. Oh, that
spiritual men and women may increase and abound in all our churches. Amen.

In 2 Corinthians, 7:1, the apostle of the Gentiles bases the experience of entire sanctification
on the glorious promises of God. To cleanse ourselves is shown by the Greek tense to be an
act done definitely and once for all. It means, therefore, to put ourselves under the conditions
of cleansing by a definite act of consecration to God. It means to place ourselves in co-operation
with the Holy Spirit, who is distinctively the Sanctifier and Cleanser. It means, also, that
we are to seek and find the baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire, in order that our hearts
may be purified by faith, and then to continually avoid all sources of temptation and all incentives
to evil, so far as we may; and continuously realize and experience the holiness which Christ
has instantaneously wrought in our souls through His Holy Spirit. Filthiness of the flesh signifies
undue indulgence of sensual appetites, as in gluttony, drunkenness and licentiousness, which
was probably very prevalent at Corinth. Filthiness of the spirit is illustrated by idolatry
and pride, nor must we forget that the spirit is often polluted also through pampering the body.

Paul's wonderful prayer in Ephesians 3:14-21, has been so admirably treated of by Dr. Daniel
Steele, that I shall content myself with referring the reader to his book on "Love Enthroned,"
page 123, and pass on. A single remark, however, may properly be made. That prayer, undoubtedly,
embodies all that we mean by entire sanctification and the filling of the Spirit and more.

In 1 Thess. 5:23, we have another prayer of the great apostle in which entire sanctification
is expressly petitioned for. Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it." The very
form of the expression in the first clause indicates that it is possible to be sanctified wholly
and possible to be sanctified partially. All Christians are cleansed from the pollution of
sins committed, that is to say, from the pollution they have acquired by actually sinning.
And thus the Corinthians are addressed by Paul as sanctified, although, manifestly, many of
them were not holy in heart and life. On the other hand, the apostle prays that the Thessalonians
may be sanctified wholly, although as a church they were already in a healthy and prosperous
condition, the only exception being a few members who were too neglectful of their outward
business and too much disposed to be busy-bodies. So we may conclude, without hesitation, that
all Christians are partially sanctified, while many good Christians are not wholly sanctified.

But provision was made in the gospel for the entire sanctification of all believers, otherwise
Paul would not have prayed for it. And not only for their entire sanctification as a definite,
instantaneous act of God, as shown by the Greek tense, but, also, for their continual preservation
in blamelessness, though not in faultlessness, until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And
lest they should stagger through unbelief he adds, "Faithful is He that calleth you. You are
not to do it. He will do it for He is able."

And this experience extends to the whole man, the spirit which takes hold of and communes with
God, the soul with its emotions, affections, desires and volitions; the body with its appetites
and its powers all made holy and preserved holy. Glory!

One more citation only and I will leave the reader to his own researches in the rich storehouse
of the Pauline writings. Taking it for granted that Paul is the author of the Hebrews, let
us read chapter 7:25 of that profound epistle. "Wherefore, he is able, also, to save them to
the uttermost that come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them."
To the uttermost refers, undoubtedly, not only to time but to quantity. It means entirely,
perfectly, altogether, through and through. And if he is able he is also willing. Oh, that
all my readers, with the writer, may praise God now and evermore for salvation from the uttermost
to the uttermost. Amen.

CHAPTER VIII.

ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY PETER.

In the first place, Peter sanctioned all the writings of his beloved brother, Paul, and this
probably at a period when Paul was either dead or separated from his ministerial work by imprisonment.
There is a tradition that both the apostles were put to death on the same day at Rome, the
one by crucifixion, choosing himself to have his head downward because unworthy to die just
like his Master--the other by beheading, because he was a Roman citizen, which was deemed,
at Rome, too honorable a position to be subjected to the ignominious death of the cross. Even
if this should be true, yet Peter's second epistle, in which he endorses Paul's teachings,
and gives to his writings the same authority as to the rest of the Bible, seems to have been
written but a short time previous to his own martyrdom. The mature judgment of Peter, therefore,
was that Paul was an inspired writer of Scripture, and that what he had given to the churches
through his epistles, and left as a permanent legacy for the church universal, is to be received
as gospel truth. And this will apply to his copious and frequent allusions to entire sanctification,
as well as to the various other subjects treated of by his inspired pen. On the subject of
holiness, therefore, Peter and Paul are as one; and we need not be surprised that in the very
first sentence of his first epistle, he addresses the Christians of the Jewish dispersion in
Asia Minor--though by no means excluding the Gentile converts--as elect according to the fore-
knowledge (not predestination) of God the Father through sanctification of the Spirit, which
must include entire as well as partial sanctification, unto (not unconditional happiness or
misery,) but unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Thus, in one grand
outburst of salutation from his glowing heart, he associates sanctification of the Spirit,
the blood of sprinkling, and the obedience of faith. Neither Peter nor Paul stops in the midst
of his earnest appeals to men's hearts, in order to give a lecture on Systematic Theology,
but both scatter seed-thoughts all over their inspired pages, which are abundant in fruitage
to the candid and reflecting mind. And right here we remark that Paul to the Thessalonians
employs the same expression, sanctification of the spirit, in connection with belief of the
truth, and thus putting the apostle of the circumcision by the side of the apostle of the uncircumcision
we have sanctification by the blood of Jesus, sanctification by faith, sanctification by the
Holy Ghost, and even in a subordinate sense, sanctification by obedience, and all this without
the slightest inconsistency or contradiction.

And as Peter starts out by calling God's people to holiness, he continues by reminding them
that their hope is to be fixed upon "an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled and that fadeth
not away, reserved in heaven for you." What more natural than that those who are expecting
to inherit a holy heaven, should themselves seek while here to become a holy people? Surely
we should desire a meetness for our inheritance as well as a title to it.

After speaking of the "trial of their faith being much more precious than of gold which perisheth,"
the apostle utters forth an imperious call to entire sanctification. Thus he quotes from the
words of the great lawgiver in Leviticus--that Moses, whom all Jews have delighted to honor,
and shows at a glance that the Old Testament, as well as the New, bears witness to the holiness
of God, and makes that fact a sufficient reason for the command and requirement that His people
should be holy, also.

Our Heavenly Father, then, is a holy God and dwells in a holy heaven. Is it not most reasonable
and most fit that He should require all who are to dwell with Him forever in that holy place,
to be holy also? And in order to find an abundant entrance into that everlasting kingdom, we
must be made holy while still clothed in flesh and sojourning upon earth. Nothing that is not
already pure and holy can pass through the gates of pearl into the eternal city, the New Jerusalem.

Holiness is what constitutes the family likeness between our Father in heaven and His children
both on earth and in heaven. A lady was accosted in the streets of a western city by a stranger,
who asked her if she was not the daughter of such a one, naming him. She replied, with some
surprise at the question, in the affirmative. "I knew you," said the gentleman, "by your resemblance
to your father who was my particular friend twenty-five years ago, away back in the State of
Maine." And the lady was delighted that the lineaments of her father's countenance were so
impressed upon her own that she should thus be recognized even by one who had never seen her
before as her father's child.

Ah! beloved, have we the likeness of our Heavenly Father so imprinted upon our faces and upon
our walk and upon our conversation that all who know Him shall recognize His features in us?
Oh, for more of the family likeness which shall stamp us as sons of God wherever we are and
whatever we do. "Be ye holy, for I am holy."

In comparison with the precious "blood of Christ"

Why, Peter, although a fisherman and an unlearned and ignorant man, yet when thou writest under
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, it is almost as hard to keep up with thee as with thy beloved
brother, Paul!

See how holiness is, as it were, piled up and repeated in various ways in the sentence quoted
above. (1), "Ye have purified your souls." Yes, and it was Peter who spoke before the council
at Jerusalem in reference to Cornelius and his household, and said that God "put no difference
between us and them, purifying their hearts by faith." The word "purify" is derived from a
Greek root which means "fire." Souls are purified by the fire of the Holy Spirit, and the result
is a continual "obeying the truth," and (2), the positive side of this purification is "unfeigned
love of the brethren," and this is love with a pure heart and fervent, the same love which
John calls perfect love, and the standard of which is in the words of the Lord Jesus, "As I
have loved you that ye also love one another."

Was ever more holiness crowded into a single verse? Peter had never been to a Theological Seminary,
but he had listened through three eventful years to the blessed teachings of the Lord Jesus,
and he had been filled with the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost, and without aiming at system
or explanation, he has compressed more sound theology into a single verse than we find in many
a voluminous treatise and many a lengthy commentary and many an eloquent sermon.

And then in the rapturous eloquence of inspiration he tells us how to grow in grace.

Peter, by no means, teaches us that we grow into grace, or that we grow into entire sanctification.
We first become receivers, and get grace before we can grow in it, and we must first receive
entire sanctification before we can grow in it. Like all other gospel blessings, this is the
gift of God, and is forever, therefore, unobtainable by any process of growth. But Peter says
in effect, in order to grow in grace you must do two things. (1), Lay aside everything that
hinders growth, specifying malice, guile, hypocrisies, envies, evil speakings. Now it is plain
as the sun at noon-day that all these things are the fruits of the carnal mind. And so in a
single thought the exhortation is to lay aside, or put off, or give up to destruction, the
depravity of our nature, the inbred sin which doth so easily beset, and which so long as it
exists, will be an insuperable hindrance to all rapid and symmetrical growth, and (2) desire,
and of course, partake of the sincere milk of the word. Ah, here is wisdom, the secret of successful
growth, in the spiritual as in the natural world, is first to become healthy, and then to take
plenty of nourishment. Holiness is spiritual health, and implies the absence of inbred sin
which is always spiritual disease. The child that is healthy and gets plenty of pure milk will
grow and develop rapidly. The time will soon come when he can eat and digest meat and still
strengthen and expand his physical organism on this richer diet, and thus he will finally become
a large and strong man. But the child may be healthy and still not grow because it is starving
for want of food. Or, it may have plenty of the most wholesome food and still not grow because
disease prevents it from assimilating the nourishment. Sound health and plenty of food, with
proper exercise, are the essentials of the right kind of growth. Now the Holy Bible contains
not only milk for babes, but strong meat for strong men. It has been remarked by another that
if Christians would be giants they must eat giants' food. And the essential requisite for appropriating
either the milk or the meat is to have a sound spiritual constitution and that means simply
entire sanctification. Peter is right again. We grow by the sincere milk of the word after
we have gotten rid of that which always and everywhere obstructs true growth.

Of course my reader will not understand me to say, any more than Peter himself says, that we
experience growth in grace simply by a head knowledge of the Holy Scriptures. I do not forget
that it is not the written word but the Eternal Word, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, who is
the bread of life. Nor do I forget that we feed upon His broken body and His shed blood, not
by intellect, not by reason, not by culture, not by learning, but by faith.

But after all it is the Bible, or rather it is Bible truth, whether presented on the pages
of inspiration or in the preached word, which is the great instrumentality employed by the
Holy Spirit, in bringing men to Christ, and in feeding and nourishing and strengthening and
edifying the church which has thus been gathered to Him. And so both Peter in speaking about
the "sincere milk of the word," and Paul in referring to the "strong meat," by which term he
characterizes the deeper spiritual truths of revelation, are leading us to Jesus, the true
bread, the living bread, the bread of life. Here is our title of nobility, beloved, and who
of us would exchange it for an earldom, or a dukedom or a kingdom? Not I at least.

The Jews of old received spiritual blessing very largely, and even temporal blessing also,
through the mediation of an outward priesthood. And the family of priests were chosen and ordained
of God Himself. "No man taketh this honor unto himself but he that is called of God, as was Aaron."

But under the Christian dispensation all God's saved people are priests as well as kings, and
the sacrifices which they offer are spiritual sacrifices, the body as a living sacrifice to
be consumed like a whole burnt offering in His service, "the fruit of the lips giving thanks
to His name," and the doing good and communicating, that is to say, a life rich in faith and
good works, such are the sacrifices with which God is well pleased. That helped, as I looked around, I was already under the trees.

It was a dull autumn day; few yellow leaves fell to the ground already, about me in the Air shouting
a few Strandvoegel that flew out to the lagoon, not a man was seen
even to hear. Peter would have us "dead to sins" by making
no response to the suggestions of Satan or the temptations which he may present to us. To be
dead either to sin within us or to sins without us, implies holiness of heart, that is, entire
sanctification. Praise the Lord for the perfect agreement of His two great apostles in regard
to this glorious doctrine.

Still further, Peter speaks of the "holy women" of old, and exhorts Christian women to be like
them, particularly in adorning themselves not with gay attire, but with inward and spiritual
graces. And in his second epistle, he alludes to "holy men of God," speaking through the Old
Testament as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. And here we have the best possible definition
of inspiration, in regard to which volumes have been written, and very different views expressed
by equally learned and candid men. But what can be more satisfactory to the humble, Christian
mind than just to feel that when he reads his Bible, he is perusing the words of "holy men
of God who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." Such a mind will find no difficulty
about inspiration.

In the last chapter of his second epistle, Peter rebukes the unbelief of the scoffers, who
then believed, and whose successors still believe that the present order of the material universe
will continue for an indefinite period, if not, indeed, forever. He assures us that the Lord
has not forgotten, that He is not slack concerning His promises, but that the very reason why
the sinful world has been spared so long is because of God's long suffering and mercy, "not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance."

Praise the Lord for the doctrine of entire sanctification as taught by the apostle of the circumcision.
Amen.

CHAPTER IX.

ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY JOHN.

John, before Pentecost, was emphatically a Son of Thunder. He could forbid a man to cast out
devils in the name of Jesus, because the man was not of his own particular fold. He was ready
to imitate Elijah by calling down fire from heaven to destroy the Samaritans who would not
extend the rites of hospitality to his Master. He was eager to have the highest possible place
in the coming kingdom of his Lord, and this at whatever cost. But after Pentecost, John was
<i>par excellence</i> the apostle of love. Not that his character became anything like putty.
He could still rebuke evil and denounce Diotrephes, and forbid the elect lady to receive or
countenance any who did not uphold the true, sound doctrines of the gospel. He was still a
son of thunder against heresy and immorality, but he was preeminently, after his baptism with
the Holy Ghost, a son of consolation. His soul seems absolutely absorbed in the love of God,
and his exhortations to the churches, seemed all to concentrate in two special points, love
God and love one another. His heart was made perfect in love on the day of Pentecost, and he
never lost the blessed experience. He retained the blessing because he retained the Blesser.
The Holy Comforter was his abiding guest and keeper.

The gospel of John contains many of the most profound and spiritual truths that ever fell from
the lips of the Lord Jesus. And the only distinction which John accords to himself, and that
always with the greatest modesty and humility, is "the disciple whom Jesus loved."

He begins his gospel with a sublime assertion of the Deity and preexistence of Christ as the
Eternal Word, then tells of the incarnation, how the Word became flesh, and we beheld His glory,
how although He was the Light of the world, yet the world knew Him not, and though He came
unto His own (the Jews) yet His own received Him not, but as many as did receive Him, whether
Jews or Gentiles, to them gave He power to become the children of God, and this through a new
birth, not of human blood, or title, or pedigree, not of man in any way whatever, but of God.
It is not sufficient, therefore, to be a child of God by creation, which, indeed, all men are,
but by adoption, by the reception of the Divine nature by birth. And this new birth is more
fully unfolded to the Jewish Sanhedrist, Nicodemus, both as to its necessity and its nature.
"Ye must be born again." "The Son of man must be lifted up." The new birth is of water and
the Spirit. The water is the water of life, the gospel offered freely to all, with its cleansing
and refreshing and vivifying properties so well symbolized by water, and the Holy Spirit is
the effective personal agent by whom the regeneration is wrought in the heart of the penitent
sinner, though His operations may be as inexplicable as the wind, which bloweth where it listeth,
and is known only by its results. Thus, in this marvelous discourse with Nicodemus, we have
God's love or God's grace as the source of our salvation, Christ crucified as the ground of
it, and the Holy Spirit as the Divine Agent of its accomplishment. Glory be to the Triune God.

Not only the discourse of our Lord with Nicodemus on the new birth, but His discourse, also,
with the woman of Samaria on true worship is given by John alone. It is remarkable that not
to a Jewish Rabbi, not to the Scribes and Pharisees, not to a Jew at all, but to a heathen
or semi- heathen woman, Jesus made the first recorded, positive declaration of His Messiahship,
and showed her that as God is a Spirit, so they that worship Him must do so, not in any specific
locality, such as Jerusalem or Mount Gerizim, and not by any prescribed form or any outward
ritual, but in spirit and in truth. No wonder that her heart was immediately and completely
captivated by so grand and glorious a revelation, and that, at once, she left her waterpot
and went her way to become a preacher of righteousness to her fellow-townsmen. The Scripture
referred to is, probably, Isaiah 58:11, and, perhaps, other similar passages.

But the beloved disciple himself gives us an extremely valuable inspired commentary on these
words of the Lord Jesus, in order that readers in all ages might make the true spiritual application
which is intended by them. "But this spake He of the Spirit which they that believe on Him
should receive, for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified."
These remarkable words seem to clearly imply that notwithstanding the presence and operation
of the Spirit in the former dispensations of God's grace, yet He was to be poured out on all
God's children under the gospel in a sense and to an extent, which so far transcends the highest
manifestation of His power in Old Testament times that in comparison it is said the Holy Ghost
was not yet given, or, literally, the Holy Ghost was not yet. And this wondrous outpouring
was to be after the glorification of Jesus and as a consequence of that glorification. So that
Pentecost, with its untold wealth of privilege, could not be realized till after the death,
resurrection and ascension of the Lord Jesus Christ.

And we are clearly informed that what the church of the hundred and twenty received on the
day of Pentecost, namely, the purifying of their hearts by faith and the enduement of power,
that is to say, entire sanctification, with all its blessed accompaniments, was not a privilege
confined to apostolic times, and to the opening of the Holy Ghost dispensation; for Peter boldly
assured the wondering multitude that the promise of the same blessed experience "is to you
and to your children and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call."
And thus it is for the church and for every individual believer, until Christ Himself shall
come again. God help all Christians everywhere to see and to believe and to realize it. Amen.

In the eighth chapter, we are told how Jesus showed the slavery of sin. "Every one that committeth
sin is the bond-servant of sin," and coupled with this the glorious announcement that, "If
the Son, therefore, shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." Yes, Jesus came to free
us not simply from the guilt and the condemnation and the penalty of sin, but from that which
brings guilt and condemnation and penalty, even from sin itself.

Here is true Christian liberty, and it does not mean license, it does not mean do as you please,
it does not mean the liberty of making your own choices, but it does mean be pleased with what
pleases God, and in this manner after all you will do as you please, it means the glad acceptance
of God's choices. And so, after all, you do have your own way because it is God's way, it means
liberty and choice to do everything right and nothing wrong, or to do right in all directions
and wrong in none. May God bring all His children out of slavery and into freedom for Jesus' sake.

In the memorable discourse of the Lord Jesus with His disciples at the last supper, as given
by John in the 14th, 15th and 16th chapters of his gospel, He told them of the blessed Comforter,
"which is the Holy Ghost," whom the Father would send in His name, and as to the method of
His coming He says, "If a man love Me, he will keep My words; and My Father will love him,
and We will come unto him and make Our abode with him." Here, I think, beyond a doubt, that
the "We" refers to the Father and the Son, and the manner of Their coming and indwelling in
the heart of the believer is through Their representative, the Holy Spirit. And if this be
true, how is it possible that such a heart in which Father, Son and Holy Ghost abide, should
not be sanctified wholly?

In his first Epistle, the beloved apostle develops beautifully the doctrine of perfect love.
He declares that God's children must not walk in darkness or sin, and that those who do so
cannot, truthfully, claim to have fellowship with Him. "But if we walk in the light, as He
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another," (which implies fellowship with God)
"and the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth from all sin."

This is a very striking and all-important statement. The verb is in the present tense, and
denotes a present and a continuous action. It cleanseth persistently and continuously. You
trust in Jesus this moment, and the blood cleanseth now, another moment and it cleanseth, and
thus on, without intermission or cessation. And the cleansing is from all sin, sin committed
and sin inbred, sin in act, word or thought, sin outward and sin inward, sin open and sin secret,
sin of knowledge and sin of ignorance, literally and truly all sin. If this does not mean entire
sanctification, what use is there in language as an expression of thought? Surely none.

But the objection is strongly urged by some that the next verse assures us that "If we say
that we have no sin we deceive ourselves and the truth is not in us." But why sunder this verse
from its appropriate connections? Were there not Pharisees in the time of Christ who would
not admit that they were sinners, and would not accept the baptism of repentance from John
the Baptist? And did not the Apostle John live to see the germs of incipient gnosticism showing
themselves in the church, assuming, like modern Christian science, that all evil is in matter,
the soul is immaculate, and some Gnostics even believing that it was possible to have fellowship
with God while living in all kinds of sensual indulgence and licentiousness, and moreover denying
the reality of the incarnation of Christ, as also of the crucifixion and resurrection?

Now John in the passage referred to, tells us that on certain conditions it is possible to
experience through the blood of Christ, which means simply the merits of His atoning and vicarious
sacrifice, a complete cleansing from all sin, and then turning to those who deny that they
are sinners, he exclaims, and if we say that we have no sin, and therefore do not need this
cleansing, and can do without this atonement, then we deceive ourselves and the truth is not
in us. How much more rational is such an interpretation than the exposition which makes one
verse contradict the other, and represents the apostle as first assuring us that we may be
cleansed from all sin, and then declaring in effect. "But be sure to remember that this cleansing
is never really affected, and you are never really without sin."

There are so many rich and blessed teachings in this epistle that we must needs make selection
and leave many passages to be carefully and prayerfully pondered by the reader, with the assurance
that there is very much gold to be found for the digging; but we would call attention in a
special manner to John's description of perfect love.

It is clearly to be inferred from these expressions that whilst all Christians do and must
love God, yet there is a stage denominated perfect love, which many Christians have not yet
reached. And this stage of religious experience is marked distinctly by the absence of fear.
Most certainly our apostle does not mean for us to understand that we shall ever get beyond
that reverential and filial fear, which is the right and proper accompaniment of our childlike
relation to our Heavenly Father. But he specially describes the fear that will be gotten rid
of as tormenting fear, and this fear he declares that "perfect love casteth out." Now we can
readily see the reasonableness of this statement. Fear about the future, whether as to temporal
or spiritual things, fear of evil tidings, fear of man, fear of death, in short, all tormenting
fear is caused by the presence of inbred sin. As a matter of course, therefore, when sin is
cast out, fear is cast out with it. Now perfect love is the positive side of entire sanctification;
it implies the absence of inbred sin and the unmixed love of God occupying the soul. Such love,
therefore, most truly must cast out fear.

The impenitent sinner neither fears nor loves God. The awakened sinner fears him, but does
not love Him. The justified believer both fears and loves. Sometimes the fear is in the ascendant
and sometimes the love. The entirely sanctified believer loves with all his heart, and has
no tormenting fear. Praise the Lord.

And the beloved apostle instructs us also as to the method of obtaining the blessing of perfect
love. It is by the prayer of faith, and the prayer of faith involves the idea of a preceding
entire consecration. "For," says John, "if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart,"
which probably signifies that He also will condemn us, and, therefore, we cannot utter a believing
prayer for such a blessing as entire sanctification while we are not wholly given up to the
Lord, for while that is our case, our heart will continue to condemn us.

But he continues, "If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence towards God." And again,
"This is the confidence that we have in Him, that if we ask anything according to His will,
He heareth us; and if we know that He hear us, whatsoever we ask we know that we have the petitions
that we desired of Him."

Nowhere is the philosophy of the plan of full salvation more beautifully portrayed than in
these precious words. We are shown here that (1), the seeker of entire sanctification must
be wholly consecrated to God. (2), That he must pray in faith. (3), That he must pray according
to God's will. (4), That then he may know that he has the very thing he asks for. Here is wisdom.
Let every seeker act upon it. Amen.

Nor does John leave us in doubt as to the witness of the Spirit to our conscious cleansing.
"If we love one another" (i.e. with a true and pure and unselfish and self-sacrificing Christian
love) "God dwelleth in us and His love is perfected in us." "Hereby know we that we dwell in
Him and He in us, because He hath given us of His Spirit." Now to have God's love perfected
in us, and to have Him to dwell in us, can mean nothing less than entire sanctification, and
we know this, as John tells us, by His Spirit. We have, therefore, the witness of the Spirit
to perfect love as well as to adoption.

CHAPTER X.

ENTIRE SANCTIFICATION AS TAUGHT BY JAMES AND JUDE.

James and Jude were brothers. They were also "brethren of the Lord." Whether this expression
means actual brothers, namely, children of Joseph and Mary, or whether it means only cousins,
also whether these two men were apostles or not, are questions which I leave to the Biblical
critics. Receiving without argument their respective epistles as belonging to the inspired
canon, I am to inquire what their teaching is in reference to the one theme of this book, that
is, entire sanctification.

James, as a writer, is intensely practical. As Bishop of Jerusalem he presided specially over
the Jewish Christian Church, and his epistle is addressed "to the twelve tribes which are scattered
abroad," i.e., to the Jews of the Dispersion, primarily, no doubt, to the Christian Jews, but
also secondarily and by way of warning to the unconverted Jews. James was "zealous of the law."
He fully agreed with Paul and with Peter that the yoke of circumcision and the Mosaic law was
not to be imposed upon the Gentile Churches, but he, no doubt, strongly insisted that Jewish
converts should be still very careful to observe the outward law. His epistle is like Matthew's
gospel, and savors strongly of the Sermon on the Mount. As a bishop and overseer of a Jewish
flock of Christians, while he fully assented to Paul's teaching on justification by faith,
he, nevertheless, urged upon the people with vehemence that they should show their faith by
their works and that they should be "doers of the word and not hearers only." As Paul completely
demolishes the doctrine of salvation by the works of the law, so James in his epistle offers
us an inspired and a vigorous protest against every form of Antinomianism. Thus the two writers,
both moved by the Holy Ghost, present the two aspects of gospel truth so plainly that he may
run that readeth. "We are saved by faith, not by works," says Paul. "Aye," says James, "but
we are saved in good works, not out of them," and we must be careful to maintain good works,
not in order to be saved, but because we are saved. Good works are necessary, not as the ground
or the cause of salvation, but as the fruit and resultant and test of the salvation which we
have received by faith. James, therefore, is not antagonistic to, but only complementary of
the great apostle of the Gentiles.

And mark how he strikes or aims right at the mark of Christian perfection in the very beginning
of his epistle. He assures us that if we let patience have her perfect work, we shall be perfect
and entire, wanting nothing.

Christian perfection, then, according to James. is perfect patience. Christian perfection according
to John, is perfect love. Christian perfection, according to Paul, is maturity or being "thoroughly
furnished unto all good works." Christian perfection, according to Peter, is in being established,
strengthened, settled. Surely none but a caviller will find any want of harmony between these
different modes of expression. They all imply deliverance from sin, which is always instantaneous,
and some of them imply a mature Christian character, which is always gradual.

James gives a vivid description of inbred sin under the name of lust.

We cannot doubt that James, like the other writers of the Bible, believed in a personal devil,
for he speaks of a wisdom which is "devilish" and if a man is enticed to sin by the natural
depravity of his heart, we must not overlook the fact that the enticement implies an enticer,
and that the wicked spiritual adversary of our race knows how to adapt his baits to the peculiar
form in which inbred sin is strongest in each individual, and thus, if possible, to entrap
and destroy him. Depravity exists by nature in all, but in one man it is particularly felt
in the direction of covetousness, in another, of pride, in another, of ambition, in another,
of sensuality. Satan's temptations in the first of these would most likely be something which
holds out the prospect of getting gain by sinning; in the second, it would be something to
feed his intense admiration of self, to cherish his pride; in the third, it would be the hope
of political or some other kind of power on the condition of sacrificing principle; in the
fourth, it would be the gratification of bodily appetites as in drunkenness, gluttony, or licentiousness.
Thus the trap is set for every man, and the trapper is wary. God save us from his wiles.

And as Peter tells us to lay aside inbred sin, as it exists in the form of malice, and guile,
and hypocrisies, and envies, and shows itself in evil speakings, so James tells us to lay apart
"all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness," or "overflowing of wickedness." Ah, beloved,
most truly did Jesus say that the heart of man is a fountain of wickedness, out of the heart
of man proceed evil thoughts and all actual sins; yes, there is by nature in each one of us
a superfluity of naughtiness, an overflowing of wickedness, a natural depravity, an inbred
sin, and this must be "laid apart," it must be gotten rid of by bringing and subjecting the
heart where it dwells to the fiery baptism with the Holy Ghost, and then shall we be in a position
to receive, with meekness, the engrafted word, which is able to save our souls.

St. James speaks of the "law of liberty," and of the "royal law," the latter being, "Thou shalt
love thy neighbor as thyself," and both mean, I apprehend, just what we have already alluded
to as the law of love. "Love," says Paul, "is the fulfilling of the law," and this is liberty,
and this is royalty, the freedom to do God's will because we love it, and to have all the antagonisms
to that blessed will expelled from our hearts, and all lawful affections and passions subdued
and subjected to Him who is our King, and who reigns without a rival in our hearts.

 "I worship Thee, sweet will of God,
    And all Thy ways adore;
  And every day I live, I seem
    To love Thee more and more."

If this is not the true liberty and the true royalty, where shall we find them? Not on earth,
at least.

James does not spend words in exhorting us to seek more religion, but he tersely defines pure
religion. And that is what we want. It does not depend upon age, nor size, nor growth. A stalk
of corn may be pure as soon as it raises itself above the surface of the ground. Another stalk
may be impure and diseased when it is many feet in height. A Christian may seek and find pure
religion and undefiled, very soon after he is born again. Another Christian may spend years
and years in seeking more religion, and yet not become the possessor of purity of heart.

This pure religion, according to our author, consists in works of beneficence and love as to
its outward manifestations, but its true inward principle is in keeping one's self "unspotted
from the world." Oh, that all my readers with myself, may thus keep themselves unspotted from
the world, which involves the idea of being sanctified wholly, and in the end "may be found
of Him in peace without spot and blameless."

But an objector here interposes with a quotation from James which is supposed to preclude the
possibility of living without sin. "In many things we offend all." But this expression is not
to be thus interpreted. To make it mean that all Christians must continue in the commission
of sin to the end of their lives, would not only be doing violence to that which is the very
trend of our author's teaching, namely, a spotless morality and a pure and holy life, but it
would also prove too much. Surely no expositor would maintain from such language that James
was a tamer of horses and a profane swearer. The truth is, that James, out of kindness and
courtesy, includes himself among his hearers or readers, and means to show us how liable we
are to give offence through rash and ill-advised words, and then, on the other hand, he does
not fail to mention the man who does not offend in word, and who is able, by the grace of God,
to bridle the whole body, that is, to live without sin, and whom, again, he styles a "perfect man."

Our author further informs us that heavenly, divine wisdom is first pure, then peaceable. The
carnal Christian, or babe in Christ, would often reverse this arrangement. He is clamorous
for peace, often to the extent that he would have a wisdom that is first peaceable and then
pure, but the Holy Ghost puts purity first, and He is always right. No compromise must be made
with error in doctrine, or evil in practice, even for the sake of peace. But when we become
possessors of a wisdom which is first pure, then, also, the other qualities follow in proper
succession, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated and the rest. Here, again, we can but thankfully
admire the perfect accuracy of the Holy Ghost, as regards the method of full salvation. To
cleanse the hands is to obtain pardon and absolution for what we have done, and it is always
the first work of the unsaved man to repent and seek the forgiveness of his sins. When this
forgiveness has been obtained, then his hands are cleansed, but he may still be double-minded.
He may still be unstable in all his ways. His spiritual course may still be zig-zag. His life
may still be a series of sinning and repenting, and sinning again and repenting again, till
he cries out in his misery, "O wretched man that I am, who (not what) shall deliver me from
this body of death?" And then James's prescription comes home to him, "Purify your hearts,
ye double-minded." Seek and obtain the blessing of entire sanctification, and, henceforth,
with one mind and one purpose, run joyfully in the way of Christ's commandments. Justification
first and entire sanctification afterwards. First cleanse your hands, then purify your hearts.
The teachings of the Holy Ghost are marvelously harmonious in the Old Testament and the New.

Finally, James assures us that the "prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall
raise him up." And not only physical but spiritual blessing may be received in the same way
for "If he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven him." His conclusion is that "The supplication
of a righteous man availeth much in its working," R.V., but I prefer to regard the Greek participle
in the original as in the passive voice, and then the meaning would be, as suggested by Dr.
S.A. Keen in his Faith papers, "The prayer of a righteous man being energized" (by the Holy
Ghost) "availeth much."

I should understand the "prayer of faith," therefore, to be a prayer begotten in the heart
of the believer by the Holy Ghost, and with the prayer is communicated also the corresponding
faith, and when this is the case, the answer is sure. Faith, in this use of the word, is a
special gift, and may be given to some and withheld from others, also given at one time and
withheld at another, just as God in His infinite and unerring wisdom may decide. This kind
of faith is one of the special gifts of which we have an account in the 12th of 1st Corinthians,
and differs, therefore, from the grace of faith or the power of believing the gospel unto salvation
when it is presented, which is given to all men, and for the exercise of which, by actually
believing, all are held responsible. "He that believeth shall be saved, and he that believeth
not shall be condemned." It is not the Holy Ghost who does the groaning, but He causes the
heart of the consecrated believer to groan, by kindling those intense desires after some specific
blessing, which often are, indeed, too deep for clear expression by utterance, and with the
groanings, also, the faith is given, which takes hold of God's Almightiness for the answer.
Such prayers do, indeed, move the hand that moves the world, and whether it be for the healing
of the sick, or the conversion of sinners, or the entire sanctification of believers, or the
supply of temporal needs, or anything else which the Holy Spirit may suggest, the blessing
is sure to come.

I am not forgetting that the assistance of the Holy Spirit is needed, and that it is obtainable
in all true prayer, but ordinary prayer must be founded upon the promises of God and an exercise
of will power to believe those promises, and therefore, it must be accompanied, in order to
be effectual, by ordinary faith, the act of believing. Extraordinary prayer must be inspired
directly by the Holy Spirit, and the gift of faith must come directly from Him. So that we
have ordinary prayer, ordinary faith and ordinary results in the one case, while in the other,
we have extraordinary prayer, extraordinary faith and extraordinary results. Praise the Lord.

Jude tells us that as Christian believers we are to "hate even the garment spotted by the flesh,"
that is, to keep entirely clear of all the pollutions of sin, symbolized by the garment of
the leper which was regarded as unclean, and which passage, when spiritually interpreted, must
mean the unspotted holiness of the true Christian. And as to the question of one's ability
to live without sin, he commits us to the care of Him who is "able to keep us from falling,"
the very thing we need and which we cannot do for ourselves, and "to present us faultless before
the presence of His glory with exceeding joy." First, then, we are to be sanctified wholly,
then kept from falling by the power of Christ through the indwelling Spirit. Finally, presented
without spot, blameless and faultless in the presence of God's glory in heaven. And this is
the gospel according to Jude.

CHAPTER XI.

SANCTIFIED BY GOD THE FATHER.

There is one expression in the epistle of Jude, which I purposely omitted in the preceding
chapter, that it might have a more prominent place in the present one.

Nowhere else in the Bible are we expressly declared to be "sanctified by God the Father." It
is cause of rejoicing, however, that every person of the Godhead, every member of the adorable
Trinity, is concerned in the sanctification of a human soul. Cheefoo), one of the chines. Treaty ports, the input in the province of Shantung
the Gulf of Petschili located, with about 32.000 inhabitants of the foreign trade (total value
1887: 1.6 million taels) give steadily. T. is the seat of a German consul, and various Missions,
on the whole about 120 Europeans and Americans.

Chigirin, a district town in the Russian province of Kiev, at the Tjasmina (tributary of the
Dnieper) in steppe-like, but fertile region, has 5 and a Russian evangelical church and (1885)
16.009 inhabitants, which brandy, soap, leather (calfskin Juften) and screen for export . Bring
- Sometimes just in, 16 Century founded, 1546, the small capital of Russian Cossacks, 1596 proposed
here, the Cossack hetman Nelimaiko the Polish Zolkjemski, 1677 and 1678, after the City became Russian
in 1659, the Turks besieged the same, with Gordon (sd 2) heroic Resisted, and finally the
Russians had to evacuate the fort, without the Turks the same would have been able to maintain
continuously. These struggles, the first to directly took place between
Russians and Turks are referred to as the "Tschigirinfeldzüge.

Tschikasa (English Chickasaw), a related Tschokta the Indian tribe in North America, earlier
quite powerful and the middle Mississippi and Yazoofluß (in the states of Alabama and Tennessee)
resident. The T. showed up early (1699) descending from the mountains of the Carolinas and inclined
to trade with them driving the English, while a deep hatred of the Mississippi coming up and
they fed treated cocky Frenchman. There were open Hostilities (1736-40), as a result of which
the stem partly destroyed or captured, and partly from its distribution area, on the other bank
of the Mississippi was. 1786 closed with the T. Friendship Union and emigrated in 1837 and 1838
after the Tschokta the Indian Territory from, the southwestern part of them live in 1883 about
6000 heads strong. They have their own Legislature, composed of Senate and House of Representatives,
to good schools, regulated financial and stand out at all before by advances in civilization other.
Your Language is little different from that of the Tschokta.

Vocabularies of the same found in Adair's "History of the American
Indians "(Lond.

1775) and the 2nd volume of the" Archaeologia Americana.

"

Tschikischlar, Fort, see Atrek.

Tschilau (people), one of the turkish pilaf (sd) äzhn-

889

Chihli
- Tschitschagow.

a court, but which is less fat cooked in an airtight
container by steam, and it represents Meals at the place of bread.

Chihli, chines. Province, see Petschili.

Lish Ilka (Chilka), Lake (lagoon right) in the British-ind. Province of Orissa, on the west
coast Gulf of Bengal, has at 1-2 ½ m depth depending on the season
891-1165 square km (16-21 QM) the extent and communicates with the
sea by a 300 m wide at passage.

At high tide Fresh water is very salty later.

Tschill (people), the 40 days (very feared in Constantinople), the
severe winter cold; the 40 days that the woman has to spend after
giving birth in seclusion.

Tschimin (Turkish), water pipe in Central Asia, plumper than the Persian
Kalian (sd), there of an elongated gourd or a wooden cylinder with
a short pipe, the tobacco is not in wetted, but smoked in the dry
state.

Chin (Russian), rank, name for the Russian ranks (Tschiny), in which the civil and military officials
ranked jointly. By the fourth class (Real State, Major-General), the needle attached.

Tschinab River, s. Tschenab.

Chi Dana (Tjindana), former name of the island of Sumba (sd).

Chinghai, busy outer harbor of the chines. Ningpo city, left on Yungfluß, near the mouth of the
same, since 1842 the european trade open. A ruined citadel, and a newly built Battery of ten
guns to defend the harbor.

In the war between France and China T. 1885 by the French repeatedly shot at and destroyed the
fort Siaokung.

Tschingkiang (Chinkiang), name of several chines.

Cities, including most importantly for the European trade open port
city in the province of Kiangsu, at the mouth of Jantsekiang, Seat
of a German consul, a Catholic and evangelical mission, and about
135 000 inhabitants In the wrong port 1886: 3526 ships of 2,328,052
tone, of which 126 German of 72.540 T.. imports evaluated 1887: 98.000
Haikuan taels.

The city in 1842 by the British fleet bombed, destroyed in 1853 by the Taiping, but later rebuilt.

Tschingtu,
capital of the chines. Sichuan province, on a tributary of the Jantsekiang has wide streets, beautiful
houses, an increasingly important trade and 350 000 inhabitants

Tschintschotscho (Chinchoxo), trading post and the former station of the German African Society,
in the Portuguese part of the Loangoküste at the mouth of Lukulu.

Tschippewäer, Indian tribe of the Algonquian, s. Odschibwä.

Tschirch, William, male choral composer, born 8 June 1818 to Lichfield
(Silesia), made his studies at the teacher training to Bunzlau and
1839 at public expense at the Royal Institute of Church Music in Berlin,
where he enjoyed the same composition lessons from Marx.

1843 He was in Legnica as urban music director and conductor in 1852 in Gera as a princely employed.
His men singing compositions spread to the widest circles, even to
America, T. woselbst was personally celebrated enthusiastically after
he accepted an invitation was followed to the Song Festival 1869 in
Baltimore organized.

Besides his men choirs, under which the winning of the Academy of Arts in Berlin with the first prize clay
earned "A Night on the sea" mentioned, yet he composed an opera, "Master Martin and his companions
"(listed 186l, Leipzig), and small things for organ and piano.

Štrba, stains in Turkish: Wllajet Adrianople, turn right at the Evros river, west of Adrianople
drive with Citadel, and 2000 inhabitants, which sericulture.

Tschirnau (Groß-T.), city in Prussian. Region Wroclaw, district Guhrau on the line Wroclaw-Szczecin
the Prussian State Railways, has a Protestant and a Catholic. Church, a Präparandenanstalt, a
noble lady pin, distillery and (1885) 758 mostly Protestant population.

Tschirnhaus (Tschirnhausen), Ehrenfried Walter, Earl of, naturalist, born 10th April 1651 Kiessling
on forest near Görlitz, studied mathematics at Leyden, was a volunteer in 1672 and 1673 in Dutch
service, visited France since 1674, Italy, Sicily and Malta and moved back later to his estate Kiessling
forest, died 11th October 1708 in Dresden. He built Saxony in three glass houses and a mill
for grinding of internal mirrors of exceptional Perfection.

He experimented with a concave mirror of focal length 2 cubits, and
described The results obtained (1687 and 1688).

No small credit is due him for the Invention of Meissen porcelain. As a philosopher, he acquired a
certain meaning through his "Medicina mentis" (Amsterd. 1687, Leipz.

1695).

Even as a mathematician, he has known Services purchased, and the
"Acta Eruditorum" from the years 1682-98 contain him a Series of works
on fuel lines, the tangent problem, quadratures, reduction of equations
See, eg Kunze, Life of EW v. T. (New Lusatian magazine, vol 43, Issue
1, Goerl.

1866), Weissenborn, Life of EW v. T. (Eisenach 1866).

Lish Iroquois, Cherokees see.

Chistopol, a district town in the Russian province of Kazan, on the
Kama, has a female grammar school, Crops, livestock, fisheries, trade
and buoyant (1885) 24.288 inh

Chita, capital of the Siberian.

Trans-Baikal region, with (1885) 5728 inh

Tschitah, see cheetah.

Tschitraga, a hieroglyphic sign that the Indians with red sandalwood
and ash from Holy cow manure or soil on the chest and face paint to
the religious or philosophical Cult to interpret, to which they profess.

The fabric color you can see the God who was venerated. The painting itself will be every day after the usual
ablutions recitation own prayer formulas made.

Tschitschagow, Vasily Yakovlevich, Russian admiral, born 1726, adopted
in 1765 and 1766 large Expeditions in the Arctic Ocean in part, in
command of the Turkish War of 1773-75, the flotilla and donische was
in 1788 during the Swedish-Russian War by S. Greig death of the commander
in chief Baltic Fleet, he was victorious in 1790 over the Swedes at
Reval and accelerated by the success the Russians at sea the conclusion
of peace.

He died 1809th -

His son Paul Vasilyevich, born 1762, was vice admiral and 1802 of the Superintending Seeministeriums
and in 1812 appointed Admiral. In May this year he took command of Kutuzov's place Moldova, the
Russian army and joined 28th May,

890

Tschitsch floor - Tschudi.

Peace of Bucharest from, then he commanded the third army of the West,
captured in November but Minsk and Borisov, but was 28th Nov. with
27.000 men on the Berezina of 8,000 French Switzerland and Poland
under Oudinot, Ney and Dombrowski hit and from Ney to Stachowa discarded.

Therefore fallen out of favor, he took leave for an indefinite time and lived since then mostly
in France and England, where he is to justify a memorandum: "Retreat of Napoleon" (Lond. 1817),
published. Since it adopted in 1834 ukase, which all Russians abroad lingering ordered to return
to their country do not accede to that He was removed from the lists
of the Russian Navy, shocked his dignity as Imperial and robbed of
his goods.

He died first Sept. 1849 in Paris. His "Memoirs" on the war of 1812 published in 1855 in Berlin
and 1862 in Paris.

Tschitsch soil, southeastern continuation of the actual Karst (sd),
which the met most of Istria and insular continues in Cherso etc.;
after this Croatian tribe inhabiting the area designated by the Chi
Chen.

He makes faces, by NW. to SE. furrowed, and culminates in the Monte
Maggiore (1394 m).

Chobe, name of Cuando in its lower course, as when he and then south to the N. bending, also
north of 18 ° S. Br a long and wide wetland is, before he in turn Cuando than in Mpalewa empties
into the Zambezi.

Tschoga (Turkish), Afghanistan and India, long, loose outer garment, fur garment in Central Asia.

Tschoh,
see Chow.

Tschohadar (Tschokadar, Turkish), servant.

Tschokta (Choctaws, Chactas), large nordamerikan. Indian tribe, originally in Mexico lived, then
to the middle Mississippi and Yazoofluß moved, since 1837, but a Part of the Indian Territory
(north of the Red River) holds. T. The drive extended Crops (maize and cotton), maintained a respectable
cattle, have well-built Homes understand on spinning, weaving, and the major trades and have one
of the Union Constitution counterfeit written constitution with a
legislative council (legislature) of 40 members, and written laws.

The executive power is by a governor exercised. All men of the nation
are liable for military service.

The language of T. is one of the three main languages the Indians. For the religious needs of the same
make the emissaries of the American Missionary societies. The New Testament and some other books by
them in the language of T. translated.

For the 36 schools a certain part of the year money is used to be paid by the Union for the countries
of assignment in the amount of 36,000 dollars. Before Transplantation of the T. to the West
was their number estimated at 18.500 souls, 1883 at 18,000. A grammar of Tschoktasprache Byrington
wrote (Philad. 1870), a dictionary Wright (English, St. Louis 1880).

Tschorba, Turkish national dish, a stew of mutton, potatoes, rice
and onions.

Tschorlu, city in Turkish: vilayet Adrianople, on Tschorlu Dere and the railway from Constantinople
to Adrianople, the seat of a Greek bishop, with 8,000 inhabitants, mostly Greeks. In the neighborhood
many vineyards and orchards.

Tschouschan (the Europeans Chusan, Eng.

Chusan), island group on the east coast of China, in the province of Chekiang, Ningpo over, 1 ½
km of the coast, consisting of a 600 sq km large main island with the fixed capital Tinghai (30,000
inhabitants) and about 400 islands with 400 000 inhabitants, including the monasteries for
1000, etc., with Buddhist monks, temples covered Put u. The main island in 1840, 1841 and 1860 occupied
by the British and only after opening China's trade with Europe returned.

Chu, Japan. Measure of length, = 60 = 360 Schaku Keng (1 Schaku =
0.3036 m), also square measure, = 3000 QKeng Ar = 99.57.

Chu (Chuy), river in the Asia-russ. Province of Turkistan, arises as Koschkar in Mustagh, Issikul
flows north from the west until it changes to NW. used, the Kungei Alatau breaks and after he left
the Karagatai taken to the desert to Mujunkum Saumalkul limited, which he pours into the Tatalkul
itself.

Tschuchloma, a district town in the Russian province of Kostroma, T. Lake, with (1885) 1978 inh

Chud, common name of the Russian empire spread Finnish tribes, in the narrower Sense a belonging to
the group of Baltic Finns, once widely popular, which can also called Vepsian (Wepsälaiset),
or Whose Nordtschuden, but of which only 56.000 Souls to the Ladoga and Onega lakes located Olonets
strokes of the government and the government Vologda remain. Nearby are related to them or
the Woten Südtschuden, the self- Waddjalaiset call, in whole or 12.000 heads in the provinces
of Novgorod and St. Petersburg, But with extinction. Grammar of Ahlquist (Helsinki 1855).

Tschudi, oldest noble family in Switzerland in the canton of Glarus. After that the same 906-1288
Säckingen Meier office obsessed, it gained by Jost T., more than 30 years as Glarus Chief Magistrate
presided and decided in 1446 to win at Ragaz, new prestige. His son John T. commanded the people
of Glarus in the Burgundian Wars and his son, Louis T. in the Swabian
War.

Of the latter's younger son was Giles (see below).

See Blumer, The sex of T. von Glarus (St. Gallen, 1853).

Note are:

1) Giles (Gilg), historian, born 5 Feb. 1505, received his first lessons Zwingli, then a pastor
in Glarus, studied in Basel and Paris in 1528 and wrote a "Description Raetia "which was printed against
his will by Seb. Münster. In various high federal and cantonal positions, he worked initially,
although the Reformation decided averse, eager in the sense of religious reconciliation. 1558 was elected
Chief Magistrate, However, he as head of the Catholic minority in a more rugged Glarus gradually
position one.

When he was therefore ignored during the election 1560 of the rural community, he devoted Up to his
28th Feb. 1572 death occurred almost exclusively the completion of his two great works of history,
the "Gallia Comata" which in addition to a description of ancient Gaul especially the antiquities
and history of Switzerland contains, and the much more valuable to
1470 reaching a "Swiss history, which up to John Mueller v. down as
the main source was used for the older Swiss history, but not printed
until 1734-36 to Basel (2 vols).

Tschudi's account of the rise of the Swiss Confederation, based on a clever combination of

891

Tschudisches Sea - Chukchi.

Documents, legendary tradition and free invention of the author is based, century-long the ruling
and remained famous by John von Muller and Schiller European public good. Since Kopp's research
the same as a forecast or a novel to reveal the value is based Chronicles Tschudi, apart from
their literary merit, mainly on the numerous, now lost documents, the text of which it has received
us. See you s, Aegidius Tschudi Life and Writings (St. Gallen, 1805, 2 vols), Vogel, T. Giles as
a statesman and historian (Zurich 1856), Blumer, T. Giles (in the "Yearbook of the Glarus Historical
Society" in 1871 and 1874); Herzog, Ä Relations of the chronicler. T. to Aargau (Aarau, 1888).

2)
by Ivan, born 19 June 1816 in Glarus, since 1846 co-owner of Verlagsbuchhandlung
Scheitlein Zollikofer and in St. Gallen, died 28th April 1887 there
was, as most researchers Alps earned by the publication of an excellent
tour guide: "Tourist in Switzerland and the adjacent southern Germany,
northern Italy, and Savoy (1855, 30th edition, 1888).

3) Johann Jakob
von, naturalist, brother of the preceding, born 25th July 1818 in
Glarus, studied in Leiden, Neuchâtel, Zurich and Paris, and later
in Berlin and Würzburg, science, traveled to Peru 1838-43, lived on
his estate since 1848 Jakobshof in Lower Austria, traveled to Brazil
1857-59, the La Plata States, Chile, Bolivia and Peru was in 1859
as an envoy Switzerland to Brazil, where he especially also for the
study of immigration conditions the middle and southern provinces
visited, returned in 1861, went in 1866 as Swiss Charge d'Affaires
in Vienna and was 1868 Envoy Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary Minister
appointed there. Since 1883 he has returned to his estate. He wrote:
"System of Batrachians (Neuchât. 1838), "Studies on the Fauna peruana"
(St. Gallen, 1844-47, with 76 boards), "The Kechuasprache" (Vienna,
1853, 3 parts), "Ollanta, an ancient Peruvian drama, from the Kechuasprache
translated and annotated "(ibid. 1875)," the organism Khetsuasprache
"(Leipzig, 1884), "Peru, travel sketches" (St. Gallen, 1846, 2 vols);
"Antiguedades peruanas" (with Don Mariano de Rivero, Vienna 1851,
with Atlas), "Travel to South America" ​​(Leipzig, 1866-69, 5 vols).
Also He worked Winckells "Handbook for Hunters" (5th edition, Leipz.
1878, 2 vols).

No, it is not for want of evidence, but because the faith-faculty has become weakened and paralyzed
by sin, and now we must determine to believe, by putting our will on to the side of faith,
and allowing it, no longer, to remain on the side of unbelief. Many a seeking soul has come
out into the fullness of salvation by singing the hymn:

 "I can, I will, I do believe
  That Jesus saves me now."

The man who came to Jesus with his right hand withered, was told to stretch it forth. He might
have said where is my evidence that it will do any good to try? But he put his will into the
obedient attitude. He willed to stretch it forth, and made the effort, and with the obedient
will the power came from Jesus, and he stretched it forth and was restored. To every one of
weak and paralyzed faith, I say, nay, Jesus says, "Stretch forth thy hand of faith, I am here
to be responsible for the result." Believe and receive and confess and rejoice. Beloved, we
are sanctified by faith. Glory to the Lamb.

CHAPTER XVI.

CONCLUSION.

I trust it has been sufficiently demonstrated that the doctrine and experience of entire sanctification
are fully and clearly taught in Holy Scripture. All the way from the patriarchs to the apostles
in the law, in the types, in the Psalms, in the prophets, in the history, in the gospels, in
the epistles, we find that God requires His people to be holy and to be holy now, that He makes
it, therefore, their privilege to be holy, and that He has made ample provision, in the sacrificial
offering of Christ, for them to be made holy.

"For their sakes," says the blessed Saviour, "I sanctify Myself that they also might be sanctified
through the truth," or as the margin, "truly sanctified," or as the Revised Version, "that
they themselves also may be sanctified in truth." The Lord Jesus Christ most assuredly did
not need to be made holy, but all His redeemed children being subjects of inbred sin do need
it. As for Him, He was the "holy thing" that was to be born of the Virgin Mary. "He knew no
sin," He "did no sin," He was "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners," and, therefore,
when He says "I sanctify Myself," He means nothing more nor less than I consecrate Myself,
or I set Myself apart, but in the other clause where the term sanctify is used in reference
to His people, it must mean that they may be cleansed from all sin entirely sanctified, made
holy or pure in heart. He sets Himself apart, therefore, to the work of redemption and salvation
that He may have a holy people on earth, as without controversy He must and will have a holy
people in heaven.

We have shown that entire sanctification is coetaneous with the baptism with the Holy Ghost,
in fact, that the two experiences are in an important sense identical, or, at least, so related
to each other that whoever has one has the other. It is Christ and none other who baptizes
with the Holy. Ghost. "He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and fire," not as some imagine,
I think erroneously, that there are to be two baptisms, first that of the Holy Ghost, and afterwards
that of fire in the way of affliction or persecution, though plenty of these are promised and
experienced by those who would live godly in Christ Jesus, but simply that He shall baptize
you with the Holy Ghost under the similitude of fire, that is, that dross and tin and reprobate
silver, or, in a word, all inbred sin may be consumed.

Nor is it correct to say that there are "many baptisms" of the Spirit. The Holy Ghost baptism
is received by the consecrated believer once for all, and is never repeated unless by unfaithfulness
or backsliding he falls from the precious grace which this baptism confers upon him, from Christ
through the Spirit, and again comes in repentance and confession to do his first works, and
again to be filled with the Spirit and cleansed from all sin. And even in that case the Holy
Ghost seldom or never repeats Himself, by giving the same emotional experience as at first,
but may and must be received and retained by faith, and the amount of feeling and the kind
of feeling which He will arouse must be left to Himself entirely, I mean to say that the experience
may be lost and may be regained, but seldom with the same phenomena of consciousness as at
the first. Do not speak, then, of having had many baptisms of the Spirit, but seek and find
the one baptism with the Holy Ghost and fire. Do not say that you are desiring or that you
have had a fresh baptism with the Holy Ghost, but let your thoughts and prayers be directed
to the one baptism which cleanseth and endueth and anointeth.

But I would not be misunderstood on this point. The Psalmist says, "I shall be anointed with
fresh oil," and to every sanctified child of God, there may and do come seasons of refreshing,
also of girding and filling, and fresh anointing for particular services, which are sometimes
called fresh baptisms, but which are not to be confounded with the one true abiding Pentecostal
experience. These blessings are not to be undervalued or lightly esteemed, but they come because
we already have the Blesser Himself as a personal indwelling Presence and Power.

Many teachers of holiness inculcate the doctrine that we are first sanctified by the blood
of Jesus, and afterwards filled or baptized with the Holy Ghost. This opinion would necessitate
three separate experiences, where, I think, the Scripture only speaks of two. We should have
(1) pardon, (2) entire sanctification by the blood, and (3) the filling of the Spirit. There
would thus be a separation between the removing of inbred sin from the heart, and the baptism
with the Holy Ghost. This baptism would, then, be only a qualification for service. It is regarded
by these teachers, as only given for an enduement of power, to do the work to which we are
called. And the practical result of this error, for such with due deference I must regard it,
is that some will be very anxious to obtain the baptism with the Holy Ghost to make them strong
or powerful in their work, but will ignore, or even deny, the doctrine of entire sanctification.
Dr. S. A. Keen tells us of a minister who wrote to him that he did not take much stock in sanctification,
but that he was very desirous of the Holy Ghost baptism, in order that he might have increased
power in the ministry of the word. And, indeed, this seems to be a very prevalent idea, that
we are to be baptized for service, but not for cleansing.

I trust that no reader who has followed me through the different chapters of this book will
imagine, for a moment, that I under-value, in the slightest degree, the precious blood of Christ,
nor do I forget that it is that blood which, as we walk in the light, cleanseth us from all
sin. I think I have sufficiently stated elsewhere that the blood of Jesus is the procuring
cause of our sanctification, as well as of our justification, and that we are forever dependent
upon the atonement for the one blessing as well as the other. It will, and must reading for your writing, be
the Gefu ͤ hl of all patriots who are bridges in this time as Alpdru ͤ ​​on your mind. Oh well!
o well! The Low German language is an absolute hindrance of the o ͤ public life, the education
and humanitarian ͤ t in Lower Saxony. As long as the language of the common life raised ͤ ​​rt are,
as before, bullocks, Ga ͤ nsebru ͤ coast and westpha ͤ allelic ham main products remain of
our civilization. As a man, He did need the energizing for His
work, and, therefore, He is said to have been anointed. Beloved, let us not separate what God
has joined together. The entire sanctification of the heart and the Holy Ghost baptism are
coetaneous experiences, and must not be divorced.

And now, beloved reader, I have accomplished my task. I have shown that like a golden thread
the doctrine of entire sanctification runs through the Bible, from Genesis to Revelation. It
is found in patriarchal times, it is in the law and the prophets, the types and the ceremonies,
the gospels and epistles, everywhere showing us that we have to do with a Holy God, and that
we as His children are required to be holy men and women. 

The following letters are as accurate as permitted by our publication, with all the writing and
Punctuation errors, and peculiarities of the original papers printed: incorrect spelling the names
or other words (such BS 35th

And to you, my readers, I bid farewell, and say, May He "make you perfect, stablish, strengthen,
settle you." Amen.

