I have said that Captain Farragut had carefully provided his ship with every apparatus for
catching the gigantic cetacean.  No whaler had ever been better armed.  We possessed every
known engine, from the harpoon thrown by the hand to the barbed arrows of the blunderbuss,
and the explosive balls of the duck-gun.  On the forecastle lay the perfection of a breech-loading
gun, very thick at the breech, and very narrow in the bore, the model of which had been in
the Exhibition of 1867. If the police arrest them, he knocks them down, is taken to the lockup, and
joyfully foots the bills.

"Ah! my boys," he cries, "what is the use of being rich, if you can't
enjoy yourself?"

He might more truly say, "if you can't make a fool of yourself;" but
he is "fast," hates slow things, and doesn't "see it." Young men loaded
down with other people's money are almost sure to lose all they inherit,
and they acquire all sorts of bad habits which, in the majority of
cases, ruin them in health, purse and character.

Ned Land was about forty years of age; he was a tall man (more than six feet high), strongly
built, grave and taciturn, occasionally violent, and very passionate when contradicted.  His
person attracted attention, but above all the boldness of his look, which gave a singular expression
to his face.

Who calls himself Canadian calls himself French; and, little communicative as Ned Land was,
I must admit that he took a certain liking for me.  My nationality drew him to me, no doubt.
It was an opportunity for him to talk, and for me to hear, that old language of Rabelais, which
is still in use in some Canadian provinces.  The harpooner's family was originally from Quebec,
and was already a tribe of hardy fishermen when this town belonged to France.

Little by little, Ned Land acquired a taste for chatting, and I loved to hear the recital of
his adventures in the polar seas.  He related his fishing, and his combats, with natural poetry
of expression; his recital took the form of an epic poem, and I seemed to be listening to a
Canadian Homer singing the Iliad of the regions of the North.

I am portraying this hardy companion as I really knew him.  We are old friends now, united
in that unchangeable friendship which is born and cemented amidst extreme dangers.  Ah, brave
Ned!  I ask no more than to live a hundred years longer, that I may have more time to dwell
the longer on your memory.

Now, what was Ned Land's opinion upon the question of the marine monster?  I must admit that
he did not believe in the unicorn, and was the only one on board who did not share that universal
conviction.  He even avoided the subject, which I one day thought it my duty to press upon
him.  One magnificent evening, the 30th July (that is to say, three weeks after our departure),
the frigate was abreast of Cape Blanc, thirty miles to leeward of the coast of Patagonia. 
We had crossed the tropic of Capricorn, and the Straits of Magellan opened less than seven
hundred miles to the south.  Before eight days were over the Abraham Lincoln would be ploughing
the waters of the Pacific.

Seated on the poop, Ned Land and I were chatting of one thing and another as we looked at this
mysterious sea, whose great depths had up to this time been inaccessible to the eye of man.
I naturally led up the conversation to the giant unicorn, and examined the various chances
of success or failure of the expedition.  But, seeing that Ned Land let me speak without saying
too much himself, I pressed him more closely.

"Well, Ned," said I, "is it possible that you are not convinced of the existence of this cetacean
that we are following?  Have you any particular reason for being so incredulous?"

The harpooner looked at me fixedly for some moments before answering, struck his broad forehead
with his hand (a habit of his), as if to collect himself, and said at last, "Perhaps I have,
Mr. Aronnax."

"But, Ned, you, a whaler by profession, familiarised with all the great marine mammalia--YOU
ought to be the last to doubt under such circumstances!"

"That is just what deceives you, Professor," replied Ned.  "As a whaler I have followed many
a cetacean, harpooned a great number, and killed several; but, however strong or well-armed
they may have been, neither their tails nor their weapons would have been able even to scratch
the iron plates of a steamer."

"But, Ned, they tell of ships which the teeth of the narwhal have pierced through and through."

"Wooden ships--that is possible," replied the Canadian, "but I have never seen it done; and,
until further proof, I deny that whales, cetaceans, or sea-unicorns could ever produce the
effect you describe."

"Well, Ned, I repeat it with a conviction resting on the logic of facts.  I believe in the
existence of a mammal power fully organised, belonging to the branch of vertebrata, like the
whales, the cachalots, or the dolphins, and furnished with a horn of defence of great penetrating
power."

"Hum!" said the harpooner, shaking his head with the air of a man who would not be convinced.

"Notice one thing, my worthy Canadian," I resumed.  "If such an animal is in existence, if
it inhabits the depths of the ocean, if it frequents the strata lying miles below the surface
of the water, it must necessarily possess an organisation the strength of which would defy
all comparison."

"And why this powerful organisation?" demanded Ned.

"Because it requires incalculable strength to keep one's self in these strata and resist their
pressure.  Listen to me.  Let us admit that the pressure of the atmosphere is represented by
the weight of a column of water thirty-two feet high.  In reality the column of water would
be shorter, as we are speaking of sea water, the density of which is greater than that of fresh
water.  Very well, when you dive, Ned, as many times 32 feet of water as there are above you,
so many times does your body bear a pressure equal to that of the atmosphere, that is to say,
15 lb. for each square inch of its surface.  It follows, then, that at 320 feet this pressure
equals that of 10 atmospheres, of 100 atmospheres at 3,200 feet, and of 1,000 atmospheres at
32,000 feet, that is, about 6 miles; which is equivalent to saying that if you could attain
this depth in the ocean, each square three-eighths of an inch of the surface of your body would
bear a pressure of 5,600 lb.  Ah! my brave Ned, do you know how many square inches you carry
on the surface of your body?"

"I have no idea, Mr. Aronnax."

"About 6,500; and as in reality the atmospheric pressure is about 15 lb.  to the square inch,
your 6,500 square inches bear at this moment a pressure of 97,500 lb."

"Without my perceiving it?"

"Without your perceiving it.  And if you are not crushed by such a pressure, it is because
the air penetrates the interior of your body with equal pressure.  Hence perfect equilibrium
between the interior and exterior pressure, which thus neutralise each other, and which allows
you to bear it without inconvenience.  But in the water it is another thing."

"Yes, I understand," replied Ned, becoming more attentive; "because the water surrounds me,
but does not penetrate."

"Precisely, Ned:  so that at 32 feet beneath the surface of the sea you would undergo a pressure
of 97,500 lb.; at 320 feet, ten times that pressure; at 3,200 feet, a hundred times that pressure;
lastly, at 32,000 feet, a thousand times that pressure would be 97,500,000 lb.--that is to
say, that you would be flattened as if you had been drawn from the plates of a hydraulic machine!"

"The devil!" exclaimed Ned.

"Very well, my worthy harpooner, if some vertebrate, several hundred yards long, and large
in proportion, can maintain itself in such depths--of those whose surface is represented by
millions of square inches, that is by tens of millions of pounds, we must estimate the pressure
they undergo.  Consider, then, what must be the resistance of their bony structure, and the
strength of their organisation to withstand such pressure!"

"Why!" exclaimed Ned Land, "they must be made of iron plates eight inches thick, like the armoured
frigates."

"As you say, Ned.  And think what destruction such a mass would cause, if hurled with the speed
of an express train against the hull of a vessel."

"Yes--certainly--perhaps," replied the Canadian, shaken by these figures, but not yet willing
to give in.

"Well, have I convinced you?"

"You have convinced me of one thing, sir, which is that, if such animals do exist at the bottom
of the seas, they must necessarily be as strong as you say."

"But if they do not exist, mine obstinate harpooner, how explain the accident to the Scotia?"

CHAPTER V

AT A VENTURE

The voyage of the Abraham Lincoln was for a long time marked by no special incident.  But one
circumstance happened which showed the wonderful dexterity of Ned Land, and proved what confidence
we might place in him.

The 30th of June, the frigate spoke some American whalers, from whom we learned that they knew
nothing about the narwhal.  But one of them, the captain of the Monroe, knowing that Ned Land
had shipped on board the Abraham Lincoln, begged for his help in chasing a whale they had in
sight.  Commander Farragut, desirous of seeing Ned Land at work, gave him permission to go
on board the Monroe.  And fate served our Canadian so well that, instead of one whale, he harpooned
two with a double blow, striking one straight to the heart, and catching the other after some
minutes' pursuit.

Decidedly, if the monster ever had to do with Ned Land's harpoon, I would not bet in its favour.

The frigate skirted the south-east coast of America with great rapidity.  The 3rd of July we
were at the opening of the Straits of Magellan, level with Cape Vierges.  But Commander Farragut
would not take a tortuous passage, but doubled Cape Horn.

The ship's crew agreed with him.  And certainly it was possible that they might meet the narwhal
in this narrow pass.  Many of the sailors affirmed that the monster could not pass there, "that
he was too big for that!"

The 6th of July, about three o'clock in the afternoon, the Abraham Lincoln, at fifteen miles
to the south, doubled the solitary island, this lost rock at the extremity of the American
continent, to which some Dutch sailors gave the name of their native town, Cape Horn.  The
course was taken towards the north-west, and the next day the screw of the frigate was at last
beating the waters of the Pacific.

"Keep your eyes open!" called out the sailors.

And they were opened widely.  Both eyes and glasses, a little dazzled, it is true, by the prospect
of two thousand dollars, had not an instant's repose.

I myself, for whom money had no charms, was not the least attentive on board.  Giving but few
minutes to my meals, but a few hours to sleep, indifferent to either rain or sunshine, I did
not leave the poop of the vessel.  Now leaning on the netting of the forecastle, now on the
taffrail, I devoured with eagerness the soft foam which whitened the sea as far as the eye
could reach; and how often have I shared the emotion of the majority of the crew, when some
capricious whale raised its black back above the waves!  The poop of the vessel was crowded
on a moment.  The cabins poured forth a torrent of sailors and officers, each with heaving
breast and troubled eye watching the course of the cetacean.  I looked and looked till I was
nearly blind, whilst Conseil kept repeating in a calm voice:

"If, sir, you would not squint so much, you would see better!"

But vain excitement!  The Abraham Lincoln checked its speed and made for the animal signalled,
a simple whale, or common cachalot, which soon disappeared amidst a storm of abuse.

But the weather was good.  The voyage was being accomplished under the most favourable auspices.
It was then the bad season in Australia, the July of that zone corresponding to our January
in Europe, but the sea was beautiful and easily scanned round a vast circumference.

The 20th of July, the tropic of Capricorn was cut by 105d of longitude, and the 27th of the
same month we crossed the Equator on the 110th meridian.  This passed, the frigate took a more
decided westerly direction, and scoured the central waters of the Pacific.  Commander Farragut
thought, and with reason, that it was better to remain in deep water, and keep clear of continents
or islands, which the beast itself seemed to shun (perhaps because there was not enough water
for him! suggested the greater part of the crew). The frigate passed at some distance from
the Marquesas and the Sandwich Islands, crossed the tropic of Cancer, and made for the China
Seas.  We were on the theatre of the last diversions of the monster:  and, to say truth, we
no longer LIVED on board.  The entire ship's crew were undergoing a nervous excitement, of
which I can give no idea:  they could not eat, they could not sleep--twenty times a day, a
misconception or an optical illusion of some sailor seated on the taffrail, would cause dreadful
perspirations, and these emotions, twenty times repeated, kept us in a state of excitement
so violent that a reaction was unavoidable.

And truly, reaction soon showed itself.  For three months, during which a day seemed an age,
the Abraham Lincoln furrowed all the waters of the Northern Pacific, running at whales, making
sharp deviations from her course, veering suddenly from one tack to another, stopping suddenly,
putting on steam, and backing ever and anon at the risk of deranging her machinery, and not
one point of the Japanese or American coast was left unexplored.

The warmest partisans of the enterprise now became its most ardent detractors.  Reaction mounted
from the crew to the captain himself, and certainly, had it not been for the resolute determination
on the part of Captain Farragut, the frigate would have headed due southward.  This useless
search could not last much longer.  The Abraham Lincoln had nothing to reproach herself with,
she had done her best to succeed. Never had an American ship's crew shown more zeal or patience;
its failure could not be placed to their charge--there remained nothing but to return.

This was represented to the commander.  The sailors could not hide their discontent, and the
service suffered.  I will not say there was a mutiny on board, but after a reasonable period
of obstinacy, Captain Farragut (as Columbus did) asked for three days' patience.  If in three
days the monster did not appear, the man at the helm should give three turns of the wheel,
and the Abraham Lincoln would make for the European seas.

This promise was made on the 2nd of November.  It had the effect of rallying the ship's crew.
The ocean was watched with renewed attention.  Each one wished for a last glance in which to
sum up his remembrance.  Glasses were used with feverish activity.  It was a grand defiance
given to the giant narwhal, and he could scarcely fail to answer the summons and "appear."

Two days passed, the steam was at half pressure; a thousand schemes were tried to attract the
attention and stimulate the apathy of the animal in case it should be met in those parts. 
Large quantities of bacon were trailed in the wake of the ship, to the great satisfaction (I
must say) of the sharks.  Small craft radiated in all directions round the Abraham Lincoln
as she lay to, and did not leave a spot of the sea unexplored.  But the night of the 4th of
November arrived without the unveiling of this submarine mystery.

The next day, the 5th of November, at twelve, the delay would (morally speaking) expire; after
that time, Commander Farragut, faithful to his promise, was to turn the course to the south-east
and abandon for ever the northern regions of the Pacific.

The frigate was then in 31° 15' N. lat. and 136° 42' E. long. The coast of Japan still remained
less than two hundred miles to leeward.  Night was approaching.  They had just struck eight
bells; large clouds veiled the face of the moon, then in its first quarter. The sea undulated
peaceably under the stern of the vessel.

At that moment I was leaning forward on the starboard netting. Conseil, standing near me, was
looking straight before him.  The crew, perched in the ratlines, examined the horizon which
contracted and darkened by degrees.  Officers with their night glasses scoured the growing
darkness:  sometimes the ocean sparkled under the rays of the moon, which darted between two
clouds, then all trace of light was lost in the darkness.

In looking at Conseil, I could see he was undergoing a little of the general influence.  At
least I thought so.  Perhaps for the first time his nerves vibrated to a sentiment of curiosity.

"Come, Conseil," said I, "this is the last chance of pocketing the two thousand dollars."

"May I be permitted to say, sir," replied Conseil, "that I never reckoned on getting the prize;
and, had the government of the Union offered a hundred thousand dollars, it would have been
none the poorer."

"You are right, Conseil.  It is a foolish affair after all, and one upon which we entered too
lightly.  What time lost, what useless emotions!  We should have been back in France six months
ago."

"In your little room, sir," replied Conseil, "and in your museum, sir; and I should have already
classed all your fossils, sir.  And the Babiroussa would have been installed in its cage in
the Jardin des Plantes, and have drawn all the curious people of the capital!"

"As you say, Conseil.  I fancy we shall run a fair chance of being laughed at for our pains."

"That's tolerably certain," replied Conseil, quietly; "I think they will make fun of you, sir.
And, must I say it----?"

"Go on, my good friend."

"Well, sir, you will only get your deserts."

"Indeed!"

"When one has the honour of being a savant as you are, sir, one should not expose one's self
to----"

Conseil had not time to finish his compliment.  In the midst of general silence a voice had
just been heard.  It was the voice of Ned Land shouting:

"Look out there!  The very thing we are looking for--on our weather beam!"

CHAPTER VI

AT FULL STEAM

At this cry the whole ship's crew hurried towards the harpooner--commander, officers, masters,
sailors, cabin boys; even the engineers left their engines, and the stokers their furnaces.

The order to stop her had been given, and the frigate now simply went on by her own momentum.
The darkness was then profound, and, however good the Canadian's eyes were, I asked myself
how he had managed to see, and what he had been able to see.  My heart beat as if it would
break.  But Ned Land was not mistaken, and we all perceived the object he pointed to.  At two
cables' length from the Abraham Lincoln, on the starboard quarter, the sea seemed to be illuminated
all over.  It was not a mere phosphoric phenomenon.  The monster emerged some fathoms from
the water, and then threw out that very intense but mysterious light mentioned in the report
of several captains.  This magnificent irradiation must have been produced by an agent of great
SHINING power. The luminous part traced on the sea an immense oval, much elongated, the centre
of which condensed a burning heat, whose overpowering brilliancy died out by successive gradations.

"It is only a massing of phosphoric particles," cried one of the officers.

"No, sir, certainly not," I replied.  "That brightness is of an essentially electrical nature.
Besides, see, see! it moves; it is moving forwards, backwards; it is darting towards us!"

A general cry arose from the frigate.

"Silence!" said the captain.  "Up with the helm, reverse the engines."

The steam was shut off, and the Abraham Lincoln, beating to port, described a semicircle.

"Right the helm, go ahead," cried the captain.

These orders were executed, and the frigate moved rapidly from the burning light.

I was mistaken.  She tried to sheer off, but the supernatural animal approached with a velocity
double her own.

We gasped for breath.  Stupefaction more than fear made us dumb and motionless.  The animal
gained on us, sporting with the waves.  It made the round of the frigate, which was then making
fourteen knots, and enveloped it with its electric rings like luminous dust.

Then it moved away two or three miles, leaving a phosphorescent track, like those volumes of
steam that the express trains leave behind.  All at once from the dark line of the horizon
whither it retired to gain its momentum, the monster rushed suddenly towards the Abraham Lincoln
with alarming rapidity, stopped suddenly about twenty feet from the hull, and died out--not
diving under the water, for its brilliancy did not abate--but suddenly, and as if the source
of this brilliant emanation was exhausted.  Then it reappeared on the other side of the vessel,
as if it had turned and slid under the hull.  Any moment a collision might have occurred which
would have been fatal to us. "How are you going to get it?"

"I will tell you confidentially; I have a wealthy old aunt, and she
will die pretty soon; but if she does not, I expect to find some rich
old man who will lend me a few thousands to give me a start.

If I only get the money to start with I will do well."

There is no greater mistake than when a young man believes he will
succeed with borrowed money.

Why?

Because every man's experience coincides with that of Mr. Astor,
who said, "it was more difficult for him to accumulate his first thousand
dollars, than all the succeeding millions that made up his colossal
fortune."

Money is good for nothing unless you know the value of it by experience.

  That is why, sir, I must be on my guard."

The crew were on their feet all night.  No one thought of sleep.  The Abraham Lincoln, not
being able to struggle with such velocity, had moderated its pace, and sailed at half speed.
For its part, the narwhal, imitating the frigate, let the waves rock it at will, and seemed
decided not to leave the scene of the struggle.  Towards midnight, however, it disappeared,
or, to use a more appropriate term, it "died out" like a large glow-worm. Had it fled?  One
could only fear, not hope it.  But at seven minutes to one o'clock in the morning a deafening
whistling was heard, like that produced by a body of water rushing with great violence.

The captain, Ned Land, and I were then on the poop, eagerly peering through the profound darkness.

"Ned Land," asked the commander, "you have often heard the roaring of whales?"

"Often, sir; but never such whales the sight of which brought me in two thousand dollars. 
If I can only approach within four harpoons' length of it!"

"But to approach it," said the commander, "I ought to put a whaler at your disposal?"

"Certainly, sir."

"That will be trifling with the lives of my men."

"And mine too," simply said the harpooner.

Towards two o'clock in the morning, the burning light reappeared, not less intense, about five
miles to windward of the Abraham Lincoln. Notwithstanding the distance, and the noise of the
wind and sea, one heard distinctly the loud strokes of the animal's tail, and even its panting
breath.  It seemed that, at the moment that the enormous narwhal had come to take breath at
the surface of the water, the air was engulfed in its lungs, like the steam in the vast cylinders
of a machine of two thousand horse-power.

"Hum!" thought I, "a whale with the strength of a cavalry regiment would be a pretty whale!"

We were on the qui vive till daylight, and prepared for the combat. The fishing implements
were laid along the hammock nettings.  The second lieutenant loaded the blunder busses, which
could throw harpoons to the distance of a mile, and long duck-guns, with explosive bullets,
which inflicted mortal wounds even to the most terrible animals.  Ned Land contented himself
with sharpening his harpoon--a terrible weapon in his hands.

At six o'clock day began to break; and, with the first glimmer of light, the electric light
of the narwhal disappeared.  At seven o'clock the day was sufficiently advanced, but a very
thick sea fog obscured our view, and the best spy glasses could not pierce it.  That caused
disappointment and anger.

I climbed the mizzen-mast. Some officers were already perched on the mast-heads. At eight o'clock
the fog lay heavily on the waves, and its thick scrolls rose little by little.  The horizon
grew wider and clearer at the same time.  Suddenly, just as on the day before, Ned Land's voice
was heard:

"The thing itself on the port quarter!" cried the harpooner.

Every eye was turned towards the point indicated.  There, a mile and a half from the frigate,
a long blackish body emerged a yard above the waves.  Its tail, violently agitated, produced
a considerable eddy. Never did a tail beat the sea with such violence.  An immense track, of
dazzling whiteness, marked the passage of the animal, and described a long curve.

The frigate approached the cetacean.  I examined it thoroughly.

The reports of the Shannon and of the Helvetia had rather exaggerated its size, and I estimated
its length at only two hundred and fifty feet.  As to its dimensions, I could only conjecture
them to be admirably proportioned.  While I watched this phenomenon, two jets of steam and
water were ejected from its vents, and rose to the height of 120 feet; thus I ascertained its
way of breathing.  I concluded definitely that it belonged to the vertebrate branch, class
mammalia.

The crew waited impatiently for their chief's orders.  The latter, after having observed the
animal attentively, called the engineer.  The engineer ran to him.

"Sir," said the commander, "you have steam up?"

"Yes, sir," answered the engineer.

"Well, make up your fires and put on all steam."

Three hurrahs greeted this order.  The time for the struggle had arrived.  Some moments after,
the two funnels of the frigate vomited torrents of black smoke, and the bridge quaked under
the trembling of the boilers.

The Abraham Lincoln, propelled by her wonderful screw, went straight at the animal.  The latter
allowed it to come within half a cable's length; then, as if disdaining to dive, it took a
little turn, and stopped a short distance off.

This pursuit lasted nearly three-quarters of an hour, without the frigate gaining two yards
on the cetacean.  It was quite evident that at that rate we should never come up with it.

"Well, Mr. Land," asked the captain, "do you advise me to put the boats out to sea?"

"No, sir," replied Ned Land; "because we shall not take that beast easily."

"What shall we do then?"

"Put on more steam if you can, sir.  With your leave, I mean to post myself under the bowsprit,
and, if we get within harpooning distance, I shall throw my harpoon."

"Go, Ned," said the captain.  "Engineer, put on more pressure."

Ned Land went to his post.  The fires were increased, the screw revolved forty-three times
a minute, and the steam poured out of the valves.  We heaved the log, and calculated that the
Abraham Lincoln was going at the rate of 18 1/2 miles an hour.

But the accursed animal swam at the same speed.

For a whole hour the frigate kept up this pace, without gaining six feet.  It was humiliating
for one of the swiftest sailers in the American navy.  A stubborn anger seized the crew; the
sailors abused the monster, who, as before, disdained to answer them; the captain no longer
contented himself with twisting his beard--he gnawed it.

The engineer was called again.

"You have turned full steam on?"

"Yes, sir," replied the engineer.

The speed of the Abraham Lincoln increased.  Its masts trembled down to their stepping holes,
and the clouds of smoke could hardly find way out of the narrow funnels.

They heaved the log a second time.

"Well?" asked the captain of the man at the wheel.

"Nineteen miles and three-tenths, sir."

"Clap on more steam."

The engineer obeyed.  The manometer showed ten degrees.  But the cetacean grew warm itself,
no doubt; for without straining itself, it made 19 3/10 miles.

What a pursuit!  No, I cannot describe the emotion that vibrated through me.  Ned Land kept
his post, harpoon in hand.  Several times the animal let us gain upon it.--"We shall catch
it! we shall catch it!" cried the Canadian.  But just as he was going to strike, the cetacean
stole away with a rapidity that could not be estimated at less than thirty miles an hour, and
even during our maximum of speed, it bullied the frigate, going round and round it.  A cry
of fury broke from everyone!

At noon we were no further advanced than at eight o'clock in the morning.

The captain then decided to take more direct means.

"Ah!" said he, "that animal goes quicker than the Abraham Lincoln. Very well! we will see whether
it will escape these conical bullets. Send your men to the forecastle, sir."

The forecastle gun was immediately loaded and slewed round.  But the shot passed some feet
above the cetacean, which was half a mile off.

"Another, more to the right," cried the commander, "and five dollars to whoever will hit that
infernal beast."

An old gunner with a grey beard--that I can see now--with steady eye and grave face, went up
to the gun and took a long aim.  A loud report was heard, with which were mingled the cheers
of the crew.

The bullet did its work; it hit the animal, and, sliding off the rounded surface, was lost
in two miles depth of sea.

The chase began again, and the captain, leaning towards me, said:

"I will pursue that beast till my frigate bursts up."

"Yes," answered I; "and you will be quite right to do it."

I wished the beast would exhaust itself, and not be insensible to fatigue like a steam engine.
But it was of no use.  Hours passed, without its showing any signs of exhaustion.

However, it must be said in praise of the Abraham Lincoln that she struggled on indefatigably.
I cannot reckon the distance she made under three hundred miles during this unlucky day, November
the 6th. But night came on, and overshadowed the rough ocean.

Now I thought our expedition was at an end, and that we should never again see the extraordinary
animal.  I was mistaken.  At ten minutes to eleven in the evening, the electric light reappeared
three miles to windward of the frigate, as pure, as intense as during the preceding night.

The narwhal seemed motionless; perhaps, tired with its day's work, it slept, letting itself
float with the undulation of the waves.  Now was a chance of which the captain resolved to
take advantage.

He gave his orders.  The Abraham Lincoln kept up half steam, and advanced cautiously so as
not to awake its adversary.  It is no rare thing to meet in the middle of the ocean whales
so sound asleep that they can be successfully attacked, and Ned Land had harpooned more than
one during its sleep.  The Canadian went to take his place again under the bowsprit.

The frigate approached noiselessly, stopped at two cables' lengths from the animal, and following
its track.  No one breathed; a deep silence reigned on the bridge.  We were not a hundred feet
from the burning focus, the light of which increased and dazzled our eyes.

At this moment, leaning on the forecastle bulwark, I saw below me Ned Land grappling the martingale
in one hand, brandishing his terrible harpoon in the other, scarcely twenty feet from the motionless
animal. Suddenly his arm straightened, and the harpoon was thrown; I heard the sonorous stroke
of the weapon, which seemed to have struck a hard body. The electric light went out suddenly,
and two enormous waterspouts broke over the bridge of the frigate, rushing like a torrent from
stem to stern, overthrowing men, and breaking the lashings of the spars.  A fearful shock followed,
and, thrown over the rail without having time to stop myself, I fell into the sea.

CHAPTER VII

AN UNKNOWN SPECIES OF WHALE

This unexpected fall so stunned me that I have no clear recollection of my sensations at the
time.  I was at first drawn down to a depth of about twenty feet.  I am a good swimmer (though
without pretending to rival Byron or Edgar Poe, who were masters of the art), and in that plunge
I did not lose my presence of mind.  Two vigorous strokes brought me to the surface of the
water.  My first care was to look for the frigate.  Had the crew seen me disappear?  Had the
Abraham Lincoln veered round?  Would the captain put out a boat?  Might I hope to be saved?

The darkness was intense.  I caught a glimpse of a black mass disappearing in the east, its
beacon lights dying out in the distance. It was the frigate!  I was lost.

"Help, help!"  I shouted, swimming towards the Abraham Lincoln in desperation.

My clothes encumbered me; they seemed glued to my body, and paralysed my movements.

I was sinking!  I was suffocating!

"Help!"

This was my last cry.  My mouth filled with water; I struggled against being drawn down the
abyss.  Suddenly my clothes were seized by a strong hand, and I felt myself quickly drawn up
to the surface of the sea; and I heard, yes, I heard these words pronounced in my ear:

"If master would be so good as to lean on my shoulder, master would swim with much greater ease."

I seized with one hand my faithful Conseil's arm.

"Is it you?" said I, "you?"

"Myself," answered Conseil; "and waiting master's orders."

"That shock threw you as well as me into the sea?"

"No; but, being in my master's service, I followed him."

The worthy fellow thought that was but natural.

"And the frigate?"  I asked.

"The frigate?" replied Conseil, turning on his back; "I think that master had better not count
too much on her."

"You think so?"

"I say that, at the time I threw myself into the sea, I heard the men at the wheel say, `The
screw and the rudder are broken.'

"Broken?"

"Yes, broken by the monster's teeth.  It is the only injury the Abraham Lincoln has sustained.
But it is a bad look-out for us--she no longer answers her helm."

"Then we are lost!"

"Perhaps so," calmly answered Conseil.  "However, we have still several hours before us, and
one can do a good deal in some hours."

Conseil's imperturbable coolness set me up again.  I swam more vigorously; but, cramped by
my clothes, which stuck to me like a leaden weight, I felt great difficulty in bearing up.
Conseil saw this.

"Will master let me make a slit?" said he; and, slipping an open knife under my clothes, he
ripped them up from top to bottom very rapidly. Then he cleverly slipped them off me, while
I swam for both of us.

Then I did the same for Conseil, and we continued to swim near to each other.

