Reply Obj. 2: There are different powers for objects that differ in genus and are on an equality;
for instance, sound and color are different genera of sensibles, to which are referred hearing
and sight. But the useful and the righteous are not on an equality, but are as that which is
of itself, and that which is in relation to another. Now such like objects are always referred
to the same power; for instance, the power of sight perceives both color and light by which
color is seen.

Reply Obj. 3: Not everything that diversifies habits, diversifies the powers: since habits
are certain determinations of powers to certain special acts. Moreover, every practical art
considers both the end and the means. For the art of the helmsman does indeed consider the
end, as that which it effects; and the means, as that which it commands. On the other hand,
the ship-building art considers the means as that which it effects; but it considers that which
is the end, as that to which it refers what it effects. And again, in every practical art there
is an end proper to it and means that belong properly to that art.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 8, Art. 3]

Whether the Will Is Moved by the Same Act to the End and to the Means?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is moved by the same act, to the end and to the means.
Because according to the Philosopher (Topic. iii, 2) "where one thing is on account of another
there is only one." But the will does not will the means save on account of the end. Therefore
it is moved to both by the same act.

Obj. 2: Further, the end is the reason for willing the means, just as light is the reason of
seeing colors. But light and colors are seen by the same act. Therefore it is the same movement
of the will, whereby it wills the end and the means.

Obj. 3: Further, it is one and the same natural movement which tends through the middle space
to the terminus. But the means are in comparison to the end, as the middle space is to the
terminus. Therefore it is the same movement of the will whereby it is directed to the end and
to the means.

On the contrary, Acts are diversified according to their objects. But the end is a different
species of good from the means, which are a useful good. Therefore the will is not moved to
both by the same act.

I answer that, Since the end is willed in itself, whereas the means, as such, are only willed
for the end, it is evident that the will can be moved to the end, without being moved to the
means; whereas it cannot be moved to the means, as such, unless it is moved to the end. Accordingly
the will is moved to the end in two ways: first, to the end absolutely and in itself; secondly,
as the reason for willing the means. Hence it is evident that the will is moved by one and
the same movement, to the end, as the reason for willing the means; and to the means themselves.
But it is another act whereby the will is moved to the end absolutely. And sometimes this act
precedes the other in time; for example when a man first wills to have health, and afterwards
deliberating by what means to be healed, wills to send for the doctor to heal him. The same
happens in regard to the intellect: for at first a man understands the principles in themselves;
but afterwards he understands them in the conclusions, inasmuch as he assents to the conclusions
on account of the principles.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument holds in respect of the will being moved to the end as the reason
for willing the means.

Reply Obj. 2: Whenever color is seen, by the same act the light is seen; but the light can
be seen without the color being seen. In like manner whenever a man wills the means, by the
same act he wills the end; but not the conversely.

Reply Obj. 3: In the execution of a work, the means are as the middle space, and the end, as
the terminus. Wherefore just as natural movement sometimes stops in the middle and does not
reach the terminus; so sometimes one is busy with the means, without gaining the end. But in
willing it is the reverse: the will through (willing) the end comes to will the means; just
as the intellect arrives at the conclusions through the principles which are called "means."
Hence it is that sometimes the intellect understands a mean, and does not proceed thence to
the conclusion. And in like manner the will sometimes wills the end, and yet does not proceed
to will the means.

The solution to the argument in the contrary sense is clear from what has been said above (A.
2, ad 2). For the useful and the righteous are not species of good in an equal degree, but
are as that which is for its own sake and that which is for the sake of something else: wherefore
the act of the will can be directed to one and not to the other; but not conversely.

QUESTION 9

OF THAT WHICH MOVES THE WILL (In Six Articles)

We must now consider what moves the will: and under this head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the will is moved by the intellect?

(2) Whether it is moved by the sensitive appetite?

(3) Whether the will moves itself?

(4) Whether it is moved by an extrinsic principle?

(5) Whether it is moved by a heavenly body?

(6) Whether the will is moved by God alone as by an extrinsic principle?

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 9, Art. 1]

Whether the Will Is Moved by the Intellect?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not moved by the intellect. But it would not be
so, if the will were moved by the intellect: because movement of the movable results from motion
of the mover. Therefore the intellect does not move the will.

Obj. 2: Further, the intellect in presenting the appetible object to the will, stands in relation
to the will, as the imagination in representing the appetible object to the sensitive appetite.
But the imagination, in presenting the appetible object, does not remove the sensitive appetite:
indeed sometimes our imagination affects us no more than what is set before us in a picture,
and moves us not at all (De Anima ii, 3). Therefore neither does the intellect move the will.

Obj. 3: Further, the same is not mover and moved in respect of the same thing. But the will
moves the intellect; for we exercise the intellect when we will. Therefore the intellect does
not move the will.

On the contrary, The Philosopher says (De Anima iii, 10) that "the appetible object is a mover
not moved, whereas the will is a mover moved."

I answer that, A thing requires to be moved by something in so far as it is in potentiality
to several things; for that which is in potentiality needs to be reduced to act by something
actual; and to do this is to move. Now a power of the soul is seen to be in potentiality to
different things in two ways: first, with regard to acting and not acting; secondly, with regard
to this or that action. Thus the sight sometimes sees actually, and sometimes sees not: and
sometimes it sees white, and sometimes black. It needs therefore a mover in two respects, viz.
as to the exercise or use of the act, and as to the determination of the act. The first of
these is on the part of the subject, which is sometimes acting, sometimes not acting: while
the other is on the part of the object, by reason of which the act is specified.

The motion of the subject itself is due to some agent. And since every agent acts for an end,
as was shown above (Q. 1, A. 2), the principle of this motion lies in the end. And hence it
is that the art which is concerned with the end, by its command moves the art which is concerned
with the means; just as the "art of sailing commands the art of shipbuilding" (Phys. ii, 2).
Now good in general, which has the nature of an end, is the object of the will. Consequently,
in this respect, the will moves the other powers of the soul to their acts, for we make use
of the other powers when we will. For the end and perfection of every other power, is included
under the object of the will as some particular good: and always the art or power to which
the universal end belongs, moves to their acts the arts or powers to which belong the particular
ends included in the universal end. Thus the leader of an army, who intends the common good--i.e.
the order of the whole army--by his command moves one of the captains, who intends the order
of one company.

On the other hand, the object moves, by determining the act, after the manner of a formal principle,
whereby in natural things actions are specified, as heating by heat. Now the first formal principle
is universal "being" and "truth," which is the object of the intellect. And therefore by this
kind of motion the intellect moves the will, as presenting its object to it.

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted proves, not that the intellect does not move, but that it
does not move of necessity.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as the imagination of a form without estimation of fitness or harmfulness,
does not move the sensitive appetite; so neither does the apprehension of the true without
the aspect of goodness and desirability. Hence it is not the speculative intellect that moves,
but the practical intellect (De Anima iii, 9).

Reply Obj. 3: The will moves the intellect as to the exercise of its act; since even the true
itself which is the perfection of the intellect, is included in the universal good, as a particular
good. But as to the determination of the act, which the act derives from the object, the intellect
moves the will; since the good itself is apprehended under a special aspect as contained in
the universal true. It is therefore evident that the same is not mover and moved in the same
respect.

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 9, Art. 2]

Whether the Will Is Moved by the Sensitive Appetite?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will cannot be moved by the sensitive appetite. For "to
move and to act is more excellent than to be passive," as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii,
16). But the sensitive appetite is less excellent than the will which is the intellectual appetite;
just as sense is less excellent than intellect. Therefore the sensitive appetite does not move
the will.

Obj. 2: Further, no particular power can produce a universal effect. But the sensitive appetite
is a particular power, because it follows the particular apprehension of sense. Therefore it
cannot cause the movement of the will, which movement is universal, as following the universal
apprehension of the intellect.

Obj. 3: Further, as is proved in Phys.  viii, 5, the mover is not moved by that which it moves,
in such a way that there be reciprocal motion. But the will moves the sensitive appetite, inasmuch
as the sensitive appetite obeys the reason. Therefore the sensitive appetite does not move
the will.

On the contrary, It is written (James 1:14): "Every man is tempted by his own concupiscence,
being drawn away and allured." But man would not be drawn away by his concupiscence, unless
his will were moved by the sensitive appetite, wherein concupiscence resides. Therefore the
sensitive appetite moves the will.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), that which is apprehended as good and fitting, moves
the will by way of object. Now, that a thing appear to be good and fitting, happens from two
causes: namely, from the condition, either of the thing proposed, or of the one to whom it
is proposed. For fitness is spoken of by way of relation; hence it depends on both extremes.
And hence it is that taste, according as it is variously disposed, takes to a thing in various
ways, as being fitting or unfitting. Wherefore as the Philosopher says (Ethic. iii, 5): "According
as a man is, such does the end seem to him."

Now it is evident that according to a passion of the sensitive appetite man is changed to a
certain disposition. Wherefore according as man is affected by a passion, something seems to
him fitting, which does not seem so when he is not so affected: thus that seems good to a man
when angered, which does not seem good when he is calm. And in this way, the sensitive appetite
moves the will, on the part of the object.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing hinders that which is better simply and in itself, from being less excellent
in a certain respect. Accordingly the will is simply more excellent than the sensitive appetite:
but in respect of the man in whom a passion is predominant, in so far as he is subject to that
passion, the sensitive appetite is more excellent.

Reply Obj. 2: Men's acts and choices are in reference to singulars. Wherefore from the very
fact that the sensitive appetite is a particular power, it has great influence in disposing
man so that something seems to him such or otherwise, in particular cases.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Philosopher says (Polit. i, 2), the reason, in which resides the will,
moves, by its command, the irascible and concupiscible powers, not, indeed, "by a despotic
sovereignty," as a slave is moved by his master, but by a "royal and politic sovereignty,"
as free men are ruled by their governor, and can nevertheless act counter to his commands.
Hence both irascible and concupiscible can move counter to the will: and accordingly nothing
hinders the will from being moved by them at times.

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 9, Art. 3]

Whether the Will Moves Itself?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will does not move itself. For every mover, as such, is
in act: whereas what is moved, is in potentiality; since "movement is the act of that which
is in potentiality, as such" [*Aristotle, Phys. iii, 1]. Now the same is not in potentiality
and in act, in respect of the same. Therefore nothing moves itself. Neither, therefore, can
the will move itself.

Obj. 2: Further, the movable is moved on the mover being present. But the will is always present
to itself. If, therefore, it moved itself, it would always be moving itself, which is clearly
false.

Obj. 3: Further, the will is moved by the intellect, as stated above (A. 1). If, therefore,
the will move itself, it would follow that the same thing is at once moved immediately by two
movers; which seems unreasonable. Therefore the will does not move itself.

On the contrary, The will is mistress of its own act, and to it belongs to will and not to
will. But this would not be so, had it not the power to move itself to will. Therefore it moves
itself.

I answer that, As stated above (A. 1), it belongs to the will to move the other powers, by
reason of the end which is the will's object. Now, as stated above (Q. 8, A. 2), the end is
in things appetible, what the principle is in things intelligible. But it is evident that the
intellect, through its knowledge of the principle, reduces itself from potentiality to act,
as to its knowledge of the conclusions; and thus it moves itself. And, in like manner, the
will, through its volition of the end, moves itself to will the means.

Reply Obj. 1: It is not in respect of the same that the will moves itself and is moved: wherefore
neither is it in act and in potentiality in respect of the same. But forasmuch as it actually
wills the end, it reduces itself from potentiality to act, in respect of the means, so as,
in a word, to will them actually.

Reply Obj. 2: The power of the will is always actually present to itself; but the act of the
will, whereby it wills an end, is not always in the will. But it is by this act that it moves
itself. Accordingly it does not follow that it is always moving itself.

Reply Obj. 3: The will is moved by the intellect, otherwise than by itself. By the intellect
it is moved on the part of the object: whereas it is moved by itself, as to the exercise of
its act, in respect of the end.

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 9, Art. 4]

Whether the Will Is Moved by an Exterior Principle?

Objection 1: It would seem that the will is not moved by anything exterior. For the movement
of the will is voluntary. But it is essential to the voluntary act that it be from an intrinsic
principle, just as it is essential to the natural act. Therefore the movement of the will is
not from anything exterior.

Obj. 2: Further, the will cannot suffer violence, as was shown above (Q. 6, A. 4). But the
violent act is one "the principle of which is outside the agent" [*Aristotle, Ethic. iii, 1].
Therefore the will cannot be moved by anything exterior.

Obj. 3: Further, that which is sufficiently moved by one mover, needs not to be moved by another.
But the will moves itself sufficiently. Therefore it is not moved by anything exterior.

On the contrary, The will is moved by the object, as stated above (A. 1). But the object of
the will can be something exterior, offered to the sense. Therefore the will can be moved by
something exterior.

I answer that, As far as the will is moved by the object, it is evident that it can be moved
by something exterior. But in so far as it is moved in the exercise of its act, we must again
hold it to be moved by some exterior principle.

For everything that is at one time an agent actually, and at another time an agent in potentiality,
needs to be moved by a mover. Now it is evident that the will begins to will something, whereas
previously it did not will it. Therefore it must, of necessity, be moved by something to will
it. And, indeed, it moves itself, as stated above (A. 3), in so far as through willing the
end it reduces itself to the act of willing the means. Now it cannot do this without the aid
of counsel: for when a man wills to be healed, he begins to reflect how this can be attained,
and through this reflection he comes to the conclusion that he can be healed by a physician:
and this he wills. But since he did not always actually will to have health, he must, of necessity,
have begun, through something moving him, to will to be healed. And if the will moved itself
to will this, it must, of necessity, have done this with the aid of counsel following some
previous volition. But this process could not go on to infinity. Wherefore we must, of necessity,
suppose that the will advanced to its first movement in virtue of the instigation of some exterior
mover, as Aristotle concludes in a chapter of the Eudemian Ethics (vii, 14).

Reply Obj. 1: It is essential to the voluntary act that its principle be within the agent:
but it is not necessary that this inward principle be the first principle unmoved by another.
Wherefore though the voluntary act has an inward proximate principle, nevertheless its first
principle is from without. Thus, too, the first principle of the natural movement is from without,
that, to wit, which moves nature.

Reply Obj. 2: For an act to be violent it is not enough that its principle be extrinsic, but
we must add "without the concurrence of him that suffers violence." This does not happen when
the will is moved by an exterior principle: for it is the will that wills, though moved by
another. But this movement would be violent, if it were counter to the movement of the will:
which in the present case is impossible; since then the will would will and not will the same
thing.

Reply Obj. 3: The will moves itself sufficiently in one respect, and in its own order, that
is to say as proximate agent; but it cannot move itself in every respect, as we have shown.
Wherefore it needs to be moved by another as first mover.

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 9, Art. 5]

Whether the Will Is Moved by a Heavenly Body?

