Proof.- To act absolutely in obedience to virtue is nothing else but  to act according to the
laws of one's own nature. But we only act, in  so far as we understand (III:iii.) : therefore
to act in obedience to  virtue is in us nothing else but to act, to live, or to preserve one's
being in obedience to reason, and that on the basis of seeking what is  useful for us (IV:xxii.Coroll.).
Q.E.D.

Prop. XXV. No one wishes to preserve his  being for the sake of anything else.

Proof.- The endeavour, wherewith everything endeavours to persist in its  being, is defined
solely by the essence of the thing itself (III:vii.);  from this alone, and not from the essence
of anything else, it necessarily  follows (III:vi.) that everyone endeavours to preserve his
being.  Moreover, this proposition is plain from IV:xxii.Coroll., for if a man  should endeavour
to preserve his being for the sake of anything else, the  last-named thing would obviously
be the basis of virtue, which, by the  foregoing corollary, is absurd. Therefore no one, &c. Q.E.D.

Prop. XXVI. Whatsoever we endeavour in  obedience to reason is nothing further  than to understand;
neither does the mind,  in so far as it makes use of reason, judge  anything to be useful to
it, save such  things as are conducive to understanding.

Proof.- The effort for self-preservation is nothing else but the essence  of the thing in question
(III:vii.), which, in so far as it exists such  as it is, is conceived to have force for continuing
in existence (III:vi.)  and doing such things as necessarily follow from its given nature (see
the  Def. of Appetite, II:ix.Note). But the essence of reason is nought else but  our mind,
in so far as it clearly and distinctly understands (see the  definition in II:xl.Note:ii.)
; therefore (III:xl.) whatsoever we endeavour  in obedience to reason is nothing else but to
understand. Again, since this  effort of the mind wherewith the mind endeavours, in so far
as it reasons,  to preserve its own being is nothing else but understanding; this effort  at
understanding is (IV:xxii.Coroll.) the first and single basis of virtue,  nor shall we endeavour
to understand things for the sake of any ulterior  object (IV:xxv.); on the other hand, the
mind, in so far as it reasons,  will not be able to conceive any good for itself, save such
things as are  conducive to understanding.

Prop. XXVII. We know nothing to be certainly  good or evil, save such things as really  conduce
to understanding, or such as are  able to hinder us from understanding.

Proof.- The mind, in so far as it reasons, desires nothing beyond  understanding, and judges
nothing to be useful to itself, save such  things as conduce to understanding (by the foregoing
Prop.). But the  mind (II:xli.&Note) cannot possess certainty concerning anything,  except
in so far as it has adequate ideas, or (what by II:xl.Note,  is the same thing) in so far as
it reasons. Therefore we know nothing  to be good or evil save such things as really conduce,
&c. Q.E.D.

Prop. XXVIII. The mind's highest good is  the knowledge of God, and the mind's  highest virtue
is to know God.

Proof.- The mind is not capable of understanding anything higher than God,  that is (I:Def.vi.),
than a Being absolutely infinite, and without which  (I:xv.) nothing can either be or be conceived;
therefore (IV:xxvi.,  &xxvii.), the mind's highest utility or (IV:Def.i.) good is the knowledge
of God. Again, the mind is active, only in so far as it understands, and  only to the same
extent can it be said absolutely to act virtuously. The  mind's absolute virtue is therefore
to understand. Now, as we have already  shown, the highest that the mind can understand is
God; therefore the  highest virtue of the mind is to understand or to know God. Q.E.D.

Prop. XXIX. No individual thing, which is  entirely different from our own nature,  can help
or check our power of activity, and  absolutely nothing can do us good or harm,  unless it
has something in common with our nature.

Proof.- The power of every individual thing, and consequently the power of  man, whereby he
exists and operates, can only be determined by an  individual thing (I:xxviii.), whose nature
(II:vi.) must be understood  through the same nature as that, through which human nature is
conceived.  Therefore our power of activity, however it be conceived, can be determined  and
consequently helped or hindered by the power of any other individual  thing, which has something
in common with us, but not by the power of  anything, of which the nature is entirely different
from our own; and  since we call good or evil that which is the cause of pleasure or pain 
(IV:viii.), that is (III:xi.Note), which increases or diminishes, helps  or hinders, our power
of activity; therefore, that which is entirely,  different from our nature can neither be to
us good nor bad. Q.E.D.

Prop. XXX. A thing cannot be bad for us  through the quality which it has in common  with our
nature, but it is bad for us in so  far as it is contrary to our nature. 

Proof.- We call a thing bad when it is the cause of pain (IV:viii.), that  is (by the Def.,
which see in III:xi.Note), when it diminishes or checks  our power of action. Therefore, if
anything were bad for us through that  quality which it has in common with our nature, it would
be able  itself to diminish or check that which it has in common with our nature,  which (III:iv.)
is absurd. Wherefore nothing can be bad for us through  that quality which it has in common
with us, but, on the other hand, in  so far as it is bad for us, that is (as we have just shown),
in so far as   it can diminish or check our power of action, it is contrary to our nature.  Q.E.D.

Prop. XXXI. In so far as a thing is in harmony  with our nature, it is necessarily good.

Proof.- In so far as a thing is in harmony with our nature, it cannot be  bad for it. It will
therefore necessarily be either good or indifferent.  If it be assumed that it be neither good
nor bad, nothing will follow from  its nature (IV:Def.i.), which tends to the preservation
of our nature,  that is (by the hypothesis), which tends to the preservation of the thing 
itself; but this (III:vi.) is absurd; therefore, in so far as a thing is  in harmony with our
nature, it is necessarily good. Q.E.D.

Corollary.- Hence it follows, that, in proportion as a thing is in harmony  with our nature,
so is it more useful or better for us, and vice versa, in  proportion as a thing is more useful
for us, so is it more in harmony with  our nature. For, in so far as it is not in harmony with
our nature, it  will necessarily be different therefrom or contrary thereto. If different,
it can neither be good nor bad (IV:xxix.); if contrary, it will be contrary  to that which
is in harmony with our nature, that is, contrary to what is  good - in short, bad. Nothing,
therefore, can be good, except in so far as  it is in harmony with our nature; and hence a
thing is useful, in proportion  as it is in harmony with our nature, and vice versa. Q.E.D.

Prop. XXXII. In so far as men are a prey  to passion, they cannot, in that respect,  be said
to be naturally in harmony.

Proof. Things, which are said to be in harmony naturally, are understood to  agree in power
(III:vii.), not in want of power or negation, and  consequently not in passion (III:iii.Note);
wherefore men, in so far as  they are a prey to their passions, cannot be said to be naturally
in  harmony. Q.E.D.

Note.- This is also self-evident; for, if we say that white and black only  agree in the fact
that neither is red, we absolutely affirm that the do not  agree in any respect. So, if we
say that a man and a stone only agree in the  fact that both are finite - wanting in power,
not existing by the necessity  of their own nature, or, lastly, indefinitely surpassed by the
power of  external causes - we should certainly affirm that a man and a stone are in  no respect
alike; therefore, things which agree only in negation, or in  qualities which neither possess,
really agree in no respect.

Prop. XXXIII. Men can differ in nature,  in so far as they are assailed by those  emotions,
which are passions, or passive  states; and to this extent one and the  same man is variable
and inconstant.

Proof.- The nature or essence of the emotions cannot be explained solely  through our essence
or nature (III:Def.i.&ii.), but it must be defined by  the power, that is (III:vii.), by the
nature of external causes in  comparison with our own; hence it follows, that there are as
many kinds of  each emotion as there are external objects whereby we are affected  (III:lvi.),
and that men may be differently affected by one and the same  object (III:li), and to this
extent differ in nature; lastly, that one and  the same man may be differently affected towards
the same object, and may  therefore be variable and inconstant. Q.E.D.

Prop. XXXIV. In so far as men are assailed  by emotions which are passions, they can be  contrary
one to another.

Proof.- A man, for instance Peter, can be the cause of Paul's feeling pain,  because he (Peter)
possesses something similar to that which Paul hates  (III:xvi.), or because Peter has sole
possession of a thing which Paul also  loves (III:xxxii.&Note), or for other causes (of which
the chief are  enumerated in III:lv.Note) ; it may therefore happen that Paul should hate 
Peter (Def. of Emotions: vii.), consequently it may easily happen also, that  Peter should
hate Paul in return, and that each should endeavour to do the  other an injury, (III:xxxix.),
that is (IV:xxx.), that they should be  contrary one to another. But the emotion of pain is
always a passion  or passive state (III:lix.); hence men, in so far as they are assailed by
emotions which are passions, can be contrary one to another. Q.E.D.

Note.- I said that Paul may hate Peter, because he conceives that Peter  possesses something
which he (Paul) also loves; from this it seems, at first  sight, to follow, that these two
men, through both loving the same thing,  and, consequently, through agreement of their respective
natures, stand in  one another's way; if this were so, II:xxx. and II:xxxi. would be untrue.
But if we give the matter our unbiased attention, we shall see that the  discrepancy vanishes.
For the two men are not in one another's way in  virtue of the agreement of their natures,
that is, through both loving the  same thing, but in virtue of one differing from the other.
For, in so far  as each loves the same thing, the love of each is fostered thereby  (III:xxxi.),
that is (Def. of the Emotions: vi.) the pleasure of each is  fostered thereby. Wherefore it
is far from being the case, that they are  at variance through both loving the same thing,
and through the agreement  in their natures. The cause for their opposition lies, as I have
said,  solely in the fact that they are assumed to differ. For we assume that  Peter has the
idea of the loved object as already in his possession, while  Paul has the idea of the loved
object as lost. Hence the one man will be  affected with pleasure, the other will be affected
with pain, and thus they  will be at variance one with another. We can easily show in like
manner,  that all other causes of hatred depend solely on differences, and not on  the agreement
between men's natures.

Prop. XXXV. In so far only as men live  in obedience to reason, do they always  necessarily
agree in nature.

Proof.- In so far as men are assailed by emotions that are passions, they  can be different
in nature (IV:xxxiii.), and at variance one with another.  But men are only said to be active,
in so far as they act in obedience to  reason (III:iii.); therefore, what so ever follows from
human nature in so  far as it is defined by reason must (III:Def.ii.) be understood solely
through human nature as its proximate cause. But, since every man by the  laws of his nature
desires that which he deems good, and endeavours to  remove that which he deems bad (IV:xix.);
and further, since that which we,  in accordance with reason, deem good or bad, necessarily
is good  or bad (II:xli.); it follows that men, in so far as they live in obedience  to reason,
necessarily do only such things as are necessarily good for  human nature, and consequently
for each individual man (IV:xxxi.Coroll.);  in other words, such things as are in harmony with
each man's nature.  Therefore, men in so far as they live in obedience to reason, necessarily
live always in harmony one with another. Q.E.D.

Corollary I - There is no individual thing in nature, which is  more useful to man, than a
man who lives in obedience to reason. For that  thing is to man most useful, which is most
in harmony with his nature  (IV:xxxi.Coroll.); that is, obviously, man. But man acts absolutely
according to the laws of his nature, when he lives in obedience to reason  (III:Def.ii.), and
to this extent only is always necessarily in harmony  with the nature of another man (by the
last Prop.); wherefore among  individual things nothing is more useful to man, than a man who
lives in  obedience to reason. Q.E.D.

Corollary II.- As every man seeks most that which is useful to him, so are  men most useful
one to another. For the more a man seeks what is useful to  him and endeavours to preserve
himself, the more is he endowed with virtue  (IV:xx.), or, what is the same thing (IV:Def.viii.),
the more is he endowed  with power to act according to the laws of his own nature, that is
to live  in obedience to reason. But men are most in natural harmony, when they live  in obedience
to reason (by the last Prop.); therefore (by the foregoing  Coroll.) men will be most useful
one to another, when each seeks most that  which is useful to him. Q.E.D.

Note.- What we have just shown is attested by experience so conspicuously,  that it is in the
mouth of nearly everyone: "Man is to man a God." Yet it  rarely happens that men live in obedience
to reason, for things are so  ordered among them, that they are generally envious and troublesome
one to  another. Nevertheless they are scarcely able to lead a solitary life,  so that the
definition of man as a social animal has met with general  assent; in fact, men do derive from
social life much more convenience than  injury. Let satirists then laugh their fill at human
affairs, let  theologians rail, and let misanthropes praise to their utmost the life of  untutored
rusticity, let them heap contempt on men and praises on beasts;  when all is said, they will
find that men can provide for their wants much  more easily by mutual help, and that only by
uniting their forces can they  escape from the dangers that on every side beset them: not to
say how much  more excellent and worthy of our knowledge it is, to study the actions of  men
than the actions of beasts. But I will treat of this more at  length elsewhere.

Prop. XXXVI. The highest good of those  who follow virtue is common to all,  and therefore
all can equally rejoice  therein.

Proof.- To act virtuously is to act in obedience with reason (IV:xxiv.),  and whatsoever we
endeavour to do in obedience to reason is to understand  (IV:xxvi.); therefore (IV:xxviii.)
the highest good for those who follow  after virtue is to know God; that is (II:xlvii.&Note)
a good which is  common to all and can be possessed. by all men equally, in so far as they
are of the same nature. Q.E.D.

Note.- Someone may ask how it would be, if the highest good of those who  follow after virtue
were not common to all? Would it not then follow, as  above (IV:xxxiv.), that men living in
obedience to reason, that is  (IV:xxxv.), men in so far as they agree in nature, would be at
variance  one with another? To such an inquiry, I make answer, that it follows not  accidentally
but from the very nature of reason, that main's highest good  is common to all, inasmuch as
it is deduced from the very essence of man,  in so far as defined by reason; and that a man
could neither be, nor be  conceived without the power of taking pleasure in this highest good.
For  it belongs to the essence of the human mind (II:xlvii.), to have an  adequate knowledge
of the eternal and infinite essence of God.

Prop. XXXVII. The good which every man,  who follows after virtue, desires for  himself he
will also desire for other  men, and so much the more, in proportion  as he has a greater knowledge
of God.

Proof.- Men, in so far as they live in obedience to reason, are most  useful to their fellow
men (IV:xxxv;Coroll.i.); therefore (IV:xix.),  we shall in obedience to reason necessarily
endeavour to bring about that  men should live in obedience to reason. But the good which every
man, in  so far as he is guided by reason, or, in other words, follows after virtue,  desires
for himself, is to understand (IV:xxvi.); wherefore the good, which  each follower of virtue
seeks for himself, he will desire also for others.  Again, desire, in so far as it is referred
to the mind, is the very  essence of the mind (Def. of the Emotions, i.); now the essence of
the  mind consists in knowledge (III:xi.), which involves the knowledge of God  (II:xlvii.),
and without it (I:xv.), can neither be, nor be conceived;  therefore, in proportion as the
mind's essence involves a greater knowledge  of God, so also will be greater the desire of
the follower of virtue, that  other men should possess that which he seeks as good for himself.
Q.E.D.

Another Proof.- The good, which a man desires for himself and loves, he  will love more constantly,
if he sees that others love it also (III:xxxi.);  he will therefore endeavour that others should
love it also; and as the  good in question is common to all, and therefore all can rejoice
therein,  he will endeavour, for the same reason, to bring about that all should  rejoice therein,
and this he will do the more (III:xxxvii.), in proportion  as his own enjoyment of the good
is greater.

