This threat, and the distance at which Hobgoblin kept from him for the rest of the way, alarmed
Wayland very much, and he suggested to his pretended sister that, on pretext of weariness,
she should express a desire to stop two or three miles short of the fair town of Warwick, promising
to rejoin the troop in the morning. A small village inn afforded them a resting-place, and
it was with secret pleasure that Wayland saw the whole party, including Dickon, pass on, after
a courteous farewell, and leave them behind.

"To-morrow, madam," he said to his charge, "we will, with your leave, again start early, and
reach Kenilworth before the rout which are to assemble there."

The Countess gave assent to the proposal of her faithful guide; but, somewhat to his surprise,
said nothing further on the subject, which left Wayland under the disagreeable uncertainty
whether or no she had formed any plan for her own future proceedings, as he knew her situation
demanded circumspection, although he was but imperfectly acquainted with all its peculiarities.
Concluding, however, that she must have friends within the castle, whose advice and assistance
she could safely trust, he supposed his task would be best accomplished by conducting her thither
in safety, agreeably to her repeated commands.

CHAPTER XXV.

     Hark, the bells summon, and the bugle calls,
     But she the fairest answers not--the tide
     Of nobles and of ladies throngs the halls,
     But she the loveliest must in secret hide.
     What eyes were thine, proud Prince, which in the gleam
     Of yon gay meteors lost that better sense,
     That o'er the glow-worm doth the star esteem,
     And merit's modest blush o'er courtly insolence?
     --THE GLASS SLIPPER.

The unfortunate Countess of Leicester had, from her infancy upwards, been treated by those
around her with indulgence as unbounded as injudicious. The natural sweetness of her disposition
had saved her from becoming insolent and ill-humoured; but the caprice which preferred the
handsome and insinuating Leicester before Tressilian, of whose high honour and unalterable
affection she herself entertained so firm an opinion--that fatal error, which ruined the happiness
of her life, had its origin in the mistaken kindness; that had spared her childhood the painful
but most necessary lesson of submission and self-command. From the same indulgence it followed
that she had only been accustomed to form and to express her wishes, leaving to others the
task of fulfilling them; and thus, at the most momentous period of her life, she was alike
destitute of presence of mind, and of ability to form for herself any reasonable or prudent
plan of conduct. 

"Oh, if you could!" said Sally, mournfully.
"It cannot be; it is not to be," he said again, as if to convince
himself. "No such thing is to be thought of. Tell me, Sally, have
you tried to keep up the cheerful side of things to her,--have you?" Overlooking every intermediate consideration, she had
only desired to be at Kenilworth, and to approach her husband's presence; and now, when she
was in the vicinity of both, a thousand considerations arose at once upon her mind, startling
her with accumulated doubts and dangers, some real, some imaginary, and all exalted and exaggerated
by a situation alike helpless and destitute of aid and counsel.

A sleepless night rendered her so weak in the morning that she was altogether unable to attend
Wayland's early summons. The trusty guide became extremely distressed on the lady's account,
and somewhat alarmed on his own, and was on the point of going alone to Kenilworth, in the
hope of discovering Tressilian, and intimating to him the lady's approach, when about nine
in the morning he was summoned to attend her. He found her dressed, and ready for resuming
her journey, but with a paleness of countenance which alarmed him for her health. She intimated
her desire that the horses might be got instantly ready, and resisted with impatience her guide's
request that she would take some refreshment before setting forward. "I have had," she said,
"a cup of water--the wretch who is dragged to execution needs no stronger cordial, and that
may serve me which suffices for him. Do as I command you." Wayland Smith still hesitated. "What
would you have?" said she. "Have I not spoken plainly?"

"Yes, madam," answered Wayland; "but may I ask what is your further purpose? I only wish to
know, that I may guide myself by your wishes. The whole country is afloat, and streaming towards
the Castle of Kenilworth. It will be difficult travelling thither, even if we had the necessary
passports for safe-conduct and free admittance; unknown and unfriended, we may come by mishap.
Your ladyship will forgive my speaking my poor mind--were we not better try to find out the
maskers, and again join ourselves with them?" The Countess shook her head, and her guide proceeded,
"Then I see but one other remedy."

"Speak out, then," said the lady, not displeased, perhaps, that he should thus offer the advice
which she was ashamed to ask; "I believe thee faithful--what wouldst thou counsel?"

"That I should warn Master Tressilian," said Wayland, "that you are in this place. I am right
certain he would get to horse with a few of Lord Sussex's followers, and ensure your personal
safety."

"And is it to ME you advise," said the Countess, "to put myself under the protection of Sussex,
the unworthy rival of the noble Leicester?" Then, seeing the surprise with which Wayland stared
upon her, and afraid of having too strongly intimated her interest in Leicester, she added,
"And for Tressilian, it must not be--mention not to him, I charge you, my unhappy name; it
would but double MY misfortunes, and involve HIM in dangers beyond the power of rescue." She
paused; but when she observed that Wayland continued to look on her with that anxious and uncertain
gaze which indicated a doubt whether her brain was settled, she assumed an air of composure,
and added, "Do thou but guide me to Kenilworth Castle, good fellow, and thy task is ended,
since I will then judge what further is to be done. He rose and offered his hand to Moses, who
took it in gloomy silence, without a smile or word.

"'My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord,'" said Mr.
Sewell.

"I cannot bear that sort of thing," said Moses abruptly,
and almost fiercely. "Not," he said, "that I am above your kindness, madam, being
but a poor fellow, who have been forced, God help me! to live by worse shifts than the bounty
of such a person as you. But, as my old master the farrier used to say to his customers, 'No
cure, no pay.' We are not yet in Kenilworth Castle, and it is time enough to discharge your
guide, as they say, when you take your boots off. I trust in God your ladyship is as well assured
of fitting reception when you arrive, as you may hold yourself certain of my best endeavours
to conduct you thither safely. I go to get the horses; meantime, let me pray you once more,
as your poor physician as well as guide, to take some sustenance."

"I will--I will," said the lady hastily. "Begone, begone instantly!--It is in vain I assume
audacity," said she, when he left the room; "even this poor groom sees through my affectation
of courage, and fathoms the very ground of my fears."

She then attempted to follow her guide's advice by taking some food, but was compelled to desist,
as the effort to swallow even a single morsel gave her so much uneasiness as amounted well-nigh
to suffocation. A moment afterwards the horses appeared at the latticed window. The lady mounted,
and found that relief from the free air and change of place which is frequently experienced
in similar circumstances.

