The army of Boulogne was composed of about one hundred and fifty thousand infantry and ninety
thousand cavalry, divided into four principal camps, the camp of the right wing, the camp of
the left wing, the camp of Wimereux, and the camp of Ambleteuse.

His Majesty the Emperor had his headquarters at Pont de Briques; thus named, I was told, because
the brick foundations of an old camp of Caesar's had been discovered there.  The Pont de Briques,
as I have said above, is about half a league from Boulogne; and the headquarters of his Majesty
were established in the only house of the place which was then habitable, and guarded by a
detachment of the cavalry of the Imperial Guard.

The four camps were on a very high cliff overlooking the sea, so situated that in fine weather
the coast of England could be seen.

In the camp on the right they had established barracks for the Emperor, Admiral Bruix, Marshal
Soult, and Decres, who was then minister of the navy.

The Emperor's barrack was constructed under the direction of Sordi, engineer, performing the
functions of engineer-in-chief of military roads; and his nephew, Lecat de Rue, attached at
that time to the staff of Marshal Soult as aide-de-camp, has been kind enough to furnish me
with information which did not come within my province.

The Emperor's barrack was built of plank, like the booths of a country fair; with this difference,
that the planks were neatly planed, and painted a grayish white.  In form it was a long square,
having at each end two pavilions of semicircular shape.  A fence formed of wooden lattice inclosed
this barrack, which was lighted on the outside by lamps placed four feet apart, and the windows
were placed laterally.  The pavilion next to the sea consisted of three rooms and a hall, the
principal room, used as a council-chamber, being decorated with silver- gray paper.  On the
ceiling were painted golden clouds, in the midst of which appeared, upon the blue vault of
the sky, an eagle holding the lightning, and guided towards England by a star, the guardian
star of the Emperor.  In the middle of this chamber was a large oval table with a plain cover
of green cloth; and before this table was placed only his Majesty's armchair, which could be
taken to pieces, and was made of natural wood, unpainted, and covered with green morocco stuffed
with hair, while upon the table was a boxwood writing-desk.  This was the entire furniture
of the council-chamber, in which his Majesty alone could be seated.  The generals stood before
him, and had during these councils, which sometimes lasted three or four hours, no other support
than the handles of their sabers.

The council-chamber was entered from a hall.  On the right of this hall was his Majesty's bedroom,
which had a glass door, and was lighted by a window which looked out upon the camp of the right
wing, while the sea could be seen on the left.  In this room was the Emperor's iron bed, with
a large curtain of plain green sarsenet fastened to the ceiling by a gilded copper ring; and
upon this bed were two mattresses, one made of hair, two bolsters, one at the head, the other
at the foot, no pillow, and two coverlets, one of white cotton, the other of green sarsenet,
wadded and quilted; by the side of the bed two very simple folding-seats, and at the window
short curtains of green sarsenet.

This room was papered with rose-colored paper, stamped with a pattern in lace-work, with an
Etruscan border.

Opposite the-bedroom was a similar chamber, in which was a peculiar kind of telescope which
had cost twelve thousand francs.  This instrument was about four feet long, and about a foot
in diameter, and was mounted on a mahogany support, with three feet, the box in which it was
kept being almost in the shape of a piano.  In the same room, upon two stools, was a little
square chest, which contained three complete suits and the linen which formed the campaign
wardrobe of his Majesty.  Above this was a single extra hat, lined with white satin, and much
the worse for wear; for the Emperor, as I shall say later in speaking of his personal peculiarities,
having a very tender scalp, did not like new hats, and wore the same a long time.

The main body of the imperial barrack was divided into three rooms, a saloon, a vestibule,
and a grand dining-room, which communicated with the kitchens by a passage parallel to that
I have just mentioned.  Outside the barrack, and connected with the kitchen, was a little shed,
covered with thatch, which served as a washroom, and which was also used as a butler's pantry.

The barrack of Admiral Bruix was arranged like that of the Emperor, but on a smaller scale.

Near this barrack was the semaphore of the signals, a sort of marine telegraph by which the
fleet was maneuvered.  A little farther on was the Tour d'Ordre, with a powerful battery composed
of six mortars, six howitzers, and twelve twenty-four pounders.

These six mortars, the largest that had ever been made, were six inches thick, used forty-five
pounds of powder at a charge, and threw bombs fifteen hundred toises [A toise is six feet,
and a league is three miles] in the air, and a league and a half out to sea, each bomb thrown
costing the state three hundred francs.  To fire one of these fearful machines they used port-fires
twelve feet long; and the cannoneer protected himself as best he could by bowing his head between
his legs, and, not rising until after the shot was fired.  The Emperor decided to fire the
first bomb himself.

To the right of the headquarters battery was the barrack of Marshal Soult, which was constructed
in imitation of the but of a savage, and covered with thatch down to the ground, with glass
in the top, and a door through which.  you descended into the rooms, which were dug out like
cellars.  The principal chamber was round; and in it was a large work- table covered with green
cloth, and surrounded with small leather folding-chairs.

The last barrack was that of Decres, minister of the navy, which was furnished like that of
Marshal Soult.  From his barrack the Emperor could observe all the maneuvers at sea; and the
telescope, of which I have spoken, was so good that Dover Castle, with its garrison, was, so
to speak, under the very eyes of his Majesty.  The camp of the right wing, situated upon the
cliff, was divided into streets, each of which bore the name of some distinguished general;
and this cliff bristled with batteries from Cologne to Ambleteuse, a distance of more than
two leagues.

In order to go from Boulogne to the camp of the right wing, there was only one road, which
began in the Rue des Vieillards, and passed over the cliff, between the barrack of his Majesty
and those of Bruix, Soult, and Decres, so that if at low tide the Emperor wished to go down
upon the beach, a long detour was necessary.  One day when he was complaining greatly of this,
it occurred to Bonnefoux, maritime prefect of Boulogne, to apply to Sordi, engineer of military
roads, and ascertain if it was not possible to remedy this great inconvenience.

The engineer replied that it was feasible to provide a road for his Majesty directly from his
barrack to the beach; but that in view of the great height of the cliff it would be necessary
to moderate the rapidity of the descent by making the road zigzag.  "Make it as you wish,"
said the Emperor, "only let it be ready for use in three days."  The skillful engineer went
to work, and in three days and three nights the road was constructed of stone, bound together
with iron clamps; and the Emperor, charmed with so much diligence and ingenuity, had the name
of Sordi placed on the list for the next distribution of the cross of the Legion of Honor,
but, owing to the shameful negligence of some one, the name of this man of talent was overlooked.
The port of Boulogne contained about seventeen hundred vessels, such as flatboats, sloops,
turkish boats, gunboats, prairies, mortar-boats, etc.; and the entrance to the port was defended
by an enormous chain, and by four forts, two on the right, and two on the left.

Fort Husoir, placed on the left, was armed with three formidable batteries ranged one above
the other, the lower row bearing twenty-four pounders, the second and third, thirty-six pounders.
On the right of this fort was the revolving bridge, and behind this bridge an old tower called
Castle Croi, ornamented with batteries which were both handsome and effective.  To the left,
about a quarter of a league from Fort Musoir, was Fort La Creche, projecting boldly into the
sea, constructed of cut stone, and crowned by a terrible battery; and finally, on the right
of Fort La Creche, was the Fort en Bois, perfectly manned, and pierced by a large opening which
was uncovered at low tide.

Upon the cliff to the left of the town, at nearly the same elevation as the other, was the
camp of the left wing.  Here was situated the barrack of Prince Joseph, at that time colonel
of the Fourth Regiment of the line; this barrack was covered with thatch.  Below the camp,
at the foot of the cliff, the Emperor had a basin hollowed out, in which work a part of the
troops were employed.

It was in this basin that one day a young soldier of the Guard, who had stuck in the mud up
to his knees, tried with all his strength to pull out his wheelbarrow, which was even worse
mired than himself; but he could not succeed, and covered with sweat, swore and stormed like
an angry grenadier.  By chance lifting his eyes, he suddenly perceived the Emperor, who was
passing by the works on his way to visit his brother Joseph in the camp on the left.  The soldier
looked at him with a beseeching air and gesture, singing in a most sentimental tone, "Come,
oh, come, to my aid."  His Majesty could not help smiling, and made signs to the soldier to
approach, which the poor fellow did, after extricating himself with great difficulty.  "What
is your regiment"--"Sire, the First of the Guard."--"How long have you been a soldier?"--"Since
you have been Emperor, Sire."--"Indeed, that is not a long time!  It is not long enough for
me to make you an officer, is it?  But conduct yourself well, and I will have you made sergeant-major.
After that, the cross and epaulets on the first battlefield.  Are you content?"--"Yes, Sire."--"Chief
of Staff," continued the Emperor, addressing General Berthier, "take the name of this young
man.  You will give him three hundred francs to clean his pantaloons and repair his wheelbarrow."
And his Majesty rode on in the midst of the acclamations of the soldiers.

At the inside extremity of the port, there was a wooden bridge which they called the Service
bridge.  The powder magazines were behind it, containing an immense amount of ammunition; and
after nightfall no one was allowed to go upon this bridge without giving the countersign to
the second sentinel, for the first always allowed him to pass.  He was not allowed to pass
back again, however; for if any person entering the bridge was ignorant of the countersign,
or had happened to forget it, he was stopped by the second sentinel, and the first sentinel
at the head of the bridge had express orders to pass his bayonet through the body of the rash
man if he was unable to answer the questions of this last sentinel. These rigorous precautions
were rendered necessary by the vicinity of these terrible powder magazines, which a single
spark might blow up, and with it the town, the fleet, and the two camps.

