How the race moves on is shown in the famous tale of a saintly Zen priest which I first heard
in that little hill inn but was afterwards to see in dramatic form on the stage of a Tokyo
theatre. An unmarried girl in the village in which the priest's temple was situated was about
to have a child. She would not confess to her angry father the name of her lover. At last she
attributed her condition to the greatly honoured priest. Her father was astonished but he was
also glad that his daughter was in the favour of so eminent a man. So he went to the priest
and said that he brought him good tidings: the girl whom he had deigned to notice was about
to have a child. The father went on to express at length his sense of obligation to the priest
for the honour done to his family. All the priest said in reply was, So desuka? (Is that so?)
Soon after the birth of the child the girl besought her father to marry her to a certain young
farmer. The father, proud of the association with the priest, refused. Finally the girl told
her parent that it was not the priest but the young farmer who was the father of her child.
The parent was aghast and chagrined as he recalled the terms in which he had addressed the
saintly man. He betook himself at once to the temple and expressed in many words his feelings
of shame and deep contrition. The priest heard him out, but all he said was, So desuka?

Yamagata signifies "shape of a mountain" and Akita means "autumn rice field." Although Akita
prefecture is mountainous there is a greater proportion of level land in it than in Yamagata.
I find "Rice, rice, rice" written in my notebook. An agricultural expert gave me to understand
that fifteen per cent. of the farmers were probably living on rents or on the dividends of
silk factories, that 55 or 60 per cent. were of the middle grade with an annual income of 300
yen, that 25 or 30 per cent. had about 150 yen--the lowest sum on which a family could be supported--and
that there were 3 or 4 per cent. of farm labourers who earned less than 150 yen. There had
been much paddy adjustment and the prefecture was spending 300,000 yen a year for the encouragement
of adjustment and the opening of new paddies. In the case of newly opened fields, tenants had
contracts, but ordinary tenancies were by word of mouth generation after generation. A great
deal of agricultural instruction was given by the prefecture, the counties and the villages,
and in 30 years the rice crop had been doubled although the area had remained about the same.
In order to secure help in the work of rural amelioration a gathering of Buddhist priests and
another of Shinto priests had been lectured to at the prefectural office. Nearly 300,000 yen
had been spent in twelve months on afforestation. The following year a special effort was to
be made to spend 500,000 yen. A society raised young trees and sold them at cheap rates to
farmers. Every young men's association in the prefecture had land and had planted trees. It
was in Akita that I first saw peat in Japan. There are said to be 7,000 acres of it in the country.

The prefecture of Aomori forms the northern tip of the mainland. Apart from its enormous forest
area and the railroad stacks of sawn lumber, what caught my eye were the apple orchards and
the number of farmers on horseback or seated in wagons. Who that has been in Japan has not
a memory of narrow winding roads along which men and women and young people are pulling and
pushing carts? Here many farming folk rode. I was told that Akita produced apples and potatoes
to the value of a million yen each and that there were ten co-operative apple societies. Much
of the fruit went to Russia.

Having passed through the city of Aomori we started to come down the east coast. To say "Take back
what you gave me," is no less a reproach than to say "You are in my debt." Let this be the first
privilege of a benefit, that he who bestowed it may choose the time when he will have it returned.
"But I fear that men may speak ill of me." You do wrong if you are grateful only for the sake
of your reputation, and not to satisfy your conscience. You have in this matter two judges, your
benefactor, whom you ought not, and yourself, whom you cannot deceive.

 Boats came from Hokkaido and stole cattle from the
prefecture to the number of a hundred a year. Sometimes horses were taken too, but horse thefts
were rare "because you cannot kill a horse and sell it for meat." The average price of a two-year-old
not thus illicitly vended was 70 yen. (It was a little less in the next prefecture of Iwate
and in Hokkaido.) Half of the stallions belonging to the "Bureau of Horse Politics" of the
Ministry of Agriculture were bought in Aomori.

The farmers by the lake that we passed on our way south were described as "very poor," for
their soil was barren and their climate bad. Their crops were only a third of what could be
raised in another part of the prefecture. The agriculture of all the prefectures through which
I now journeyed south to Tokyo suffer from the cold temperature of the sea. The east-coast
temperature drops in winter to 7 degrees below freezing.[167] "Living is more and more difficult,"
said someone to me. "The number of tenants increases because farmers get into debt and have
to sell their land. Millet and buckwheat are much eaten. Although the temperature is 5 per
cent. colder in Hokkaido, the people do worse here because our soil is barren and there is
no profitable winter occupation like lumbering. Only 10 per cent. of the rural population save
anything. In bad times 65 per cent. of the families get into debt."

At Morioka in Iwate prefecture I visited the excellent higher agricultural college, where there
were 300 students. The competition for places, as at every educational institution in Japan,
was keen. The number who sat at the last entrance examinations--the average age was twenty--was
317, of whom only 80 got in. There were 15 professors and 10 assistants. The charge to students
was 300 yen for a year of ten months. The annual cost of the college to the Government was
70,000 yen. Of the foreign volumes among the 20,000 books in the library 50 per cent. were
German, 30 per cent. English and 20 per cent. American.

An apiary of a single skep in a roped-off enclosure was an illustration of unfamiliarity with
bees. It seemed strange to find that in this up-to-date and efficient institution the biggest
implement for cutting grass which was in use, a sickle of course, had a blade no longer than
8 inches. Hung up at the back of a shed I noticed a rusty scythe. When I tried to show what
it could do it was suggested that the implement was "too heavy, too difficult and too dangerous."

Iwate is the poorest of the northern prefectures, for bad weather so often comes when the rice
is in flower. As many as 40 per cent. of the people were just making ends meet. Another 40
per cent. were always dogged by poverty. Millet was the food of 10 per cent. of the farmers;
millet, salted vegetables and bean soup were the meagre diet of 5 per cent; the staple food
of the remainder was barley and rice. There are few temples in Iwate compared with the rest
of Japan. "Education is more backward than in other prefectures," someone said. "The farmers
are not able. Too much saké is drunk." Farmers come in to Morioka to sell charcoal and wood
and I saw some of them turning into the saké shops.

There was talk in praise of millet. Though low socially in the dietary of Japan, it has merits.
It withstands cold and even salt spray. It ripens earlier than rice and so may sometimes be
harvested before a spell of bad weather. It yields well, it will store for some time, its taste
is "little inferior to rice and better than that of barley" and it contains more protein than
rice. It is cooked after slight polishing and the straw provides fodder. "In the north-east,
where millet is most eaten," I was told, "there are people who are 5 ft. 10 ins. to 6 ft. and
there are many wrestlers." The seeds in the handsome heavy ears of millet are about the size
of the letter O in the footnote type of this book.

In the train a farmer who knew the prefecture spoke of Bon songs and dances: "The result of
the action against them was not good. The meeting of young men and women at the Bon gatherings
was in their minds half the year in prospect and half in retrospect. Bearing in mind the condition
of the people, even the worst Bon songs are not objectionable. But when the people become educated
some songs will be objectionable."

Visitors to a poor prefecture like Miyagi must be surprised to see so much adjusted paddy.
There is more adjusted paddy in Miyagi than in any other prefecture. Some 90,000 acres have
been taken in hand and a large amount of money has been spent. The work has been carried out
largely by way of giving wages to farmers during famine. A new tunnel brought water to 6,000
acres. "The bad climate of Miyagi cannot be mended," I was told; "all that can be done is to
seek for the earliest varieties of rice, to sow early, to work as diligently as possible and
to deal with floods by embanking the rivers and by tree planting." As many as 7,000 people
go from Miyagi to Hokkaido in a year. It seems to point to a certain amount of fecklessness
that 15 per cent. of them return.

One man I spoke with during my journey south gave a vivid impression of the influence of young
men's associations. "Before they started," said he, "the young men spent their time in singing
indecent songs, in gambling, in talking foolishly, and twice or thrice a year in immorality.
A young widow has sometimes been at fault; the parents-in-law need her help and village sentiment
is against her remarriage. The suppression of Bon dances has done more harm than good by keeping
out of sight what used to be said and done openly[168]. Two or three priests are active in
this prefecture. Where the Shinshu sect is strong you will find little divorce. But the influence
of Buddhism has been stationary in recent years. There is some action by missionaries of the
Japanese Christian church, but the number of Christians among real rustics is very small."

At Sendai it was pleasant to see a prefectural office--or most of it--housed in a Japanese
building instead of a dreadful edifice "in Western style." In feudal times the building was
a school. Portraits of daimyos and famous scholars of the Sendai clan surround the Governor's
room, and adjoining it is the tatami-covered apartment in which the daimyo used to sit when
he was present at the examinations. Among the portraits is one of a retainer which was painted
in Rome, where he had been sent on a mission of inquiry.

