This book is a record of the personal
          observations of a private soldier in the Flash
          Ranging Service of the American Expeditionary
          Forces in France. It not only relates his
          experiences while in France, but also tells of
          going over and returning. In brief, it is a
          soldier's story from the time he left America to
          help crush the autocracy of Germany, until he
          returned again after fighting was over.

Contents

Chapter                                                      Page

   I. Going Over                                                1

  II. Our First Glimpse of France                              10

 III. From Brest to Langres                                    18

  IV. Nearing the Front                                        29

   V. Preparation for Battle                                   37

  VI. The Great St. Mihiel Drive                               42

 VII. Gassed                                                   54

VIII. Hospital Experiences                                     63

  IX. Home Again                                               72

In the Flash Ranging Service

By Private Edward Alva Trueblood

Chapter I.

Going Over.

When the sun arose on the 22nd of June, 1918, three great transports were lying out in the
stream of New York harbor. They were filled with American soldiers for duties overseas. They
were well camouflaged and well convoyed. The previous afternoon they had pulled away from a
Jersey City pier, where they had taken on their human cargoes, and they were undoubtedly under
sealed orders. They had slipped away quietly from the piers without attracting undue attention,
and while they moved to the location where they anchored for the night, not a soldier's uniform
could have been detected from shore even after the most scrutinizing search with the best binoculars
obtainable. The departure was made without a word of warning and not a fond good-bye. It was
accomplished with a methodical silence that called for admiration. It is the way Uncle Sam
does things during war times.

Just before 9 o'clock on that beautiful June morning, simultaneously but without communicating
with each other, each of those transports began to weigh anchor, and except for the click,
click, click of the machinery all was silent. Precisely at 9:05, without the blast of a whistle,
the sound of a gong, or the hoisting of a signal flag on the mast, but like so many automatic
machines, these vessels turned their prows to the sea and began their long voyage.

Among those who sailed on one of the vessels of this transport fleet were the members of the
Twenty-ninth Engineers, A. E. F., of which I was a member, being attached to Company C. Our
departure was an occasion never to be forgotten.

As we glided out of the great harbor and saw first the Statue of Liberty, then all trace of
our native land disappear from sight, and we realized that we were on our way to fight the
most savage, inhuman and despicable foe that has ever drawn a lance, a feeling of solemn thoughtfulness
came over most of the boys. Many of them were so affected, as they knew a certain percentage
of us must inevitably fall in battle, that they went below to spend a few hours by themselves
in serious thought. I am not ashamed to say that I was one of those who sought solace for my
feelings in thoughtful solitude.

The vessel upon which we sailed was an Italian transport, by name, the "King of Italy." It
was accompanied by a French and a former German liner and was convoyed by a destroyer and a
cruiser. On the second day out we picked up four more transports, making seven in all in our fleet.

There were 1,500 American soldiers on our transport and approximately the same on four of the
other transports. Two of them, however, carried more than 3,500 men, making a total of about
15,000 men on that one fleet bound for duty overseas. Of the 1,500 men on the King of Italy,
500 were white and 1,000 colored troops. No trouble was caused by this mixture of races because
of good management. The white and colored boys were kept on different parts of the boat and
all guard duty was in the hands of the white troops.

For the first few hours after sailing, thoughts of home lingered in the minds of most of the
boys, but these were hastily banished when we had our first life drill. This took place at
2 o'clock on our first day out. The drill was a thorough one, and it soon became apparent to
most of the boys that even if we should be torpedoed by a submarine while going across, our
troops would have no difficulty in getting away from the boat before it took its final plunge
toward the bottom of the sea. In the life drill, every man had his place. He was assigned to
a certain boat and could take no other. The lower decks were emptied first, and then those
above, one at a time. I was bunked on the fifth deck, hence, as the liner had six decks, would
have been among the last to leave the ship, in case of disaster.

The object of the life drill, of course, was to make it possible to empty the boat of troops
quickly and in military order in the event that the boat became a submarine victim. Every man
was instructed at the sound of the alarm to go to his bunk and stand there until given further
orders. In the meantime, he was to put on his life belt. The boys marched out to the life boats
only when they received orders from their superiors to do so. After a few drills, we mastered
the manoeuver and it would have been possible for us to have emptied that boat of 1,500 soldiers
in twelve minutes, if such action had been necessary.

We had life drills two or three times a day all the way across. The signal for the drill was
four siren blasts, and when we heard those blasts, there was a lively time on deck for a few
minutes, until the ship, in theory, had been abandoned.

American people, who believe in giving their soldiers the right kind of treatment, and particularly
wholesome food, would have been righteously indignant, if they could have known how poorly
we were fed while on that transport. Granting, for the sake of the argument, that the Bible was
given originally by infallible divine dictation, yet the men who wrote down the message were
fallible; the men who copied it were fallible; the men who translated it (some of it twice
over, first from Hebrew to Greek, and then from Greek to English) were fallible; and the editors,
who from the scores of manuscripts, by their personal comparison and decisions between the conflicting
readings, patched together our present text, were most fallible. To any who have weak stomachs,
I suggest that they skip over the next two or three pages, as the details may nauseate them.

The kitchens and mess rooms of the transport were on the top deck. Meal tickets were issued
to the men, and when they went to mess, the tickets were punched. This is the way the Government
kept track of the number of meals served, as these tickets were collected when we left the
boat. The white men were fed first, and the colored troopers afterwards. This was done so as
to keep free of any possibility of racial trouble, and apparently it worked well.

After the second day out, our "chow," which is the soldier's name for food of all kinds, was
vile. It consisted largely of spoiled beef and such foods as spoiled rabbits. When I say spoiled,
I mean just what the word implies. These rabbits were positively in a state of decay. They
had been in cold storage for a long time, evidently a very long time. They had been carried
in the ice boxes without being drawn, and when exposed to the air the odor of decay was so
strong that they were positively nauseating. I saw strong men turn exceedingly sick just from
the stench, and I do not believe it is an exaggeration to say that there was more upset stomachs
on that trip from the decaying rabbits that were given us to eat than from the action of the sea.

The beef that we were given consisted of only the poorest and toughest parts. The good cuts
went to the mess for the army officers and for the officers and crew of the ship. The potatoes
that we were fed were the poorest that I have ever seen. They were served about half cooked,
and were small, wet, soggy and unpalatable. It was seldom that a potato fit to eat was given
to the men. We received rice several times, but it was only about half cooked. During one meal
we were given bologne sausage, and after some of the boys had eaten their allotment, the discovery
was made that the sausage was full of maggots. The soup was like water with neither flavor
nor body. The bread served was Italian-French bread made with sour dough, and not at all palatable
to an American, who has been accustomed to sweet and wholesome bread. The coffee was of the
poorest quality--probably mostly chickory--and we were given neither milk nor sugar for it.
The result was that most of the boys did not touch their coffee at all. The only seasoning
given our food was an insufficiency of salt. Everything served was tasteless, unpalatable and
unwholesome.

That there was better food on the boat, we knew, for we could see it going to the officers'
tables. They were served chicken two or three times a week--the men never. Officers were given
fresh fruit at every meal--the men not at all. Officers were given palatable, sweet bread;
the men only when they would pay for it out of their own pockets and then at a big price.

It is my opinion that the owners of the boat on which I sailed made an enormous profit off
those meals served to the soldiers. Certainly the Government would not have given the soldiers
such unfit food. The Government is to blame to this extent, however, in not seeing that the
ship owners lived up to their contract to feed the men properly. There was a man on board who
was supposed to see that the men were given wholesome and nourishing food, but he failed absolutely
to perform his duty. Whether he was in the company's pay or simply negligent, I cannot say,
for I do not know. But it is a fact that he did not perform his duty and 1,500 men were fed
spoiled and unnourishing food as a result. Men who indulge in "graft" of this kind are no better
than traitors, and should be treated as such by the Government.

As a part of the uneatable diet we were given, numerous complaints were made. We were not long
in being told that we could purchase something in the way of wholesome food for ourselves,
if we had the money. This was done on the sly. We could purchase a palatable steak for $1.50
or $2, or we could get chops for about the same price. A chicken would cost about $4. All the
boys who had money were forced to buy food this way or go hungry. Many of the boys ate only
enough to keep them alive. Often two would go in together and buy a steak or a chicken, each
putting up half of the money. Even then, we could not get the food we wanted, as only a limited
quantity could be "sneaked" out.

We could buy sweet bread in the canteen on the boat for 25 cents a loaf, and a small loaf at
that. That was the only way we could get it. Sweet rolls, the kind that sell four for a nickle
at home, cost two for a nickle. Oranges, apples, bananas and other kinds of fruit cost 25 cents
each. Unable to eat the food in the mess room, most of the boys had to pay the exorbitant prices
asked at the canteen or go hungry.

We had no sugar at all. The Government must have provided a sugar ration for us, so my conclusion
is that it was stolen by someone in connection with the boat management and used in some form
of graft. Because it was necessary for them to buy so much of their food, all the boys who
had money with which they expected to buy things when they landed on the other side, were without
a penny when the boat docked.

Every afternoon between 2 and 3 o'clock, the Y. M. C. A. workers who were on the transport
came on deck and held song services. Many familiar hymns were sung. These meetings were very
popular at first, but gradually the fascination for them wore off, and toward the latter part
of the voyage they were but lightly attended.

The "Y" workers did promote one form of entertainment, however, that the boys thoroughly enjoyed.
This was boxing. Every afternoon several bouts would be held. Nearly every company had a fighter
and he was matched with the best man of some other company. Lively bouts of about three or
four rounds were fought. The colored soldiers took to this sport keenly and they furnished
some good contests among themselves. White men, however, were not permitted to box the colored
soldiers, as such a bout might have led to a racial difference. Members of the ship's crew
also wanted to partake in the sport and they furnished several bouts. The sailors, however,
were somewhat awkward at first, but they were game and they afforded us many a good laugh.
Those who had charge of the boxing never let a bout go to a knockout. When one man was apparently
getting the worst of it or was clearly outboxed, the bout would be stopped.

Very strict rules were issued on the boat with regard to lights at night. Every porthole was
closed, and every precaution taken so that not a gleam of light could be seen. The men were
warned that anyone who attempted to make a light would be shot on the spot. The fleet moved
along in the darkness at full speed ahead. That it did not meet with accident was due to excellent
management on the part of the Government.

All the boats in our fleet were camouflaged. The King of Italy had great irregular streaks
of black and white painted across it. One of the boats in our fleet had a really remarkable
picture of a sinking ship painted on its side. Another had two ships painted on its side and
was camouflaged to look like two vessels instead of one. While the camouflaged ships appeared
strange at first, we soon were used to the unusual appearance, and thought nothing of them.
A camouflaged vessel is visible to the naked eye, almost as plain as one that has not been
daubed with paint, but it is through the mirrors of a periscope that the camouflage is effective.
In reflecting the picture on the horizon, the mirrors lose some of the rays of light, so officers
explained to me, hence the eyes of the periscope are unable to detect the camouflage.

Our voyage passed pleasantly with smooth seas until the eleventh day, when the water was a
little choppy, and then for the first time some of the boys were a little sea sick.

It was my fortune to see our first and only brush with a submarine. It happened about 4 o'clock
in the morning on the twelfth day out. The sea was choppy and the night very dark and cold.
I was on guard duty on the sixth deck of our vessel, and I noticed unusual activity on the
part of the destroyers that were convoying our fleet. Our transport stopped dead still. In
a moment four shots were fired from the destroyer. I could see the fire from the gun plainly.
It was an exciting moment and the first real guns of war that I had ever heard. Depth bombs
were also dropped, then all was still again. All this happened without disturbing the men asleep
on our boat, and in the morning they were told that the transport had been attacked by submarines.
It was the belief that the destroyer had sunk one of the U-boats.

We were given orders on the twelfth day to sleep in our clothes with our life belts on during
the rest of the trip. This was issued so that there would be no delay in getting off the boat
if we were hit by a torpedo. That night, being unused to sleeping with clothes on, was a restless
one for most of us. The following night, however, notwithstanding the fact that we were fully
dressed, we slept well.

We were also joined on that day by a flotilla of destroyers. The sight of these boats was hailed
with joy, for we knew we were nearing land. We had not been informed, however, in what country
nor at what port we would land, but we had hoped that it would be France, and we soon learned
that our destination was France.

The torpedo boat flotilla that accompanied us during the last two days was made up mostly of
American and British destroyers, though there were two French boats among them. They made a
lively scene, and surely gave us great protection. If a speck would appear on the horizon,
two boats would be off to investigate it, and would return later to join the fleet. We were
also accompanied on the last day of the voyage by two airplanes as a further protection against
submarines.

We sighted land on the thirteenth day, and it was a welcome view. Everybody was happy and eager
to disembark. It was quite a contrast from the feeling that existed just after we left New
York harbor. We were a merry crowd as we entered the harbor of Brest and we were glad to see
a large city again. We disembarked at 3 o'clock in the afternoon. Before leaving the boat,
we were given "leaving rations," which consisted of a loaf of sour bread, a can of bully beef
and a small piece of cheese. This was given to us because we had a long march ahead and our
kitchens would not be in place for several hours. We were taken off the transport on barges
built especially for that purpose. We were then marched to the Napoleon Barracks, built by
the Emperor Napoleon, eight miles from Brest, and were glad to put our feet on land again,
even though the march was a long one after a thirteen day sea voyage. We had only a passing
glimpse of Brest, but did not mind that as we knew we would have opportunity to visit the city
later.

CHAPTER II.

Our First Glimpse of France

At Brest, the American soldiers got their first idea of the magnitude of the work that the
American Government was doing in the prosecution of the war. Prior to our arrival there we
had heard a great deal about the construction work in French ports that the Americans had undertaken,
but our ideas of just what this work was, were more or less vague. At Brest we saw just what
it was. We saw miles of concrete piers that had been built in record-breaking time with American
skill, American speed and American thoroughness. This work was a revelation to all France,
and the magnitude of the task, together with the remarkably short time in which it was completed,
stamp it as one of the wonders of the war and as a lasting tribute to American ingenuity and
efficiency. These piers and warehouses of American construction played a great part in ending
the war, for they enabled the American Government not only to land millions of troops in France,
but to provide adequate food, ammunition, guns and other necessary supplies for these men.
Nothing like it had ever been done before in the history of the world.

Soon after we left the boat at Brest, the men were lined up on the pier and given a sensible
and appreciated address by the Commanding Officer. He told us that now more than ever before,
since we were upon foreign soil, orders were to be obeyed to the letter. I had sense enough to
release Moira's hand the moment I felt the drag of her body, and then, before I quite knew what
had happened. I found I was whirling along in the mud, cavorting down the side of something that looked,
or felt--for I couldn't see, as I've already stated--very much like the edge of a precipice.
I brought up, just when I was beginning to wonder how much further I had to fall, by colliding
with something that felt very like a hedge of brambles.


After this interesting advice was received we swung into squad right and our first march on
French territory began. We first marched more than a mile through the railroad yards in Brest.
These were all of American construction. We saw miles of warehouses, filled with various kinds
of material of war and great quantities of food, not only for the American soldiers, but for
the civilians of France as well. These warehouses were of wooden construction, and so different
in design and material from other buildings in Brest that we recognized at once that they were
built by Yankees. For this reason, we greeted them as friends; it was like looking upon a familiar
scene.

Most everything else, however, that met our eyes had a decidedly foreign look. The railroad
trains in the yards were French, and entirely different from those of this country. The freight
cars have a diminutive look. They are only about half the size of American cars and they rest
upon single trucks. The locomotives are much smaller than ours and have brass boilers. We did
not see anything of the familiar dark red American box car and the giant American locomotives
until we got into the interior of France.

We passed many peasant women and children while we were marching through the railroad yards.
Some of them were offering cakes and nuts for sale, others were begging white bread from us.
It was here that we first heard those two French words that became so familiar to us before
we left France, "Donnez moi." It was "donnez moi" this and "donnez moi" that, especially from
the children who begged cigarettes, pennies, and anything else that the American boys might
have to give away.

Brest is built on hills, some of which rise abruptly and give a picturesque look to the old
city. As we marched through the residence part of the city, the women from the windows gave
us a hearty welcome, waving flags and calling "Vive les Amerique." Our march took us over a
winding roadway through the district where the poorer classes lived and we did not get a view
of the more attractive parts of the city on our arrival. The street we marched along was paved
with broken rock and was in excellent condition; it was crossed several times by overhead railroad
tracks built on massive arches of masonry.

Our first impressions are rather difficult to describe because everything had such different
appearance from familiar things in America. One noticeable feature was the character of the
construction. The buildings are of stone or some other such inflammable material, with roofs
of slate or tile. There are no frame buildings, except those that have been constructed by
Americans since April, 1917.

The dress and the habits of the people differ materially from those of America. Most of the
lower classes wear sabots, or wooden shoes. Some wear sabots with leather tops. But few, if
any, all leather shoes are in use among the lower classes. While all shades and colors of clothes
were worn by children, we noticed that the women were nearly all dressed in black. This, we
believed to be because they had lost relatives in the war, and we later found that our conclusion
was the correct one. Among the poorer classes the men wear large loosely fitting trousers and
tight jackets. They wear a peculiar hat, with a tightly fitting crown, a broad round brim,
and two streamers of black ribbon about eighteen inches long hanging down in back. The middle
classes dress more like Americans, though not with as well made clothes as one is accustomed
to see in this country.

After marching about five miles, we were given a rest in an open field in the outskirts of
Brest. Here we were again addressed by an officer and cautioned to be careful about coming
in contact with the French people, and particularly with the women and children of the lower
classes. We were informed that the lower classes of women and the peasant children are nearly
all syphylitic, especially in seaport towns. This sent a shudder through us, for we had already
been fondling some of the French children, before we realized the necessity for caution. The
warning was heeded and thereafter the boys kept the peasants at a distance.

As we resumed our march, we began to get into a cultivated district. The rolling land along
the roadway was cut up into small farms ranging in size from a half acre to about two and a
half acres. The boundary lines of these farms were hedges; there were no fences, such as we
have in America. The land was planted to truck gardens, berries, fruit trees, etc., and at
the time that we saw them, they were in good condition and apparently quite productive.

It was about 6 o'clock in the evening and after a long and hard march that we arrived at the
Napoleon Barracks, where we were to have a few days' rest before going into the interior. These
barracks are quite extensive. They are built of stone and are surrounded by a stone wall. The
wall is about three feet thick and twenty feet high, and it would be a difficult matter for
anyone to scale it. To keep soldiers from trying to get out, broken glass is cemented into
it for the entire length on top. The purpose of this was to make it so dangerous that no soldier
would attempt to climb it. There are two arched gateways leading to the interior. These archways
are fitted with heavy gates, which were originally designed as defense gates in case of attack.
The main buildings within the enclosure are of two stories and are built of stone. We were
not long in being assigned to the bunks that we were to occupy during our stay. These were
two decked affairs with a mattress of slats about two inches apart to sleep on. They were about
as uncomfortable as anyone can imagine and most of the boys preferred to sleep on the floor.
These barracks had been occupied by many American boys who had gone before us. We saw thousands
of American names written on the walls, and occasionally we would run across one that we knew.
And, like the other, we too wrote our names, for the boys who followed to read and comment upon.

Our meal for the first night at the barracks consisted of the rations we had been given upon
leaving the ship--bully beef, sour bread and cheese. Our cooks got their fires started and
gave us some coffee, which stimulated us after our long and tiresome march.

After eating, we were permitted to write to our folks at home, and all of us spent the evening
in correspondence. We were not permitted to write while on board ship, so most of us had several
letters to send. I wrote until 11 o'clock that night. I was surprised to find that it was not
yet dark. The long and appreciated twilight is due to the fact that Brest is a great distance
farther north than Sacramento, and this was in the middle of summer, when the evenings are longest.

Not all of the buildings within the walls at the barracks are of ancient construction. Several
were recently built, such as a hospital, a bath house for the accommodation of our men, the
Y. M. C. A. hut, etc. At this particular place the "Y" hut was appreciated by us because it
afforded us amusement, we could buy fruit, cakes, tobacco and other articles there, and we
could attend to our correspondence there. We were assembled there on one occasion to hear two
addresses on the ways and habits of the French people, which were to benefit us. We also exchanged
our American money at the hut for French money. "But I haven't the slightest intention of giving in
yet. As a matter of fact I rather think we've been a little too sure that we were on the right
track. We haven't been as careful as we might. We've gone along blindly."

"What
do you mean?" he demanded. Some of the boys, not knowing the value of the French franc,
paid enormous prices for fruits, candies, etc., to French women and girls, who peddled these
articles.

While at the Napoleon Barracks we saw the first American wounded. They were soldiers who had
participated in the defense against the German drive which began in March, 1918. It was from
them that we first learned the real horrors of war. Some had only one arm; others had lost
a leg; still others were suffering from shell shock. Those who were suffering from shell shock
were the most pitiful, as the least unusual noise startled them.

I had the good fortune to be placed on a motor truck detail during three days of our brief
stay at Brest. This gave me an opportunity of seeing most of the city. It has about 120,000
inhabitants, is one of the chief ports of France and has a harbor that is protected by nature
as well as by strong fortifications. Lying as it does, among the hills, there is much natural
beauty in the city and its surroundings. The streets are about as wide as those of the average
American city, although there are a number of very narrow streets that cut into the main thoroughfares
at angles and these reminded me somewhat of the narrow streets of Boston. The city is kept
clean and there are numerous parks and public squares. The latter are frequented mostly by
women and children, though it is not uncommon to see French soldiers, home from the front on
leave, lounging in them. The warm blooded French people have ideas that differ widely from
those of Americans in many respects, and it is nothing unusual to see a French couple making
love in broad daylight with persons passing by on all sides, in one of these public parks.
Occasionally one would see an American soldier sitting with a French Mademoiselle. French troops
were often drilling in these squares--not troops that had participated in the war, but companies
of younger men who were being trained for war. It was interesting to watch them and to contrast
their manoeuvers with ours.

There are no skyscrapers in Brest, that is to say, there are no tall office buildings there,
although the city is an important business point. The only tall structures are the churches
and an old castle, dating from the thirteenth century. The business buildings are all of two
or three stories. The stores are not as up to date as the retail establishments in America,
and the methods of doing business are entirely different from ours. Goods are not on display
in the open as they are in American stores, but are kept in show cases. If you are interested
in a certain piece of goods, the clerk takes it out of the show case and exhibits it to you.
If you do not buy it, the article is placed right back in the show case. The clerks are mostly
girls. They are plainly dressed but always neat. Most of them wear black. They are by no means
as well dressed as American girls who work in stores. The French store employes are very poorly
paid, the average wage for a clerk being two and a half francs, or about 50 cents in American
money a day.

