So he wearied as he turned on the couch that became less and less comfortable, till he rose
and, with a rug thrown over him, leant on the brick balustrade of the loggia. He stood looking
at the stars in the dimness, not wholly unlike the figure of some old Roman noble in his toga,
nor perhaps wholly unlike the figure of the unconverted Augustine, weary of himself and of
all things.

But this remark only shows how the stars and the deep blue openings into the heavens, and the
manifold suggestions of the towers of Dante's city, and the neighbourhood of Savonarola's cell,
affect the imagination and call up comparisons by far too mighty. Edmund Grosse's weariness
of evil is nothing but a sickly shadow of the weariness of the great imprisoned soul to whom
an angel cried to take up and read aright the book of life. Grosse is in fact only a middle-aged
man in pajamas with a travelling rug about his shoulders, with a sallow face, a sickly body,
and a rather shallow soul. He will not go quite straight even in his love quest, and he cannot
bring himself to believe how strongly that love has hold of him. He is cynical about the best
part of himself and to-night only wishes that it would trouble him less.

"Damn it," he muttered at last, "I wish I had slept indoors--I am bored to death by those stars!"

Next day Grosse set about the work for which he had come to Florence. He called on two men
whom he knew slightly, and found them at home, but neither of them had ever heard of Madame
Danterre. Dawkins, his much-travelled servant, of course, was more successful, and by the evening
was able to take Edmund in a carriage to see some fine old iron gates, and to drive round some
enormous brick walls--enormous in height and in thickness.

The Villa was in a magnificent position, and the gardens, Dawkins told his master, were said
to be beautiful. Madame Danterre had only just moved into it from a much smaller house in the
same quarter.

Edmund next drove to the nearest chemist, and there found out that Dr. Larrone was the name
of Madame Danterre's medical man. He already knew the name of her lawyer from Mr. Murray, who
had been in perfunctory communication with him during the years in which Sir David had paid
a large allowance to Madame Danterre. But he knew that any direct attempt to see these men
would probably be worse than useless. What he wished to do was to come across Madame Danterre
socially, and with all the appearance of an accidental meeting. His two friends in Florence
did their best for him, but they were before long driven to recommend Pietrino, a well-known
detective, as the only person who could find out for Grosse in what houses it might be possible
to meet Madame Danterre.

Grosse soon recognised the remarkable gifts of the Italian detective, and confided to him the
whole case in all its apparent hopelessness. There was, indeed, a touch of kindred feeling
between them, for both men had a certain pleasure in dealing with human beings--humanity was
the material they loved to work upon. The detective was too wise to let his zeal for the wealthy
Englishman outrun discretion. He did very little in the case, and brought back a distinct opinion
that Grosse could, at present, do nothing but mischief by interference. Madame Danterre had
always lived a very retired life, and was either a real invalid or a valetudinarian. Her great,
her enormous accession of wealth had only been used apparently in the sacred cause of bodily
health. She saw at most six people, including two doctors and her lawyer; and on rare occasions,
some elderly man visiting Florence--a Frenchman maybe, or an Englishman--would seek her out.
She never paid any visits, although she kept a splendid stable and took long drives almost
daily. The detective was depressed, for he had really been fired by Grosse's view as to the
will, and he had come to so favourable an opinion of Grosse's ability that he had wished greatly
for an interview between the latter and Madame Danterre to come off.

Edmund was loth to leave Florence until one evening when he despaired, for the first time,
of doing any good. It was the evening on which he succeeded in seeing Madame Danterre without
the knowledge of that lady. The garden of the villa into which he so much wished to penetrate
was walled about with those amazing masses of brickwork which point to a date when labour was
cheap indeed. Edmund had more than once dawdled under the deep shadow of these shapeless masses
of wall at the hour of the general siesta.

He felt more alert while most of the world was asleep, and he could study the defences of Madame
Danterre undisturbed. A lost joy of boyhood was in his heart when he discovered a corner where
the brickwork was partly crumbled away, and partly, evidently, broken by use. It looked as
if a tiny loophole in the wall some fifteen feet from the ground had been used as an entrance
to the forbidden garden by some small human body. That evening, an hour before sunset, he came
back and looked longingly at the wall. The narrow road was as empty as it had been earlier
in the day. Twice he tried in vain to climb as far as the loophole, but the third time, with
trousers ruined and one hand bleeding, he succeeded in crawling on to the ledge below the opening
so that he could look inside. He almost laughed aloud at the absurdity of his own pleasure
in doing so. Some rich, heavy scent met him as he looked down, but, fresh from the gardens
of Como, this garden looked to him both heavy and desolate--heavy in its great hedges broken
by statuary in alcoves cut in the green, and desolate in its burnt turf and its trailing rose
trees loaded with dead roses. His first glance had been downwards, then his look went further
afield, and he knew why Madame Danterre had chosen the villa, for the view of Florence was
superb. He had not enjoyed it for half a moment when he heard a slight noise in the garden.
Yes, down the alley opposite to him there were approaching a lady and two men servants. He
held his breath with surprise. Was this Madame Danterre? the rival of Rose, the real love of
David Bright? What he saw was an incredibly wizened old woman who yet held herself with considerable
grace and walked with quick, long steps on the burnt grass a little ahead of the attendants,
one of whom carried a deck chair, while the other was laden with cushions and books. It was
evident to the onlooker at the installation of Madame Danterre in the shady, open space where
three alleys met, that everything to do with her person was carried out with the care and reverence
befitting a religious ceremony; and there was almost a ludicrous degree of pride in her bearing
and gestures. Edmund felt how amazingly some women have the power of making others accept them
as a higher product of creation, until their most minute bodily wants seem to themselves and
those about them to have a sacred importance. At last, when chair and mat and cushions and
books had been carefully adjusted after much consideration, she was left alone.

For a few moments she read a paper-covered volume, and Edmund determined to creep away at once,
when she suddenly got up and began walking again with long, quick steps, her train sweeping
the grass as she came towards the great wall; and he drew back a little, although it was almost
impossible that she should see him. Her gown, of a dark dove colour, floated softly; it had
much lace about the throat on which shone a string of enormous pearls; and she wore long, grey
gloves. Edmund, who was an authority on the subject, thought her exquisitely dressed, as a
woman who feels herself of great importance will dress even when there is no one to see her.
In the midst of the extraordinarily wizened face were great dark eyes full of expression, with
a fierce brightness in them. It was as if an internal fire were burning up the dried and wizened
features, and could only find an outlet through the eyes. Rapidly she had passed up and down,
and sometimes as she came nearer the wall Edmund saw her flash angry glances, and sometimes
sarcastic glances, while her lips moved rapidly, and her very small gloved hand clenched and
unclenched.

At last a noise in the deserted road behind him, the growing rumbling of a cart, made him think
it safer to move, even at the risk of a little sound in doing so. He reached the ground safely
before he could be seen, and proceeded to brush the brick-dust off the torn knees of his grey
trousers.

He walked down the hill into the town with an air of finality, for he had determined to go
back to England. He could not have analysed his impressions; he could not have accounted for
his sense of impotence and defeat, but so it was. He had come across the personality of Madame
Danterre, and he thereupon left her in possession of the field. But at the same time, before
leaving Florence, he gave largely of the sinews of war to that able spy, the Italian detective,
Pietrino.

CHAPTER V

"YOUR MOTHER'S DAUGHTER"

The surprising disposal of Sir David Bright's fortune was to have very important consequences
in a quiet household among the Malcot hills, of the existence of which Sir Edmund Grosse and
Lady Rose Bright were entirely unaware.

In a small wind-swept wood that appeared to be seeking shelter in the hollow under the great
massive curve of a green hill, there stood one of those English country houses that must have
been planned, built, and finished with the sole object of obtaining coolness and shade. The
principal living rooms looked north, and the staircase and a minute study were the only spots
that ever received any direct rays of the sun. All the rooms except this favoured little study
had windows opening to the ground, and immediately outside grew the rich mossy turf that indicates
a clay soil. The mistress of the house was not easily daunted by her surroundings, and she
had impressed her cheerful, comfortable, and fairly cultured mind on all the rooms. Mrs. Carteret
was the widow of a Colonel Carteret, who had retired from the army to farm his own acres, and
take his place in local politics. It is needless to say that, while the politics had gained
from the help of an upright and chivalrous, if narrow, mind, the acres had profited little
from his attentions. When he died he left all he possessed absolutely to his widow, who was
not prepared to find how very little that all had become. Mrs. Carteret took up the burden
of the acres, dairy, gardens, and stable, with a sense of sanctified duty none the less heroic
in sensation because she was doing all these things for her own profit. Her neighbours held
her in proportionate respect; and, as she had a fine person, pleasant manners, and good connections,
she kept, without the aid of wealth, a comfortable corner in the society of the county.

It was not long after Colonel Carteret's death, and some thirteen years before the death of
Sir David Bright, that the immediate neighbourhood became gradually conscious of the fact that
Mrs. Carteret had adopted a little niece, the child of a soldier brother who had died in India.
This child, from the first, made as little effect on her surroundings as it was possible for
a child to do. Molly Dexter was small, thin, and sallow; her dark hair did not curl; and her
grey eyes had a curious look that is not common, yet not very rare, in childhood. It is the
look of one who waits for other circumstances and other people than those now present. I know
nothing so discouraging in a child friend--or rather in a child acquaintance, for friendship
is warned off by such eyes--as this particular look. Mrs. Carteret took her niece cheerfully
in hand, commended the quiet of her ways, and gave credit to herself and open windows for a
perceptible increase in the covering of flesh on the little bones, and a certain promise of
firmness in the calves of the small legs. As to the rest: "Of course it was difficult at first,"
she said, "but now Molly is perfectly at home with me. Nurses never do understand children,
and Mary used to excite her until she had fits of passion. But that is all past. She is quite
a healthy and normal child now."

Molly was growing healthy, but whether she was normal or not is another point. It does not
tend to make a child normal to change everything in life at the age of seven. Not one person,
hardly one thing was the same to Molly since her father's death. The language of her ayah had
until then been more familiar to her than any other language. The ayah's thoughts had been
her thoughts. The East had had in charge the first years of Molly's dawning intelligence, and
there seemed impressed, even on her tiny figure, something that told of patience, scorn, and
reserve. And yet Mrs. Carteret was quite satisfied.

Once, indeed, the widow was puzzled. Molly had strayed away by herself, and could not be found
for nearly two hours. Provided with two figs and several bits of biscuit, a half-crown and
a shilling, she had started to walk through the deep, heavy lanes between the great hills,
with the firm intention of taking ship to France. Mrs. Carteret treated the escapade kindly
and firmly; not making too much of it, but giving such sufficient punishment as to prevent
anything so silly happening again. But she had no suspicion of what really had happened. Molly
had, in fact, started with the intention of finding her mother. It was two years since she
had come to live with Mrs. Carteret, and, if the child had spoken her secret thought, she would
have told you that throughout those two years she had been meaning to run away and find her
mother. In that she would have fallen into an exaggeration not uncommon with some grown-up
people. It had been only at moments far apart, or occasionally for quite a succession of nights
in bed, that she had spent a brief space before falling asleep in dreaming of going to seek
her mother. But whole months had passed without any such thought; and during these long interludes
the healthy country scenes about her, and the common causes for smiles and tears in a child's
life, filled her consciousness. Still, the undercurrent of the deeper life was there, and very
small incidents were strong enough to bring it to the surface. Molly had short daily lessons
from the clergyman's daughter, a young lady who also took a cheerful, airy view of the child,
and said she would grow out of her little faults in time. In one of these lessons Molly learnt
with surprising eagerness how to find France for herself on the map. That France was much nearer
to England than to India, and how it was usual to cross the Channel were facts easily acquired.
Molly was amazingly backward in her lessons, or she must have learnt these things before. When
lessons were over and she went out into the garden, instead of running as usual she walked
so slowly that Mrs. Carteret, while talking to the gardener, actually wondered what was in
that child's mind. Molly was living through again the parting with the ayah. She could feel
the intensely familiar touch of the soft, dark hand; she could see the adoring love of the
dark eyes with their passionate anger at the separation. The woman had to be revenged on her
enemies who were tearing the child from her. "They deceive you," she said. "The beautiful mother
is not dead; she lives in France, not England; they will try to keep you from her, but the
faithful child will find a way."

Molly unconsciously in her own mind had already begun to put these words into English, whereas
a year before she would have kept to the ayah's own language. But in either language those
words came to her as the last message from that other life of warmth and love and colour in
which she had once been a queen. Indeed, every English child brought home from India is a sovereign
dethroned. And the repetition of the ayah's last words gave utterance to a sense of wrong that
Molly nourished against her present rulers and against the world in which she was not understood.

That same day Mrs. Carteret spoke sharply and with indignation because Molly had trodden purely
by accident on the pug; and her aunt said that the one thing with which she had no patience
was cruelty to animals--whereas the child was passionately fond of animals. Again, on that
same day, Molly fell into a very particularly dirty little pond near the cowshed at the farm.
Mary, the nurse, no doubt was the sufferer, and she said that she did not suppose that black
nurses minded being covered with muck--how should they?--and she supposed she must be treated
as if she were a negro herself, but time would show whether she were a black slave or an Englishwoman
with a house of her own which she could have now if she liked for the asking. While Mary spoke
she pushed and pulled, and, in general treated Molly's small person as something unpleasant,
and to be kept at a distance. Once clean and dressed again, Molly sat down quite quietly to
consider the ways and means of getting to France, with the result already told.

Several years passed after that, in which Mrs. Carteret did by Molly, as by every one else,
all the duties that were quite obviously evident to her, and did not go about seeking for any
fanciful ones. And Molly grew up, sometimes happy, and sometimes not, saying sometimes the
things she really meant when she was in a temper, and acquiescing in Mrs. Carteret's explanation
that she had not meant them when she had regained her self-control.

Until Molly was between fifteen and sixteen, Mrs. Carteret was able to keep to her optimism
as to their mutual relations.

"The child is, of course, very backward. I tried to think it was want of education, but I've
come to see it's of no use to expect to make Molly an interesting or agreeable woman; and very
plain, of course, she must be. But, you know, plenty of plain, uninteresting women have very
fairly happy lives, and under the circumstances"--but there Mrs. Carteret stopped, and her
guest, the wife of the vicar, knew no more of the circumstances than did the world at large.

But when Molly was about the age of fifteen she began to display more troublesome qualities,
and a certain faculty for doing quite the wrong thing under a perverse appearance of attempting
good works. There is nothing annoys a woman of Mrs. Carteret's stamp so much as good done in
the wrong way. She had known for so many years exactly how to do good to the labourer, his
family, and his widow, or to the vagrant passing by. It was really very tiresome to find that
Molly, while walking in one of the lanes, had slipped off a new flannel petticoat in order
to wrap up a gypsy's baby. And it might be allowed to be trying that when believing an old
man of rather doubtful antecedents to be dying from exhaustion, Molly had herself sought whisky
from the nearest inn. She had bought a whole bottle of whisky, though indeed, being seized
with qualms, she had poured half the contents of the bottle into a ditch before going back
to the cottage. And it was undoubtedly Mrs. Carteret's duty to protest when she found that
Molly had held a baby with diphtheria folded closely in her arms while the mother fetched the
doctor.

Can any one blame Mrs. Carteret for finding these doings a little trying? And it showed how
freakish and contradictory Molly was in all her ways that she would never join nicely in school
feasts, or harvest homes, or anything pleasant or cheerful. Nor did she make friends even with
those she had worried over in times of sickness. She would risk some serious infection, or
meddle, with her odd notions, day after day in a cottage; and then she would hardly nod to
the convalescent boy or girl when she met them again in the lanes.

There was no one to tell her aunt what new, strange instincts and aspirations were struggling
to the light in Molly. A passionate pity for pain would seize on her and hold her in a grip
until she had done some definite act to relieve it. But pity was either not akin to love in
Molly, or her affections had been too starved to take root after the immediate impulse of mercy
was passed. The girl was not popular in the village, although, unlike Mrs. Carteret, her poorer
neighbours had a great idea of Molly's cleverness. Needless to say that when, after some unmeasured
effort at relieving suffering, Molly would come home with a sense of joy she rarely knew after
any other act, it hurt her to the quick and roused her deepest anger to find herself treated
like a naughty, inconsiderate child. The storms between Mrs. Carteret and Molly were increasing
in number and intensity, with outspoken wrath on one side, and a white heat of dumb, indignant
resistance on the other. Then, happily, there came a change. Molly's education had been of
the very slightest until she was nearly sixteen, when Mrs. Carteret told her to expect the
arrival of a finishing governess. She also announced that a music master from the cathedral
town would, in future, come over twice a week to give her lessons.

"It's not my doing," said Mrs. Carteret,--and meaning only to be candid she sounded very ungracious;
and although she did not pay for these things, it was due to her urgent representations of
their need that they had been provided. Molly supposed that all such financial arrangements
were made for her by her father's lawyer, of whom she had heard Mrs. Carteret speak.

Throughout these years it had never occurred to Mrs. Carteret to doubt that Molly believed
her mother to be dead, and she never for a moment supposed the child's silence on the subject
to be ominous. Such silence did not show any special power of reserve; many children brought
up like Molly will carefully conceal knowledge which they believe that those in authority over
them suppose them not to possess. Perhaps in Molly's case there was an instinctive shrinking
from exposing an ideal to scorn. Perhaps there was a wholly unconscious want of faith in the
ideal itself, an ideal which had been built up upon one phrase. Yet the notion of the beautiful,
exiled mother, so cruelly concealed from her child, was very precious, however insecurely founded.
It must be concealed from other eyes by mists of incense, and honoured in the silence of the
sanctuary.

The new governess, Miss Carew, was a very fair teacher, and she soon recognised the quality
of her pupil's mind. Mrs. Carteret was possibly a little disappointed on finding that Miss
Carew considered Molly to be very clever, as well as very ignorant. The widow was herself accustomed
to feel superior to her own circle in literary attainments,--a sensation which she justified
by an occasional reading of French memoirs and by always getting through at least two articles
in each Nineteenth Century. It was a detail that she had never cared for poetry; Sir James
Stephen, she knew, had also never cared to have ideas expressed in verse. But she felt a little
dull when Miss Carew and Molly discussed Browning and Tennyson and De Musset. Miss Carew fired
Molly with new thoughts and new ambitions in matters intellectual, but also in more mundane
affairs. If it is possible to be in the world and not of it we have all of us also known people
who are of the world though not in it; and Miss Carew was undoubtedly one of the latter. Her
tongue babbled of beauties and courts, of manners, of wealth, and of chiffons, with the free
idealism of an amateur, and this without intending to do more than enliven the dull daily walks
through Malcot lanes.

Two years of this companionship rapidly developed Molly. She did not now merely condemn her
aunt and her friends from pure ignorant dislike; she knew from other testimony that they were
rather stupid, ignorant, badly-dressed, and provincial. But the chief change in her state of
mind lay in her hopes for her own future. Miss Carew had pointed out that, if such a very large
salary could be given for the governess, there must surely be plenty of money for Molly's disposal
later on. Why should not Molly have a splendid and delightful life before her? And then poor
Miss Carew would suppress a sigh at her own prospects in which the pupil never showed the least
interest. It was before Miss Carew's second year of teaching had come to an end, and while
Molly was rapidly enlarging her mental horizon, that the girl came to a very serious crisis
in her life.

Occupied with her first joy in knowledge, and with dreams of future delights in the great world,
she had not broken out into any very freakish act of benevolence for a long time. One night,
when Mrs. Carteret and Miss Carew met at dinner time, they continued to wait in vain for Molly.
The servants hunted for her, Mrs. Carteret called up the front stairs, and Miss Carew went
as far as the little carpenter's shop opening from the greenhouse to find her. It was a dark
night, and there was nothing that could have taken her out of doors, but that she was out could
not be doubted. The gardener and coachman were sent for, and before ten o'clock the policeman
in the village joined in the search, and yet nothing was heard of Molly. Mrs. Carteret became
really frightened, and Miss Carew was surprised to see her betray so much feeling as almost
to lose her self-control. She kept walking up and down, while odd spasmodic little sentences
escaped from her every few minutes.

"How could I answer for it to John if his girl came to any harm?" she repeated several times.

She kept moving from room to room with a really scared expression. Once the governess overheard
her exclaim with an intensely bitter accent, "Even her wretched mother would have taken more
care of her!"

At that moment the door opened; Molly came quietly in, looking at them both with bright, defiant
eyes. From her hat to the edge of her skirt she appeared to be one mass of light, brown mud;
her right cheek was bleeding from a scratch, and the sleeve of her coat was torn open.

"Where have you been to?" demanded Mrs. Carteret, in a voice that trembled from the reaction
of fear to anger.

"I went for a walk, and I found a man lying half in the water in Brown-rushes pond; he had
evidently fallen in drunk. I got him out after nearly falling in myself, and then I had to
get some one to look after him. They took him in at Brown-rushes farm, and I found out who
he was and went to tell his wife, who is ill, that he was quite safe. I stayed a little while
with her, and then I came home. I have walked about twenty miles, and, as you can see, I have
had several tumbles, and I am very tired."

Molly's voice had been very quiet, but very distinct, and her look and bearing were full of
an unspoken defiance.

"And you never thought whether I should be frightened meanwhile?" said Mrs. Carteret.

"Frightened about me?" said Molly in astonishment.

"You had no thought for my anxiety--the strain on my nerves," her aunt went on.

"I thought you might be angry, but I never for a moment thought you would be frightened."

Miss Carew looked from one to the other in alarm and perplexity. She felt for them both, for
the woman who had been startled by the extent of her fears, and was the more angry in consequence,
and for Molly, who betrayed her utter want of belief in any kind of feeling on Mrs. Carteret's
part.

"If you do not care for my feelings, or, indeed, believe in them, I wish you would have some
care for your own good name." A moment's pause followed these words, and then in a low voice,
but quite distinct, came the conclusion, "You must remember that your mother's daughter must
be more careful than other girls."

Molly's cheeks, just now bright from the battle with the autumn wind, became as white as marble.
There was no concealment possible; both women saw that the child realised the full import of
the words, and that she knew they could read what was written on her face. There could be no
possibility of keeping up appearances after such a moment. But Miss Carew moved forward, and
flung her arms round Molly with a gesture of simple but complete womanliness. "You must have
a hot bath at once," she cried, "or you will catch your death of cold."

"Perhaps it would be better if I did," cried Molly in a voice fearful to her hearers in its
stony hardness and hopelessness. "What does it matter?"

Miss Carew would have been less unhappy if the child had burst into any reproaches, however
angry or unseemly; she wanted to hear her say that something was a lie, that some one was a
liar, but what was so awful to the ordinary little woman was to realise that Molly believed
what had been said, or rather the awful implication of what had been said. The real horror
was that Molly should come to such knowledge in such a way.

The girl made no effort to shake her off, and not the least response to her caress. With perfect
dignity she went quietly up-stairs. With perfect dignity she let the governess and the housemaid
do to her whatever they liked. They bathed Molly, rubbed her with lotions, poulticed her with
mustard, gave her a hot drink, and all the time Miss Carew's heart ached at the impossibility
of helping her in the very least.

"Can I leave the door open between our rooms, in case you want anything in the night?" she
faltered.

"Oh, yes; certainly."

"May I kiss you?"

"Yes, of course."

CHAPTER VI

MOLLY COMES OF AGE

For some time after that terrible night Molly never spoke to Mrs. Carteret unless it were absolutely
necessary. It may be difficult to believe that no explanation was sought or given and after
a time things seemed to be much as before. The silence of a brooding nature is a terrible thing;
and it is more common in narrow, dull lives than in any other. Uneducated men and women in
villages, or servants cramped together in one house, I have known to brood over some injury
in an awful silence for twenty or thirty years. If Molly's future life had been in Mrs. Carteret's
hands, the sense of wrong would have burrowed deeper and been even better hidden, but Molly,
aided by Miss Carew, had convinced herself that liberty would come, without any fight for it,
at twenty-one; so her view of the present was that it was a tiresome but inevitable waiting
for real life.

Miss Carew, watching her anxiously, could never find out what she had thought since the night
of the alarm; and if she had seen into her mind at any one moment alone, she would have been
misled. For Molly's imagination flew from one extreme to another. At first, indeed, that sentence,
"Your mother's daughter ought to be more careful than other girls," had seemed simply a revelation
of evil of which she could not doubt the truth. She saw in a flash why her mother had gone
out of her life although still living. The whole possibility of shame and horror appeared to
fit in with the facts of her secluded life with Mrs. Carteret. A morbid fear as to her own
birth seized on the poor child's mind, and might have destroyed the healthier aspect of life
for her entirely; but happily Mrs. Carteret and the governess did think of this danger, and
showed some skill in laying the phantom. Some photographs of John Dexter as a young man were
brought out and shown to the governess in Molly's presence, and her comments on the likeness
to Molly were true and sounded spontaneous. Relieved of this horror the girl's mind reacted
to the hope that Mrs. Carteret had only spoken in temper and spite, grossly exaggerating some
grievance against Molly's mother. Then was the ideal restored to its pedestal, and expiatory
offerings of sentiment of the most elaborate kind hung round the image of the ill-used and
misunderstood, the beautiful, unattainable mother. If Miss Carew had seen into the reveries
of her pupil at such a moment, she would hardly have believed how they alternated with the
coldest fits of doubt and scepticism. Molly was dealing with a self-made ideal that she needed
to satisfy the hunger of her nature for love and worship. But it had no foundations, no support,
and it was apt to vanish with a terrible completeness. Then she would feel quite alone and
horribly ashamed; she would at moments think of herself as something degraded and to be shunned.
Some natures would have simply sunk into a nervous state of depression, but Molly had great
vitality and natural ambition. In her ideal moments she thought of devoting her life to her
mother; and the ayah's words were still a text, "The faithful child will find a way." But in
darker hours she defied the world that was against her.

Molly, having decided to make no effort at any change in her life until the emancipating age
of twenty-one, determined to prepare herself as fully as possible for the future. Mrs. Carteret
was quite willing to keep Miss Carew until her niece was nearly twenty, and by that time the
girl had read a surprising amount, while her mind was not to be despised. She had also "come
out" as far as a very sleepy neighbourhood made it possible for her to see any society. She
had been to three balls, and a good many garden parties. No one found her very attractive in
her manners, though her appearance had in it now something that arrested attention. She took
her position in the small Carteret circle in virtue of a certain energy and force of will.
Molly danced, and played tennis, and rode as well as any girl in those parts, but she did not
hide a silent and, at present, rather childish scorn which was in her nature. Miss Carew left
her with regret and with more affection than Molly gave her back, for the governess was proud
of her, and felt in watching her the pleasures of professional success. Perhaps she put down
too much of this success to her own skill, but it was true that, without Miss Carew, Molly
would have been a very undeveloped young person. There was still one year after this parting
before Molly would be free, and it seemed longer and slower as each day passed. One interest
helped to make it endurable. A trained hospital nurse had been provided for the village, and
Molly spent a great deal of time learning her craft. The nursing instinct was exceedingly strong
and not easily put down, and, if Molly must interfere with sick people, it was as well, in
Mrs. Carteret's opinion, that she should learn how to do it properly.

But the slow months rolled by at length, and the last year of bondage was finished.

The sun did its best to congratulate Molly on her twenty-first birthday. It shone in full glory
on the great, green hills, and the blue shadows in the hollows were transparent with reflected
gold. The sunlight trembled in the bare branches of the beeches and turned their grey trunks
to silver.

Standing in the little study, Molly's whole figure seemed to expand in the sunshine. Her eyes
sparkled, her lips parted, and she at once drank in and gave forth her delight.

Some people might still agree with Mrs. Carteret that Molly was not beautiful. Still, it was
an appearance that would always provoke discussion. Molly could not be overlooked, and when
her mind and feelings were excited, then she gave a strange impression of intense vitality--not
the pleasant overflow of animal spirits, but a suppressed, yet untamed, vitality of a more
mental, more dangerous kind. Her movements were usually sudden, swift, and abrupt, yet there
was in them all a singular amount of expression, and, if Molly's keen grey eyes and sensitive
mouth did not convey the impression of a simple, or even of a kindly nature, they gave suggestions
of light and longing, hunger and resolution.

To-day, the twenty-first birthday, was to be the first day of freedom, the last of shackles
and dulness and commonplace. It was to be a day of speech and a day of revenge.

Molly was waiting now for Mrs. Carteret to come in and stand before her and hear all she meant
to say about the long, unholy deception that had been put upon her. She was going to say good-bye
now and be free. Molly's money would now be her own, she could take it away and share it with
the deserted, misjudged mother. Nothing in all this was melodramatic; it would have been but
natural if the facts had been as she supposed, only Molly made the little mistake of treating
as facts her carefully built-up fancies, her long, childish story of her own life.

She was so absorbed that she hardly saw Mrs. Carteret come in and sit down in her square, substantial
way in a large arm-chair. Molly, standing by the window knocking the tassel of the blind to
and fro, was breathing quickly. The older woman looked through some papers in her hand, put
some notes of orders for groceries on a table by her side, and flattened out a long letter
on foreign paper on her knee. She looked at Molly a little nervously, with cold blue eyes over
gold-rimmed spectacles reposing on her well-shaped nose, and began:

"Now that you are of age I must----"

But Molly interrupted her. In a very low voice, speaking quickly with little gasps of impatience
at any hesitation in her own utterance,--

"Before you talk to me about the arrangements, I want to tell you that I have made up my mind
to leave here at once. I know it will be a relief to you as well as to me. Any promise you
made to my father is satisfied now, and you cannot wish to keep me here. You have always been
ashamed of me, you have always disliked me, and you have always deceived me. I knew all this
time that my mother was alive, and you never spoke of her except once and then it was to insult
me as deeply as a girl can be insulted. If what you said were true--and I don't believe it"--her
voice shook as she spoke--"there would be all the more reason why I should go to my poor mother.
I want you to know, therefore, that with whatever money comes to me from my father, I shall
go to my mother and try to make amends to her."

Mrs. Carteret stared over her spectacles at Molly in absolute amazement. After fourteen years
of very kind treatment, which had involved a great deal of trouble, this uninteresting, silent
niece had revealed herself at last! Fourteen years devoted to the idealisation of the mother
who had deserted her, and to positive hatred of the relation who had mothered her! Tears rose
in the hard, blue eyes. Subtleties of feeling Anne Carteret did not know, but some affection
for those who are near in blood and who live under the same roof had been a matter of course
to her, and Molly had hurt her to the quick. However, it was natural that common-sense and
justice should quickly assert themselves to show this idiotic girl the criminal absurdity of
what she said. Mrs. Carteret was unconsciously hitting back as hard as she could as she answered
in a tone of cheerful common-sense:

"As a matter of fact, the money you will receive will not be your own, but an allowance from
your mother--a large allowance given on the condition that you do not live with her. Happily,
it is so large that there will not be any necessity for you to live here."

Mrs. Carteret held up the letter of thin foreign paper in a trembling hand, but she spoke in
a perfectly calm voice:

"I was myself always against this mystery as to your mother, but I felt obliged to act by her
wish in the matter. She insists that she still wishes it to be thought by the world at large
that she is dead, but she agrees at last that you should know something about her. I told her
that I could not allow you to come of age here and have a great deal of money at your disposal
without your knowing that from your father you have only been left a fortune of two thousand
pounds----"

Mrs. Carteret paused, and then, with a little snort, added, half to herself:

"The rest was all squandered away, and certainly not by his own doing."

Then she resumed her business tone:

"More than this, I obtained from your mother leave to tell you that this very large allowance
comes out of a fortune left to her quite recently by Sir David Bright. I have acted by the
wishes of both your parents as far as I possibly could. As to my disliking you or being ashamed
of you, such notions could only come out of a morbid imagination. In spite of your feelings
towards me, I still wish to be your friend. I want your father's daughter to stand well with
the world. So that I am left to live here in peace undisturbed, I shall be glad to help you
at any time."

Mrs. Carteret's feelings were concentrated on Molly's conduct towards herself, but Molly's
consciousness was filled with the greatness of the blow that had just fallen. It seemed to
her that she had only now for the first time lost her mother--her only ideal, the object of
all her better thoughts. That her enemy was justified was, indeed, just then of little importance.
She turned a dazed face towards her aunt:

"I ought to beg your pardon: I am sorry."

"Oh, pray don't take the trouble."

Mrs. Carteret got out of the chair with emphatic dignity, and held out some papers.

"You had better read these. I will speak to you about them afterwards."

She left the room absolutely satisfied with her own conduct. But, coming to a pause in the
drawing-room, she remembered that she had made one mistake.

"How stupid of me to have left Jane Dawning's letter among those papers."

But she did not go back to fetch the letter from her cousin Lady Dawning; and she did not own
to herself that that apparent negligence was her real revenge. Yet from that moment her feelings
of self-satisfaction were uncomfortably disturbed.

Meanwhile, Molly was kneeling by the window in the study in floods of tears. Everything in
her mind had lost its balance; and baffled, disheartened, and ashamed, she wept tears that
brought no softness. She did not know it, but while to herself it seemed as if she were absorbed
in weeping over her disillusionment, she was in fact deciding that, as her ideal had failed
her, she would in future live only for herself, and get everything out of life that she could
for her own satisfaction.

No one in the world cared for her, but she would not be defeated or crushed or forlorn. With
an effort she sprang to her feet with one agile movement, and pushed her heavy hair back from
her forehead with her long, thin fingers.

The colour had gone from her clear, dark skin for the moment, and her breathing was fast and
uneven, but her face still showed her to be very young and very healthy. How differently the
troubles of the mind are written in our faces when age has undermined the foundations and all
momentary failure is a presage of a sure defeat. Molly showed her determination to be brave
and calm by immediately setting herself to read the papers left for her by Mrs. Carteret.

One was in French, a long letter from a lawyer in Florence communicating Madame Danterre's
wishes to Mrs. Carteret. It stated that, owing to the painful circumstances of the case, his
client chose to remain under her maiden name, and to reside in Florence. Mrs. Carteret was
at liberty to inform Miss Dexter of this, but she did not wish it known to anybody else. Madame
Danterre further asked Mrs. Carteret to make such arrangements as she thought fit for her daughter
to see something of the world, either in London or by travelling, but she did not wish her
to come to Florence. Otherwise the world was before her, and £3000 a year was at her disposal.
Molly could hardly, it was implied, ask for more from a mother from whom she had been torn
unjustly when she was an infant. The rest of the letter was entirely about business, giving
all details as to how the quarterly allowance would be paid. In conclusion was an enigmatic
sentence to the effect that, by a tardy act of repentance, Sir David Bright had left Madame
Danterre his fortune, and she wished her daughter to know that the large allowance she was
able to make her was in consequence of this act of justice. Molly would have had no inkling
of the meaning of this sentence if Mrs. Carteret had come back to claim the letter from Lady
Dawning which she had unintentionally left among the lawyer's papers. But this last, a closely-written
large sheet of note-paper, lay between the letter from the lawyer in Florence, and other papers
from the family lawyer in London, anent the will of the late Colonel Dexter and its taking
effect on his daughter's coming of age.

Molly turned carelessly from the question of £2000 and its interest at three and a half per
cent. to the letter surmounted by a black initial and a coronet.

     "My DEAR ANNE,--

     "I am not coming to stay in your neighbourhood as I had hoped. I
     should have been very glad to have had a talk with you about Molly,
     if it had been possible, for her dear father's sake. Indeed, I
     think you are far from exaggerating the difficulties of the case.
     You are very reluctant to take a house in London, and you say that
     if you did take one and gave up all your home duties you would not
     now have a circle of friends there who could be of any use to a
     girl of her age. I feel that very likely you would be glad if my
     daughter would undertake her, and you are quite right in thinking
     that she would like a girl to take into the world. But I must be
     frank with you, as I want to save you from pitfalls which I may be
     more able to foresee than you can in your secluded home. My dear, I
     know that dear old John died without a penny: why if he had had any
     fortune as a young man--but, alas! he had none--is it possible
     that, in a soldier's life, with, for a few years, a madly
     extravagant wife to help him, he could conceivably have saved a
     capital that can produce £3000 a year!

     "No, my dear Anne, the money is from her mother, and I must tell
     you that I've often wondered if that estimable lady is really dead
     at all. Then, you know, that I always kept up with John, and that I
     knew something about Sir David Bright. To conclude, Rose Bright is
     my cousin by marriage, and we are all dumbfounded at finding that
     she has been left £800 a year instead of twice as many thousands,
     and that the fortune has gone to a lady named Madame Danterre. It
     is so old a story that I don't think any one has read the
     conclusion aright except myself, and parole d'honneur, no one
     shall if I can help it. I am too fond of poor John's memory to want
     to hurt his child, only for the child's own sake I would not advise
     you to bring her up to London. I should keep her quietly with you,
     and trust to a man appearing on the scene--it's a thing you can
     trust to, where there is £3000 a year. I daresay I could send some
     one your way quite quietly. But don't bring John's girl to London,
     at any rate, just yet.

     "I hope we may come within reach of you in the autumn. I should
     love to have a quiet day with you and to see Molly.

                              "Ever yours affectionately,

                                    "JANE DAWNING."

     "P.S.--By the way, is the £3000 sure to go on? If it is not, might
     it not be as well to put a good bit of it away?"

Thus in one short hour, Molly had been told that her mother was living but did not want her
child; that the ideal of motherly love had in her own case been a complete fiction; that the
mother of her imagination had never existed, and, immediately afterwards, she had been given
a glimpse of the world's view of her own position as a young person best concealed, or, at
least, not brought too much forward.

Lastly, with the news of the money that at least meant freedom, she had gained, by a rapid
intuition, a faint but unmistakable sense of discomfort as to the money itself.

It was not any scrupulous fear that it could be her duty to inquire whether Sir David Bright
ought to have left his fortune to his widow! Probably Lady Rose had quite as much as many dowagers
have to live on. But she had been forced to know that other people disapproved of Sir David's
will. It was not a fortune entered into with head erect and eyes proudly facing a friendly
world. Still, Molly was not daunted: the combat with life was harder and quite different from
what she had foreseen, but she had always looked on her future as a fight.

Presently she let the "letter from Jane" fall close to the chair in which her aunt had been
sitting, and moved the chair till the paper was half hidden by the chintz frill of the cover.
She meant Mrs. Carteret to think that she had not read it.

She then went out for a long walk and met her aunt at luncheon with a quietly respectful manner,
a little more respectful than it had ever been before.

Later in the day Molly wrote to the family lawyer, and consulted him as to how to find a suitable
lady with whom to stay in London. Mrs. Carteret read and passed the letter. Seeing that Molly
was determined to go to London, she was anxious to help her as much as possible, without calling
down upon herself such letters of advice as the one from Lady Dawning. It proved as difficult
to find just the right thing in chaperones as it is usually difficult to find exactly the right
thing in any form of humanity, and December and January passed in the search. But in the end
all that was to be wished for seemed to be secured in the person of Mrs. Delaport Green, who
was known to a former pupil of Miss Carew's, and at length Molly went out of the rooms with
the northern aspect, and drove through the wood that sheltered under the shoulder of the great
green hill, with nothing about her to recall the child who had come in there for the first
time fourteen years ago, except that she still had the look of one who waits for other circumstances
and other people.

CHAPTER VII

EDMUND GROSSE CONTINUES TO INTERFERE

Mr. Murray had had no belief in Sir Edmund Grosse's doings, and he indulged in the provoking
air of "I told you so," when the latter, who had not been in London for several months, appeared
at the office, and owned to the futility of his visit to Florence. Meanwhile, Mr. Murray had
also carried on a fruitless enquiry in a different direction.

"The General's two most intimate friends were killed about two months after his death, and
his servant died in the same action--probably before Sir David himself. I have tried to find
out if he had any talk on his own affairs with friends on board ship going out, but it seems
not. I can show you the list of those who went out with him."

Sir Edmund knew something of most people and after studying the list he went to look up an
old soldier friend at the Army and Navy Club. Indeed, for some weeks he was often to be seen
there, and he was as attentive to Generals as an anxious parent seeking advancement in the
Army for an only son. He soon became discouraged as to obtaining any information regarding
David's later years, but some gossip on his younger days he did glean. Nothing could have been
better than David's record; he seemed to have been a paragon of virtue.

"That's what made it all the more strange that he should have fallen into the hands of Mrs.
Johnny Dexter," mused an old Colonel as he puffed at one of Grosse's most admirable cigars.
"Poor old David; he was wax in her hands for a few weeks, then he got fever and recovered from
her and from it at the same time--he went home soon after. He'd have done anything for her
at one moment."

This Colonel might well have been flattered by Edmund's attentions; but he gave little in return
for them except what he said that day.

"Mrs. Johnny Dexter! Why, I'm sure I have known Dexters," thought Edmund, as he strolled down
Pall Mall after this conversation. He stopped to think, regardless of public observation. "Why,
of course, that old bore Lady Dawning was a Miss Dexter. I'll go and see her this very day."

Lady Dawning was gratified at Sir Edmund's visit, and was nearly as much surprised at seeing
him as he was at finding himself in the handsome, heavily-furnished room in Princes Gate. Stout,
over fifty, and clumsily wigged, it rarely enough happened to Lady Dawning to find not only
a sympathetic listener but an eager inquirer into those romantic days when love's young dream
for her cousin Johnny Dexter was stifled by parental authority: "And it all ended in my becoming
Lady Dawning." A sigh of satisfaction concluded the episode of romance, and led the way back
to the present day.

When Lady Dawning had advised Mrs. Carteret to keep poor dear Johnny's girl quietly in the
country, she had by no means intended to let any of her friends know anything about Molly.
She had looked important and mysterious when people spoke of Sir David Bright's amazing will,
but she made a real sacrifice to Johnny's memory by not divulging her knowledge of facts or
her own conclusions from those facts. But the enjoyment of talking of her own romantic youth
to Edmund had had a softening effect.

Sir Edmund appeared to be so very wise and safe.

"Of course, it is only to you," came first; and then, "It would be a relief to me to get the
opinion of a man of the world; poor dear Anne Carteret consults me, and I really don't know
what to advise. Fancy! that woman allows the girl £3000 a year, and Anne Carteret would probably
have acted on my advice and kept her quiet so that no one need know anything of the wretched
story, but the girl won't be quiet, and will come up to London, and it seems so unsafe, don't
you know? They are looking for a chaperone, as nothing will make Anne come herself. And if
it all comes out it will be so unpleasant for poor dear Rose Bright to meet this girl all dressed
up with her money; don't you think so?"

Lady Dawning was now quite screaming with excitement, and very red in nose and chin. It would
be a long time before she could be quite dull again. But Edmund was far too deeply interested
to notice details.

They parted very cordially, and Lady Dawning promised to let him know if she heard from Anne
Carteret, and, if possible, to pass on the name of the chaperone woman who was to take Molly
into society.

"And so your protégée is to arrive to-night?" said Edmund Grosse.

"Yes, and I am so frightened;" and with a little laugh appreciative of herself in general,
Mrs. Delaport Green held up a cup of China tea in a pretty little white hand belonging to an
arm that curved and thickened from the wrist to the elbow in perfect lines.

Sir Edmund gave the arm the faintest glance of appreciation before it retreated into lace frills
within its brown sleeve. Those lace frills were the only apparent extravagance in the simple
frock in question, and simplicity was the chief note in this lady's charming appearance.

"I don't believe you are frightened, but probably she is frightened enough."

"I know nothing whatever about her," sighed the little woman, "and we are only doing it because
we are so dreadfully hard up; my maid says that I shall soon not have a stitch to my back,
and that would be so fearfully improper. At least"--she hesitated--"I am doing it because times
are bad. Tim really knows nothing about it; I mean that he does not know that Miss Dexter is
a 'paying guest', and it does sound horribly lower middle-class, doesn't it? But I'm so afraid
Tim won't be able to go to Homburg this year, and he is eating and drinking so much already,
and it's only the beginning of April. What will happen if he can't drink water and take exercise
all this summer?"

"But I suppose you know her name?"

"I believe it is Molly Dexter. And do you think I should say 'Molly' at once--to-night, I mean?"

Sir Edmund did not answer this question.

"I used to know some Dexters years ago."

"Yes, it is quite a good name, and Molly is of good family: she is a cousin of Lady Dawning,
but she is an orphan. I think I must call her Molly at once," and the little round eyes looked
wistful and kindly.

Sir Edmund was able from this to conclude rightly that Mrs. Delaport Green was not aware of
the existence of Madame Danterre, and would have no suspicions as to the sources of the fortune
that supplied Molly's large allowance. It had, in fact, been thought wiser not to offer explanations
which had not been called for.

"It will be very tiresome for you," said Grosse. "You will have to amuse her, you know, and
is she worth while?"

"Quite; she will pay--let me see--she will pay for the new motor, and she will go to my dressmaker
and keep her in a good temper. But, of course, I shall have to make sacrifices and find her
partners. I must try and not let my poor people miss me. They would miss me dreadfully, though
I know you don't think so."

"And you don't even know what she is like?"

"Oh, yes, I do; I have seen her once, and she is oh! so interesting: olive skin, black, or
almost black, hair, almond-shaped grey eyes--no, I don't mean almond-shaped, but really very
curiously-shaped eyes, full of--let me see if I can tell you what they are full of--something
that, in fact, makes you shiver and feel quite excited. But, do you know, she hardly speaks,
and then in such a low voice. I'll tell you now, I'll tell you exactly what she reminds me
of: do you know a picture in a very big gallery in Florence of a woman who committed some crime?
It's by one of the pupils of one of the great masters; just try and think if you don't know
what I mean. Oh, must you go? But won't you come again, and see how we get on, and how I bear up?"

When Molly did arrive, her dainty little hostess petted and patted her and called her "Molly"
because she "could not help it."

"Oh, we will do the most delightful things, now that you have come; we must, of course, do
balls and plays, and then we will have quite a quiet day in the country in the new motor, and
we will take some very nice men with us. And then you won't mind sometimes coming to see people
who are ill or poor or old?"

The little voice rose higher and higher in a sort of wail.

"It does cheer them up so to look in and out with a few flowers, and it need not take long."

"I don't mind people when they are really ill," said Molly, in her low voice, "but I like them
best unconscious."

Mrs. Delaport Green stared for a moment; then she jumped up and ran forward with extended hands
to greet a lady in a plain coat and skirt and an uncompromising hat.

"Oh, how kind of you to come, and how are you getting on? Molly dear, this is the lady who
lives in horrid Hoxton taking care of my poor people I told you about. Do tell her what you
really mean about liking people best when they are unconscious, and you will both forgive me
if I write one tiny little note meanwhile?"

Molly gave some tea to the newcomer as if she had lived in the house for years, and drew her
into a talk which soon allayed her rising fears as to whether her own time would have to be
devoted to horrid Hoxton. By calm and tranquil questions she elicited the fact that Mrs. Delaport
Green had visited the settlement once during the winter.

"She comes as a sunbeam," said the resident with obviously genuine admiration, "and, of course,
with all the claims on her time, and her anxiety as to her husband's health, we don't wish
her to come often. She is just the inspiration we want."

The hostess having meanwhile asked four people to dinner, came rustling back, and, sitting
on a low stool opposite the lady of the settlement, held one of her visitor's large hands in
both her own and patted it and asked questions about a number of poor people by name, and made
love to her in many ways, until the latter, cheered and refreshed by the sunbeam, went out
to seek the first of a series of 'busses between Chelsea and Hoxton.

Mrs. Delaport Green gave a little sigh.

"I must order the motor. The dear thing needn't have come your very first night, need she?
It makes me miserable to leave you, but I was engaged to this dinner before I knew that you
existed even! Isn't it odd to think of that?" Her voice was full of feeling.

"And you must be longing to go to your room. You won't have to dine with Tim, because he is
dining at his club. Promise me that you won't let Tim bore you: he likes horrid fat people,
so I don't think he will; and are you sure you have got everything you want?"

Molly's impressions of her new surroundings were written a few weeks later in a letter to Miss
Carew.

     "MY DEAR CAREY,--

     "I have been here for three weeks, but I doubt if I shall stay
     three months.

     "I am living with a very clever woman, and I am learning life
     fairly quickly and getting to know a number of people. But I am
     not sure if either of us thinks our bargain quite worth while,
     though we are too wise to decide in a hurry. There are great
     attractions: the house, the clothes, the food, the servants, are
     absolutely perfect; the only thing not quite up to the mark in
     taste is the husband. But she sees him very little, and I hardly
     exchange two words with him in the day, and his attitude towards us
     is that of a busy father towards his nursery. But I rather suspect
     that he gets his own way when he chooses. The servants work hard,
     and, I believe, honestly like her. The clergyman of the parish, a
     really striking person, is enthusiastic; so is her husband's
     doctor, so are one religious duchess and two mundane countesses. I
     believe that it is impossible to enumerate the number and variety
     of the men who like her. There are just one or two people who pose
     her, and Sir Edmund Grosse is one. He snubs her, and so she makes
     up to him hard. I must tell you that I have got quite intimate with
     Sir Edmund. He is of a different school from most of the men I have
     seen. He pays absurd compliments very naturally and cleverly,
     rather my idea of a Frenchman, but he is much more candid all the
     time. I shock people here if I simply say I don't like any one. If
     you want to say anything against anybody you must begin by
     saying--'Of course, he means awfully well,' and after that you may
     imply that he is the greatest scoundrel unhung. Sir Edmund is not
     at all ill-natured, and he can discuss people quite simply--not as
     if he wished to defend his own reputation for charity all the time.
     He won't allow that Adela Delaport Green is a humbug: he says she
     is simply a happy combination of extraordinary cleverness and
     stupidity, of simplicity and art. 'I believe she hardly ever has a
     consciously disingenuous moment,' he said to me last night. 'She
     likes clergymen and she likes great ladies, and she likes to make
     people like her. Of course, she is always designing; but she never
     stops to think, so that she doesn't know she is designing. She is
     an amazing mimic. Something in this room to-night made me think of
     Dorset House directly I came in, and I remembered that, of course,
     she was at the party there last night. She must have put the sofa
     and the palms in the middle of the room to-day. At dinner to-night
     she suddenly told me that she wished she had been born a Roman
     Catholic, and I could not think why until I remembered that a
     Princess had just become a Papist. She could never have liked the
     Inquisition, but she thought the Pope had such a dear, kind face.
     Now she will probably tremble on the verge of Rome until several
     Anglican bishops have asked their influential lady friends to keep
     her out of danger.'

     "'And you don't call her a humbug?'

     "'No; she is a child of nature, indulging her instincts without
     reflection. And please mark one thing, young lady; her models are
     all good women--very good women--and that's not a point to be
     overlooked.'

     "I told him--I could not help it--how funny she had been yesterday,
     talking of going to early church. 'I do love the little birds quite
     early,' she said, 'and one can see the changes of the season even
     in London, going every day, you know, and one feels so full of hope
     walking in the early morning fasting, and hope is next to charity,
     isn't it?--though, of course, not so great.'

     "And she has been out in the shut motor exactly once in the early
     morning since I came up, and she knew that I knew it.

     "However, Sir Edmund maintained that, at the moment, Adela quite
     believed she went out early every day, and I am not sure he is not
     right. But then, you see, Carey, that with her power of believing
     what she likes, and of intriguing without knowing it, I am not
     quite sure that she will last very well. She might get tired of
     me--quite believe I had done something which I had not done at all!
     And then the innocent little intrigues might become less amusing to
     me than to other people. However, I believe I am useful for the
     present, and the life here suits me on the whole. But I will report
     again soon if the symptoms become more unfavourable, and ask your
     opinion as to my plans for the season if the Delaport Green
     alliance breaks down before then.

                              "Yours affectionately,

                                     "MOLLY DEXTER."

CHAPTER VIII

AT GROOMBRIDGE CASTLE

Mrs. Delaport Green counted it as a large asset in Molly's favour that Sir Edmund Grosse was
so attentive. Adela did not seriously mind Sir Edmund's indifference to herself if he were
only a constant visitor at her house, but she was far from understanding the motives that drew
him there to see Molly. In fact, having decided, on the basis of his own theory of the conduct
of Madame Danterre, that Molly had no right to any of the luxuries she enjoyed, he had been
prepared to think of her as an unscrupulous and designing young woman. Somehow, from the moment
he first saw her he felt all his prejudices to be confirmed. There was something in Molly which
appeared to him to be a guilty consciousness that the wealth she enjoyed was ill-gotten. Miss
Dexter, he thought, had by no means the bearing of a fresh ingenuous child who was innocently
benefiting by the wickedness of another. The poor girl was, in fact, constantly wondering whether
the people she met were hot partisans of Lady Rose Bright, or whether they knew of Madame Danterre's
existence, and if so, whether they had the further knowledge that Miss Molly Dexter was that
lady's daughter. They might, for either of these reasons, have some secret objection to herself.
But she was skilful enough to hide the symptoms of these fears and suspicions from the men
and women she usually came across in society, who only thought her reserve pride, and her occasional
hesitations a little mysterious. From Sir Edmund she concealed less because she liked him much
more, and he kindly interpreted her feelings of anxiety and discomfort to be those of guilt
in a girl too young to be happy in criminal deceit. With his experience of life, and with his
usually just perceptions, he ought to have known better; but there is some quality in a few
men or women, intangible and yet unmistakable, which makes us instinctively suspect present,
or foretell future, moral evil; and poor Molly was one of these. What it was, on the other
hand, which made her trust Sir Edmund and drew her to him, it would need a subtle analysis
of natural affinities to decide. No doubt it was greatly because he sought her that Molly liked
him, but it was not only on that account. Nor was this only because Edmund was worldly wise,
successful, and very gentle. There was a quality in the attraction that drew Molly to Edmund
that cannot be put into words. It is the quality without which there has never been real tragedy
in the relations of a woman to a man. In the first weeks in London this attraction hardly reached
beyond the merest liking, and was a pleasant, sunny thing of innocent appearance.

Mrs. Delaport Green was, for a short time, of opinion that the problem of whether to prolong
Molly's visit or not would be settled for her by a quite new development. Then she doubted,
and watched, and was puzzled.

Why, she thought, should such a great person as Sir Edmund Grosse, who was certainly in no
need of fortune-hunting, be so attentive to Molly if he did not really like her? At times she
had a notion that he did not like her at all, but at other times surely he liked her more than
he knew himself. He said that she was graceful, clever, and interesting; and the acute little
onlooker had not the shadow of a doubt that he held these opinions, but why did she at moments
think that he disliked Molly? Certainly the dislike, if dislike it were, did not prevent him
from very constantly seeking her society. It was the only intimacy that Molly had formed since
she had come up to London.

As Lent was drawing to a close, Mrs. Delaport Green became much occupied at the thought of
how many services she wished to attend. "One does so wish one could be in several churches
at once," she murmured to a devout lady at an evening party. But, finding one of these churches
to be excessively crowded on Palm Sunday, she had gone for a turn in the country in her motor
with a friend, "as, after all, green fields, and a few early primroses make one realise, more
than anything else in the world, the things one wishes one could think about quietly at such
seasons."

For Easter there were the happiest prospects, as she and Molly had been invited to stay at
a delightful house "far from the madding crowd"--Groombridge Castle--with a group of dear friends.

Molly, knowing that "dear friends" with her hostess meant new and most desirable acquaintances,
bought hats adorned with spring flowers and garments appropriate to the season with great satisfaction.

Their luggage, their bags, and their maid looked perfect on the day of departure, and Tim had
gone off to Brighton in an excellent temper. Mrs. Delaport Green trod on air in pretty buckled
shoes, and patted the toy terrier under her arm and felt as if all the society papers on the
bookstall knew that they would soon have to tell whither she was going.

"I saw Sir Edmund Grosse's servant just now," she said to Molly with great satisfaction. "Very
likely Sir Edmund is coming to Groombridge. Why does one always think that everybody going
by the same train is coming with one? Did you tell him where we were going?"

"No, I don't think so; I have hardly seen him for a week, and I thought he was going abroad
for Easter."

When the three hours' journey was ended and the friends emerged on the platform, they were
both glad to see Sir Edmund's servant again and the luggage with his master's name. There was
a crowd of Easter holiday visitors, and Mrs. Delaport Green and Molly were some moments in
making their way out of the station. When they were seated in the carriage that was to take
them to the Castle, Mrs. Delaport Green turned expectantly to the footman.

"Are we to wait for any one else?"

"No, ma'am; Lady Rose Bright and the two gentlemen have started in the other carriage."

They drove off.

"I am so glad it is Lady Rose Bright." Molly hardly heard the words.

"I have so wished to know her," Adela went on joyfully, "and she has had such an interesting
story and so extraordinary."

"Can I get away--can I go back?" thought Molly, and she leant forward and drew off her cloak
as if she felt suffocated. "To meet her is just the one thing I can't do. Oh, it is hard, it
is horrible!"

"You see," Adela continued, "she married Sir David Bright, who was three times her age, because
he was very rich, and also, of course, because she loved him for having won the Victoria Cross,
and then he died, and they found he had left all the money to some one he had liked better
all the time. So there is a horrid woman with forty thousand a-year somewhere or other, and
Rose Bright is almost starving and can't afford to buy decent boots, and every one is devoted
to her. I am rather surprised that she should come to Groombridge for a party, she has shut
herself up so much; but it must be a year and a half at least since that wicked old General
was killed, and he certainly didn't deserve much mourning at her hands."

As Adela's little staccato voice went on, Molly stiffened and straightened and starched herself
morally, not unaided by this facile description of the story in which she was so much involved.
She would fight it out here and now; nothing should make her flinch; she would come up to time
as calm and cool as if she were quite happy. And, after all, Sir Edmund Grosse would be there
to help her.

It was not until the first of the two heavy handsome old-fashioned carriages, drawn by fine,
sleek horses, was beginning to crawl up a very steep hill that its occupants began to take
an interest in those who were following.

"Who is in the carriage behind us?" asked Sir Edmund of the young man usually called Billy,
who was sitting opposite him, and whom he was never glad to meet.

"Mrs. Delaport Green and a girl I don't know--very dark and thin."

Edmund growled and fidgeted.

"Horrid vulgar little woman," he muttered between his teeth, "pushes herself in everywhere,
and I suppose she has got the heiress with her."

"Don't be so cross, Edmund," said Lady Rose. "Who is the heiress?"

"Oh! a Miss Dickson--not Dickson--what is it? The money was all made in beer"--which was really
quite a futile little lie. "But that isn't the name: the name is Dexter. The girl is handsome
and untruthful and clever; let her alone."

Rose perceived that he was seriously annoyed, and waited with a little curiosity to see the
ladies in question.

As the two carriages crawled slowly up the zigzag road, climbing the long and steep hill, the
occupants of both gazed at the towers of the Castle whenever they came in sight at a turn of
the road, or at an opening in the mighty horse-chestnuts and beeches, but they spoke little
about them. Those in the first carriage were too familiar with Groombridge and its history
and the others were too ignorant of both to have much to say. Edmund Grosse gave expression
to Rose's thought at the sight of the familiar towers when he said:

"Poor old Groombridge! it is hard not to have a son or even a nephew to leave it all to."

"He likes the cousin very much," said Rose.

"But isn't Mark Molyneux going to be a priest?" said the young man, Billy, to Lady Rose. "I
heard the other day that he is in one of the Roman seminaries--went there soon after he left
Oxford."

Edmund answered him.

"Groombridge told me he thought he would give that up. He said he believed it was a fancy that
would not last."

"He did very well at Oxford," said Rose, "and the Groombridges are devoted to him. It is so
good of them with all their old-world notions not to mind more his being a Roman Catholic."

The talk was interrupted by the two men getting out to ease the horses on a steep part of the
drive.

Rose's own point of view that a young and earnest priest, even although, unfortunately, not
an Anglican, might do much good in such a position as that of the master of Groombridge Castle,
would certainly not have been understood by her two companions.

Meanwhile, in the second carriage, Molly was becoming more and more distracted from painful
thoughts by the glory of the summer's evening, and the historic interest of the Castle. She
felt at first disinclined to disturb the unusual silence of the lady beside her. Certainly
the principal tower of the Castle, in its dark red stone, looked uncommonly fine and commanding,
and about it flew the martlets that "most breed and haunt" where the air is delicate.

The horse-chestnut leaves were breaking through their silver sheaths in points of delicate
green, and daffodils and wild violets were thick in grass and ground ivy, while rabbits started
away from within a few feet of the road.

But, although reluctant to break the silence, at last interest in the scene made Molly ask:

"Do you know the date?"

"Oh, Norman undoubtedly," said Mrs. Delaport Green; "the round towers, you know. Round towers
go back to almost any date."

Molly was dissatisfied. "You don't know what reign it was built in?"

"Some time soon after the Conqueror; I think Tim did tell me all about it. He looked it up
in some book last night."

As a matter of fact, the present Castle had been built under George III., and the towers would
have betrayed the fact to more educated observers; while even Molly could see when they came
close to the great mass of building that the windows and, indeed, all the decoration was of
an inferior type of revived Gothic. But, however an architect might shake his head at Groombridge,
it was really a striking building, massive and very well disposed, and in an astonishingly
fine position, commanding an immense view of a great plain on nearly three sides, while to
the east was stretched the rest of the range of splendidly-wooded hills on the westerly point
of which it was situated. In the sweet, soft air many delicate trees and shrubs were developed
as well as if they had been in quite a sheltered place.

Lady Groombridge was giving tea to the first arrivals when Mrs. Delaport Green and Molly were
shown into the big hall of the Castle.

"Let us come for a walk; we can slip out through this window," murmured Sir Edmund, as he took
her empty tea-cup from his cousin.

Rose began to move, but Lady Groombridge claimed her attention before she could escape.

"Do you know Mrs. Delaport Green and Miss Dexter?"

Rose, as she heard Molly's name, found herself looking quite directly into very unexpected
and very remarkable grey eyes with dark lashes. Her gentle but reserved greeting would have
been particularly negative after Edmund's warning as to both ladies, but she did not quite
control a look of surprise and interest. There was a great light in Molly's face as she saw
the young and beautiful woman whom she had dreaded intensely to meet.

Rose was evidently unconscious of a certain gentle pride of bearing, but was fully conscious
of a wish to be kindly and loving. In neither of these aspects--and they were revealed in a
glance to Molly--did Rose attract her. But Molly's look, which puzzled Rose, was as a flame
of feeling, burning visibly through the features of the dark, healthy face, and finding its
full expression in the eyes. The glory of the landscape she had just passed through, and the
excitement of finding herself in such a building, added fuel to Molly's feelings, and seemed
to give a historic background to her meeting with her enemy. Some subtle and curious sympathy
lit Rose's face for a moment, and then she shrank a little as if she recoiled from a slight
shock, and turning with a smile to Sir Edmund Grosse, she followed him down the great hall
and out into a passage beyond. He had given Molly an intimate but rather careless nod before
he turned away.

Edmund was quite silent as he walked out on the terrace, and seemed as absorbed as Rose in
the view that lay below them. But it was with the scene he had just witnessed inside the Castle
that his mind was filled. There had been something curiously dramatic in the meeting which
he would have done a great deal to prevent. But, annoyed as he was, he could not help dwelling
for a moment on the picture of the two with a certain artistic satisfaction. Rose, in her plain,
almost poor, clinging black clothes was, as always, amazingly graceful; he felt, not for the
first time, as if her every movement were music.

"But that girl is handsome. How she looked into Rose's face, the amazing little devil!--she
is plucky."

Then he caught himself up abruptly; it was no use to talk nonsense to himself. The point was
how to keep these two apart and how short Mrs. Delaport Green's visit might be made.

"Unluckily Monday is a Bank holiday, but they shall not be asked to stay one hour after the
10.30 train on Tuesday if I have to take them away myself," he murmured. Meanwhile, it was
a beautiful evening; there was a wonderful view, and Rose was here, and, for the moment, alone
with him. She ran her fingers into the fair hair that was falling over her forehead, and pushed
it back and her hat with it, so that the fresh spring air "may get right into my brain," she
said, "and turn out London blacks."

"The blacks don't penetrate in your case," said Edmund.

"I'm afraid they do," she murmured, "but now I won't think of them. Easter Eve and this place
are enough to banish worries."

"Our hostess contrives to have some worries here."

"Ah! dear Mary, I know; she can't help it; she has always been so very prosperous."

"Oh, it's prosperity, is it?" asked Edmund. He had turned from the view to look more directly
at Rose.

"Yes, I know it does not have that effect on you, because you have a happier temperament."

"But am I so very prosperous?" The tone was sad and slightly sarcastic.

"It is quite glorious: one seems to breathe in everything, don't you know, and the smell of
primroses; and it is so sweet to think that it is Easter Eve."

Mrs. Delaport Green was coming forth on the terrace, preceded by these words in her clear staccato
voice.

"Do you think," said Rose very gently to Edmund, "that we might go down into the wood?"

Presently Molly fell behind Lady Groombridge and Mrs. Delaport Green as they walked along the
terrace, and leant on the wall and looked at the view by herself.

The Castle stood on the last spur of a range of hills, and there was an abrupt descent between
it and the next rounded hill-top. Covered with trees, the sharp little valley was full of shadow
and mystery; and then beyond the great billowy tree-tops rose and fell for miles, until the
brilliant early green of the larches and the dark hues of the many leafless branches, already
ruddy with buds, became blue and at length purple in the distance.

This joy and glory of her mother earth nobody could grudge Molly, surely? But the very beauty
of it all made her more weak; and tears rose in her eyes as she looked at the healing green.

"I am tired," she thought; "and, after all, what harm can it do me to meet Lady Rose Bright?
And if Sir Edmund Grosse was annoyed to see me here, what does it matter?"

Presently Lady Groombridge and her admiring guest came back to where Molly was standing. In
the excitement of arrival and of meeting Lady Rose, and the little shock of Sir Edmund's greeting,
Molly had hardly taken stock of the mistress of the Castle. Lady Groombridge was verging on
old age, but ruddy and vigorous. She wore short skirts and thick boots, and tapped the gravel
noisily with her stick. She had almost forgotten that she had ever been young and a beauty,
and her conversation was usually in the tone of a harassed housekeeper, only that the range
of subjects that worried her extended beyond servants and linen and jam into politics and the
Church and the souls of men within a certain number of miles of Groombridge Castle.

She stood talking between Molly and Mrs. Delaport Green in a voice of some impatience as she
scanned the landscape in search of Rose.

"Dear me, where has Rose gone to? and she knew how much I wanted to have a talk with her before
dinner. And I wanted to tell her not to let our clergyman speak about incense and candles.
He was more tiresome than usual after Rose was here last time."

Mrs. Delaport Green tried to interject some civil remarks, but Lady Groombridge paid not the
slightest attention. The only visitors who interested her in the least were Rose and Edmund
Grosse. She could hardly remember why she had invited Mrs. Delaport Green and Molly when she
met them in London, and Billy was always Lord Groombridge's guest.

"Well, if Rose won't come out of the wood, I suppose we may as well come in, and perhaps you
would like to see your room;" and, with an air of resignation, she led the way.

She stood in the middle of a gorgeously-upholstered room of the date of George IV., and looked
fretfully round.

"Of course it is hideous, but I think if you have a good thing even of the worst date it is
best to leave it alone;" and then, with a gleam of humour in her eye, she turned to Molly,
"and whenever you feel your taste vitiated (or whatever they call it nowadays) in your room
next door, you can always look out of the window, you know." And then, speaking to Mrs. Delaport
Green:

"We have no light of any sort or kind, and no bathrooms, but there are plenty of candles, and
I can't see why, with large hip baths and plenty of water, people can't keep clean. Yes, dinner
is at 8.15 sharp; I hope you have everything you want; there is no bell into your maid's room,
but the housemaid can always fetch your maid."

Then she ushered Molly into the next room and, after briefly pointing out its principal defects,
she left her to rest her body and tire her mind on a hard but gorgeously-upholstered couch
until it should be time to dress for dinner.

CHAPTER IX

A LITTLE MORE THAN KIND

Edmund Grosse felt more tolerant of Billy at Groombridge Castle than elsewhere. At Groombridge
he was looked upon as a kindly weakness of Lord Groombridge's, who consulted him about the
stables and enjoyed his jokes. This position certainly made him more attractive to Edmund,
but he was not sorry that Billy, who seldom troubled a church, went there on Easter Sunday
morning and left him in undisturbed possession of the terrace.

The sun was just strong enough to be delightful, and, with an interesting book and an admirable
cigar, it ought to have been a goodly hour for Grosse. But the fact was that he had wished
to walk to church with Rose, and he had quite hoped that if it were only for his soul's sake
she would betray some wish for him to come. But if she didn't, he wouldn't. He knew quite well
that she would be pleased if he went, but if she were so silly and self-conscious as to be
afraid of appearing to want his company--well and good; she should do without it.

He had been disappointed and annoyed with Rose during their walk on the evening before. The
simple, matter-of-fact way in which they had been jogging along in London was changed. At first,
indeed, she had been natural enough, but then she had become silent for some moments, and afterwards
had veered away from personal topics with a tiresome persistency. He half suspected the truth,
that this was due to a careless word of his own which had betrayed how suddenly he had given
up his intention to spend Easter on the Riviera. If she had jumped to the conclusion that this
change was because Edmund had learnt at the eleventh hour that Rose would be at Groombridge,
she had no right to be so quick-sighted. It was almost "Missish" of Rose, he told himself,
to be so ready to think his heart in danger, and to be so unnecessarily tender of his feelings.
She might wait for him to begin the attack before she began to build up fortifications.

He was at the height of his irritation against Rose, when the three other ladies came out on
the terrace. Lady Groombridge instantly told Mrs. Delaport Green that she knew she wished to
visit the dairy, and hustled her off through the garden. Edmund rose and smiled, with his peculiar,
paternal admiration, at Molly, whose dark looks were at their very best set in the complete
whiteness of her hat and dress. Then he glanced after the figures that were disappearing among
the rose-bushes.

"The party is not in the least what your chaperone expected; indeed, we can hardly be dignified
by the name of a party at all, but you see how happy she is. She even enjoyed dear old Groombridge's
prosing last night, and she has been very happy in church, and now she is going to see the
dairy. The only thing that troubles her is that Lady Groombridge has not allowed her to change
her gown, and a well-regulated mind cannot enjoy her prayers and a visit to cows in the same
gown. Now suppose," he looked at Molly with a lazy, friendly smile, "you put on a short skirt
and come for a walk."

A little later they were walking through the woods on the hills beyond the Castle. Perhaps
he intended that Rose, who had stayed to speak to the vicar, should find that he had not been
waiting about for her return.

"I would give a good deal to possess the cheerful philosophy of Mrs. Delaport Green," he said,
as, looking down through an opening in the trees, they could see that little woman with her
skirts gracefully held up standing by while Lady Groombridge discoursed to the keeper of cows,
who looked sleek and prosperous and a little sulky the while.

"You would be wise to learn some of it from her," Edmund went on. "Isn't this nice? Let us
sit upon the ground, as it is dry, and feel how good everything is. You like this sort of thing,
don't you?"

Molly murmured "Yes," and sat down on a mossy bank and looked up into the glorious blue sky
and then at a tuft of large, pale primroses in the midst of dark ground ivy, then far down
to the fields where a group of brown cows, rich in colour, stood lazily content by a blue stream
that sparkled in the sunlight. Edmund was not hard-hearted, and Molly looked very young, and
a pathetic trouble underlay the sense of pleasure in her face. There was no peace in Molly's
eyes, only the quick alternations of acute enjoyment and the revolt against pain and a child's
resentment at supposed blame.

Pleasure was uppermost at this moment, for so many slight, easy, human pleasures were new to
her. She sat curved on the ground, with the ease and suppleness of a greyhound ready to spring,
whereas Sir Edmund was forty and a little more stiff than his age warranted.

"But when you do enjoy yourself I imagine it's worth a good many hours of our friend's sunny
existence. Oh, dear, dear!" For at that moment the dairy was a scene of some confusion; two
enormous dogs from the Castle had bounded up to Lady Groombridge, barking outrageously, and
one of them had covered her companion with mud.

"She is saying that it does not matter in the least, and that the gown is an old rag, but I'm
sure it's new on to-day, and it's impossible to say how much has not been paid for it."

Molly laughed; she felt as sure that Sir Edmund was right as if she could hear every word the
little woman was saying.

"Well, that you will allow is humbug!"

"Yes, I think I will this time, and I believe, too, that the philosophy has collapsed. I'm
sure she's a mass of ruffled feathers, and her mind is full of things that she will hurl at
the devoted head of her maid when she gets in. You can only really wound that type of woman
to the quick by touching her clothes. There now, is that severe enough?"

"Why do we always talk of Mrs. Delaport Green?" asked Molly.

"Because she is on trial in your mind and you are not quite sure whether she suits."

"I might go further and fare worse," said Molly.

"Is there no one you would naturally go to?" asked Edmund.

"There is the aunt who brought me up, Mrs. Carteret, and I'd rather--" She paused. "There is
nothing in this world I would not rather do than go back to her."

Molly's face was completely overcast; it was threatening and angry.

"Poor child!" said Edmund gently.

"I wonder," said Molly, "if anybody used to say 'poor child' when I was small. There must have
been some one who pitied an orphan, even in the cheerful, open-air system of Aunt Anne's house,
where no one ever thought of feelings, or fancies, or frights at night, or loneliness."

Edmund looked at her with a sympathy that tried to conceal his curiosity.

"Was it possible," he wondered, "that she really thought she was an orphan?"

"It's dreadful to think of a very lonely child," he said.

"But some people have to be lonely all their lives," said Molly.

Sir Edmund was touched. She had raised her head and looked at him with a pleading confidence.
Then, with one swift movement, she was suddenly kneeling and tearing to pieces two or three
primroses in succession.

"Some people have to say things that can never be really said, or else keep everything shut up."

"Don't you think they may make a mistake, and that the things can be said--" He hesitated;
he did not want to press her unfairly into confidence; "to the right person?" he concluded
rather lamely.

"Who is to find the right person?" said Molly bitterly; "the right person is easy to find for
people who have just ordinary cares and difficulties, but the people who are in real difficulties
don't easily find the right person. I doubt if he or she exists myself!"

She turned to find Edmund Grosse looking at her with far too much meaning in his face; there
was a degree and intensity of interest in his look that might be read in more than one way.

Molly blushed with the simplicity suited to seventeen rather than to twenty-one. She was very
near to the first outpouring in her life, the torrent of her pent-up thoughts and feelings
was pressing against the flood-gates. It seemed to her that she had never known true and real
sympathy before she felt that look. She held out her hands towards him with a little unconscious
gesture of appeal.

"I have had a strange life," she said; "I am in very strange circumstances now."

But Edmund suddenly got up, and before she could speak again a slight sound on the path showed
her that some one was coming.

Rose, finding every one dispersed, had taken a walk by herself in the wood. She was glad to
be alone; she felt the presence of God in the woods as very near and intimate. Her mind had
one of those moments of complete rest and feeding on beautiful things which come to those who
have known great mental suffering in their lives, and to whom the world is not giving its gaudy
preoccupations. So, walking amidst the glory of spring lit by a spiritual sunshine, Rose came
round a little stunted yew-tree to find Molly kneeling on the ground ivy, and Edmund standing
by her. Molly rose in one movement to her full height, as if her legs possessed no jointed
impediments, and a fiercely negative expression filled the grey eyes. Rose's kind hand had
unwittingly slammed the flood-gates in the moment they had opened; and Edmund, seeing that
look, and feeling the air electric, suddenly reverted to a belief in Molly's sense of guilt
towards Rose.

For the fraction of a second Rose looked helplessly at Edmund, and then held out a little bunch
of violets to Molly.

"Won't you have these? There; they suit so well with your gown."

With a quick and very gentle touch she put the violets into Molly's belt, and smiled at her
with the sunshine that was all about them.

Molly looked a little dazed, and the "Thank you" of her clear low voice was mechanical.

"I was just coming for a few minutes' walk in the wood."

Rose's voice was very rich in inflection, and now it sounded like a caress.

"But I wonder if it is late? I think I have forgotten the time, it is all so beautiful."

She laid her hand for a moment on Molly's arm.

"It is very late," said Edmund with decision, but without consulting his watch on the point.

They all moved quickly, and while making their way back to the Castle Rose and Edmund talked
of Lord and Lady Groombridge, and Molly walked silently beside them.

CHAPTER X

THE PET VICE

"May I come in?"

At the same moment the door was half opened, and Lady Groombridge, in a heavy, dark-coloured
gown, made her way in, with the swish of a long, silk train. She half opened the door with
an air of mystery, and she closed it softly while she held her flat silver candlestick in her
hand as if she wished she could conceal it, yet the oil lamps were still burning in the gallery
behind her. The appearance of the wish for concealment was merely the unconscious expression
of her mental condition at the moment.

Two women looked up in surprise as she made this unconsciously dramatic entrance into her guest's
bedroom. Lady Rose was sitting in front of the uncurtained window in a loose, white dressing-gown,
lifting a mass of her golden hair with her hair brush. She had been talking eagerly, but vaguely,
before her hostess came in, in order to conceal the fact that she wished intensely to be allowed
to go to bed.

Lady Rose made many such minor sacrifices on the altar of charity, and she was sorry for the
tall, thin, mysterious girl who, at first almost impossibly stiff and cold, had volunteered
a visit to her room to-night. It was only a very few who were ever asked to come into Rose's
room, and she had hastily covered the miniature of her dead husband in his uniform with her
small fan before she admitted Molly.

By some strange impulse, Molly had attached herself to Rose during the rest of that Easter
Sunday. Curiosity, admiration, or jealousy might have accounted for Molly's doing this. To
herself it seemed merely part of her determination to face the position without fear or fancies.
If Lady Rose found out later with whom she had spent those hours, at least she should not think
that Molly had been embarrassed. Perhaps, too, Sir Edmund's efforts to keep them apart made
her more anxious to be with her.

Having been kindly welcomed to Rose's room, Molly found herself slightly embarrassed; they
seemed to have used up all common topics during the day, and Molly was certainly not prepared
to be confidential.

The entrance of the hostess came as a relief. That lady, without glancing at Rose or Molly
as she came into the middle of the room, banged the candlestick down on a small table, and
then threw herself into an arm-chair, which gave a creak of sympathy in response to her loud sigh.

"It is perfectly disgraceful!" she said, "and now I don't really know what has happened. On
Easter Sunday night, too!"

Molly had been standing by the window, looking out on the moonlit park. She now leaned further
across the wide window-seat, so that her slight, sea-green silk-clad figure might not be obtrusive,
and the dark keen face was turned away for the same purpose.

"That woman has actually," Lady Groombridge went on, "been playing cards in the smoking-room
on Easter Sunday night with Billy and those two boys. What Groombridge will say, I can't conceive;
it is perfectly disgraceful!"

"Have they been playing for much?"

"Oh, for anything, I suppose; and Edmund Grosse says that the boy from the Parsonage has lost
any amount to Billy. They have fleeced him in the most disgraceful way."

There was a long silence. Rose looked utterly distressed.

"If he had only refused to play," she said at last, as if she wished to return in imagination
to a happier state of things.

"It's no use saying that now," said Lady Groombridge, with an air of ineffable wisdom.

Molly Dexter bit her tiny evening handkerchief, and her grey eyes laughed at the moonlight.

"Well, Rose, I can't say you are much comfort to me," the hostess went on presently, with a
dawn of humour on her countenance as she crossed one leg over the other.

"But, my dear, what can I say?"

The tall, white figure, brush in hand, rose and stood over the elderly woman in the chair.
Rose had had the healthy development of a girlhood in the country, but her regular features
were more deeply marked now and there were dark lines under her clear, blue eyes.

"Do you think," said the hostess in a brooding way, "that Mrs. What's-her-name Green would
tell you how much he lost, Rose, if you went to her room? Of course, I can't possibly ask her."

"Oh no; she thinks me a goody-goody old frump."

At the same moment another brush at the splendid hair betrayed a half-consciousness of the
grace of her own movements.

"She wouldn't say a word to me--she is much more likely to tell one of the men. Perhaps she
will tell Edmund Grosse to-morrow; he is so easy to talk to."

"But that's no use for to-night, and Groombridge will be simply furious if I ask him to interfere
without telling him how much it comes to. Billy won't say a word."

"I think," said Rose very slowly, "that if we all go to bed now, we shall have some bright
idea in the morning."

Before this master-stroke of suggestion had reached Lady Groombridge's brain, a very low voice
came from the window.

"Would you like me to go and ask her?"

The hostess started; she had forgotten Miss Molly Dexter. A little dull blush rose to her forehead.

"Oh dear, I had forgotten you were there; but, after all, she is no relation of yours, and
it isn't your fault, you know. Could you--would you really not mind asking her?"

"I don't mind at all. Might I take your candle?"

"Of course," said Lady Groombridge, "you won't, don't you know----"

"Say that you sent me?" The low, detached voice betrayed no sarcasm. She knew perfectly well
that Lady Groombridge disliked being beholden to her at that moment. It was rather amusing
to make her so.

For fifteen minutes after that the travelling clock by Lady Rose's bed ticked loudly, and drowned
the faint murmur of her prayers while she knelt at the prie-dieu.

Lady Groombridge knew Rose too well to be surprised. But she did not, like the young widow,
pass the time in prayer; she was worried--even deeply so. She was of an anxious temperament,
and she was really shocked at what had happened.

Molly did not come back with any air of mystery, but with a curiously negative look.

"Thirty-five pounds," she said very quietly.

Lady Groombridge sat up, very wide awake.

"More than half his allowance for a whole year," she said with conviction.

"Oh dear, dear," said Lady Rose, rising as gracefully as a guardian angel from her prie-dieu.

Molly made no comment, although in her heart she was very angry with Mrs. Delaport Green. Her
quick "Good-night" was very cordially returned by the other two.

"Now tell me something more about Miss Molly Dexter," said Rose, sinking on to a tiny footstool
at Lady Groombridge's feet as soon as they were alone.

"I am ashamed to say that I know very little about her; I am simply furious with myself for
having asked them at all. I don't often yield to kind-hearted impulses, and I'm sure I'm punished
enough this time."

Lady Groombridge gave a snort.

"But who is she? Is she one of the Malcot Dexters?"

"Yes; I can tell you that much. She is the daughter of a John Dexter I used to know a little.
He died many years ago, not very long after divorcing his wife, and this poor girl was brought
up by an aunt, and Sir Edmund says she had a bad time of it. Then she made one of those odd
arrangements people make nowadays, to be taken about by this Mrs. Delaport Green, and I met
them at Aunt Emily's, and, of course, I thought they were all right and asked them to come
here. After that I heard a little more about the girl from some one in London; I can't remember
who it was now."

"Poor thing," said Rose; "she looks as if she had had a sad childhood. But what curious eyes;
I find her looking through and through me."

"Yes; you have evidently got a marked attraction for her."

"Repulsion, I should have called it," said Rose, with her gentle laugh.

Lady Groombridge laughed too, and got up to go to bed.

"And what became of the mother?"

"She is living--" said the other; then she caught her sleeve in the table very clumsily, and
was a moment or two disengaging the lace. "She is living," she then said rather slowly, "in
Paris, I think it is, but this girl has never seen her."

"How dreadful!"

"Yes. Good-night, Rose; do get to bed quickly,--a wise remark when it is I who have been keeping
you up!"

Lady Groombridge, when she got to her own room, murmured to herself:

"I only stopped just in time. I nearly said Florence, and that is where the other wicked woman
lives. It's odd they should both live in Florence. But--how absurd, I'm half asleep--it would
be much odder if there were not two wicked women in Florence."

Sir Edmund was aware as soon as he took his seat by Molly at the breakfast-table that she knew
why Lady Groombridge was pouring out tea with a dark countenance. He put a plate of omelette
in his own place, and then asked if Molly needed anything. As she answered in the negative
he murmured as he sat down:

"Mrs. Delaport Green is not down?"

"She has a furious toothache."

Molly's look answered his.

"I suppose there is no such thing as a dentist left in London on Easter Monday?"

No more was safe just then; but by common consent they moved out on to the terrace as soon
as they had finished breakfast.

"It is too tiresome, too silly, too wrong," said Molly.

"Yes; the pet vice should be left at home," said Edmund. "Many of them do it because it's fashionable,
but this one must have it in the blood. I saw her begin to play, and she was a different creature
when she touched the cards. What sort of repentence is there?"

"I found her crying last night like a child, but this morning I see she is going to brazen
it out. But she wants to quarrel with me at once, so I don't get much confidence."

"But you don't mind that?"

"Not in the least, only--" Molly sighed, but intimate as their tone was, she did not now feel
any inclination to reveal her greater troubles.

"I don't want to end up badly with my first venture, and I have nowhere else to go. For to-day
I think she will talk of going to see the dentist until she finds out how she is treated here."

"Oh! that will be all right for to-day," said Edmund. "There are no possible trains on Bank
holiday, and no motor. Let her get off early to-morrow."

Molly had evidently sought his opinion as decisive, and she turned as if to go and repeat it
to Mrs. Delaport Green.

"But what will you do yourself?" he asked very gently.

"I shall go away with her, and then--I wonder--" She hesitated, and looked full into his face.
"Would you be shocked if I took a flat by myself? I don't want to hunt for another Mrs. Delaport
Green just now."

Sir Edmund paused. It struck him for a moment as very tiresome that he should be falling into
the position of counsellor and guide to this girl, while he had anything but her prosperity
at heart. He looked at her, and there was in her attitude a pathetic confidence in his judgment.

"I don't want," she went on, holding her head very straight and looking away to the wooded
hills, "I don't want to do anything unconventional."

A deep blush overspread the dark face--a blush of shame and hesitation, for the words, "your
mother's daughter ought to be more careful than other girls," so often in poor Molly's mind,
were repeated there now.

"If there were an old governess, or some one of that sort," suggested Sir Edmund, with hesitation.

"Oh yes, yes!" cried Molly eagerly; "there is one, if I could only get her. Oh, thank you,
yes! I wonder I did not think of that before." And she gave a happy, youthful laugh at this
solution.

"Is it some one you really care for?" asked Edmund, with growing interest.

"I don't know about really caring"--Molly looked puzzled--"but she would do. There is one thing
more I wanted to ask you. About the silly boy last night: whom does he owe the money to? I
know nothing about bridge."

"He owes it to Billy."

Molly looked sorry.

"I thought, if it were to Mrs. Delaport Green----"

"You might have paid the money?" Edmund smiled kindly at her. "No, no, Miss Dexter, that will
be all right."

She turned from him, laughing, and went indoors to Mrs. Delaport Green's room.

She found that lady writing letters, and the floor was scattered with them, six deep round
the table. She put her hand to her face as Molly came in.

"There are no possible trains," said Molly, "so I'm afraid you must bear it. Sir Edmund advises
us to go by an early train to-morrow: he thinks to-day you would be better here, as there won't
be a dentist left in London."

"I am very brave at bearing pain, fortunately," was the answer, "and I am trying, even now,
to get on with my letters. I think I shall go to Eastbourne to-morrow; there are always good
dentists in those places. I love the churches there, and the air will brace my nerves. I might
have gone to Brighton only Tim is there. Will you"--she paused a moment--"will you come to
Eastbourne too?"

Mrs. Delaport Green was not disposed to have Molly with her. She was exceedingly annoyed at
the débâcle of her visit to Groombridge--a visit which she was describing in glowing terms
in her letters to all her particular friends. It would be unpleasant to have Molly's critical
eyes upon her; she liked, and was accustomed to, people with a very different expression.

Molly, however, ignoring very patent hints with great calmness and firmness, told her that
she intended to stay with her for just as long as it was necessary before finding some one
to live with in a little flat in London. She felt the possibility, at first, of Mrs. Delaport
Green's becoming insolent, but she was presently convinced that she had mastered the situation.
They agreed to go to Eastbourne together next day, and then to look for a flat for Molly in
London. The suggestion that Mrs. Delaport Green might help Molly to choose the furniture proved
very soothing indeed.

Molly went down-stairs again to let Sir Edmund know they were not going to leave till next
morning, and to find out if he had succeeded in speaking to Lady Groombridge.

As she passed through the hall, she saw that he was sitting with Lady Rose by a window opening
on to the terrace. She was passing on, being anxious not to interrupt them, but Rose held out
her hand.

"I've hardly seen you this morning. Do come and sit with us." And then, as Molly rather shyly
sat down by her side on a low sofa, Lady Rose went on:

"I was just telling Sir Edmund a very beautiful thing that has happened, only it is very sad
for dear Lord Groombridge and for her. They have only had the news this morning, but it is
not a secret, and it is very wonderful. You know that this place was to go to a cousin, quite
a young man, and they liked him very much. They did mind his being a Roman Catholic, but they
were very good about it, and now he has written that he has actually been ordained a priest,
and that he will not have the property or the Castle as he is going to be just an ordinary
parish priest working amongst the poor. It is wonderful, isn't it? They say the next brother
is a very ordinary young man--not like this wonderful one--and so they are very much upset
to-day, poor dears. They knew he was studying for the priesthood, but they did not realise
that the time for his Ordination had really come."

Molly murmured shyly something that sounded sympathetic, and then, looking at Sir Edmund, ventured
to say:

"Mrs. Delaport Green would like to stay till the early train to-morrow. But have you seen Lady
Groombridge?"

"Yes; it's all right--or rather, it's all wrong--but she won't tell Groombridge to-day, and
she will be quite fairly civil, I think."

"And this news," said Rose gently, "will make them both think less of that unfortunate affair
last night."

Molly rose and moved off with an unusually genial smile.

CHAPTER XI

THE THIN END OF A CLUE

Edmund Grosse later on in the morning strolled down to the stables. He had been there the day
before, but he had still something to say to the stud-groom, an old friend of his, who had
the highest respect for the baronet's judgment.

Edmund loved a really well-kept stable, where hardly a straw escapes beyond the plaited edges,
where the paint is renewed and washed to the highest possible pitch of cleanliness, and where
a perpetual whish of water and clanking of pails testify to a constant cleaning of cobblestone
yard and flagged pavement.

In the middle of Groombridge Castle stable-yard there was an oval of perfect turf, and that
was surrounded by soft, red gravel; then came alternate squares of pavement and cobble-stones,
on to which opened the wide doors of coach-houses and stables and harness-rooms, and the back
gate of the stud-groom's house.

An old, white-haired, ruddy-faced man standing on the red gravel smiled heartily when Sir Edmund
appeared. The man was in plain clothes, with a very upright collar and a pearl horseshoe-pin
in his tie; his figure was well-built, but showed unmistakably that his knees had been fixed
in their present shape by constant riding.

He touched his hat.

"How's the mare to-day, Akers?" asked Sir Edmund.

"Nicely, nicely; it's a splendid mash that, Sir Edmund. Old Hartley gave me the recipe for
that. He was stud-groom here longer than I have been, in the old lord's day. He had hoped to
have had his son to follow him, but the lad got wild, and it couldn't be."

The old man sighed, and changed the conversation. "Will you come round again, sir?"

"Yes," said Edmund; "I don't mind if I do. But you've got a son of your own about the stable,
haven't you?" he asked, as they turned towards the other side of the yard.

"I had two, Sir Edmund," was the brief and melancholy answer. "Jimmy's here, but the lad I
thought most on, he went and enlisted in the war, and he couldn't settle down again after that.
Jimmy, he'll never rise to my place--it would not be fair, and I wouldn't let his lordship
give it a thought--but the other one might have done it."

Sir Edmund felt some sympathy for the stay-at-home, whom he knew. "He seems a cheerful, steady
fellow."

"He's steady enough, and he's cheerful enough," said his father, in a tone of great contempt;
"but the other lad had talent--he had talent."

Both men had paused in the interest of their talk.

"My eldest son, Thomas, of whom I'm speaking, went to the war in the same ship as General Sir
David Bright, and there's a thing I'd like to tell you about that, Sir Edmund. It never came
into my head how curious a thing it was till yesterday--last night, I may say. Lady Rose Bright's
lady's-maid come in with Lady Groombridge's lady's-maid to see my wife, and you'll excuse me
if I do repeat some woman's gossip when you see why I do it. Well, the long and short of it
was that it seems Lady Rose Bright has been left rather close as to fortune for a lady in her
position, and the money's all gone off elsewhere. Then the maid said, Sir Edmund--whether truly
or not I don't know, naturally--that there had been hopes that another will might be sent home
from South Africa, but that nothing came of it. I felt, so to speak, puzzled while I was listening,
and afterwards my wife says to me while we were alone, she says, 'Wasn't it our Thomas when
he was on board ship wrote that he had put his name to a paper for Sir David Bright?'--witnessing,
you'll understand she meant by that, sir--'and what's become of that paper I should like to
know,' says she. So she up and went to her room and took out all Thomas's letters, and sure
enough it was true."

Akers paused, and then very slowly extracted a fat pocket-book from his tight-fitting coat,
and pulled out a letter beautifully written on thin paper. He held it with evident respect,
and then, after a preparatory cough, he began to read:

"'I was sent for to-day, and taken up with another of our regiment to the state cabins by Sir
David Bright's servant, and asked to put my name to a paper as witness to Sir David Bright's
signature, and so I did.'"

Akers stopped, and looked across his glasses at Sir Edmund.

"I don't know if you will remember Sir David's servant, Sir Edmund; he was killed in the same
battle as Sir David was, poor fellow. A big man with red hair--a Scotchman--you'd have known
that as soon as he opened his mouth. He'd have chosen my boy from having known him here, in
all probability."

"Yes, yes," said Grosse impatiently; "but how do you know that what he witnessed was a will?"

"Well, of course, I don't know, Sir Edmund, and of course the boy didn't know what was in the
paper he witnessed; but the missus will have it that that paper was a will, and there'll be
no getting it out of her head that the right will has been lost. I was wondering about it when
I see you come into the yard, and I thought I'd just let you see the lad's letter. It could
do no harm, and it might do good."

Edmund had been absolutely silent during this narrative, with his eyes fixed on the stud-groom's
face.

"And where is Thomas now?" he asked, in a low voice.

"He's in North India somewhere, Sir Edmund, but that is his poor mother's trouble; we've not
had a line from him these three months."

"Oh, I'll find him for you," said Edmund, and he was just going to ask what regiment Thomas
was in when they were disturbed by the appearance of Billy emerging from the hunters' stable,
and Edmund Grosse felt an unwarrantable contempt for a young man who dawdles away half the
morning in the stable.

"Should I find you at six o'clock this evening?" he asked, in a low voice, of the stud-groom;
and having been satisfied on that point, he strolled off and left Billy to talk of the horses.

Edmund Grosse felt for the moment as if the missing will were in his grasp, and he was quite
sure now that he had never doubted its existence. What he had just heard was the very first
thing approaching to evidence in favour of his own theory, which he had hitherto built up entirely
on guess-work. Of course, the paper might have been some ordinary deed, some bit of business
the General had forgotten to transact before starting. But, if so, he felt sure that it must
have been business unknown to the brothers Murray, as they had discussed with Grosse every
detail of Sir Edmund's affairs. One thing was certain: it would be quite as difficult after
this to drive out of Edmund Grosse's head the belief that this paper was a will as it would
be to drive it out of the head of Mrs. Akers.

Edmund was in excellent spirits at luncheon. In the afternoon he drove with Lady Groombridge
and Rose and Molly to see a famous garden some eight miles off, the owners of which were away
in the South. The original house to which the gardens belonged had been replaced by a modern
one in Italian style at the beginning of the nineteenth century. It was not interesting, and
Lady Groombridge gave a sniff of contempt as she turned her back on it and her attention, and
that of her friends, to the far more striking green walls beyond the wide terraced walk on
the south side of the building.

In the midst of ordinary English country scenery, these gardens had been set by a great Frenchman
who had caught the strange secret of the romance of utterly formal hedges. He could make of
them a fitting framework for the glories of a court, or for sylvan life in Merrie England.
There were miles of hedges; not yew, hornbeam had been chosen for this green, tranquil country.
At one spot many avenues of hedges met together as if by accident, or by some rhythmic movement;
it was a minuet of Nature's dancing, grown into formal lines but not petrified--every detail,
in fact, alive with green leaves. If you stood in the midst of this meeting of the ways, the
country round outside, seen in vistas between the hedges, was curiously glorified, more especially
on one side where the avenues were shortened. There one saw larger glimpses of fields and woods
and bits of common-land that seemed wonderfully eloquent of freedom and simplicity, nature
and husbandry. But if you had not seen those glimpses through the lines of strange, stately,
regal dignity--the lines of those mighty hedges--you would not have been so startled by their
charm. That was the triumph of the genius of Lenôtre: he had seen that, framed in the sternest
symbols of rule and order, one could get the freshest joy in the pictures of Nature's untouched
handiwork. On the west side the avenues of hedges disappeared into distant vistas of wood,
one only ending in a piece of most formal ornamental water. I don't know how it was, but it
was difficult not to be infected by a curious sense of orgy, of human beings up to their tricks--love
tricks, drinking and eating--perhaps murdering tricks--all done in some impish fantastic way,
between those long hedges or behind them. If there were not something going on down one avenue
you looked into, it was happening in another.

Somewhat of all this Edmund said to Molly as they strolled between the hedges which reached
far above his head, but she felt that he was absent-minded while he did so. He had planned
for himself a walk and a talk with Rose, but he had reckoned without his hostess, who had shown
so unmistakably that she intended him to amuse Molly that it would have been discourteous to
have done anything else. He had felt rather cross as he saw Lady Groombridge and Rose turn
down one of the longest walks, one that seemed indeed to have no ending at all, with an air
of finality, as if their tête-à-tête were to be as long as the path before them, and as secret
as the hedges could keep it. He would never have come out driving with three women if he had
not hoped to get a talk alone with Rose. He told himself that Rose's avoidance of him was becoming
quite an affectation, and after all, he asked himself, what had he done to be treated like this?

"Why, if I were trying to make love to her she could not be more absurd! The only time after
our first walk here that we have been alone she made Miss Dexter join us, and as the girl would
not stay Rose found she must write letters."

As soon as he had made up his mind that he would show Rose what nonsense it all was, he could
and did--not without the zest of pique--turn his attention to Molly.

"Lady Groombridge doesn't frame well here, does she?" he said, smiling. "Rather a shock at
that date--the tweed skirt and the nailed boots and the felt hat."

"Yes; but Lady Rose floats down between the hedges as if she had a long train, only she hasn't,"
laughed Molly. "The hem of her garment never touches the earth, as a matter of fact. I wonder
how it is done."

"You are right," said Edmund; "and, do you know another thing about Rose?--whatever she wears
she seems to be in white."

"I know," answered Molly. "I see what you mean."

"It may be," said Edmund, "because she always wore white as a young girl. I remember the day
when David Bright first saw her she was in white." Edmund had for a moment forgotten entirely
why he should not have mentioned David Bright. If Molly could have read his mind at the next
moment she would have seen that he was expressing a most fervent wish that he had never met
her. How little he had gained, or was likely to gain, from her, and how stupid and tiresome,
if not worse, was this appearance of friendship. He felt this much more strongly on account
of the morning's discovery, and he was determined to keep on neutral ground.

"Have you ever seen Versailles?" he asked.

"No; I have seen absolutely nothing out of England except India, when I was a small child."

There it was again! He could not let her give him any confidences about India or anything else.

"Well, the hedges at Versailles don't impress me half as much as these do, and yet these are
not half so well known. There's more of nature here, and they are not so self-contained. At
Versailles the Court and its gardens were the world, and nature a tapestry hanging out for
a horizon; here it is amazing how the frame leads one's eyes to the great, beautiful world
outside. I never saw meadows and woods look fairer than from here."

They were silent; and in the silence Grosse heard shouting and then saw a huge dog dragging
a chain, rushing along the avenue towards them, while louder shouts came from the opposite
direction.

"We must run," he said very quietly, "there's something wrong with it;" and two men, still
calling and waving their arms, appeared at the end nearest the house. Edmund took Molly by
the arm, and they ran to meet the men.

"Get the lady over the kitchen-garden wall!" shouted one who held a gun, and as they came to
the end of the hedge on their left they saw a wall at right angles to it about five feet high.
Molly looked for any sort of footing in the bricks for one second, and then she felt Grosse
lift her in his arms, and deposit her on the top of the wall. She rolled over on the other
side into a strawberry bed in blossom. She heard a gun fired as she jumped to her feet, and
a second shot followed.

"He's dead, sir," she heard a voice say. "I'll open the gate for the lady."

And then a garden gate a few yards off was opened inward, and Molly walked to meet the man
whom she supposed to be a head gardener. She thanked him and went through the gate, to find
Edmund, with a very white face, leaning back on a stone bench built into the wall.

"The gentleman strained himself a bit," said the gardener, in a tone of apology to Molly. "I
can't think how he come to break his chain"--he meant the dog this time. "I've said he ought
to be shot long ago; now they'll believe me. Why, he bit off the porter's ear at the station
when he first come, and he was half mad with rage to-day."

"I'm all right," said Edmund, with a kindly smile to the horribly distressed Molly. She went
up to him with a gentle, tender anxiety on her face that betrayed a too strong feeling, only
he was just faint enough not to notice it.

"It's nothing, child," he said in the fatherly tone that to Molly meant so far too much. "The
merest rick. I forgot, in the hurry, to think how high I was lifting you, and I also forgot
that there might be cucumber frames on the other side!"

"I wouldn't have said 'over the garden wall,' sir, if there had been," said the gardener with
a smile, as he offered a glass of water that had been fetched by the other man, whose coat
and gaiters proclaimed him unmistakably a keeper.

"A fine dog, poor fellow," said Edmund to the latter.

The keeper shook his head. "I don't deny it, sir, but there are fine lions and fine bears,
too, sir, that are kept locked up in the Zoölogical Gardens." Evidently the gardener and the
keeper were of one opinion in this matter.

Presently Sir Edmund was so clearly all right that the men, after being tipped and having all
their further offers of help refused, went away.

Edmund and Molly were left alone.

"How well you run!" he said, smiling.

"Yes; even without a ferocious dog behind me I can run fairly well," she said. "But I wish
you had let me get over that wall alone. And I wish they could have spared that splendid animal."

"After all, he would have been shot whether we had been there or not," said Edmund. "My only
bad moment was listening for the crash of broken glass and thinking that you were cut to pieces."

"You are sure that you have not hurt yourself?" Her grey eyes were large with anxiety.

Edmund, laughing, held up his hand, which was bleeding.

"I see I have sustained a serious injury of which I was not aware in the excitement of the crisis."

Molly examined his hand with a professional air. Edmund let her wash it with her handkerchief
dipped in the glass of water, and bind it with his own. Her touch was light and skilful, and
it would have been absurd to refuse to let her do it. But, as holding his wrist she raised
it a little higher to turn her bandage under it, her small, lithe, thin hand was close to his
face, and he gave it the slightest kiss.

Any girl who had been abroad would have taken it as little more than the merest politeness,
but to Molly it came as a surprise. A glow of quick, deep joy rose within her; her cheeks did
not blush, for this was a feeling too peaceful, too restful for blushes or any sort of discomfort.

"This young lady can run like a deerhound," said Edmund, "and bandage like a surgeon."

"But that's about all she can do," laughed Molly. "Ah! there"--she could not quite hide the
regret in her voice--"there are Lady Groombridge and Lady Rose."

CHAPTER XII

MOLLY'S NIGHT WATCH

That night Molly could write it on the tablets of her mind that she had passed a nearly perfect
day. The evening had not promised to be as happy as the rest, but it had held a happy hour.
Mrs. Delaport Green had made a masterly descent just in time for dinner. Molly smiled at the
thought when alone in her room. A beautiful tea-gown had expressed the invalid, and was most
becoming.

"Every one has been so kind, dear Lady Groombridge; really, it is a temptation to be ill in
this house--everything so perfectly done."

Lady Groombridge most distinctly grunted.

"Why is toothache so peculiarly hard to bear?" She turned to Edmund Grosse.

"It wants a good deal of philosophy certainly, especially when one's face swells; but yours,
fortunately, has not lost its usual outline." And he gave her a complimentary little bow.

"Oh! there you are wrong," cried the sufferer. "My face is very much swollen on one side."

But she did not mention on which side the disfigurement was to be seen, and she ate an excellent
dinner and talked very brightly to her host, who could not think why his wife had taken an
evident dislike to the little woman. Edmund teased her several times, and would not let her
settle down into her usual state of self-content, but after dinner she wisely took refuge with
the merciful Rose.

Lady Groombridge meanwhile gave Molly a dose of good advice, kindly, if a little roughly, administered.

"I was pretty and an orphan myself, and it is not very easy work; then you have money, which
makes it both better and worse. Be with wise people as much as you can; if they are a little
dull it is worth while. If you take up with any bright, amusing woman you meet, you will find
yourself more worried in the long run;" and she glanced significantly at Mrs. Delaport Green.

The obvious nature of the advice, of which this remark is a sample, did not spoil it. Sometimes
it is a comfort to have the thing said to us that we quite see for ourselves. In to-day's unwonted
mood Molly was ready to receive very ordinary wisdom as golden.

And then Lady Groombridge discovered that Molly was musical, and the older woman loved music,
finding in it some of the romance which was shut out by her own limitations and by a life of
over great bustle and worry.

So Molly found in her music expression for her joy in the spring, and her wistful, undefined
sense of hope in life.

Lady Groombridge, sitting near her, listened almost hungrily, and asked for more. She was utterly
sad to-night with the "might have been" of a childless woman. The news of the final sacrifice
on the part of the heir to Groombridge, of all that meant so much to herself and her husband,
had made so keen to her the sense of emptiness in their old age. And the music soothed her
into a deeper feeling of submission that in reality underlay the outward unrest and discontent
of to-day. Submission was, at one time, the most marked virtue of every class in our country,
and it may be found sometimes in those who, having lost all other conscious religion, will
still say, "He knows best," revealing thereby the bed-rock of faith as the foundation of their
lives. Lady Groombridge had not lost her religious beliefs, but she was more dutiful than devout,
and did not herself often reflect on what strength duty depended.

And Molly, who knew nothing of submission, yet ministered to the older woman's peace by her
music. When the men came out, Lord Groombridge took a chair close to his wife's as if to share
in her pleasure, and Edmund moved out of Molly's sight. She sometimes heard the voice of Rose
or of Billy or of Mrs. Delaport Green, but not Sir Edmund's, and she naturally thought he was
listening, whereas part of the time he was reading a review. But as the ladies were going up
to bed, he said, looking into the large, grey eyes:

"Who said she could do nothing but run like a deerhound and bandage like a surgeon? And now
I find she can play like an artist. What next?"

And Molly, standing in her room, said to herself that it had been the happiest day of her life.

But a moment later the maid came in, and while helping to take off her dinner dress, told her
mistress that the kitchenmaid in a room near hers was groaning horribly. It seemed that Lady
Groombridge had given out some medicine, and Lady Rose had sent up her hot-water bottle and
her spirit-lamp, and had advised that the bottle be constantly refilled during the night.

"But I'm sure, miss, she shouldn't take that medicine. I took on myself to tell her not to
till I'd spoken to you, and I'm sure I don't know who is going to sit up filling bottles to-night.
Lady Groombridge's maid"--in a tone of deep respect--"isn't one to be disturbed, and the scullerymaid
won't get to bed till one in the morning: this girl being ill it gives her double work."

Molly instantly rose to the situation. She knew of better appliances than the softest hot-water
bottles, and soon after her noiseless entrance into the housemaid's attic the pain had been
relieved. But, being a little afraid that the girl was threatened with appendicitis, she knew
that if that were the case the relief from the application she had used was only temporary.
However, the patient rested longer than she expected. Molly sat by the open window, while behind
her on the two narrow beds lay the sick girl and the now loudly-snoring scullerymaid, who had
come up a little before twelve o'clock.

"Not quite six hours' sleep that girl will get to-night," mused Molly, "and then downstairs
again and two hours' work before the cook comes down to scold her. What a life!"

But, after all, Molly had noticed the blush with which the girl had put a few violets in a
little pot on the chimney-piece. Was it quite sure that Miss Dexter's life would be happier
than that of the snorer on the bed, who smiled once or twice in her noisy sleep?

"There is happiness in this world after all," mused Molly, soothed by thoughts of the past
day, by the stillness on the face of the earth, and by a certain rest that came to her with
all acts of kindness--a certain lull to those activities of mind and instinct that constantly
led her out of the paths of peace.

This was a sacred time of the night to Molly. It was associated in her mind with the best hours
she had ever lived, hours of sick nursing and devotion, hours of real use and help. For months
now she had been living entirely for herself, to fight her own battle and make her own way
in a hostile world. She had had much excitement and even real pleasure. Her imagination had
taken fire with the notion that she must assert herself or be crushed in the race of life.
Heavy ordinary people would find it hard to understand Molly's strange idealisation of the
glories of the kingdom of this world which she meant to conquer. And if she were frustrated
in her passion for worldly success, there were capacities in her which she as yet hardly suspected,
but she did feel at times the stirrings of evil things, cruelty, revenge, and she hardly knew
what else. How could people understand her? She shrank from understanding herself.

But to-night she knew the inspiration of another ideal; she recognised the possibility of aims
in which self hardly counts. There had been indeed a stir in the minds of all at Groombridge
when they knew of the final step taken by the heir. Molly, looking up at the great castle,
on her homeward drive, with its massive towers and its most commanding position, had felt more
and more impressed by an action on so big a scale. It was impossible to be at Groombridge and
not to feel the great and noble opportunities its possession must give any remarkable man;
and the man who could give up such opportunities must be a very remarkable man indeed. In Molly's
self-engrossed life it had something of the same effect as a great thunderstorm among mountains
would have had in the physical order.

And to-night it came over her again, and she seemed to be listening to the echoes of a far
vibrating sound. And might there not be happiness for Mark Molyneux? Might it not be happiness
for herself to give up the wretched, uncomfortable fight that life so often seemed to be, and
to let loose the Molly who could toil and go sleepless and be happy, if she could achieve any
diminution of bodily pain in man or woman, child or beast?

The dawn lightened; one or two rabbits stirred in the bracken in the near park--this was peace.
Then Molly smiled tenderly at the dawn. There might come another solution in which life would
be unselfish without such acute sacrifice, and in which evil possibilities would be starved
for lack of temptation. And all that was good would grow in the sunshine.

And the sleeping scullerymaid smiled also.

CHAPTER XIII

SIR DAVID'S MEMORY

Lady Rose Bright was faintly disturbed on Tuesday morning, and came into Lady Groombridge's
sitting-room after Mrs. Delaport Green and Molly had left the castle too preoccupied to notice
the tall figure of Grosse in a far window.

This room had happily escaped all Georgian gorgeousness of decoration, and the backs of the
books, a fine eighteenth-century collection, stood flush to the walls. The long room was all
white except for the books, the flowered chintz covers, some fine bronze statuettes, and a
few bowls of roses.

Lady Rose moved mechanically towards the empty fire-place.

It was one thing to try not to dislike Miss Dexter, and to see her in a haze of Christian love;
it was another to realise that, while she herself had slept most comfortably, Molly had not
been to bed at all because the little kitchenmaid was in pain. Humility and appreciation were
rising in Rose's mind, as half absently she gently raised a vase from the chimney-piece, and,
turning to the light to examine its mark, saw Sir Edmund looking at her from his distant window.

A little, quite a little, flush came into her cheeks; not much deeper than the soft, healthy
colour usual to them. She examined the china with more attention.

The tall figure moved slowly, lazily, down the room towards her, holding the Times in one hand.

"It's not Oriental," he said, "it's Lowestoft."

"Ah!" said Rose absently. She felt the eyes whose sadness had been apparent even to Mrs. Delaport
Green looking her over with a quick scrutiny.

"Why, in your general scheme of benevolence, have you not thought it fit, during the last few
days, to give me the chance of talking to you alone?" The tone was full of exasperation, but
ironical too, as if he were faintly amused at himself for being exasperated.

"I don't know. Have I avoided being alone with you?" Rose had turned to the chimney-piece.

Edmund Grosse sank into a low chair, crossed his legs, and looked up at her defiantly, but
with keen observation.

"It has been too absurd," he said, "you have hardly spoken to me, and you know, of course,
that I came here to see you. I meant to go to the Riviera until I heard that you were coming here."

"But you have been quite happy, quite amused. There seemed no reason why I should interrupt.
And you know, Edmund, they said that you came here every year."

"Well, I didn't come only to see you," he said, "as you like it better that way. And now, it
is about Miss Molly Dexter I want to speak to you."

This time Rose gave a little ghost of a sigh, and looked at him with unutterable kindness.
She was feeling that, after all, she had come second in his consciousness--after Miss Dexter,
whom she could not like, but who had sat up all night with the kitchenmaid.

"Why about Miss Dexter? what can I have to do with her?" The tone was almost contemptuous--not
quite, Rose was too kind.

"Do you remember that I went to Florence?"

"Yes; I did not want you to go." There was at once a distinct note of distress in her voice.
It was horribly painful to her to have to think of the things she tried so hard to bury away.

"No, but I went," he said very gently; "and it was useless, as I knew it would be. But I want
to tell you one thing which I have learnt, and which I think you ought to know, as it may be
inconvenient if you do not. It is that Miss Dexter----" Rose interrupted him quickly.

"Is the daughter of the lady in Florence?" She gave a little hysterical laugh. He looked at
her in astonishment.

"And that is why she dislikes me so much. Do you know, Edmund, I had a feeling from the moment
I first saw her that there was something wrong between us. It gave me a horrible feeling, and
then I asked Mary Groombridge about her, and she told me the poor girl's story; only she said
the mother lived in Paris. Of course Mary does not know, or she would never have asked us here
together. But that is how I knew what you were going to say; and yet I had no notion of it
till a moment ago, when it came to me in a flash. Only I wish I had known sooner!"

It was not common with Rose to say so much at a time, and there had been slight breaks and
gaps in her voice, pathetic sounds to the listener. She seemed a little--just a little--out
of breath with past sorrow and present pain. Edmund thought he would never come to know all
the inflections in that voice.

"I wish I had known sooner. I am afraid I have not been kind to her."

"And if you had known you would have cast your pearls at her feet," he said, in tender anger.
"Don't make the mistake of being too kind to her, Rose. I want you to keep her at a distance.
There is something all the more dangerous about her because she is distinctly attractive. She
has primitive passions, and yet she is not melodramatic; it's a dangerous species."

It was amazing how easy it was to take a severe view of poor Molly after she had gone away,
and how he believed what he said.

"She has never seen her mother?" asked Rose gently.

"No, but I am sure she knows about her mother," the slowness in his voice was vindictive; "and
that her mother knows what we don't know about the will."

"Edmund dear," said Rose very earnestly, "do please leave that point alone; no good can come
of it. I do assure you that no good, only harm, will come of it. It's bad and unwholesome for
us all--mother and you and me--to dwell on it. I do really wish you would leave it alone."

Edmund frowned, though he liked that expression, "mother and you and me."

"You needn't think about it unless you wish to," he answered.

"But I wish you wouldn't!"

"If I had banished it from my thoughts up till now, I could not leave it alone now, for I have
a clue."

"Oh, don't, Edmund."

"Well, it may come to nothing; only I'm glad that it makes one thing still more clear to me
though it may go no further."

He told her then of what the stud-groom had said, and ended by showing her the letter. Rose
read it in silence, and then, still standing with her face turned away, she said in a very
low voice:

"It is a comfort as far as it goes. But I knew it was so; he never meant things to be as they
are--poor David! Edmund, it is of no use to think of it. Even if the paper then witnessed were
the will, it is lost now and will never be found. I would rather--I would really rather not
think too much about it."

"No, no," he answered soothingly, "don't dear, don't dwell on it."

"I like," she answered, "to dwell on the thought that David did think of me lovingly, and did
not mean to leave me to any shame. I am sure he never meant to leave me poor, and to let me
suffer all the publicity about that poor woman. I am sure he always meant to change the will
in time, but, you see, all that mischief is done and can't be undone. I mean the humiliation
and the idea that she was in Florence all the time during our married life, and all the talk,
and my having to meet this unfortunate girl who has his money. All of them think he was unfaithful
to me, and nothing can put that right. Nothing--I mean nothing of this world--can put any of
that right. And I can't bear the idea of a quarrel and going to law with these people for money;
it may be pride, but I simply can't bear it."

"But, don't you see," said Edmund, "that if we could prove there was another will, that would
clear David's reputation."

"It won't prevent people knowing that there was the first will and all about the poor woman
in Florence."

"No; but it will make people feel that he behaved properly in the end. It will alter their
bad opinion of him."

"But it will also make them go on thinking and talking of the scandal, and if it is left alone
they will forget. People forget so soon, because there is always something new to talk about.
He will just take his place among the heroes who died for their country, and the rest will
be forgotten."

Edmund looked at her quickly, as if taking stock of the delicate nature of the complex womanly
materials he had to deal with, but her face was still averted.

"I think it's hard on David." He spoke as if yielding to her wish. "I do think it is hard.
If he did make this will, and it is lost through chance or fraud, I think it is very hard that
his last wishes should be disregarded, and his memory should suffer in all right-minded people's
opinions. Of course, it is for you to decide, but I own I should otherwise feel it wrong to
leave a stone unturned if anything could be done to restore his good name."

He felt that Rose was terribly troubled, but he could not quite realise what it was to her
to disturb her hardly-won peace of mind and calm of conscience.

"If it were not for the money!" she faltered. "I shall get to long for that money; so many
people become horrid when they have a lawsuit about a fortune. It has always seemed to me that
if the money is only for one's self one might leave it alone, and then, after all, if we went
to law and failed, things would be much worse than they were before."

"Well," said Edmund, slightly exasperated but controlling himself. "I don't mean to do anything
definite yet, but we ought to find out if we can make a case of it. We can always stop in time
if we can't get what we want, but it's worth while to try. It is not merely the money--the
less you dwell on that the better. Seriously, I think it would be very wrong that, through
any fastidiousness of yours, David's memory should not be cleared if it is possible to clear it."

The last shot had this time reached the mark. After a few minutes' silence Rose said in a very
low voice:

"But then, what can I do about it?" He felt that she was hurt, but he knew he had gained his point.

"I don't think you can do anything at this moment but allow me a free hand; I could not do
what is necessary without your permission and your trust--and, presently, let me compare notes
with you freely. I know what your judgment is worth when you can get rid of those scruples."

"Very well."

But still she did not turn round. Indeed, the wounds in her mind were too deep and too fresh
to make the subject give her anything but quivering pain. It was impossible that Edmund should
suspect half of what she felt. He naturally concluded that much of her present suffering showed
how unconquerably Rose's love for Sir David had outlived the strain put on it. To Rose it would
have been much simpler if it had been so. But in fact part of the trial to Rose was the doubt
of her own past love, and of her own present loyalty. Had she ever truly loved David while
he was still her hero "sans peur et sans reproche," could that love have been killed at all?
So much anxiety to be sure of having forgiven, so much self-reproach for the failure of her
marriage, such an acute, overwhelming sense of shame, and such shrinking from all that was
ugly and low, were intermixed and confused in poor Rose's mind that it was no wonder even Edmund,
with all his tact and his tenderness, blundered at times.

They were quite silent for some moments. Edmund wanted to see her face but he could not. Presently
she looked into the glass over the chimney-piece, and in the glass he saw with remorse a little
tear about to fall.

"I think I've caught cold," she murmured to herself. Producing a tiny handkerchief she seemed
to apply it to her nose, and so caught that one little tear. Her movements were wonderfully
graceful, but the man looking at her did not think of that. What he thought was:--How exactly
she was herself and no one else. How could she have that child's simplicity of hers, and her
amazing power of seeing through a stone wall? How could she be a saint and have all a woman's
faults? How could she live half in another world and yet with all her absurd unworldliness
be so eminently a woman of this one? She was twenty-six, but she knew what many women of fifty
never learn; she was twenty-six, yet she was more innocent than many a child of thirteen. What
a contrast to Molly's crude ignorance and hankering after success!

All the time he looked at her in silence and she did not seem to realise it. She put her handkerchief
into her belt and took it out again; she touched her hair, seeing in the glass that it was
untidy. Then she sat down on a low stool, and her soft, fluffy black draperies fell round her.
She pressed her elbows on her knees, and sank her face in her hands. She might have been alone;
he was not quite sure she was not praying. There were some moments of silence. At last she
moved, raised her head, and looked him gently full in the face.

"And you--you never talk about yourself," she said, with a thrill in her voice that he had
known so long. "I always talk so much of myself when I am alone with you."

"No," he said, with a touch of lazy anger, "I'm not worth talking about, not worth thinking
of, and you know it!"

For a moment she flushed.

"You always have abused yourself."

"Because I know what's in your thoughts, and when I am with you I can't help expressing them--there!"
he concluded defiantly, and crossed and uncrossed his legs again.

"Edmund, that isn't one bit, one little bit true. But I do wish you were happier."

"Yes, of course," he went on sardonically, "you know that too. You know that I loathe and detest
life--that I hate the morning because it begins a new day. Oh, I am bored to extinction, you
know all that, you most exasperating woman. I hate"--he suddenly seemed to see that he was
giving her pain, and the next words were muttered to himself--"no, I love the pity in your eyes."

The graceful figure sitting there trembled a little, and the white hands covered the eyes again.

"But," he went on quickly in a louder voice, "the pity's no good. You might as well expect
me to command an army to-morrow, or become an efficient Prime Minister, or an Archbishop of
Canterbury, or a Roman Catholic Cardinal, or anything else that is impossible, as become the
sort of man you would like me to be. You know so perfectly well," he laughed, "how rotten I
am; you are astonished if you find me do any sort of good--you can't help it, how can you,
when it's just and true? Do you know I sometimes have had absurd dreams of what I might have
been if you had not been so terribly clear-sighted. You stood in your white frock under the
old mulberry tree--your first long skirt--and you saw that I was no good, and you were perfectly
right, but, after all, what is your life to be now?"

Rose got up from the stool and rested one hand on the marble mantelpiece. She needed some help,
some physical support.

"Edmund," she said, "I don't think I dwell much on the future; I leave all in God's hands.
I have been through a good deal now, you must not expect too much of me." She paused. "But
what you have said to me about yourself is nonsense; I wish you would not talk like that. You
are only forty. You are very clever, very rich, you have the right sort of ambition although
you won't say so, and you are, oh! so kind. Couldn't you do something, have some real interest?"
He growled inarticulately. "Is it of no use to ask you just to think it over?"

"None whatever," he said firmly and cheerfully.

The gong sounded in the hall for luncheon.

BOOK II

CHAPTER XIV

MOLLY IN THE SEASON

"Still together?"

"Yes; and it has not turned out so badly as might be expected."

"I thought you were to have had a flat with a dear old governess?"

"I could not get Miss Carew, the governess in question, and Adela Delaport Green pressed me
to stay with her for the season."

"It does credit to the amiability of both," said Edmund.

"I don't know about that," answered Molly, "we both knew what we wanted, and that we could
not easily get it unless we combined, and so we combined."

"But was it quite easy to get over the slight friction at Groombridge?"

"Oh, yes; directly we got away Adela was all right. She felt stifled by the atmosphere, and
she recovered as soon as she got home."

Edmund would have been less surprised at the tone of this last remark if he had seen Lady Groombridge's
exceedingly offhand way of greeting Molly this same evening. That great lady, having expected
to find that Molly had, acting on her advice, abandoned Mrs. Delaport Green, was quite disappointed
in the girl when she met them still together in London, and so she extended her frigidity to
both of them.

"And you are enjoying yourself?" Edmund went on. "Come, let us sit behind those palms. You
look as if things were going smoothly."

"It is delightful."

Molly cast her grey eyes over the moving groups that were strolling about the ballroom, and
over the lights and flowers and the band preparing to begin again, and then looked up into
Edmund's face. It was a slow, luxurious movement, fitted to the rather unusually developed
face and expression. Most debutantes are crude in their enjoyment, but Molly was beginning
London at twenty-one, not at eighteen, and circumstances made her more mature than her actual
experience of society warranted. Yet it seemed to Edmund that the untamed element in her was
the more striking from the contrast. Molly accepted social delights and social conventions
as a young and gentle tigress might enjoy the soft turf of an English lawn.

The defiance in her tone when she alluded to Groombridge faded now.

"I have six balls in the next four nights, and one opera, and we are going to Ascot, then back
to London, then to Cowes, and, after that, I am going to the Italian Lakes and to Switzerland,
and wherever I like."

"Is Mrs. Delaport Green so very unselfish?"

"Oh, no; I am only going to stay with Adela till the end of the season, and then I am going
abroad with two girls who are quite delightful, and in October the flat and the governess are
to come into existence."

"Yes; everything--everything perfect," murmured Grosse, looking at her with an expression that
included her own appearance in the "everything perfect." Then, dropping his restless eyeglass,
he went on.

"And you are never bored?"

"Never for one single moment."

"Amazing! and what is more amazing is that possibly you never will be bored."

"Am I to die young then?" asked Molly.

"Not necessarily, but I believe you will enjoy too keenly, and probably suffer too keenly to
be bored."

"Did you ever enjoy very keenly?" asked Molly, with timid interest.

"Didn't I!" cried Grosse, with unusual animation; "until the last seven or eight years I enjoyed
myself hugely, but----"

"Why did it stop?" asked Molly, her large eyes straining with eagerness.

"You look like a child who must know the end of the story at once. Do you always get so eager
when you are told a story? Mine is dreadfully dull. While I had plenty of work to do, and something
to look forward to, I was amused, but then----"

"Then what?"

"Well, then I became rich, and I've been dawdling about ever since. At first I enjoyed it,
but now I'm bored to extinction."

"I can understand," said Molly, "when anything becomes quite easy it doesn't seem worth while
to do it. But isn't there anything difficult you want to do?"

"Yes," said Edmund, "there are two things; one is plainly impossible, and the other is not
hopeful, and neither of them prevents my feeling bored, for unfortunately neither of them gives
me enough to do."

"Couldn't you work more at them?" asked Molly, with much sympathy.

"No," he said, as if talking to himself, "no one has the power to make a woman change her nature,
and the other matter needs an expert. Good Heavens!" he stopped short, in astonishment at himself.

"Why, what's the matter?" asked Molly, while a deep flush of colour rose in her dark cheeks.

"You must be a witch," he said lightly; "you make me say things I don't in the least mean to
say, and that I have never said to anyone else. And here is a distracted partner, Edgar Tonmore,
coming to reproach you."

"Our dance is nearly over, Miss Dexter," said a young, fresh voice, and a most pleasing specimen
of well-built and well-trained manhood stood before them. "I have been looking for you everywhere."

Molly and Edmund rose.

He stood where they left him watching her whirl past. It was as he had suspected; she had the
gift of perfect movement.

And Molly, as she danced past, glanced towards the tall, loose figure, dignified with all its
carelessness and with some curious trick of distinction and indifference in its bearing, and
twice she caught tired eyes looking very earnestly at her.

"Good Heavens! I was talking of Rose to that girl, and of my efforts to get at her mother's
money, and I never speak of either to mortal man. What made me do it?"

Slowly he turned away and left the ballroom and the house, declining with a wave of the hand
various appeals to stay, and found himself in the street.

"Sympathies and affinities be hanged!" He said it aloud. "She isn't even really beautiful,
and I'll be hanged, too, if I'll talk to her any more."

But, alack for Molly, he did talk to her on almost every occasion on which they met. It was
from no conscious lack of royalty to Rose; it was largely because he was so full of her and
her affairs that he would in an assembly of indifferent people drift towards one who was in
any way connected with those affairs. Then one word or two, the merest "how d'ye do?" seemed
to develop instantly into talk, and shortly the talk turned to intimate things. And for him
Molly was always at her best. Many people did not like her, yet admired her, and admitted her
into their houses half unwillingly. Her speech was not often kindly, and there was an element
of defiance even in her quietness, for her unmistakable social ease was distinctly negative.
Molly was rich and dressed well, and Mrs. Delaport Green was a very clever woman, whose blunders
were rare and whose pet vice was not unfashionable. There was nothing in this life to soften
and ripen the best side of Molly. But Edmund drew out whatever she had in her that was gentle
and kindly.

It does not need the experience of many London seasons in order to realise that it is a condition
of things in which many of the faculties of our nature are suspended. It is not as a Puritan
moralist might put it, that the atmosphere of a whirlpool of carnal vice chokes higher things,
for the amusements may be perfectly innocent. Only for a time the people who are engaged in
them don't happen to think, or to pity, or to pray, or to condemn, or often, I believe, to
love, though it may seem absurd to say so. It may, therefore, be called a rest cure for aspirations
and higher ambitions and anxieties and all the nobler discontents. To Molly it was youth and
fun and brightness and forgetfulness. There was no leisure to be morbid, no occasion to be
bitter or combative. The game of life was too bright and smooth, above all too incessant not
to suffice.

Mrs. Delaport Green might be outside the circle in which Lady Groombridge disported herself
with more dignity than gaiety, but she had the entrée to some houses almost as good, if not
as exclusive, and she had also a large number of acquaintances who entertained systematically
and extravagantly. That the Delaport Greens were very rich, or lived as if they were very rich,
had from the first surprised the "paying guest." Lately it had become evident to her that if
Adela had not been addicted to cards, Molly would never have been established in her house.
She had found out by now that Mr. Delaport Green was a man of very good repute in the financial
world as being distinctly successful on the Stock Exchange. He struck Molly as a sturdy type
of Englishman, rather determined on complete independence, and liking to pay his way in a large
free fashion. She rather wondered at his having consented to the plan of the "paying guest,"
but he seemed quite genial when he came across her and inquired with sympathy after her amusements,
and evidently wished that she should enjoy herself.

Many girls whose position was undoubtedly secure, whom no one disliked and everybody was willing
to amuse, had a much less amusing summer than Molly. And Edmund Grosse, most unconsciously
to himself, was a leading figure in the warm dream of delight in which Molly lived from the
middle of May till the end of June. They did not meet often at dances, but at stiffer functions,
at the Opera, and also twice in the country--once on the river on a Sunday afternoon, and once
for a whole week-end party, which last days deserve to be treated in more detail.

The group who met under the deep shade of some historic cedars, on a hot Saturday afternoon,
to spend together a Saturday to Monday with a notably pleasant host and hostess, had carried
with them the electric atmosphere of the season that so fascinated Molly's inexperience, to
perfume it further with the June roses and light it with the romance of summer moonlight. Of
the party were Molly and her chaperone and Sir Edmund Grosse.

By this time Mrs. Delaport Green had made up her mind that Molly had decidedly better become
Lady Grosse, and she felt that it would be a pleasing and honourable conclusion to the season
if the engagement were announced before she and Molly parted. She had fleeced Molly very considerably,
but she wanted her to have her money's worth, and go away content.

It would take long to carry conviction as to the actual good and the possibility of further
good there was in Mrs. Delaport Green. Out of reach of certain temptations she might have been
quoted as a positive model of goodness and unselfish brightness. If her imitative gift had
found only the highest models, she might have been a happy nun, or a quiet, stay-at-home wife
and mother. But she was tossed into a social whirlpool where her instincts and her ambitions
and her perceptions were all confused, and out of the depths of her little spoiled soul, had
crawled a vice--probably hereditary--which might otherwise have slept. It was fast becoming
known that Molly's chaperone was a thorough gambler.

Sir Edmund Grosse was not unwilling to dawdle under the shade of an old wall with Mrs. Delaport
Green that Saturday evening in the country.

"I feel terribly responsible," she said, in her thin eager little voice; "I am sure that boy
is going to propose to my protégé!"

"What boy?" asked Edmund, in a tone of indifference.

"Edgar Tonmore."

"Is Edgar here, then?"

"Oh, no; it won't be at once. He has gone to Scotland, but he will be back before we leave London."

"Really he is an excellent fellow. I don't see why you should be anxious."

"But Molly is an orphan," she said plaintively, eyeing him quickly as she spoke.

"Even so, orphans marry and live happily ever after."

"But I'm not sure she will live happily."

"Why not?"

"I don't think she cares for him."

"Then I suppose she will refuse."

"But people so often make mistakes. I don't think dear Molly knows her own mind, and it is
so natural that she should not confide in me as I am in her mother's place."

"Leave things alone. Edgar will find out if she likes him or not."

"Will he? oh well, it's a comfort that you take that view." And she then changed the topic,
being of opinion that nothing more could be done with it. But no doubt the effect produced
in Edmund was an increase of interest in Molly's affairs. It would be exceedingly tiresome
if she should marry this attractive but penniless boy, as he knew him to be, under the impression
that she possessed enough money for them both.

Edmund had only that morning received certain intelligence of the whereabouts of young Akers,
the son of the old stud-groom.

From Florence had come the information that Madame Danterre was supposed to be in failing health,
and that she had been seldom seen to drive out of her secluded grounds this summer, whereas
last year she used to go long distances in her old-fashioned English carriage in the evenings.
Thus it became a matter of thrilling interest whether the great fortune would pass to Molly
before any evidence could be produced of the existence of the last will in which he so firmly
believed.

"I believe the old sinner knows all about it, even if she hasn't got it," Grosse murmured to
himself.

Finally he concluded that it would be better if Molly married money and not poverty, and did
not smile on the penniless Edgar Tonmore. Therefore, finding himself alone with her during
church time next morning, he thought no harm of trying to put a little spoke in the wheel to
prevent that affair going too easily. But first he asked her why she did not go to church.

"I might say, why don't you go yourself?" said Molly, "but I don't mind telling you that I
hardly ever do go."

"Why not?"

"Why not?" Molly was leaning back in a low chair under the shadow of the cedars, as still as
if she would never move again, as still as the greyhound that was lying by her. "I hate going
to church. None of it seems beautiful to me as it does to Adela. My aunt used to say that we
were not fortunate in our clergyman, but personally I don't like any clergymen. I am anti-clerical
like a Frenchwoman."

"Have you any French blood?"

"Yes; my mother was French."

"But you do good works; I remember how you nursed the kitchenmaid at Groombridge."

"I like to stop pain, but not because it is a good work. I can't stand all the fuss about good
works and committees, and nonsense about loving the poor. It's a way rich people have to make
themselves feel comfortable. Don't you think so?"

"No, I don't. I know people who make themselves exceedingly uncomfortable because they give
away half what they possess."

"Really," said Molly, a little contemptuously. She knew that he was thinking of Rose Bright.
"My opinion is that doing good works means to bustle about trying to get as much of other people's
money to give away as you can, without giving any yourself."

Edmund did not like to suggest that this opinion might be the result of special experiences
gained while living in the house of Mrs. Delaport Green.

"If," Molly went on, evidently glad to relieve her mind on the subject, "you got the money
to pay your unfortunate dressmaker, there would be some justice in that. But," she suddenly
sat up and her eyes shot fire at Edmund, "to fuss at a bazaar to show your kindness of heart
while you know you are not going to pay the woman who made the very gown you have on, is perfectly
sickening."

"It is atrocious," said Grosse, who wanted to change the subject. But this was effected by
the most unexpected apparition of Mr. Delaport Green, whom they had both supposed to be refreshing
himself by the sea at Brighton.

Mr. Delaport Green was dressed in very light grey, with a white waistcoat. His figure was curious,
as it extended in parts so far in front of the rest that it gave the impression that you must
pass your eyes over a great deal of substance in the foreground before you could see the face.
Then again, the nose was so predominant that it checked any attempt to realise the eyes and
forehead, while the cheeks were baggy and the skin unwholesome.

Edmund Grosse had only seen him on two occasions when he dined at his house, and he had liked
him at once. There was something markedly masculine about him; he knew life, and had made up
his mind as to his own part in it without delusions and without whining. He would have preferred
to have been slim and handsome, and to have known the ways of the social world from his youth,
but there were plenty of other things to be interested in, and he was not averse to the power
which follows on wealth. He was a self-made Englishman, with nothing of the Jew about him,
either for good or evil. But no apparition could have been more surprising to the two as he
came slowly over the grass to meet them. Molly saw at once that Adela's husband was exceedingly
annoyed, probably exceedingly angry, and although she had always felt his capacity for being
very angry, she had never seen him in that condition before.

"I came down in the motor to get a short talk on business with Miss Dexter," he explained,
"but I am sorry to disturb a more amusing conversation."

Edmund, of course, after that left them alone, and walked off by himself.

Molly looked all her astonishment at Adela's "Tim."

"Miss Dexter," he said very slowly, "I was given to understand when you came to us in the winter
that you were a young lady wanting a home and some amusement in London. I thought it kindly
in my wife to wish to have you with her, and, as she is young and a good deal alone" (Molly
looked the other way at this assertion), "I thought it would be for the advantage of both.
But I had no notion that there was any question of payment in the case, and I must now ask
you to tell me exactly what you have paid to Mrs. Delaport Green since first you made her acquaintance."

Molly was not entirely astonished at discovering that Adela's husband had known nothing whatever
of Adela's financial arrangements with herself. But she was so angry at this proof of what
she had up to now only faintly suspected, that it was not very difficult to make her tell all
that she knew of her share in Adela's expenses, only that knowledge proved to be of a very
vague kind. Molly had kept no accounts, and had the vaguest notion of what her bills included.
One thing she intended to conceal (but Mr. Delaport Green managed to make her confide even
that) was the fact that she had given £100 to his wife's dressmaker. He made no comment of
any sort, only firmly and quietly insisted on Molly giving him all the items she could. Then
he got up and said--

"Good-bye for the present; I want to get back in time for lunch."

And he walked away, making one or two notes in a little book he held in his hand as to the
cheque that Molly should find waiting for her next day.

Molly, left alone on the bench, did not at the first moment dwell on the thought of how far
this talk with her host would affect her own plans. She could only think of the man himself.
She had been for many weeks in his house, and had never done more than "exchange the weather"
with him, or occasionally suffer gladly the little jokes and puns to which he was addicted.
She had written to Miss Carew that his attitude towards Adela and herself was that of a busy
man towards his nursery. Since that how little she had thought about him! And now she felt
the strength in him, not weakened, but lit up with a kind of pathos. He might have been a true
friend to any man or woman. He was really fond of Adela Delaport Green, and that position in
itself was tragic enough. It was plain to Molly, although nothing had been breathed on the
subject that morning, that Tim would not find it hard to forgive his Adela. Adela would pass
almost scot-free from well-merited punishment; and yet her husband was strong enough to have
punished effectively where he deemed it necessary. Molly was puzzled because she was without
a clue to the mystery. The fact was that Tim had no wish to punish effectively. As long as
Adela passed untouched by one sin, as long as he felt sure of one great virtue in her life,
all such details as much gambling, much selfishness, absurd extravagance, could be easily forgiven.
Molly herself would be fairly dealt with and set aside; the "paying guest" was an indignity
that he would soon forget. He would have been entirely indifferent to the impression of regretful
interest that he had made upon her.

That night Edmund Grosse was Molly's confidant as to the second, and evidently final, rupture
between herself and Mrs. Delaport Green that had taken place in the afternoon. He could not
but be kind and sympathetic as to her difficulties. It was, no doubt, very blind of him not
to see that she was too quickly convinced of the wisdom of his advice, far too anxious to act
as seemed well in his opinion. It never dawned on his imagination for a moment that the most
serious part of the loss of the end of the season to Molly was the loss of his society during
that time.

They strolled in the moonlight between the cedars and under the great wall with its alternate
"ebon and ivory" of darkest evergreen growths and masses of white climbing roses, Molly's white
gown rustling a little in the stillness. And Molly discovered with joy that he was trying to
set her mind against marriage with Edgar Tonmore. If he only knew how little danger there was
of that! And under Edmund's influence she decided to offer herself for a visit of two or three
weeks to Mrs. Carteret, in the old and much disliked home of her childhood. It would look right;
it would give a certain dignity to her position after the breakdown of the Delaport Green alliance,
and it was always a great mistake to break with natural connections. So far Edmund Grosse;
and in Molly's mind it ran something like this: "He wants me to stand well with the world,
and I will do this, intolerable as it is, to please him. He likes to think that I have some
nice relations, and so I must try to be friendly with Aunt Anne Carteret, though that is the
hardest part. And he wants me to get away from Edgar Tonmore, and I would go away from so many
more people if he wished it."

The evening passed into night, and Edmund was walking alone under the wall, dreaming of Rose.

All this foolish gambling, quarrelsome, small world of men and women made such a foil to her
image. Molly and her mother, the Delaport Greens, and many others were grouped in his mind
as he purled the smoke disdainfully from his cigar. Something in Molly's walk by his side just
now had made him see again the old woman with her quick, alert movements in the garden at Florence;
after all they were cut from the same piece, the old wicked woman and the slight, dark girl
with the curious eyes. Molly must not be trusted; she must be suspected all the more because
of her attractions in the moments of dangerous gentleness. And with a certain simplicity Edmund
looked again at the moon above him, all the more glorious because secret and dark things were
moving stealthily under the trees in the lower world.

And Molly was kneeling on her low window-seat, looking out at the same moon in a mood of joy
that was transmuted half consciously into prayer by the alchemy of pure love.

CHAPTER XV

A POOR MAN'S DEATH

Early in October, Molly and Miss Carew took up their abode in a flat with quite large rooms
and a pleasing view of Hyde Park.

August and September had been two of the healthiest and most normal months that Molly had ever
spent or was likely ever to spend again. The weeks between the rupture with the Delaport Greens
and the journey to Switzerland had been trying, although it was undoubtedly much pleasanter
to be Mrs. Carteret's guest than it had ever been to be a permanent inmate of her house.

Molly--thought Mrs. Carteret--was restless, not inclined to morbid thoughts, and more gentle
than of yore, but more nervous and fanciful.

It was not until after a fortnight abroad, after the revelation of mountains realised for the
first time, that Molly had the courage to say to herself that she had been a fool during the
visit to Aunt Anne. Was it in the least likely that a man of Edmund Grosse's kind would act
romantically or hastily? Of course not. She had been as foolish as Mrs. Browning's little Effie
in dreaming that a lover might come riding over the Malcot hills on a July evening.

The girls with whom Molly had travelled were of a healthy, intellectual type, and Molly, under
their influence, had grown to feel the worth of the higher side of Nature's gifts. And so,
vigorous in mind and body, she had come to London in October, so she said, to study music.

Miss Carew was a little disappointed when Molly expressed lofty indifference as to who had
yet come to London. But that indifference did not last long when her friends of the season
began to find her out. Then Miss Carew surprised Molly by her excessive nervousness and shyness
of new acquaintances. "Carey" had always professed to love society, and had always been very
carefully dressed in the fashion of the moment. But, as a civilian may idealise warfare and
be well read in tactics, and yet be unequal to the emergency when war actually raises its grisly
head, so it was with poor Miss Carew. She simply collapsed when Molly's worldly friends, as
she called them with envious admiration, swept into the room, garnished with wonderful hats
and fashionable furs. She had none of a Frenchwoman's gift for ignoring social differences,
and she had the uneasy pride that is rare in a Celt, although she had all a Celt's taste for
refinement and show and glitter. Miss Carew sat more and more stiffly at the tea-table, until
she confided frankly to Molly--

"My dear, I am too old, and I am simply in the way. It is just too late in my life, you see,
after all the years of governess work. Of course, if my beloved father had lived, I should
never have been a governess. But as it is, I think I need not appear when you have visitors,
except now and then."

Molly acquiesced after enough protest, chiefly because she had begun to wonder if it would
be quite easy to have an occasional tête-à-tête with men friends without having to suggest
to Miss Carew to retire gracefully. She had that morning heard that Sir Edmund Grosse was in
London, but she had no reason, she told herself, to suppose that he knew where she was.

Meanwhile, she was exceedingly angry at finding that Adela Delaport Green was giving her version
of her relations with Molly in the season to all her particular friends. Molly could not find
out details, but she more than suspected that the fact of her being Madame Danterre's daughter
made up part of Adela's story, although she could not imagine how she came to know who her
mother was.

Molly would probably have brooded to a morbid degree over these angry suspicions, but that
another side of life was soon pressed upon her, a new source of human interest, in the dying
husband of a charwoman.

This woman, Mrs. Moloney, had cleaned out the flat before Molly and Miss Carew took possession.

High up in a small room in a block of workmen's buildings in West Kensington, Pat Moloney lay
dying. He and his wife had been thriftless and uncertain, they drifted into marriage, drifted
in and out of work, and, having watched their children grow up with some affection and a good
deal of neglect, had now seen them drift away, some back to the old country, and some to the
Colonies.

Mrs. Moloney counted on her fingers to remember their number and their ages, and spoke with
almost more realisation of the personalities of three little beings that had died in infancy
than of the living men and women and their children.

Moloney was far too ill by the time Molly Dexter came to see him to speak of anything distinctly.
Three years ago he had fallen from a ladder and had refused to go into the hospital, in which
decision he had been supported by his wife, who "didn't hold" with those institutions. A kindly,
rough, clever young doctor had since treated him for growing pain and discomfort, and had prophesied
evil from the first. Pat kept about and, when genuinely too ill for regular work, took odd
jobs and drifted more and more into public houses. He had never been a thorough drunkard, and
had been free from other vices, though lazy and self-indulgent. But pain and leisure led more
and more to the stimulants that were poison in his condition. At last a chill mercifully hastened
matters, and Pat, suffering less than he had for some months past, was nearing his end in semi-consciousness.
Molly Dexter then descended on the Moloneys in one of her almost irresistible cravings to relieve
suffering.

Ordinary human nature when not in pain was often too repugnant to Molly for her to be able
to do good works in company with other people. She was, as she had told Edmund Grosse, a born
anti-clerical, and she scorned philanthropists; so her best moods had to work themselves out
alone and without direction. Nor was she likely to spoil the recipients of her attentions,
partly from the strength of her character, partly because the poor know instinctively whether
they are merely the objects on which to vent a restless longing to relieve pain, or whether
they are loved for themselves.

Molly, in the village at home, had always made the expression of gratitude impossible, but
she constantly added ingratitude as a large item in the account she kept running, in her darker
hours, against the human race.

Late on a wet and windy October evening she went to undertake the nursing of Pat Moloney for
the first part of the night. She had been visiting him constantly for several weeks, and actually
nursing him for three days.

"Has the doctor been?"

"Yes, miss" (in a very loud whisper); "he says Pat is awful bad; he left a paper for you."

Molly Dexter walked across the small, bare room and took a paper of directions from the chimney-piece,
and then stood looking at the old man's heavy figure on the bed. He was lying on his side,
his face turned to the wall.

"You had better rest in the back room while I am here," she said.

"I couldn't, indeed I couldn't, miss, him being like that; you mustn't ask me to. Besides,
I've been round and asked the priest to come, and so I couldn't take my things off. I'll just
have some tea and a drop of whisky in it, and I can keep going all the night, it's more than
likely he'll die at the dawn."

Molly eyed the woman with supreme contempt.

"It isn't at all certain that he's going to die, he'll make a good fight yet if you will give
him a chance."

Mrs. Moloney looked deeply offended. It had been all very well to be guided by a lady at the
beginning of the illness, but now it was very different. She felt half consciously that science
had done its worst, and bigger questions than temperatures and drugs were at issue.

"A priest now," said Molly, in a whisper of intense scorn, "would kill him at once."

Mrs. Moloney did not condescend to reply. She had propped a poor little crucifix, a black cross,
with a chipped white figure on it, against a jam pot on a shelf under the window, and she had
borrowed two candlesticks with coloured candles from a labourer's wife on the floor beneath.
The window had been shut, so that the wind should not blow down these objects.

Molly looked at the man on the bed and sniffed.

"He must have air--" the whisper was a snort.

At that moment there was a knock on the outer door. On the iron outer stairs was standing the
priest.

"It's just the curate," said Mrs. Moloney, looking out of the window; and then she disappeared
into the tiny passage.

Molly stood defiantly, her figure drawn to its full height. She felt that she knew exactly
the kind of Irish curate who was coming in to disturb, and probably kill, the unhappy man on
the bed. Well, she should make a fight for this poor, crushed life; she would stand between
the horrible tyranny and superstition that lit those pink candles, and that would rouse a man
to make his poor wretched conscience unhappy and frighten him to death. "If there is a hell,"
she muttered, "it must be ready to punish such brutality as that."

Mrs. Moloney opened the door as wide as possible, and the priest came in. Miss Dexter looked
at him in amazement; how, and where had she seen him before?

He went straight to the bed and looked at the man in silence, while Molly looked at him. He
was about middle height, with very dark hair and eyes, a small, well-formed head, and a very
good forehead. It was not until he turned to Mrs. Moloney that Molly understood why she had
fancied that she had seen him before. She was sure now that she had seen his photograph, but,
although she was certain of having seen it, she could not remember when or where she had done so.

"Can't you open the window, Mrs. Moloney?"

"It's the only place to make into an altar, father?"

"Oh, never mind that yet; I will manage."

Molly stepped forward; whatever he was going to do, it should not be done without a protest.

"The doctor's orders are that he is not to be disturbed."

The priest did not seem aware of the exceedingly unpleasant expression on Molly's countenance.

"It would be a great mistake to wake him, of course," he said; and then, "Do you suppose he
will sleep for long?"

"I haven't the faintest notion"; the uttermost degree of scorn was conveyed in those few words.

Mrs. Moloney suppressed a sob.

"He's not been to the Sacraments for three years," she murmured.

The priest leant over the bed and looked intently at the dying man.

Mrs. Moloney opened the window and put the crucifix and candlesticks in a corner on the dirty
floor.

"It might kill him to wake him now," murmured Molly.

"Yes, that is just the difficulty." The young man was speaking more to himself than to her.

"Difficulty!" thought Molly with scorn. "Fiddlesticks!"

The silence was unbroken for some moments. The fresh autumn air blew into the room. A sandy
coloured cat came from under the bed, looked at them, and then rubbed her arched back against
the unsteady leg of the only table, which was laden with bottles and basins, finally retired
into a further corner, and upset and broke one of the pink candles that belonged to the neighbour.

But Mrs. Moloney never took her eyes off the priest's pale face.

"I'll wait until he wakes," he said to her, "but is there anywhere else I could go? It's not
good to crowd up this room."

"That's intended to remove me," thought Molly, "but it won't succeed."

Mrs. Moloney moved into the little back room, and pulled forward a chair. When the priest was
seated she shut the door behind her and whispered to him--

"Father, you'll not let his soul slip through your fingers, will you, father dear? Just because
of the poor lady who knows no better!"

"Who is she? She is not like the district visitors I've seen about in the parish."

"No, indeed; she is a lady, and I've done some work for her, and she would not be satisfied
when she heard Moloney was ill but she must come herself, and yesterday, not to grudge her
her due, father, the doctor said if he pulled through that I owed her his life. Well, that's
proved a mistake, anyhow, but she's after spoiling his last chance, and he's not been the good
man he was once, father."

"Yes, Mrs. Moloney, you must watch him carefully, and here I am if there is any change. I'm
sure that lady is an excellent nurse, and we mustn't let any chance slip of keeping him alive,
must we?"

She shook her head; this was only an English curate, still he must be obeyed.

Molly was profoundly irritated by Mrs. Moloney's proceeding to make a cup of tea for the priest,
but he was grateful for it, as he had been out at tea-time, and had come to the Moloneys' instead
of eating his dinner. He opened the window of the tiny room as far as it would go, and read
his Office by the light of the tallow candle. That finished, he sat still and began to wonder
about the lady with the olive complexion and the strange, grey eyes.

"I felt as if I should frizzle up in the fire of her wrath," he thought with a smile.

He took his rosary and was half through it when the door opened and Molly came in. She shut
it noiselessly, and then spoke in her usual unmoved, impersonal voice.

"The new medicine is not having any effect; the temperature has gone up; the doctor said if
it did so now it was a hopeless case. I must rouse him in an hour to give him another dose
and take the temperature again. After that, if it is as high as I expect it to be, you can
do anything you like to him."

As she said the last words, she went back into the other room.

The hour passed slowly, and she came again and let the priest know in almost the same words
that he was free to act as he pleased. Then she added abruptly--

"Do you mind telling me your name?"

"My name? Molyneux."

"Then are you any relation of Lord Groombridge?"

"I am his cousin."

"I have been at Groombridge." But the priest felt that the tone was not in the least more friendly.

"Moloney won't suffer now," she went on, turning towards the door, "and I think he will be
conscious for a time."

Molly was giving up her self-imposed charge; she wanted to be off. With the need for help no
longer an attraction, Moloney had almost ceased to interest her; he would remain only as part
of the darker background of her mind, as a dim figure among many in the dim coloured atmosphere
of revolt and bitterness in which her thoughts on human life would move when she had no labour
for her hands. He was another of those who suffered so uselessly, a mere half animal who had
to do the rough work of the world, and then was dropped into the great charnel house of unmeaning
death. As soon as the man began to show signs, faint signs of perception, she left the priest
by his bedside and went back into the inner room to put on the cloak she had left there. And
then she hesitated.

What would go on in the next room? She was anxious now to know more about it, because she had
caught so strange a look on Father Molyneux's face. If he had only known this man before she
could have understood it. But how could there be this passion of affection, this intensity
of feeling, for a total stranger, a rough brutal-looking fellow who was no longer in pain,
who would probably die easily enough, and probably be no great loss to those he left? She had
seen a strange intensity of reverence in the way the young man had touched the wreck upon the
bed. She had known thrills of curious joy herself when relieving physical agony; was it something
like that which filled the whole personality and bearing of the priest?

She began to feel that she could not go away; she wanted to see this thing out. It was something
entirely new to her.

Low voices murmured in the next room; she hesitated now to pass through, she might be intruding
at too sacred a moment. She believed that the priest was hearing the dying man's confession.
She had a half contemptuous dislike of this feeling of mystery and privacy. She felt she had
been foolish not to go away at once. But she did not move for nearly half an hour, and then
the door opened, and the man's wife came in and started back.

"I'm sure I thought you had gone, miss." Her manner was much more cordial than it had been
before. She was tearful and excited. "I want to raise him a bit higher, and there's a cloak
here. He is going off fast now, but he was quite himself when I left him with the father to
make his confession; he looked his old self and the good man he was for many a year--and God
Almighty knows he has suffered enough these last years to change him, poor soul."

Molly went back with her to the sick bed and helped her to raise the dying man. The dawn came
in feebly now, and made the guttering candle dimmer. Death was all that was written on the
grey face, and the body laboured for breath. The flicker of light in the mind, that had been
roused, perhaps, by those rites which had passed in her absence, had faded; there was not the
faintest sign of intelligence in the eyes now; the hands were cold and would never be warm
again. The sandy cat had crept away into the other room; and outside the great town was alive
again, the vast crowds were astir, each of whom was just one day nearer to death. There was
nothing but horror, stale, common horror, in it all for Molly. But, kneeling as upright as
a marble figure, and his whole face full of a joy that seemed quite human, quite natural, Father
Molyneux was reading prayers, and there was a curious note of triumph in the clear tones. At
first she did not heed the words; then they thrust themselves upon her, and her eyes fastened
on the dying, meaningless face, the very prey of death, in a kind of stupefaction at the words
spoken to him.

"I commend thee to Almighty God, dearest brother, and commend thee to Him whose creature thou
art; that, when thou shalt have paid the debt of humanity by death, thou mayest return to the
Maker, Who formed thee of the dust of the earth. As thy soul goeth forth from the body, may
the bright company of angels meet thee; may the judicial senate of Apostles greet thee; may
the triumphant army of white-robed Martyrs come out to welcome thee; may the band of glowing
Confessors, crowned with lilies, encircle thee; may the choir of Virgins, singing jubilees,
receive thee; and the embrace of a blessed repose fold thee in the bosom of the Patriarchs;
mild and festive may the aspect of Jesus Christ appear to thee, and may He award thee a place
among them that stand before Him for ever."

And so it went on; some of it appealing to her more, some less; some passages almost repulsive.
But her imagination had caught on to the vast outlines of the prayer--the enormous nature of
the claims made on behalf of the dying labourer.

Was it Pat Moloney who was to pass out of this darkness to "gaze with blessed eyes on the vision
of Truth"? What a tremendous assertion made with such intensity of confidence! What a curious
pageantry, too, so magnificent in its simplicity, was ordered, almost in tones of command,
by the Church Militant for the reception of the charge she was giving up. The triumphant army
of Martyrs was to come out to meet him; the Confessors were to "encircle him"; Michael was
"to receive him as Prince of the armies of Heaven." Peter, Paul, John were to be in attendance.
Nor in the rich strain was there any false ring of praise, or any attempt to veil the weakness
of humanity. "Rejoice his soul, O Lord, with Thy Presence, and remember not the iniquities
and excesses which, through the violence of anger or the heat of evil passion, he hath at any
time committed. For, although he hath sinned, he hath not denied the Father and the Son and
the Holy Ghost, but hath believed and hath had a zeal for God, and hath faithfully adored the
Creator of all things."

Was it an immense, an appalling impertinence--this great drama? Was it a mere mockery of the
impotence and darkness of man's life? Would the priest say all this at the death-bed of the
drunken beggar, of the voluptuous tyrant, of the woman who had been too hard or too weak in
the bonds of the flesh? Was it a last great delusion, a last panacea given by the Church to
those who had consented to bandage their eyes and crook their knees in childish obedience?
Vaguely in her mind there flitted half phrases of the humanitarian, the materialist, the agnostic.
It seemed as if their views of the wreck on the bed pressed upon all her consciousness. But,
just as they had never succeeded in silencing the voice of that great drama of faith and prayer
through the ages, so she could not dull to her own consciousness the strange, spiritual vitality
that poured out in this triumphant call to the powers on high to come forth in all their glory
to receive the inestimable treasure of the redeemed soul of Pat Moloney.

CHAPTER XVI

MOLLY'S LETTER TO HER MOTHER

There followed after that night a quite new experience for Molly. It was the upheaval of an
utterly uncultivated side of her nature. She was astonished to find that she had religious
instincts, and that, instead of feeling that these instincts were foolish and irrational--a
lower part of her nature,--they now seemed quite curiously rational and established in possession
of her faculties. Her mind seemed more satisfied than it had ever been before. She did not
know in what she believed, but she felt a different view of life in which men seemed less utterly
mean, and women less of hypocrites. Externally it worked something in this way.

The day on which Pat Moloney died at dawn she could not rest so much as she intended, to make
up for the short night. She wrote one or two brief notes begging to be let off engagements,
and told the servants to say she was not at home. She could not keep quite still, and she did
not want to go out. Gradually, as the day wore on, she worked herself into more and more excitement.
Her imagination pictured what might be the outcome of such a view of life and death as seemed
to have taken hold of her. In her usual moods she would have thought with sarcasm that such
were the symptoms of "conversion" in a revivalist. But now there was no critical faculty awake
for cynicism; the critical faculty was full of a solemn kind of joy. Next there came, after
some hours of a sort of surprise at this sudden and vehement sense of uplifting, the wish for
action and for sacrifice. Her mind returned to the concrete, and the circumstances of her life.
And then there came a most unwelcome thought. If Molly wanted to sacrifice herself indeed,
and wished to do some real good about which there could be no self-delusion, was there not
one duty quite obviously in her path, her duty as a child? Had she ever made any attempt to
help the forlorn woman in Florence? Perhaps Madame Danterre's assertion, when Molly came of
age, that she did not want to see Molly, was only an attempt to find out whether Molly really
wished to come to her mother. From the day on which her ideal of her mother had been completely
shattered Molly had shrunk from even thinking of her. She now shivered with repugnance, but
she was almost glad to feel how repugnant this duty might be, much as a medieval penitent might
have rejoiced in his own repugnance to the leprous wounds he was resolved to dress as an expiation
for sin. It did not strike her, as it never struck the noble penitents in the Middle Ages,
that it might be very trying to the object of these expiatory actions. She felt at the moment
that it must be a comfort to her mother to receive all the love and devotion that she would
offer her. And there was real heroism in the letter that Molly proceeded to write to Madame
Danterre. For she knew that if her offer were accepted she risked the loss of all that at present
made life very dear, both in what she already enjoyed, and in the hope that was hidden in her
heart.

Molly had pride enough to shrink utterly from the connection with her mother, and her girl's
innocence shrank, too, with quick sensitiveness from what might be before her. How strange
now appeared the dreams of her childhood, the idealisation of the young and beautiful mother!

The letter was short, but very earnest, and had all the ring of truth in it. She could not
but think that any mother would respond to it, and, for herself, after sending it there could
be no looking back. Once the letter was posted to the lawyer to be forwarded to Madame Danterre,
a huge weight seemed to be lifted from Molly's mind. That night she met Edmund Grosse at dinner.
He had never seen her so bright and good-looking, and he found he had many questions to ask
as to the summer abroad.

For several weeks Molly received no answer from Florence, but during that time she did not
repent her hasty action. And during those weeks her interest in religion grew stronger. Just
as she had been unable to work with philanthropists, she was ready now to take her religion
alone. She felt kinder to the world at large, but she did not at first feel any need of human
help or human company. She went sometimes to a service at Westminster Abbey, sometimes to St.
Paul's, sometimes to the Oratory, and two or three times to the church in West Kensington in
which Father Molyneux was assistant parish priest. On the whole she liked this last much the
best. Indeed, she was so much attracted by his sermons that she went to call upon him late
one afternoon.

The visitor was shown into a rather bare parlour, and Father Molyneux soon came in. He was
a good deal interested in seeing her there. He had never been more snubbed in his life than
by this lady on their first meeting, and he had been much surprised at seeing her in the church
soon afterwards. She was plainly dressed, though at an expense he would never have imagined
to be possible, and she appeared a little softer than when he had seen her last. She looked
at him rather hard, not with the look that puzzled Rose Bright; it was a look of sympathy and
of inquiry.

"I have had curious experiences since we met," she said, "and I want to understand them better.
Have you--has anybody been praying for me?"

"I have said Mass for you twice since poor Moloney died," he said.

"I thought there was some sort of influence," she murmured. "That night I was tired and excited
and worried, and foolishly prejudiced. Somehow the prayers you read for Pat Moloney, the whole
attitude of your Church in those prayers, caught my breath. I imagine it was something like
the effect of a revivalist preacher on a Welsh miner." She paused. Father Molyneux was full
of interest, and did not conceal it.

"I can't tell," he said. "Of course, it may have been----"

"Nerves," interrupted Molly so decidedly that he laughed; it was not in the least what he had
meant to say.

"But," she went on, with an air of impartial diagnosis, "it has lasted. I have been very happy.
I understand now what is meant by religion. I understand what you felt about that man's soul.
I understand, when you are preaching, that intense sense of worth-whileness. I understand the
religious sense, the religious attitude. It makes everything worth while because of love. It
does not explain all the puzzles. It does not answer questions, it swallows them up alive.
It makes everything so big, and at the same time so small, because there are infinite things
too. Then it insists on reality; I see now it must insist on dogma for fear of unreality. Renan
was quite wrong in that great sentence of his: 'Il ne faut rien dire de limitée en face de
l'infini.' The infinite is a fog to us if there are no outlines in our conception of it. Don't
you think so?"

There was a light in her face no one had ever seen there before.

"And the only outlines that can satisfy us are the outlines of a Personality. As a rule I have
always disliked individuals. I know you are surprised. Of course, you are just the other way;
you have a touch of genius, a gift for being conscious of personalities, of being attracted
to them. Now I have never liked people; in fact, I've hated most of them. But since this religious
experience I have known"--her voice dropped; it had been a little loud--"I have known that
I want a friend, and can have one."

The priest was astonished by Molly. He had never met any one like her before. Her self-confidence
was curious, and her eloquence was so sudden and abounding that his own words seemed to leave
him. She was in a moment as silent as she had been talkative, her eyes cast down on the floor.
Then she looked at him with an almost imperious questioning in her eyes.

"You have said so much that I expected to say myself," he said, with a faint sense of humour,
"and you have not asked me a single question."

Molly laughed "Tell me," she said, "I am right; it is all true? I do understand religious experience,
the religious sense at last, don't I?"

"Shall I tell you what I miss in it?" he said, suppressing any further comment on her amazing
assertion. "I mean in all you have said. And, oddly enough, the Welsh miner would have had
it. I mean that, seeing Our Lord as the One Friend of your life, you should also see that you
have resisted and betrayed and offended Him during that life which He gave you."

"No: I have not thought much about that side of things" said Molly "I have been too happy."

"You would be far happier if you did."

"But what have I done?" said Molly, almost in a tone of injured respectability.

"Well, you have hated people--or, at least" (in a tone of apology), "you said so just now."

"Oh! yes; it's quite true. I am a great hater and an uncertain one. I never know who it is
going to be, or when it will come."

"But you know you have been commanded to love them."

"Yes; but only as much as I love myself, and I quite particularly dislike myself."

"You've no right to--none whatever."

"And why not?"

"Because God made you in His own image and likeness. You can't get out of it. But, you know,
I don't believe one word you say. I met you showing love to the poor."

"No, indeed," said Molly indignantly, "I did not love Pat Moloney. I wish you would believe
what I say. I hate my mother; I hate the aunt who brought me up; I hate crowds of people. I
don't hate one man because I want him to fall in love with me, but if he doesn't do that soon,
I shall hate him too. I feel friendly towards you now, but I don't know how soon I may hate
you. At least," she paused, and a gentle look came into her face, "I had all these hatreds
up to a few weeks ago; now they are comparatively dormant."

Again the flood of her words seemed to check him, but he tried:

"I believe it then; I will take all you say as true. I think you are fairly convincing. Well,
then, how do you suppose you can be united to Infinite Love, Infinite Mercy, Infinite Purity?
God is not merely good, He is Goodness. Until you feel that His Presence would burn and destroy
and annihilate your unworthiness, you have no sense of the joys of His Friendship. You stand
now looking up to Him and choosing Him as your Friend, whereas you must lie prostrate in the
dust and wait to be chosen. When you have done that He will raise you, and the Heavens will
ring with the joy of the great spirits who never fell, and who are almost envious of the sinner
doing Penance."

Molly bent her head low. "I see," she murmured, "mine have been merely the guesses of an amateur;
it is useless--I don't understand."

"It isn't, indeed it isn't," he said quietly. "It is the introduction. The King is sending
His heralds. Some are drawn to Him by the sense of their own sinfulness, others, as you are,
by a glimpse of His beauty."

Molly was not angry, only disappointed. The very habit of a life of reserve must have brought
some sense of disappointment in the result. She did not mind being told that she must lie in
the dust; the abnegation was not abhorrent; she knew that love in itself sometimes demanded
humiliation. But she felt sad and discouraged. She had seemed to have conquered a kingdom.
Without exactly being proud of them, she had felt her religious experiences to be very remarkable,
and now she saw that they only pointed to a very long road, hard to walk on. She got up quickly
and was near the door before he was.

"Will you come and see me?" she said, and she gave him her card. "If you can, send me a postcard
beforehand that I may not miss you. Good-bye."

He opened the front door for her and her carriage was waiting.

"The third time you have been late for dinner this week," observed the Father Rector. "Have
some mutton?"

"Thanks," said the young man; "I wish I could learn the gentle art of sending people away without
offending them."

"They didn't include that in the curriculum at Oxford?" The tone was not quite kind; neither
was the snort with which the remark was concluded. It was no sauce to the lumpy, greasy mutton
that Mark was struggling to eat. Suddenly he caught the eye of the second curate, Father Marny,
who had conceived a great affection for him, and he smiled merrily with a school-boy's sense
of mischief.

CHAPTER XVII

THE BLIND CANON

In a small room in a small house in a small street in Chelsea, Father Molyneux was sitting
with a friend. There were a few beautiful things in the room, and a few well-bound books; but
they had a dusty, uncared for look about them. It teased the young priest to see a medicine
bottle and a half-washed medicine glass standing on a bracket with an exquisite statuette of
the Madonna. The present occupier of these lodgings had had very true artistic perceptions
before he had become blind.

Mark Molyneux had just been reading to him for an hour, and he now put down the book. The old
man smacked his lips with enjoyment. The author was new to him, but he had won his admiration
at the first reading.

"What people call his paradoxes," he said, "is his almost despairing attempt at making people
pay attention; he has to shout to men who are too hurried to stop. The danger is that, as time
goes on, he will only be able to think in contrasts and to pursue contradictions."

The speaker paused, and then, his white fingers groped a little as if he were feeling after
something. His voice was rich and low. Then he kept still, and waited with a curious look of
acquired patience. At last, the younger man began.

"I want to ask your advice, or rather, I want to tell you something I have decided on."

"And you only want me to agree," laughed Canon Nicholls, and the blind face seemed full of
perception.

"Well, I think you will." The boyish voice was bright and keen. "I've come to tell you that
I want to be a monk."

"Tut, tut," said Canon Nicholls, and then they both laughed together. "Since when?" he asked
a moment later.

"It has been coming by degrees," said Mark, in a low voice. "I want to be altogether for God."

"And why can't you be that now?"

"It's too confusing," he said; "half the day I am amused or worried or tired. I've got next
to no spiritual life."

Canon Nicholls did not help him to say more.

"I can't be regular in anything, and now there's the preaching."

"What's the matter with that?"

"Who was it who said that a popular preacher could not save his soul? Father Rector says that
it's very bad for me that I crowd up the church. He is evidently anxious about me."

"How kind!"

"Then, since I've been preaching, such odd people come to see me."

"I know," said the Canon, "there's a fringe of the semi-insane round all churches; they used
to lie in wait for me once."

"Then I simply love society. I've been to hear such interesting people talk at several houses
lately. I go a good deal to Miss Dexter."

"Miss Molly Dexter."

"Yes."

"I wouldn't do that; she's a minx. She is the girl who stayed with that kind little woman,
Mrs. Delaport Green, who sometimes comes to see me."

"You see," Mark went on eagerly, "I'm doing no good like this. So I have made up my mind to
try and be a Carthusian."

His face lit up now with the same intense delight. "It's such a splendid life! Fancy! No more
humbug, and flattery, and insincerity. 'Vous ne jouerez plus la comédie,' an old monk said
to me. Wouldn't it be splendid? Think of the stillness, and then the singing of the Office
while the world is asleep, like the little birds at dawn. It would be simply and entirely to
live for God!"

"I do believe in a personal devil," muttered Canon Nicholls to himself, and Mark stared at
him. "Now listen," he said. "There is a young man who has a vocation to the priesthood, and
he comes under obedience to work in London. That is, to live in the thick of sin, of suffering,
of folly and madness. If it were acknowledged that the place was full of cholera or smallpox
it would be simple enough. But the place is thick with disguises. The worst cases don't seem
in the least ill; the stench of the plague is a sweet smell, and the confusion is thicker because
there are angels and demons in the same clothes, living in the same houses, doing the same
actions, saying almost the same things. In every Babylon there have been these things, but
this is about the biggest. And the most harmless of the sounds, the hum of daily work, is loud
and continuous enough to dull and wear the senses. So confused and perplexed is the young man
that he doesn't know when he has done good or done harm; being young, compliments appeal to
him very seriously; being young, he takes too many people's opinions; and, being young, he
generalises and if, for instance, I tell him not to go often to the house of a capricious woman
of uncertain temper, he probably resolves at once never to lunch in an agreeable house again.
Meanwhile, above this muddle, this tragicomedy, he sees the distant hills glowing with light;
so, without waiting for orders, he leaves the people crying to him for help and turns tail
and runs away! And what only the skill of a personal devil could achieve, he thinks in his
heart that he is choosing a harder fight, a more self-denying life."

"But I could help those people more by my prayers."

"Granted, if it were God's will that you should lead the life of contemplation, but I don't
believe it is. I don't see what right you've got to believe it is. As to not living altogether
for God here, that's His affair. Mind you, I don't undervalue the difficulties, and it's uncommon
hard to human nature. Don't think too much of other people's opinions; I know you feel a bit
out of it with the priests about you. They are rough to young men like you--it's jealousy,
if they only knew it. Jealousy is the fault of the best men, because they never suspect themselves
of it. If they saw it, they would fight it. Face facts. You have some gifts; you will be much
humbler if you thank God for them instead of trying to think you haven't got them. And be quite
particularly nice to the growler sort of priest; he's had a hard time and, lived a hard life;
much harder than the life of a monk. Mind you respect his scars."

He talked on, partly to give Mark time; he saw he had given him a shock.

"Mind," he said, "there is sometimes an acute personal temptation, but you've not got that
now. You've got a sort of perception of what it might be. It won't be unbearable." He crossed
his legs and put the long, white fingers into each other. "But I'm old now, and it's my experience
that the mischief for all priests is to let society be their fun. It ought to be a duty, and
a very tiresome duty too. Take your amusements in any other way, and go out to lunch in the
same state of mind as you visit a hospital. Do you think the best women, whether Protestant
or Catholic, think society their fun? They may like it or not, but it is a serious duty to them."

Mark sprang up suddenly. "I can't stand this!" he said. "You go on talking, and I want to be
a Carthusian, and I will be one." He laughed; his voice was troubled and the clear joy of his
face was clouded.

Canon Nicholls felt in his pocket for a snuff-box, and brought it out. "Go along, if you can't
stand it. And don't come back till you've seen through the devil's trick. I don't mind what
I bet that you won't run away."

Left alone, Canon Nicholls covered his blind eyes with his hands and heaved a deep sigh.

The man who had just left him was the object of his keenest affection, the apple of those blind
eyes that craved to look upon his face. But his love was not blind, and he felt the danger
there lay in the seeming perfectness of the young man. Mark's nature was gloriously sweet and
abounding in the higher gifts; his love of God had the awe of a little child, and his love
of men had the tenderness of a shepherd towards his lost sheep. Mark had loved life and learning,
had revelled in Oxford, and would, in one sense, be an undergraduate all his days. He had known
dreams of ambition, and visions of success in working for his country. Then gently--not with
any shock--had come the vocation to the priesthood, and so tenderly had the tendrils that attached
him to a man's life in the world been loosened, that the process hardly seemed to have hurt
any of the sensitive sympathies and interests he had always enjoyed. Even in the matter of
giving up great possessions, all had come so gradually as to seem most natural and least strained.

Long before the Groombridges could be brought to believe that the brilliant and favourite young
cousin had rejected all that they could leave him, it had become a matter of course to the
rest of the family and their friends that Mark Molyneux would be a priest, and give up the
property to the younger brother.

When the outer world took up the matter, Father Molyneux always made people feel as if allusions
to his renunciation of Groombridge were simply quite out of taste, and nothing out of taste
seemed in keeping with anything connected with him. It was all so simple to Mark, and so perfect
to Canon Nicholls, that the latter almost dreaded this very perfection as unlikely, and unbefitting
the "second-rate" planet in which it was his lot to live. And to confirm this almost superstitious
feeling of a man who had lived to know where the jolts and jars of life cause the acutest suffering
to the idealist, had come this fresh aspiration of Mark's after a life more completely perfect
in itself. Strong instincts were entirely in accord with the older man's sober judgment of
the situation. And yet he wished it could be otherwise. He had no opinion of the world that
Mark wanted to give up. He would most willingly have shut any cloister door between that world
and his cherished son in the spirit. It was with no light heart that he wanted him to face
all the roughness of human goodness, all the blinding confusion of its infirmities, all the
cruelty of its vices. The old man's own service in his last years was but to stand and wait,
but, even so, he was too often oppressed by the small things that fill up empty hours, small
uncharitablenesses, small vanities, small irritations. Was it not a comfort at such moments
to believe that in another world we should know human nature in others and in ourselves without
any cause for repugnance and without any ground for fear?

CHAPTER XVIII

MADAME DANTERRE'S ANSWER

At last there came a letter to Molly from her mother.

     "CARISSIMA,--

     "I thank you for your most kind intentions. I too have at times
     thought of seeing you. But I am now far too ill, and I have no
     attention to spare from my unceasing efforts to keep well. I can
     assure you that two doctors and two nurses spend their time and
     skill on the struggle. I may, they tell me, live many years yet if
     I am not troubled and disturbed. I had, by nature, strong maternal
     instincts; it was your father's knowledge of that side of my
     character which made his conduct in taking you from me almost
     criminal in its cruelty. You must have had a most tiresome
     childhood with his sister, and probably you gave her a great deal
     of trouble. Your letter affected me with several moments of
     suffocation, and the doctors and nurses are of opinion that I must
     not risk any more maternal emotions. My poor wants are now very
     expensive. I am obliged to have everything that is out of season,
     and one chef for my vegetables alone. Have you ever turned your
     attention to vegetable diet? Doctor Larrone, whom I thoroughly
     confide in, sees no reason why life should not be indefinitely
     prolonged if the right--absolutely the right--food is always given.
     I am sending you a little brochure he has written on the subject.

     "I hope that your allowance is sufficient for your comfort. I
     should like you to have asparagus at every meal, and I trust, my
     dear child, that you will never become a dévote. It is an
     extraordinary waste of the tissues.

     "As we are not likely to correspond again, I should like you to
     know that I have made a will bequeathing to you the fortune which
     was left me, as an act of reparation, by Sir David Bright.

     "I wonder why an Englishman, Sir Edmund Grosse, has made so many
     attempts at seeing me? Do you know anything of him? I risk much in
     the effort to write this letter to assure you of my love.

                                  "YOUR DEVOTED MOTHER.

     "P.S.--There is no need to answer the question as to Sir Edmund
     Grosse."

Molly was so intensely disgusted with the miserable old woman's letter that her first inclination
was to burn it at once. She was kneeling before the fire with that intention when Sir Edmund
Grosse was announced. She thrust the paper into her pocket, and realised in a flash how astonishing
it was that Sir Edmund should have tried to see Madame Danterre. The only explanation that
occurred to her at the moment was that he had tried to see her mother because of his interest
in herself. She did not know that he had not been in Florence since he had known her. But what
could have started him in the notion that Miss Dexter was Madame Danterre's child? And did
he know it for certain now? That was what she would like to find out.

Molly had on a pale green tea-gown, which fell into a succession of almost classic folds with
each rapid characteristic movement. The charm of her face was enormously increased by its greater
softness of expression. Although she could not help wishing to please him, even in a moment
full of other emotion, she did not know how much there was to make her successful to-day. She
did not realise her own physical and moral development during the past months.

Edmund's manner was unconsciously caressing. He had come, he told himself--and it was the third
time he had called at the flat,--simply because he wanted to keep in touch, to get any information
he could. And he had heard rumours from Florence that Madame Danterre was becoming steadily
weaker and more unable to make any effort.

"A man told me the other day that this was the best-furnished flat in London, and, by Jove!
I rather think he was right."

"I never believe in the man who told you things, he is far too apposite; I think his name is
Harris."

Edmund smiled at the fire.

"Who was the attractive little priest I met here the other day?" he asked.

"Little! He is as tall as you are."

"Still, one thinks of him as un bon petit prêtre, doesn't one? But who is he?"

"Father Molyneux."

"Not Groombridge's cousin?"

"Yes, the same."

"I wonder if he repents of his folly now? I didn't think he looked particularly cheerful!"

"Didn't you?" said Molly. "Well, I think he is the happiest person I know! But we never do
agree about people, do we?"

"About a few we do, but it's much more amusing to talk about ourselves, isn't it?"

"Much more. What do you want me to tell you about myself this time?"

Edmund looked at her with sleepy eyes and perceived that something had changed. "I should like
to know what you think about me?" he said gently.

"No, you wouldn't," said Molly, and she gave a tiny sigh. "No, for some reason or other you
want to know something which I have settled to tell you."

Her manner alarmed and excited him. As a matter of honourable dealing he felt that he ought
to give her pause. "Are you sure you are wise?" he said.

"I'm not sure, but that's my own affair, and it will be a relief. I would rather you knew what
you want to know, though why you want to know"--her eyes were searching him--"I can't tell."

Sir Edmund Grosse almost told her that he did not want to know.

"You want to know for certain that my mother is living in Florence under the name of Madame
Danterre--the Madame Danterre you have tried to see there. And further, you want to know how
much I have ever seen of her."

"Oh, please!" cried Edmund, "I don't indeed wish you to tell me all this."

"You do, and so I shall answer the questions. I have never seen her in my life. But these last
few weeks I have thought I ought to try, so I wrote and offered to go to her, and I have this
evening had the first letter she has ever written to me. In this letter"--she drew it half
out of her pocket--"she declines to see me, and she exhorts me to a vegetable diet."

There was a moment in which her face looked the embodiment of sarcasm, then something gentler
came athwart it. He had never come so near to liking her before. He could no longer think of
her as all the more dangerous on account of her attractions; she was a suffering, cruelly-treated
woman. It is dangerous to see too much of one's enemies: Edmund was growing much softer.

"But why," she went on with quiet dignity, "did you try so hard to break through her seclusion?"

It was a dreadful question--a question impossible to answer. He was silent; then he said--

"Dear lady, I told you I did not want you to satisfy what you supposed to be my wish for knowledge,
and I am very sorry that now, at least, I cannot tell you why I wished to see Madame Danterre."

Naturally, it never struck him for a moment that Molly might think it was for her sake that
he had tried to see her mother, as he had not known of her existence when he was in Florence.
But his reticence made her incline much more to that idea. She almost blushed in the firelight.
Edmund was feeling baffled and sorry. If there were another will--and he still maintained that
there was another--certainly Miss Dexter knew nothing about it. He had wronged her; and after
all what reasonable grounds had there been for his suspicions as to her guilt?

"I suppose," he thought, "Rose is right, and will-hunting is demoralising, or 'not healthy,'
as she calls it."

But he had been too long silent.

"It is very hard on you to get such a letter," he said, with a ring of true sympathy in his
voice and more expression than usual in his face. "I wish I had not come in and disturbed you;
I wish you had a woman friend here instead."

"I don't," said Molly quickly. "Don't go yet. I can say as little as I like with you, and then
I'm going to church to hear the bon petit prêtre preach."

"He will lure you to Rome."

"Perhaps."

"Well, I think there's a good deal to be said for Rome."

"Don't you mind people joining it?" she asked, a little eagerly.

"No, I like it better than Ritualism."

"But Lady Rose is a Ritualist."

"I believe you will find angels few and far between in any religion."

"It must be nice to be an angel," mused Molly.

He had risen to go; he thought he might still find Rose at home and he wanted to speak to her,
yet he was in no hurry to be gone.

"Don't give me an excuse for compliments; I warn you, you will repent it if you do," he said
warmly; and then, after a little hesitation which might well have been mistaken for an effort
at self-command in a moment of emotion, he added in a low voice--

"May I come and see you again very soon?"

As Molly gave him her hand he looked at her with wistful apology for having wronged her in
his thoughts, for having intruded into her secrets. There was more pity in his eyes than he
knew at the moment. He bent his head after that, and with the foreign fashion he sometimes
fell into, and which Molly had known before, gently kissed her hand. The quick kindly action
was the expression of his wish to make amends.

Molly stood quite still after he had gone away, as motionless as a living figure could stand,
her grey eyes dilated and full of light. Would he could have seen her! But if he had, would
he have understood what love meant in a heart that had never before been opened by any great
human affection? No love of father, mother, sister, or brother had ever laid a claim on Molly.
The whole kingdom of her affections had been standing empty and ready, and now the hour of
fulfilment was near.

"He will come again very soon," she whispered to herself. And then she put her hand to her
lips and kissed it where it had been kissed a moment before, but with a devotion and reverence
and gentleness that made the last kiss a tragic contrast.

Presently, happier than she had ever been in her life before, Molly went out to hear Mark Molyneux
preach on sanctifying our common actions.

"No position is so hard" he said in his peroration, "no circumstances are so difficult, no
duties so conflicting, no temptations so mighty, as not to be the means to lead us to God if
we seek to do His will."

But the words seemed in no way appropriate to Molly's mind, which was wholly occupied in a
wordless song of thanksgiving.

CHAPTER XIX

LADY ROSE'S SCRUPLE

As Edmund Grosse was shown up-stairs to Lady Rose Bright, he passed a young clergyman coming
down. He found Rose standing with a worried look in the middle of the room.

"Edmund! how nice," she said gently.

"What has that fellow been worrying you about?"

"It isn't his fault, poor man," said Rose, "only it's so sad. He has had at last to close his
little orphanage. You see, we used to give him £100 a year, and after David died I had to write
and tell him that I couldn't go on, and it has been a hard struggle for him since that. I don't
think he meant it, but when he came and saw this house"--she waved her hands round the very
striking furniture of the room--"I think he wondered, or perhaps it was my fancy. You see,
Edmund, I don't know how it is, but I've overdrawn again. What do you think it can be? The
housekeeping comes to so little; I have only four servants, and----"

She paused, and there were tears in her eyes. She was wondering where the orphans would go
to. It was not like Rose to give way like this and to have out her troubles at once. The fact
was that she was finding how much harder it is to help in good works without money than with.
If she had started without money it would have been different, but to try to work with people
who used to find her large subscriptions a very great help and now had to do without them,
was depressing. She had to make constant efforts to believe that they were all just the same
to her as they had been in the past.

"How much did you give that youth instead of the £100?"

"Only ten, Edmund." There was a note of pleading in her voice.

"And you will have dinner up here on a tray as there is no fire in the dining-room?"

"Well, what does it matter?"

"And how much will there be to eat on the tray?"

"Oh! much more than I can possibly eat."

"Because it will be some nasty warmed-up stuff washed down by tea. It's of no use trying to
deceive me: I've heard that the cook is seventeen, and an orphan herself."

"But what will those other orphans have for dinner?"

"Now, Rose, will you listen to common sense. How many orphans has that sandy-faced cleric on
his hands?"

"There were only four left."

"Then I'll get those four disposed of somehow, if you will do something I want you to do."

"What is it? But, Edmund, you know you have done too much for my poor works already; I can't
let you."

"Never mind, if you will do what I want."

"What is it?"

"Come right away in the yacht, you and your mother, and we'll go wherever you like."

Joy sprang into her face, but then he saw doubt, and he knew with a deep pang what the doubt
meant. He wished to move, oh! so carefully now, or he would lose all the ground he had lately
gained.

"What scruples have you now?" he asked laughing. "What a genius you have for them! Look here,
Rose, it's common sense; you want a change, you can let the house up to Easter. Besides, you
know what it would do for your mother; see what she thinks."

"It's all so quick," gasped Rose, laughing.

"Well, then, don't settle at once if you like; but not one penny for those poor dear little
orphans if you don't come. And now, I want to say something else quick, because the tray with
the chops and the cheese and the tea will all be getting greasy if I don't get out of the way.
Do you know I think I was very hard on that Miss Dexter. I remember I solemnly warned you not
to have to do with her. You were quite right: it is not healthy to think so much of that will;
it poisons the mind. I am quite sure that poor thing is not to blame."

His tone was curiously eager, it seemed to Rose; and then he began discussing Miss Dexter,
and said he thought that at moments she was beautiful. Presently he remembered the tray that
was coming, and saw that the hour was half-past seven, and hurried away. She fancied that she
missed in his "Good-night" the sort of gentle affectionateness he had shown her so freely of late.

She went up to her room to prepare for the meal he had disparaged so much, looking tired. She
smiled rather sadly when she had to own to herself that the tray of supper was almost exactly
what Edmund had foretold. She dismissed it as soon as she could, and then drew a chair up to
the fire and took up a book. But it soon dropped on to her knee. She had been trying not to
give way to depression all that day. But it was very difficult. There seemed to be so little
object in life. She felt as if everything had got into a fog; there was no one at home to whom
her going and coming mattered any more than the meals mattered. And, meanwhile, she was being
sucked into a world of committees and sub-committees. She had thought that, as she could no
longer give money, she would give her time and her work; so, when asked, she had joined many
things just because she was asked, and she was a little hazy as to the objects of some of them.
Having been afraid that she would not have enough to do, she found now that she had already
more than she could manage. And everything seemed so difficult. During the past week she had
twice taken the wrong bus, and come home very wet and tired. Another day she had taken the
wrong train when coming back from South London, and had found herself at Baker Street instead
of Sloane Square. These things tried her beyond reason with the sense of loneliness, of incapacity,
of uncertainty. Then she had thought that, with very quiet black clothes, she could go anywhere,
but her mother had discovered that she sometimes came back from the Girls' Club in Bermondsey
as late as ten o'clock at night, and there had been a fuss. Rose had forgotten the fact that
she was very fair and very good to look at; she found, half-consciously, that her beauty had
its drawbacks. There did not seem to be any reason why she should spare her strength in any
way. So, a little wan and tremulous, she appeared at the early morning service, and then, after
walking back in any weather, there was a dull little breakfast, and soon after that she got
to work. Every post brought begging letters in crowds, and these hurt her dreadfully. It was
her wish to live for God and the poor, and every day she had to write: "Lady Rose Bright much
regrets that she is quite unable," etc., etc. Then, after those, she would begin another trial--begging
letters to her rich friends to help her poor ones, or letters trying to get interest and influence.
The difficulties and the confusion of life in the modern Babylon weighed on Rose in something
of the same way that they tried Mark Molyneux. It seemed to her that it must be safe and right
to be doing so many disagreeable things and to be very tired, too tired to enjoy pleasures
when they came her way. Constantly, one person was trying to throw pleasures in her way; one
person reminded old friends that Rose was in town; one person suggested that Rose Bright, although
she did not go to parties, might come in to hear some great musician at a friend's house; one
person wanted to know her opinion on the last book; one person tried to find out when he could
take her anywhere in his motor. And this very morning Rose had asked herself if this one friend
ought to be allowed to do all these things? Was she sure that she was quite fair to Edmund Grosse?

It had been a day of fears and scruples. She had been unnerved when the clergyman had called
just to let her realise that the withdrawal of her subscription had, in the end, meant the
collapse of his little orphanage; and when she was breaking down under this, Edmund had come
in, and how soothed and comforted she had felt by his presence! And then the joy of his proposal
as to the yacht! Her pulses beat with delight; she felt a positive hunger for blue skies, blue
water, blue shores; a longing to get away from cares and muddles and badly-done jobs and being
misunderstood. Was it not horribly selfish, horribly cowardly? Was it not the longing to stifle
the sounds of pain, to shut her eyes to the gloom of the misery about her, to shut her mind
to the effort to understand what was of practical good, and what was merely quack in the remedies
offered? Still, she realised to-night that she must get some sort of rest; that part of all
this gloom was physical. She would understand and feel things more rightly if she went away
for a bit.

But could she, ought she, to go away on Edmund's yacht?

Could Rose honestly feel quite sure that all his kindness meant nothing more? She had never
since she was eighteen, and wearing her first long skirt, heard from him any word that need
mean more than cousinly affection. He had contrived after that Easter visit to Groombridge
to make her feel that she had been foolish and self-conscious in trying not to be alone with
him. For many months now she had felt absolutely at her ease in his company. It seemed to be
only to-day that this thought had come back to trouble her. She did not want to be disturbed
with such notions; they would spoil their friendship. And he could not be feeling like that;
he was always so cool, so untroubled. Why to-night, just as he was waiting to know if she would
come on the yacht or not, he had talked much more warmly of Miss Dexter than seemed quite natural!
Faintly she felt that it might be good for him if they went on the yacht, she and her mother.
They would be better for Edmund than some of the people he might otherwise ask; he was not
always wise as to his lady friends. And it would be so good for Lady Charlton, and so good,
too, for those four orphans. And where should they go? It did not matter much where they went
if they only gained light and colour and rest. The artist was strong in Rose at that moment.
She looked at one or two old guide-books till it was bed-time. Then, the last thing at night,
a strange gust of thought came upon her just after her prayers.

Could she, would she, ever marry again? She knelt on at the priedieu with her fair head bowed,
and then there came over her a strong sense of the impossibility of it. The shock she had had
was too great, too lasting in its effects. She did not know it was that, she did not tell herself
that once humiliated, once misled, she could not trust again. She did not say that the past
married life which she had made so full of duty, so full of reverence as almost to deceive
herself while she lived it, had been desecrated, polluted and had made her shrink unutterably
from another married life.

A young widow, sometimes, when drawing near to a second marriage, suddenly realises it to be
impossible because the past asserts its tyrannous claim upon her heart. What had appeared to
be a dead past is found to be both alive and powerful. But with Rose it was not simply her
heart; it was her nature as a woman that refused. That nature had been hurt to the very quick,
humbled and brought low once. Surely it was enough!

CHAPTER XX

THE HEIRESS OF MADAME DANTERRE

For about a week after the evening on which she had received her mother's letter and Edmund
Grosse had been to see her, Molly Dexter stayed at home from four o'clock till seven o'clock
and wore beautiful tea-gowns. She had a very small list of people to whom she was always at
home written on a slate, but one by one they had been reduced in number. Now there were five--Father
Molyneux, who never came except by appointment; Sir Edmund Grosse; and three ladies who happened
to be abroad for the winter.

The week was from a Friday to a Thursday, and on the Thursday several things happened to Molly.
It was a brilliant day, and although those evenings from four till seven when nobody came were
sorely trying, she was in very good spirits. A friend coming out of church the day before had
told her that she had met Sir Edmund Grosse at a country house.

"He said such pretty things about you," purred the speaker, a nice newly "come out" girl who
admired Molly very much.

But the main point to Molly had been the fact that Edmund had been away from London. Surely
he would come directly now! She seemed to hear, constantly ringing in her ears, the voice in
which he had asked if he might "come again very soon."

Thursday had been a good day altogether, for Molly had skated at Prince's and come home with
a beautiful complexion to be "At Home" to the privileged from four till seven. She got out
of her motor, and was walking to the lift when it came whizzing down from above, and the little
friend who had said the nice things yesterday stepped out of it, looking very bright.

"Oh, Miss Dexter," she said, "may I come up again and tell you my good news?" Molly took her
kindly by the arm and drew her into the lift again, and they went up. But she hoped the girl
would not stay. She wanted to be quite alone, so that if anybody came who mattered very much
they would not be disturbed.

"Well, what's the good news?"

Molly looked brilliant as she stood smiling in the middle of the room.

"Well, it isn't a bit settled yet, but I met Sir Edmund Grosse at luncheon, and he asked me
if mother would let me go on his yacht to Cairo. Lady Rose Bright is going and Lady Charlton,
and he said they all wanted something very young indeed to go with them, so they thought I'd
better come, and his nephew Jimmy, too. Wasn't it awfully kind of him?"

Molly turned and poked the fire.

"When do they go?" she asked.

"Sir Edmund starts to-morrow, but Lady Rose and Lady Charlton will follow in about ten days.
They will join the yacht at Marseilles, and I should go with them. Do you think mother will
let me go, Miss Dexter?"

Miss Dexter looked down.

"Why should your mother object?" she said.

"But it's so sudden."

"Yes, it's very sudden," said Molly, in a low voice.

"I can hardly keep quiet; I don't know how to get through the time till six o'clock, and mother
can't be at home till then."

Molly turned back into the room; her face was very white. There were white dents in her nostrils,
and there was a bitter smile on her lips. Whatever she might have said was stopped in the utterance.
The parlourmaid had come into the room, and now, coming up to Molly, said in a low voice:

"There is a gentleman asking if Miss Dexter will see him on important business; he says he
is a doctor, and that he has come from Italy."

Molly frowned.

"What is his name?"

"It sounded like Laccaroni, ma'am."

"Show him up."

"Well, I'm off," said the young visitor, and, still entirely absorbed in her own affairs, she
took Molly's limp hand and left the room.

A spare man with a pale face and rather good eyes was announced as "Dr. Laccaroni." "Larrone,"
he corrected gently. He carried a small old tin despatch box, and looked extremely dusty.

"I am the bearer of sad tidings," he said in English, with a fair accent, in a dry staccato
voice. "It was better not to telegraph, as I was to come at once."

"You attended my mother?"

"Yes, until two nights ago. That was the end."

"Did she suffer?"

"For a few hours, yes; and there was also some brain excitement--delirium. In an interval that
appeared to be lucid (but I was not quite sure) she told me to come to you, mademoiselle, quite
as soon as she was dead, and she gave me money and this little box to bring to you. She said
more than once, 'It shall be her own affair.' The key is in this sealed envelope. Afterwards
twice she spoke to me: 'Don't forget,' and then the rest was raving. But the last two hours
were peace."

"And where is my mother to be buried?"

"Madame will be cremated, and her ashes placed in an urn in the garden, mademoiselle, in a
fine mausoleum, with just her name, 'Justine,' and the dates--no more. Madame told me that
these were her wishes."

"Do you know what is in this box?"

"Not at all, and I incline to think there may be nothing: the mind was quite confused. And
yet I could only calm her by promising to come at once, and so I came, and if mademoiselle
will permit I should like to retire to my hotel."

"Can I be of any use to you?"

"Not at all: the money for the journey was more than enough."

Molly was left alone, and she gave orders that no one, without exception, was to be admitted.
Then she walked up and down the room in a condition of semi-conscious pain.

At first it seemed as if Dr. Larrone's intelligence had not reached her brain at all. The only
clear thing in her mind at that moment was the thought that Edmund was going away at once with
Lady Rose Bright. The disappointment was in proportion to the wild hopes of the last week,
only Molly had not quite owned to herself how intensely she had looked forward to his next
coming. It was true he might still come and see her before he started, but if he came it could
not be what she had meant it to be. If he had meant what Molly dreamed of, could he have gone
off suddenly on this yachting expedition? She knew the yachting was not thought of when she
had seen him, for he told her then that he meant to stay in London for some weeks. But as her
thoughts grew clearer, what was most horrible to Molly was a gradual dawning of common daylight
into the romance she had been living in for months. For, looking back now, she could not feel
sure that any of her views of Edmund's feelings towards herself had been true. It was a tearing
at her heart's most precious feelings to be forced to common sense, to see the past in the
matter-of-fact way in which it might appear to other people. And yet, Adela Delaport Green
had expected him to propose even in the season, but then, what might not the Adela Delaport
Greens of life suspect and expect without the slightest foundation? Could Molly herself say
firmly and without delusion that Edmund had treated her badly? How she wished she could! She
would rather think that he had been charmed away by hostile influence, or even that he had
deliberately played with her than feel it all to have been her own vain fancy! It was agony
to her to feel that she had without any excuse, set up an idol in her sacred places, and woven
about him all the dreams and loves of her youth. It must be remembered not only that it was
the first time that Molly had loved in the ordinary sense of the word, but it was absolutely
the first time that she had ever felt any deep affection for any human being whatever. And
now a great sense of abandonment was on her; the old feeling of isolation, of being cast out,
that she had had all her life, was frightfully strong. Edmund had left her; he had deceived
her, played with her, she told herself, deluded her; and now her mother's death brought home
all the horror, the disgrace, which that mother's life had been for Molly. An outcast whom
no one cared for, no one loved, no one wanted. The new gentleness of the past weeks, the new
softness, all the high and sacred thoughts that had seemed to have taken possession of her
inner life, were gone at this moment. Her feeling now was that, if she were made to suffer,
she could at least make others suffer too.

She had thrown off her furs in walking up and down, and they had fallen on to the box which
Dr. Larrone had brought. Presently they slipped to the floor, and showed the small, black tin
despatch box.

Molly broke the seal of the envelope, took out the key, and opened the box, half mechanically
and half as seeking a distraction.

Inside she found two or three packets of old yellow letters, a few faded photographs, and a
tiny gold watch and chain; and underneath these things a large registered envelope addressed
to Madame Danterre.

Molly was not acutely excited about this box. She knew that her mother's will would be at the
lawyer's. She had no anxiety on this point, but there is always a strange thrill in touching
such things as the dead have kept secret. Even if they have bid us do it, it seems too bold.

Molly shrank from what that box might contain, what history of the past it might have to tell,
but she did not think it would touch her own life. Therefore, thinking more of her own sorrow
than anything else, Molly drew two papers out of the registered envelope, and then shrank back
helplessly in her chair. She had just seen that the larger of the two enclosures was a long
letter beginning: "Dearest Rose." She hesitated, but only for a moment, and then went on reading.

"I trust and hope that if I die in to-morrow's battle this will reach you safely. I have really
no fear whatever of the battle, and after it is over I shall have a good opportunity of putting
this paper into a lawyer's hands at Capetown."

Then she hastily dropped the letter and took up a small paper that had been in the same envelope.
A glance at this showed that it was the "last will and testament of Sir David Bright."

It was evidently not drawn up by a lawyer, but it seemed complete and had the two signatures
of witnesses; Lord Groombridge and Sir Edmund Grosse were named as executors. It was dated
on board ship only a few weeks before Sir David Bright died.

At first Molly was simply bewildered. She read, as if stupefied, the perfectly simple language
in which Sir David had bequeathed all and everything he possessed to his wife, Lady Rose Bright,
subject to an annual allowance of £1000 to Madame Danterre during her life-time. It was so
brief and simple that, if Molly had not known how simple a will could be, she might have half
doubted its legality. As it was she was not aware of the special facilities in the matter of
will-making that are allowed to soldiers and sailors when on active service. The absolutely
amazing thing was that the paper should have been in Madame Danterre's possession.

Molly turned to the letter, and read it with absorbed attention.

The General wrote on the eve of the battle, without the least anxiety as to the next day. But
he already surmised the vast proportions that the war might assume, and he intended to send
the enclosed will with this letter to the care of a lawyer in Capetown for fear of eventualities.
Then, next day, as Molly knew, he had been killed.

But Molly did not know that to the brother officer who had been with him in his last moments
Sir David had confided two plain envelopes, and had told him to send the first--a blue one--to
his wife, and the second--a white one--to Madame Danterre, faintly murmuring the names and
addresses in his dying voice. The same officer was himself killed a week later. If he had lived
and had learned the disposal of Sir David's fortune, it might possibly have occurred to him
that he had put the addresses on the wrong letters. But he was sure at the time that Sir David's
last words had been: "Remember, the white one for my wife." And perhaps he was right, for it
is not uncommon for a man even in the full possession of all his faculties (which Sir David
was not) to make a mistake just because of his intense anxiety to avoid making it. As it was,
knowing nothing whatever of the circumstances, the will and the letter seemed to Molly to come
out of a mysterious void.

To any one with an unbiassed mind who was able to study it as a human document, the letter
would have been pathetic enough. It was the revelation, the outpouring of what a man had suffered
in silence for many long years. It seemed at moments hardly rational. The sort of unreasonable
nervous terror in it was extraordinary. Molly read most of the real story in the letter, but
not quite all. There had been a terrible sense of a spoilt life and of a horrible weakness
always coming between him and happiness. The shadow of Madame Danterre had darkened his youth;
a time of folly--and so little pleasure in that folly, he moaned--had been succeeded by an
actual tyranny. The claim that she was his wife had begun early after her divorce from Mr.
Dexter, and it seemed extraordinary that he had not denied it at once. David Bright had been
taken ill with acute fever in Mrs. Dexter's house almost immediately after that event. Mrs.
Dexter declared that he had gone through the form of marriage with her before witnesses, and
she declared also that she had in her possession the certificate of marriage. The date she
gave for the marriage was during the days when he had been down with the fever, and he never
could remember what had happened.

"God knows," he wrote, "how I searched my memory hour by hour, day by day, but the blank was
absolute. I don't to this hour know what passed during those days."

While still feeble from illness he had given her all the money he could spare, and for years
the blackmail had continued. Then, at last, after he had been a year in England, the worm had
turned.

"I dared her to do her worst. I declared, what I am absolutely convinced to have been the case,
that the marriage certificate she had shown me was a forgery, and I concluded that if she proved
the marriage by forgery and perjury, I should institute proceedings for divorce on the grounds
of her subsequent life. I got no answer, and for three years there was total silence. Then
came a letter from a friend saying that Madame Danterre, who had taken her maiden name, was
dying and wished me to know that she forgave me." With this note had been sent to him a diamond
ring he had given her in the first days of her influence over him. He sent it back, but months
later he got it again, returned by the Post Office authorities, as no one of the name he had
written to could be found.

Then came a solemn declaration that he had never doubted of Madame Danterre's death.

"I thought that to have spoilt my youth was enough; but she was yet to destroy my best years.
Ah! Rose," he wrote, "if I had loved you less it would have been more bearable. I met you;
I worshipped you; won you. Then, after a brief dream of joy, the cloud came down, and my evil
genius was upon me. I don't think you were in love with me, my beloved, but it would have come
even after you had found out what a commonplace fellow it was whom you thought a hero; it would
have come. You must have loved me out of the full flow of your own nature if I had not been
driven to cowardice and deception."

Evidently Madame Danterre had had a kind of almost uncanny power of terrifying the soldier.
He had been a good man when she first met him, and he had been a good man after that short
time of mad infatuation. He was by nature and training almost passionately respectable; he
was at length happily married; but this horror of an evil incident in the past had got such
a hold on his nerves that when he met Madame Danterre (whom he had believed to be dead) coming
out of a theatre in London, the hero of the Victoria Cross, of three other campaigns, perhaps
the bravest man in England, fainted when he saw her. Without doubt it was the publication of
Mr. John Steele's will leaving his enormous fortune to Sir David Bright that had resuscitated
Madame Danterre.

From the moment of that shock David Bright had probably never been entirely sane on the subject.
The resurrection of Madame Danterre had seemed to him preternatural and fateful. The woman
had become to him something more or something less than human, something impervious to attack
that could not be dealt with in any ordinary way.

From that time there had grown up an invisible barrier between him and his wife. He found himself
making silly excuses for being out at quite natural times. He found himself getting afraid
of her, and building up defences, growing reserved and absurdly dignified, trying to cling
to the pedestal of the elderly soldier as he could not be a companion.

Madame Danterre had gone back to Florence, fat with blackmail, and then had begun a steady
course of persecution.

Step by step he had sunk lower down, knowing that he was weakening his own case most miserably
if it should ever become public. Nothing satisfied her, although she received two thousand
a year regularly, until the will was drawn up, which left everything to her except an allowance
of £800 a year to Rose.

Once a year for three years Madame Danterre had visited London, and had generally contrived
that Sir David should be conscious of the look in her astonishing eyes, which Sir Edmund had
likened to extinct volcanoes, at some theatre, or in the park, once at least every season.
Evidently that look had never failed. It touched the exposed nerve in his mind--exposed ever
since the time of illness and strain when he was young and helpless in India. It was evident
that he had felt that any agony was bearable to shield Rose from the suffering of a public
scandal. If he could only have brought himself to consult one of the Murrays something might
have been done. As it was, he had recourse to subterfuge. He assured Madame Danterre annually,
in answer to her insisting on the point, that no other will had ever been signed by him, but
he always carried a will with him ready to be signed. There was much of self-pity perhaps in
the letter, there was the plaint of a wrecked life, but there was still more of real delicate
feeling for Rose, of intense anxiety to shield her, of poignant regret for "what might have
been" in their home life. The man had been of a wholesome nature; his great physical courage
was part of a good fellow's construction. But he had been taught to worship a good name, an
unsullied reputation, and to love things of good repute too much, perhaps, for the sake of
their repute, as he could not venture to risk the shadow for the reality. The effect of reading
Sir David's last letter to Rose on an unbiassed reader of a humane turn of mind would have
been an intensity of pity, and a sigh at the sadness of life on this planet.

Molly was passionately biassed, and as much of Sir David's story as reached her through the
letter was to her simply a sickening revelation from a cowardly traitor of his own treason
through life, and even up to the hour of death. Her mother had been basely deceived; for his
sake she had been divorced, and he had denied the marriage that followed. Of course, it was
a marriage, or he would never have been so frightened. Then her mother, thus deserted, young
and weak, had gone astray, and he had defended himself by threatening divorce if she proclaimed
herself his wife. Every word of the history was interpreted on the same lines. And then, last
of all, this will was sent to her mother. Was it a tardy repentance? Had he, perhaps when too
weak for more, asked some one to send it to Madame Danterre that she might destroy it? If so,
why had she not destroyed it? Why, if it might honourably have been destroyed, send to Molly
now a will that, if proved, would make her an absolute pauper? In plain figures Molly's fortune
could not be less than £20,000 a year if that paper did not exist, and would be under £80 a
year if it were valid.

Molly next seized on one of the old packets of letters in trembling hope of some further light
being thrown on the situation, but in them was evidence impossible to deny that her mother
had invented the whole story of the marriage. Why Madame Danterre had not destroyed these letters
was a further mystery, except that, time after time, it has been proved that people have carefully
preserved evidence of their own crimes. Fighting against it, almost crying out in agonised
protest, Molly was forced to realise the slow persevering cunning and unflinching cruelty with
which her mother had pursued her victim. It was an ugly story for any girl to read if the woman
had had no connection with her. It seemed to cut away from Molly all shreds of self-respect
as she read it. She felt that the daughter of such a woman must have a heritage of evil in
her nature.

The packet of old letters finished, there was yet something more to find. Next came a packet
of prescriptions and some receipts from shops. Under these were the faded photographs of several
men and women of whom she knew nothing. Lastly, there was half a letter written to Molly dated
in August and left unfinished and without a signature:

     "CARISSIMA:

     "I am far from well, but I believe Dr. Larrone has found out the
     cause and will soon put things right again. If you ever hear
     anything about me from Dr. Larrone you can put entire confidence in
     him. I have found out now why Sir Edmund Grosse has tried to see
     me. He is possessed with the absurd idea that I have no right to
     Sir David Bright's fortune, although he does not venture to call in
     question the validity of the will which left that fortune to me.
     Dr. Larrone has certain proof that Grosse employs a detective here
     to watch this house. I have also heard that he is in love with poor
     David's widow, and hence I suppose this trop de zèle on her
     behalf. As he cannot get at me he is likely to try to become
     intimate with you, so I warn you to avoid him now and in future."

That was all.

Molly sat staring vacantly in front of her, almost unconscious of her surroundings from the
intensity of pain. Each item in the horror of the situation told on her separately, but in
no sequence--with no coherence. Shame, "hopes early blighted, love scorned," kindness proved
treason, the prospect of complete and dishonourable poverty, a poverty which would enrich her
foes. And all this was mixed in her mind with the dreadful words from the old letters that
seemed to be shouted at her.

Miss Carew, coming in at dinner-time, was horror-struck by what she saw. Molly was sitting
on the floor surrounded by letters and papers, moaning and biting her hand. The gong sounded,
the parlourmaid announced dinner, and Molly gathered up her papers, locked them in the box,
fastened the key on to her chain--all in complete silence--and got up from the floor. She then
walked straight into the dining-room in her large hat and outdoor clothes without speaking.

And without a word the terrified Miss Carew went with her, and tried to eat her dinner.

Molly ate a very little of each thing that was offered to her, taking a few mouthfuls voraciously,
and then quite suddenly, as she was offered a dish of forced asparagus, she went into peal
after peal of ringing, resounding laughter. "I should like you to have asparagus at every meal,"
she said, and then again came peal after peal--each a quite distinct sound. It was dreadful
to hear, and Miss Carew and the servant were terrified. It was the laughter, not of a maniac,
not of pure unreasoning hysteria, not quite of a lost soul. It suggested these elements, perhaps,
but it was chiefly a nervous convulsion at an overpowering perception of the irony in the heart
of things.

The hysterical fit lasted long enough for Miss Carew to insist on a doctor, and Molly did not
resist. When he came she implored him to give her a strong sleeping-draught. She kept Miss
Carew and the maid fussing about her, in a terror of being alone, until the draught was at
last sent in by a dilatory chemist. She then hurried them away, drank the medicine, and set
herself to go to sleep. The draught acted soon, as Miss Carew learnt by listening at the door
and hearing the deep, regular breathing. But the effects passed off, and Molly sat up absolutely
awake at one o'clock in the morning. She lay down again and tried to force herself to sleep
by sheer will power, but she soon realised the awful impotence of desire in forcing sleep.

At last, horror of her own intensely alert faculties, blinded by darkness, made her turn up
the light. Instantly the sight of the familiar room seemed unbearable, and she turned it down
again. But again the darkness was quite intolerable, and seemed to have a hideous life of its
own which held in it presences of evil. At one moment she breathed in the air of the winter's
night, shivering with cold; at the next she was stifled for want of breath. So the light by
the bed was turned on again, and to get a little further from it Molly got up and slowly and
carefully put on her stockings and fur slippers, then opened a cupboard and took out a magnificent
fur cloak and wrapped herself in it. Then suddenly one aspect of the position became concrete
to her imagination. She knew that the cloak was bought with ill-gotten money. Her enormous
allowance after she came of age, even the expenses of her education--Miss Carew's salary among
other things--had been won by fraud. And now, oh! why, why had not her miserable mother spoken
the truth when she got the will, or why had she not destroyed it? Why had she left it to Molly
to put right all this long, long imposture, and to reveal to the world the story of her mother's
crime? It seemed to Molly as if she were looking on at some other girl's life, and as if she
were considering it from an external point of view. The sleeping-draught had, no doubt, excited
still further the terrible agitation of her nerves, and ideas came to her as if they had no
connection with her own personality.

Wicked old woman, dying in Florence! How cruel those words were: "Let it be her own affair"!
Her last act to send those papers to the poor girl she had deserted as a baby, and refused
even to see as a woman. "Let it be her own affair." Her own affair to choose actual poverty
and a terrible publicity as to the past instead of a great fortune and silence as to her mother's
guilt. "Let it be her own affair" to enrich her enemies, to give a fortune to the woman who
would scorn her! Would the man who had pretended to be her friend, and who had been pursuing
her mother with detectives all the time, would he some day talk pityingly of her with his wife,
and say she "had really behaved very well, poor thing"?

Suddenly Molly stopped, full of horror at a new thought. Oh! she must make things safe and
sure, or--good God!--what might not her mother's daughter be tempted to do? A deep blush spread
over her face and neck. She moved hastily to the door, and in a moment she was in Miss Carew's
room.

"I want to speak to you; I want to tell you something," said Molly, turning up the electric
light as she spoke.

Miss Carew was startled out of a sweet sleep, and her first thought was the one which haunted
her whenever she was awakened at an untimely hour. Her carefully-curled fringe was lying in
the dressing-table drawer, and Molly had never seen her without it!

"Yes, yes; in one moment," she answered fussily. "I will come to your room in one minute."

Molly felt checked, and there had been something strange and unfamiliar in Miss Carew's face.
Suddenly she felt what it would be to tell Miss Carew the truth--Miss Carew, who was now her
dependent, receiving from her £100 a year, would be shocked and startled out of her senses,
and might not take these horrible revelations at all kindly. It would, anyhow, be such a reversal
of their mutual positions as Molly could not face. And by the time the chestnut hair tinged
with grey had been pinned a little crooked on Miss Carew's head, and she had knocked timidly
at Molly's door, she was startled and offended by the impatient, overbearing tone of the voice
that asked her to "go back to bed and not to bother; it was nothing that mattered."

The night had got on further than Molly knew by that time, and she was relieved to hear it
strike four o'clock. She was astonished at noticing that, while she had been walking up and
down, up and down her room, she had never heard the clock strike two or three. The fact of
having spoken to Miss Carew had brought her for the moment out of the inferno of the last few
hours, and the time from four o'clock to six was less utterly miserable because worse had gone
before it.

At six she called the housemaid, and kept her fussing about the room, lighting the fire, and
getting tea, so as not to be alone again. At eight o'clock she sent for coffee and eggs, and
the coffee had to be made twice before she was satisfied with it. Then she suddenly said she
felt much better, and, having dressed much more quickly than usual, she went out.

Molly had determined to confide the position to Father Molyneux. When she got to the church
in Kensington it was only to find that Father Molyneux had gone away for some days.

That evening the doctor was again summoned, and told Miss Carew that he had now no doubt that
Miss Dexter was suffering from influenza, with acute cerebral excitement, and the case was
decidedly anxious.

"He might have found out that it was influenza last night," said Miss Carew indignantly, "and
I even told him the housemaid had just had influenza! Molly simply caught it from her, as I
always thought she would."

BOOK III

CHAPTER XXI

AN INTERLUDE OF HAPPINESS

An interlude of happiness, six weeks of almost uninterrupted enjoyment, followed for Rose after
she went on board Sir Edmund's yacht.

Edmund Grosse had most distinctly made up his mind that during those weeks he would not betray
any ulterior motive whatever. They were all to be amused and to be happy. There is no knowing
when an interlude of happiness will come in life; it is not enough to make out perfect plans,
the best fail us. But sometimes, quite unforeseen, when all the weather signs are contrary,
there come intervals of sunshine in our hearts, in spite of any circumstances and the most
uninteresting surroundings. Harmony is proclaimed for a little while, and we wonder why things
were black before, and have to remember that they will be black again. But when such a truce
to pain falls in the happiest setting, and the most glorious scenery, then rejoice and be glad,
it is a real truce of God. So did Rose night by night rejoice without trembling. It wanted
much skill on Edmund's part to ward off any scruples, any moments of consciousness. He showed
great self-command, surprising self-discipline in carrying out his tactics. There were moments
when their talk had slid into great intimacy, when they were close together in heart and in
mind, and he slipped back into the commonplace only just in time. There were moments, especially
on the return journey, when he could hardly hide his sense of how gracious and delicious was
her presence, how acute her instincts, how quaintly and attractively simple her mind, how big
her spiritual outlook. But before she could have more than a suspicion of his thoughts Edmund
would make any consciousness seem absurd by a comment on the doings of the very young people
on board.

"The child does look happy," he said in his laziest voice one evening when he knew his look
had been bent for a rashly long moment on Rose. "Happy and pretty," he murmured to himself,
and he watched his youngest guest with earnestness. Then he sat down near Rose on a low deck-chair,
and put away the glasses he held in his pocket. "I'm not sure I don't get as much pleasure
out of the hazy world I see about me as you long-sighted people do; the colours are marvellous."
Rose looked at him in surprise.

"But Edmund, don't you see more than haze?"

"Oh, yes, I can see a foreground, and then the rest melts away. I don't know what is meant
by a middle distance--that's why I can't shoot."

Rose sat up with an eager look on her face. "I never knew that; I only thought you did not
care for shooting."

There was a silence of several minutes, and neither looked at the other. At last Edmund rose
and went to the side of the boat and looked over at the water, and then, turning half-way towards
her, said: "Why does it startle you so much?"

"Oh, I don't know."

"But you do know perfectly well."

"Indeed, Edmund." Her face was flushed and her voice a little tremulous.

"You shall tell me." He spoke more imperiously than he knew.

"I can't, indeed I can't."

"No," he said; "it would be a difficult thing to say, I admit."

"Couldn't we read something?" said Rose.

"No, no use at all. I am going to tell you why you are so glad I am short-sighted."

"But I am not glad."

"I repeat that you are, and this is the reason why."

"You shall not say it," said Rose, now more and more distressed and embarrassed.

"It's because you never knew before why I did not volunteer for the war, that is why you are
so glad." "Yes," he thought in anger, "she has had this thing against me all the time; it is
one of the defences she has set up." But he was hurt all the same--hurt and angry; he wanted
to punish her. "So all the time you have thought this of me?"

"No, indeed, indeed, Edmund, it wasn't that. I never meant that; I knew you were never that,
do believe me."

"Well, if I do believe you so far, what did you think?"

Rose let her book lie on her knee and leant over it with her hands clasped. "I thought that
perhaps," she faltered, "you had been too long in the habit of doing nothing much, and that
you had grown a little lazy--at least, I didn't really think so, but that idea has struck me."

She came and stood by him. "Oh, Edmund, why do you make me say things when I don't want to,
when I hate saying them, when they are not really true at all." She was deeply moved, and he
felt that in one sense she was in his power. He gave a bitter sigh.

"Can I make you say whatever I like?" Her face flushed and a different look, one of fear he
thought, came into her troubled eyes. "Then say after me, 'I am very sorry I did not understand
by intuition that you were too blind to shoot the Boers, and that I was so silly as to think
for a moment that you had ever wasted your time or been the least little bit lazy.'"

"No, I won't say anything at all"--she held out both hands to him--"except what the children
say, 'let us just go on with the game and pretend that that part never happened.'"

And though Rose was still embarrassed, still inclined to fear she had hurt him, what might
have been a little cloud was pierced by sunshine. "How ridiculously glad she is that I'm not
a coward!" He, too, in spite of annoyance, felt more hopeful than he had been for a long time.

At Genoa they got long delayed letters and papers. In one of these a short paragraph announced
the death of Madame Danterre. "It is believed," were the concluding words, "that she has left
her large fortune to her daughter, Miss Mary Dexter." That was the first reminder to Rose that
the interlude of mere enjoyment was almost over. She was not going to repine; it had been very
good. Coming on board after reading this with a quiet patient look, a look habitual to her
during the last two years, but which had faded under the sunshine of happy days, Rose saw Edmund
Grosse standing alone in the stern of the boat with a number of letters in his left hand pressed
against his leg, looking fixedly at the water. The yacht was already standing out to sea, but
Edmund had not glanced a farewell at beautiful and yet prosperous Genoa, a city that no modern
materialism can degrade. Like a young bride of the sea, she is decked by things old and things
new, and her marble palaces do not appear to be insulted by the jostling of modern commerce.
All things are kept fresh and pure on that wonderful coast. Something had happened, of that
Rose was sure; but what?

