Masterman Ready - by Captain Marryat

Chapter I

It was in the month of October, 18--, that the Pacific, a large ship, was running before a
heavy gale of wind in the middle of the vast Atlantic Ocean. She had but little sail, for the
wind was so strong, that the canvas would have been split into pieces by the furious blasts
before which she was driven through the waves, which were very high, and following her almost
as fast as she darted through their boiling waters; sometimes heaving up her stern and sinking
her bows down so deep into the hollow of the sea, that it appeared as if she would have dived
down underneath the waves; but she was a fine vessel, and the captain was a good seaman, who
did what he considered best for the safety of his vessel, and then put his trust in that Providence
who is ever watchful over us.

The captain stood before the wheel, watching the men who were steering the ship; for when you
are running before a heavy gale, it requires great attention to the helm: and as he looked
around him and up at the heavens, he sang in a low voice the words of a sea song:

"One wide water all around us, All above us one black sky."

And so it was with them;--they were in the middle of the Atlantic, not another vessel to be
seen, and the heavens were covered with black clouds, which were borne along furiously by the
gale; the sea ran mountains high, and broke into large white foaming crests, while the fierce
wind howled through the rigging of the vessel.

Besides the captain of the ship and the two men at the wheel, there were two other personages
on deck: one was a young lad about twelve years old, and the other a weather-beaten old seaman,
whose grisly locks were streaming in the wind, as he paced aft and looked over the taffrail
of the vessel.

The young lad, observing a heavy sea coming up to the stern of the vessel, caught hold of the
old man's arm, crying out - "Won't that great wave come into us, Ready?"

"No, Master William, it will not: don't you see how the ship lifts her quarters to it?--and
now it has passed underneath us. But it might happen, and then what would become of you, if
I did not hold on, and hold you on also? You would be washed overboard."

"I don't like the sea much, Ready; I wish we were safe on shore again," replied the lad. "Don't
the waves look as if they wished to beat the ship all to pieces?"

"Yes, they do; and they roar as if angry because they cannot bury the vessel beneath them:
but I am used to them, and with a good ship like this, and a good captain and crew, I don't
care for them."

"But sometimes ships do sink, and then everybody is drowned."

"Yes; and very often the very ships sink which those on board think are most safe. We can only
do our best, and after that we must submit to the will of Heaven."

"What little birds are those flying about so close to the water?"

"Those are Mother Carey's chickens. You seldom see them except in a storm, or when a storm
is coming on."

The birds which William referred to were the stormy petrels.

"Were you ever shipwrecked on a desolate island like Robinson Crusoe?"

"Yes, Master William, I have been shipwrecked; but I never heard of Robinson Crusoe. So many
have been wrecked and undergone great hardships, and so many more have never lived to tell
what they have suffered, that it's not very likely that I should have known that one man you
speak of, out of so many."

"Oh! but it's all in a book which I have read. I could tell you all about it--and so I will
when the ship is quiet again; but now I wish you would help me down below, for I promised mamma
not to stay up long."

"Then always keep your promise like a good lad," replied the old man; "now give me your hand,
and I'll answer for it that we will fetch the hatchway without a tumble; and when the weather
is fine again, I'll tell you how I was wrecked, and you shall tell me all about Robinson Crusoe."

Having seen William safe to the cabin door, the old seaman returned to the deck, for it was
his watch.

Masterman Ready, for such was his name, had been more than fifty years at sea, having been
bound apprentice to a collier which sailed from South Shields, when he was only ten years old.
His face was browned from long exposure, and there were deep furrows on his cheeks, but he
was still a hale and active man. He had served many years on board of a man-of-war, and had
been in every climate: he had many strange stories to tell, and he might be believed even when
his stories were strange, for he would not tell an untruth. He could navigate a vessel, and,
of course, he could read and write. The name of Ready was very well suited to him, for he was
seldom at a loss; and in cases of difficulty and danger, the captain would not hesitate to
ask his opinion, and frequently take his advice. He was second mate of the vessel.

The Pacific was, as we have observed, a very fine ship, and well able to contend with the most
violent storm. She was of more than four hundred tons burthen, and was then making a passage
out to New South Wales, with a valuable cargo of English hardware, cutlery, and other manufactures.
The captain was a good navigator and seaman, and moreover a good man, of a cheerful, happy
disposition, always making the best of everything, and when accidents did happen, always more
inclined to laugh than to look grave. His name was Osborn. The first mate, whose name was Mackintosh,
was a Scotsman, rough and ill-tempered, but paying strict attention to his duty - a man that
Captain Osborn could trust, but whom he did not like.

Ready we have already spoken of, and it will not be necessary to say anything about the seamen
on board, except that there were thirteen of them, hardly a sufficient number to man so large
a vessel; but just as they were about to sail, five of the seamen, who did not like the treatment
they had received from Mackintosh, the first mate, had left the ship, and Captain Osborn did
not choose to wait until he could obtain others in their stead. This proved unfortunate, as
the events which we shall hereafter relate will show.

Chapter II

Master William, whom we have introduced to the reader, was the eldest boy of a family who were
passengers on board, consisting of the father, mother, and four children: his father was a
Mr. Seagrave, a very well-informed, clever man, who having for many years held an office under
government at Sydney, the capital of New South Wales, was now returning from a leave of absence
of three years. He had purchased from the government several thousand acres of land; it had
since risen very much in value, and the sheep and cattle which he had put on it were proving
a source of great profit. His property had been well managed by the person who had charge of
it during his absence in England, and he was now taking out with him a variety of articles
of every description for its improvement, and for his own use, such as furniture for his house,
implements of agriculture, seeds, plants, cattle, and many other things too numerous to mention.

Mrs. Seagrave was an amiable woman, but not in very strong health. The family consisted of
William, who was the eldest, a clever, steady boy, but, at the same time, full of mirth and
humour; Thomas, who was six years old, a very thoughtless but good-tempered boy, full of mischief,
and always in a scrape; Caroline, a little girl of seven years; and Albert, a fine strong little
fellow, who was not one year old: he was under the charge of a black girl, who had come from
the Cape of Good Hope to Sydney, and had followed Mrs. Seagrave to England. We have now mentioned
all the people on board of the Pacific: perhaps we ought not to forget two shepherd's dogs,
belonging to Mr. Seagrave, and a little terrier, which was a great favourite of Captain Osborn,
to whom she belonged.

It was not until the fourth day from its commencement that the gale abated, and then it gradually
subsided until it was nearly a calm. The men who had been watching night after night during
the gale now brought all their clothes which had been drenched by the rain and spray, and hung
them up in the rigging to dry: the sails, also, which had been furled, and had been saturated
by the wet, were now loosened and spread out that they might not be mildewed. The wind blew
mild and soft, the sea had gone down, and the ship was running through the water at the speed
of about four miles an hour. Mrs. Seagrave, wrapped up in a cloak, was seated upon one of the
arm-chests near the stern of the ship, her husband and children were all with her enjoying
the fine weather, when Captain Osborn, who had been taking an observation of the sun with his
sextant, came up to them.

"Well, Master Tommy, you are very glad that the gale is over?"

"I didn't care," replied Tommy, "only I spilt all my soup. But Juno tumbled off her chair,
and rolled away with the baby, till papa picked them both up."

"It was a mercy that poor Albert was not killed," observed Mrs. Seagrave.

"And so he might have been, if Juno had not thought only of him and nothing at all about herself,"
replied Mr. Seagrave.

"That's very true, sir," replied Captain Osborn. "She saved the child, and, I fear, hurt herself."

"I thump my head very hard," said Juno, smiling.

"Yes, and it's lucky that you have a good thick woolly coat over it," replied Captain Osborn,
laughing.

"It is 12 o'clock by the sun, sir," said Mackintosh, the first mate, to the captain.

"Then bring me up the latitude, Mr. Mackintosh, while I work out the longitude from the sights
which I took this morning. In five minutes, Mr. Seagrave, I shall be ready to prick off over
our place on the chart."

"Here are the dogs come up on deck," said William; "I dare say they are as glad of the fine
weather as we are. Come here, Romulus! Here, Remus! - Remus!"

"Well, sir," said Ready, who was standing by them with his quadrant in his hand, "I should
like to ask you a question. Those dogs of yours have two very odd names which I never heard
before. Who were Romulus and Remus?"

"Romulus and Remus," replied Mr. Seagrave, "were the names of two shepherds, brothers, who
in ancient days founded the city of Rome, which eventually became the largest and most celebrated
empire in the world. They were the first kings of Rome, and reigned together. History says
that Remus affronted Romulus by leaping over a wall he had raised, and Romulus, in his anger,
took away his life; but the history of early days is not to be depended upon."

"No, nor the brothers either, it appears," replied Ready; "however, it is the old story - two
of a trade can never agree. One sometimes hears of Rome now - is that the same place?"

"Yes," replied William, "it is the remains of the old city."

"Well, one lives and learns," said Ready. "I have learnt something to-day, which everyone will
to the last day of his life, if he will only ask questions. I'm an old man, and perhaps don't
know much, except in the seafaring way; but I should have known much less if I did not ask
for information, and was not ashamed to acknowledge my ignorance; that's the way to learn,
Master William."

"Very good advice, Ready, - and, William, I hope you will profit by it," said Mr. Seagrave;
"never be ashamed to ask the meaning of what you do not understand."

"I always do, papa. Do I not ask you questions, Ready?"

"Yes, you do, and very clever questions for a boy of your age; and I only wish that I could
answer them better than I can sometimes."

"I should like to go down now, my dear," said Mrs. Seagrave; "perhaps Ready will see the baby
down safe."

"That I will, ma'am," said Ready, putting his quadrant on the capstan: "now, Juno, give me
the child, and go down first; - backwards, you stupid girl! how often do I tell you that? Some
day or another you will come down with a run."

"And break my head," said Juno.

"Yes, or break your arm; and then who is to hold the child?"

As soon as they were all down in the cabin, the captain and Mr. Seagrave marked the position
of the vessel on the chart, and found that they were one hundred and thirty miles from the
Cape of Good Hope.

"If the wind holds, we shall be in to-morrow," said Mr. Seagrave to his wife. "Juno, perhaps
you may see your father and mother."

Poor Juno shook her head, and a tear or two stole down her dark cheek. With a mournful face
she told them, that her father and mother belonged to a Dutch boor, who had gone with them
many miles into the interior: she had been parted from them when quite a little child, and
had been left at Cape Town.

Chapter III

The next morning the Pacific arrived at the Cape and anchored in Table Bay.

"Why do they call this Table Bay, Ready?" said William.

"I suppose it's because they call that great mountain the Table Mountain, Master William; you
see how flat the mountain is on the top."

"Yes, it is quite as flat as a table."

"Yes, and sometimes you will see the white clouds rolling down over the top of it in a very
curious manner, and that the sailors call spreading the tablecloth: it is a sign of bad weather."

"Then I hope they will not spread the tablecloth while we are here, Ready," said William, "for
I shall certainly have no appetite. We have had bad weather enough already, and mamma suffers
so much from it. What a pretty place it is!"

"We shall remain here two days, sir," said Captain Osborn to Mr. Seagrave, "if you and Mrs.
Seagrave would like to go on shore."

"I will go down and ask Mrs. Seagrave," said her husband, who went down the ladder, followed
by William.

Upon the question being put to Mrs. Seagrave, she replied that she was quite satisfied with
the ship having no motion, and did not feel herself equal to going on shore; it was therefore
decided that she should remain on board with the two younger children, and that, on the following
day, Mr. Seagrave should take William and Tommy to see Cape Town, and return on board before night.

The next morning, Captain Osborn lowered down one of the large boats, and Mr. Seagrave, accompanied
by Captain Osborn, went on shore with William and Tommy. Tommy had promised his mamma to be
very good; but that he always did, and almost always forgot his promise directly he was out
of sight. As soon as they landed, they went up to a gentleman's house, with whom Captain Osborn
was acquainted. They stayed for a few minutes to drink a glass of lemonade, for it was very
warm; and then it was proposed that they should go to the Company's Gardens and see the wild
beasts which were confined there, at which William was much delighted, and Tommy clapped his
hands with joy.

"What are the Company's Gardens, papa?" inquired William.

"They were made by the Dutch East India Company, at the time that the Cape of Good Hope was
in their possession. They are, properly speaking, Botanical Gardens; but, at the same time,
the wild animals are kept there. Formerly there were a great many, but they have not been paid
attention to lately, for we have plenty of these animals in England now."

"What shall we see?" said Tommy.

"You will see lions, Tommy, a great many in a large den together," said Captain Osborn.

"Oh! I want to see a lion."

"You must not go too near them, recollect."

"No, I won't," said Tommy.

As soon as they entered the gates, Tommy escaped from Captain Osborn, and ran away in his hurry
to see the lions; but Captain Osborn caught him again, and held him fast by the hand.

"Here is a pair of very strange birds," said the gentleman who accompanied them; "they are
called Secretaries, on account of the feathers which hang behind their heads, as the feather
of a pen does when a clerk puts it behind his ear: but they are very useful, for they are snake-killers;
indeed, they would, if they could, live altogether upon snakes, which they are very great enemies
to, never letting one escape. They strike them with their feet, and with such force as to kill
them immediately."

"Are there many snakes in this country?" inquired William.

"Yes, and very venomous snakes," replied Mr. Seagrave; "so that these birds are very useful
in destroying them. You observe, William, that the Almighty, in his wisdom, has so arranged
it that no animal (especially of a noxious kind) shall be multiplied to excess, but kept under
by being preyed upon by some other; indeed, wherever in any country an animal exists in any
quantity, there is generally found another animal which destroys it. The Secretary inhabits
this country where snakes exist in numbers, that it may destroy them: in England the bird would
be of little value."

"But some animals are too large or too fierce to be destroyed by others, papa; for instance,
the elephant and the lion."

"Very true; but these larger animals do not breed so fast, and therefore their numbers do not
increase so rapidly. For instance, a pair of elephants will not have more than one young one
in the space of two years or more; while the rabbits, which are preyed upon and the food of
so many other beasts as well as birds, would increase enormously, if they were not destroyed.
Examine through the whole of creation, and you will find that there is an unerring hand, which
invariably preserves the balance exact; and that there are no more mouths than for which food
is provided, although accidental circumstances may for a time occasion a slight alteration."

They continued their walk until they came to the den of the lions. It was a large place, in
closed with a strong and high wall of stone, with only one window to it for the visitors to
look at them, as it was open above. This window was wide, and with strong iron bars running
from the top to the bottom; but the width between the bars was such that a lion could put his
paw out with ease; and they were therefore cautioned not to go too near. It was a fine sight
to see eight or ten of these noble-looking animals lying down in various attitudes, quite indifferent
apparently to the people outside--basking in the sun, and slowly moving their tufted tails
to and fro. William examined them at a respectful distance from the bars; and so did Tommy,
who had his mouth open with astonishment, in which there was at first not a little fear mixed,
but he soon got bolder. The gentleman who had accompanied them, and who had been long at the
Cape, was relating to Mr. Seagrave and Captain Osborn some very curious anecdotes about the
lion. William and they were so interested, that they did not perceive that Tommy had slipped
back to the grated window of the den. Tommy looked at the lions, and then he wanted to make
them move about: there was one fine full-grown young lion, about three years old, who was lying
down nearest to the window; and Tommy took up a stone and threw it at him: the lion appeared
not to notice it, for he did not move, although he fixed his eyes upon Tommy; so Tommy became
more brave, and threw another, and then another, approaching each time nearer to the bars of
the window.

All of a sudden the lion gave a tremendous roar, and sprang at Tommy, bounding against the
iron bars of the cage with such force that, had they not been very strong, it must have broken
them. As it was, they shook and rattled so that pieces of mortar fell from the stones. Tommy
shrieked; and, fortunately for himself, fell back and tumbled head over heels, or the lion's
paws would have reached him. Captain Osborn and Mr. Seagrave ran up to Tommy, and picked him
up: he roared with fright as soon as he could fetch his breath, while the lion stood at the
bars, lashing his tail, snarling, and showing his enormous fangs.

"Take me away--take me on board the ship!" cried Tommy, who was terribly frightened.

"What did you do, Tommy?" said Captain Osborn.

"I won't throw any more stones, Mr. Lion; I won't indeed!" cried Tommy, looking terrified towards
the animal.

Mr. Seagrave scolded Tommy well for his foolish conduct, and by degrees he became more composed;
but he did not recover himself until they had walked some distance away from the lion's den.

They then looked at the other animals which were to be seen, Tommy keeping a most respectful
distance from every one of them. He wouldn't even go near to a Cape sheep with a broad tail.

When they had seen everything, they went back to the gentleman's house to dinner; and, after
dinner, they returned on board.

Chapter IV

The following morning the fresh water and provisions were received on board, and once more
the Pacific stretched her broad canvas to the winds, and there was every prospect of a rapid
voyage, as for many days she continued her passage with a fair wind and flowing sheet. But
this did not continue: it fell calm, and remained so for nearly three days, during which not
a breath of wind was to be seen on the wide expanse of water; all nature appeared as if in
repose, except that now and then an albatross would drop down at some distance from the stern
of the vessel, and, as he swam lazily along with his wings half-furled, pick up the fragments
of food which had been thrown over the side.

"What great bird is that, Ready?" inquired William.

"It is an albatross, the largest sea-bird we have. Their wings are very long. I have seen them
shot, and they have measured eleven feet from the tip of one wing to the tip of the other when
the wings have been spread out."

"It is the first one that I have seen," said William.

"Because you seldom meet them north of the Cape, sir: people do say that they go to sleep on
the wing, balancing themselves high up in the air."

"Papa," said William, turning to Mr. Seagrave, who stood by, "why is it that one bird can swim
and another cannot? You recollect when Tommy drove the hens into the large pond, they flounced
about, and their feathers became wet, and would support them no longer, and then they were
drowned. Now, how does a sea-bird contrive to remain so long on the water?"

"Because a sea-bird, William, is provided with a sort of oil on purpose to anoint the outside
of its feathers, and this oil prevents the water from penetrating them. Have you not observed
the ducks on shore dressing their feathers with their bills? They were then using this oil
to make their feathers waterproof."

"How odd!"

"Don't say how odd, William; that is not an expression to use when we talk of the wonderful
provisions made by the Almighty hand, who neglects not the meanest of his creatures - say rather,
how wonderful!"

"That's very true, sir," observed Ready; "but still you must not be too hard upon Master William,
for I have heard many a grownup man make use of the same expression."

On the third day of the calm, the barometer fell so low as to induce Captain Osborn to believe
that they should have a severe gale, and every preparation was made to meet it, should it come
on. Nor was he mistaken: towards midnight the clouds gathered up fast, and as they gathered
up in thick piles, heaped one over the other, the lightning darted through them in every direction;
and as the clouds rose up, so did the wind, but at first only in heavy gusts, and then lulling
again to a calm.

"Ready," said Captain Osborn, "how do you think we shall have the wind?"

"Why, Captain Osborn, to tell you the truth, I don't think it will be steady to one point long.
It may at first blow hard from the north, but it's my idea it will shift soon to some other
quarter, and blow still harder."

"What think you, Mackintosh?"

"We'll have plenty of it, and a long steady gale, that's my notion; and the sooner we ship
the dead lights the better."

Mr. Seagrave, with William, happened to be standing by at the time of this conversation, and
at the term dead lights Willie's face expressed some anxiety. Ready perceived it, and said--

"That's a foolish name they give to the shutters which go over the cabin windows to prevent
the water from breaking into the cabin when a vessel sails before the wind; you know we had
them on the last time that we had a gale."

"But, Ready," said Captain Osborn, "why do you think that we shall have a shift of wind?"

"Well, I don't know; perhaps I was wrong," replied the old man, "and Mr. Mackintosh is right:
the wind does seem to come steady from the north-east, that's certain;" and Ready walked away
to the binnacle, and looked at the compass. Mr. Seagrave and William then went below, and Mr.
Mackintosh went forward to give his orders. As soon as they were all gone, Ready went up again
to Captain Osborn and said:

"Captain Osborn, it's not for me to contradict Mr. Mackintosh, but that's of little consequence
in a time like this: I should have held to my opinion, had it not been that the gentleman passenger
and his son were standing by, but now, as the coast is clear, I tell you that we shall have
something worse than a gale of wind. I have been in these latitudes before, and I am an old
seaman, as you know. There's something in the air, and there has been something during the
last three days of calm, which reminds me too well of what I have seen here before; and I am
sure that we shall have little better than a hurricane, as far as wind goes - and worse in
one point, that it will last much longer than hurricanes generally do. I have been watching,
and even the birds tell me so, and they are told by their nature, which is never mistaken.
That calm has been nothing more than a repose of the winds previous to their being roused up
to do their worst; and that is my real opinion?"

"Well, and I'm inclined to agree with you, Ready; so we must send topgallant yards down on
deck, and all the small sails and lumber out of the tops. Get the trysail aft and bent, and
lower down the gaff. I will go forward."

Their preparations were hardly complete before the wind had settled to a fierce gale from the
north-east. The sea rose rapidly; topsail after topsail was furled; and by dusk the Pacific
was flying through the water with the wind on her quarter, under reefed foresail and storm
staysail. It was with difficulty that three men at the wheel could keep the helm, such were
the blows which the vessel received from the heavy seas on the quarter. Not one seaman in the
ship took advantage of his watch below to go to sleep that night, careless as they generally
are; the storm was too dreadful. About three o'clock in the morning the wind suddenly subsided;
it was but for a minute or two, and then it again burst on the vessel from another quarter
of the compass, as Ready had foretold, splitting the foresail into fragments, which lashed
and flogged the wind till they were torn away by it, and carried far to leeward. The heavens
above were of a pitchy darkness, and the only light was from the creaming foam of the sea on
every side. The shift of wind, which had been to the west-north-west, compelled them to alter
the course of the vessel, for they had no chance but to scud, as they now did, under bare poles;
but in consequence of the sea having taken its run from the former wind, which had been north-east,
it was, as sailors call it, cross, and every minute the waves poured over the ship, sweeping
all before their weight of waters. One poor man was washed overboard, and any attempt made
to save him would have been unavailing. Captain Osborn was standing by the weather gunnel,
holding on by one of the belaying-pins, when he said to Mackintosh:

"How long will this last, think you?"

"Longer than the ship will," replied the mate gravely.

"I should hope not," replied the captain; "still it cannot look worse. What do you think, Ready?"

"Far more fear from above than from below just now," replied Ready, pointing to the yard-arms
of the ship, to each of which were little balls of electric matter attached, flaring out to
a point. "Look at those two clouds, sir, rushing at each other; if I--"

Ready had not time to finish what he would have said, before a blaze of light, so dazzling
that it left them all in utter darkness for some seconds afterwards, burst upon their vision,
accompanied with a peal of thunder, at which the whole vessel trembled fore and aft. A crash
- a rushing forward - and a shriek were heard, and when they had recovered their eyesight,
the foremast had been rent by the lightning as if it had been a lath, and the ship was in flames:
the men at the wheel, blinded by the lightning, as well as appalled, could not steer; the ship
broached to - away went the mainmast over the side - and all was wreck, confusion, and dismay.

Fortunately the heavy seas which poured over the forecastle soon extinguished the flames, or
they all must have perished; but the ship lay now helpless, and at the mercy of the waves beating
violently against the wrecks of the masts which floated to leeward, but were still held fast
to the vessel by their rigging. As soon as they could recover from the shock, Ready and the
first mate hastened to the wheel to try to get the ship before the wind; but this they could
not do, as, the foremast and mainmast being gone, the mizenmast prevented her paying off and
answering to the helm. Ready, having persuaded two of the men to take the helm, made a sign
to Mackintosh (for now the wind was so loud that they could not hear each other speak), and,
going aft, they obtained axes, and cut away the mizen-rigging; the mizen-topmast and head of
the mizenmast went over the side, and then the stump of the foremast was sufficient to get
the ship before the wind again. Still there was much delay and confusion, before they could
clear away the wreck of the masts; and, as soon as they could make inquiry, they found that
four of the men had been killed by the lightning and the fall of the foremast, and there were
now but eight remaining, besides Captain Osborn and his two mates.

Chapter V

Sailors are never discouraged by danger as long as they have any chance of relieving themselves
by their own exertions. The loss of their shipmates, so instantaneously summoned away, - the
wrecked state of the vessel, - the wild surges burying them beneath their angry waters, - the
howling of the wind, the dazzling of the lightning, and the pealing of the thunder, did not
prevent them from doing what their necessity demanded. Mackintosh, the first mate, rallied
the men, and contrived to fix a block and strap to the still smoking stump of the foremast;
a rope was rove through the block, and the main-topgallant sail hoisted, so that the vessel
might run faster before the gale, and answer her helm better than she did.

The ship was again before the wind, and comparatively safe, notwithstanding the heavy blows
she now received from the pursuing waves. Night again came on, but there was no repose, and
the men were worn out with exposure and fatigue.

The third day of the gale dawned, but the appearances were as alarming as ever: the continual
breaking of the seas over the stern had washed away the binnacles, and it was impossible now
to be certain of the course the ship had been steered, or the distance which had been run;
the leaky state of the vessel proved how much she had already suffered from the violent shocks
which she had received, and the certainty was apparent, that if the weather did not abate,
she could not possibly withstand the force of the waves much longer.

The countenance of Captain Osborn showed great anxiety: he had a heavy responsibility on his
shoulders - he might lose a valuable ship, and still more valuable cargo, even if they did
not all lose their lives; for they were now approaching where the sea was studded with low
coral islands, upon which they might be thrown by the waves and wind, without having the slightest
power to prevent it in their present disabled condition.

Ready was standing by him when Captain Osborn said--

"I don't much like this, Ready; we are now running on danger and have no help for it."

"That's true enough," replied Ready: "we have no help for it; it is God's will, sir, and His
will be done."

"Amen!" replied Captain Osborn solemnly; and then he continued, after a pause, "There were
many captains who envied me when I obtained command of this fine ship, - would they change
with me now?"

"I should rather think not, Captain Osborn, but you never know what the day may bring forth.
You sailed with this vessel, full of hope - you now, not without reason, feel something approaching
to despair; but who knows? it may please the Almighty to rebuke those angry winds and waves,
and to-morrow we may again hope for the best; at all events you have done your duty - no man
can do more."

"You are right," replied Captain Osborn; "but hold hard, Ready, that sea's aboard of us."

Ready had just time to cling with both hands to the belaying-pins when the sea poured over
the vessel, with a volume of water which for some time swept them off their legs: they clung
on firmly, and at last recovered their feet.

"She started a timber or two with that blow, I rather think," said Ready.

"I'm afraid so; the best vessel ever built could not stand such shocks long," replied Captain
Osborn; "and at present, with our weak crew, I do not see that we can get more sail upon her."

All that night the ship flew in darkness before the gale. At daybreak the wind abated, and
the sea went down: the ship was, however, still kept before the wind, for she had suffered
too much to venture to put her broadside to the sea. Preparations were now made for getting
up jury-masts; and the worn-out seamen were busily employed, under the direction of Captain
Osborn and his two mates, when Mr. Seagrave and William came upon deck.

William stared about him: he perceived, to his astonishment, that the tall masts, with all
their rigging and sails, had disappeared, and that the whole deck was in a state of confusion
and disorder.

"See, my child," said Mr. Seagrave, "the wreck and devastation which are here. See how the
pride of man is humbled before the elements of the great Jehovah."

"Ay, Master Willy," said old Ready, "look around you, as you well may.

"But, father," said Willy, after a pause, "how shall we ever get to Sydney without masts or sails?"

"Why, William," replied Ready, "we must do what we can: we sailors are never much at a loss,
and I dare say before night you will find us under some sort of sail again. We have lost our
great masts, so we must put up jury-masts, as we call them; that is, little ones, and little
sails upon them; and, if it pleases God, we shall see Sydney yet. How is Madam, sir?" continued
Ready to Mr. Seagrave. "Is she better?"

"I fear she is very weak and ill," replied Mr. Seagrave; "nothing but fine weather will do
her any good. Do you think that it will be fine now?"

"Why, sir, to tell you the truth, I fear we shall have more of it yet: I have not given my
thoughts to the captain, as I might be mistaken; but still I think so - I've not been fifty
years at sea without learning something. I don't like the gathering of that bank there, Mr.
Seagrave, and I shouldn't wonder if it were to blow again from the very same quarter, and that
before dark."

"God's will be done," replied Mr. Seagrave, "but I am very fearful about my poor wife, who
is worn to a shadow."

"I shouldn't think so much about that, sir, as I really never knew of people dying that way,
although they suffer much. William, do you know that we have lost some of our men since you
were down below?"

"No - I heard the steward say something outside about the foremast."

"We have lost five of our smartest and best men - Wilson was washed overboard, Fennings and
Masters struck dead with the lightning, and Jones and Emery crushed by the fall of the foremast.
You are young, Master Willy, but you cannot think too early of your Maker, or call to mind
what they say in the burial service, - 'In the midst of life we are in death'."

"Thank you, Ready, for the lesson you have given my son," said Mr. Seagrave; "and, William,
treasure it up in your memory."

"Yes, William, they are the words of an old man who has seen many and many a one who was full
of youth and spirits called away before him, and who is grateful to God that he has been pleased
to preserve his life, and allow him to amend his ways."

"I have been thinking," said Mr. Seagrave, after a silence of a minute or two, "that a sailor
has no right to marry."

"I've always thought so, sir," replied Ready; "and I dare say many a poor deserted sailor's
wife, when she has listened to the wind and rain in her lonely bed, has thought the same."

"With my permission," continued Mr. Seagrave, "my boys shall never go to sea if there is any
other profession to be found for them."

"Well, Mr. Seagrave, they do say that it's no use baulking a lad if he wishes to go to sea,
and that if he is determined, he must go: now I think otherwise - I think a parent has a right
to say no, if he pleases, upon that point; for you see, sir, a lad, at the early age at which
he goes to sea, does not know his own mind. Every high-spirited boy wishes to go to sea - it's
quite natural; but if the most of them were to speak the truth, it is not that they so much
want to go to sea, as that they want to go from school or from home, where they are under the
control of their masters or their parents."

"Very true, Ready; they wish to be, as they consider they will be, independent."

"And a pretty mistake they make of it, sir. Why, there is not a greater slave in the world
than a boy who goes to sea, for the first few years after his shipping: for once they are corrected
on shore, they are punished ten times at sea, and they never again meet with the love and affection
they have left behind them. It is a hard life, and there have been but few who have not bitterly
repented it, and who would not have returned, like the prodigal son, and cast themselves at
their fathers' feet, only that they have been ashamed."

"That's the truth, Ready, and it is on that account that I consider that a parent is justified
in refusing his consent to his son going to sea, if he can properly provide for him in any
other profession. There never will be any want of sailors, for there always will be plenty
of poor lads whose friends can do no better for them; and in that case the seafaring life is
a good one to choose, as it requires no other capital for their advancement than activity and
courage."

Chapter VI

Mr. Seagrave and William went down below into the cabin, where they found that there was plenty
of employment; the steward had brought a basin of very hot pea-soup for the children. Tommy,
who was sitting up in the bed-place with his sister, had snatched it out of Juno's left hand,
for she held the baby with the other, and in so doing, had thrown it over Caroline, who was
screaming, while Juno, in her hurry to assist Caroline, had slipped down on the deck with the
baby, who was also crying with fright, although not hurt. Unfortunately, Juno had fallen down
upon Vixen the terrier, who in return had bitten her in the leg, which had made Juno also cry
out; while Mrs. Seagrave was hanging her head out of her standing bed-place, frightened out
of her wits at the accident, but unable to be of any assistance. Fortunately, Mr. Seagrave
came down just in time to pick up Juno and the baby, and then tried to comfort little Caroline,
who after all was not much scalded, as the soup had had time to cool.

"Massa Tommy is a very naughty boy," cried Juno, rubbing her leg. Master Tommy thought it better
to say nothing - he was duly admonished - the steward cleaned up the mess, and order was at
length restored.

In the meantime, they were not idle upon deck; the carpenter was busy fixing a step for one
of the spare topmasts instead of a mainmast, and the men were fitting the rigging; the ship
unfortunately had sprung a leak, and four hands at the pumps interfered very much with their
task. As Ready had prophesied, before night the gale blew, the sea rose again with the gale,
and the leaking of the vessel increased so much, that all other labour was suspended for that
at the pump. For two more days did the storm continue, during which time the crew were worn
out with fatigue - they could pump no longer: the ship, as she rolled, proved that she had
a great deal of water in her hold - when, melancholy as were their prospects already, a new
disaster took place, which was attended with most serious results. Captain Osborn was on the
forecastle giving some orders to the men, when the strap of the block which hoisted up the
main-topgallant yard on the stump of the foremast gave way, the yard and sail came down on
the deck, and struck him senseless. As long as Captain Osborn commanded them, the sailors had
so high an opinion of his abilities as a seaman, and were so encouraged by his cheerful disposition,
that they performed their work well and cheerfully; but now that he was, if not killed, at
all events senseless and incapable of action, they no longer felt themselves under control.
Mackintosh was too much disliked by the seamen to allow his words to have any weight with them.
They were regardless of his injunctions or requests, and they now consulted among themselves.

"The gale is broke, my men, and we shall have fine weather now," observed Ready, going up to
the sailors on the forecastle. "The wind is going down fast."

"Yes," replied one of the men, "and the ship is going down fast, that's quite as certain."

"A good spell at the pumps would do us some good now," replied Ready. "What d'ye say, my lads?"

"A glass of grog or two would do us more," replied the seaman. "What d'ye say, my boys? I don't
think that the captain would refuse us, poor fellow, if he could speak."

"What do you mean to do, my lads?" inquired Mackintosh: "not get drunk, I hope?"

"Why not?" observed another of the men; "the ship must go down soon."

"Perhaps she may - I will not deny it," said Mackintosh; "but that is no reason why we should
not be saved: now, if you get drunk, there is no chance of any one being saved, and my life
is precious to me. I'm ready to join with you in anything you please, and you may decide what
is to be done; but get drunk you shall not, if I can help it, that's certain."

"And how can you help it?" replied one of the seamen, surlily.

"Because two resolute men can do a great deal - I may say three, for in this instance Ready
will be of my side, and I can call to my assistance the cabin passenger - recollect the firearms
are all in the cabin. But why should we quarrel? - Say at once what you intend to do; and if
you have not made up your minds, will you listen to what I propose?"

As Mackintosh's courage and determination were well known, the seamen again consulted together,
and then asked him what he proposed.

"We have one good boat left, the new yawl at the booms: the others, as you know, are washed
away, with the exception of the little boat astern, which is useless, as she is knocked almost
to pieces. Now we cannot be very far from some of the islands, indeed I think we are among
them now. Let us fit out the boat with everything we require, go about our work steadily and
quietly, drink as much grog as will not hurt us, and take a good provision of it with us. The
boat is complete with her masts, sails, and oars; and it's very hard if we do not save ourselves
somewhere. Ready, do I give good advice or not?"

"You give very good advice, Mackintosh - only what is to become of the cabin passengers, the
women, and children? and are you going to leave poor Captain Osborn? or what do you mean to do?"

"We won't leave the captain," said one of the seamen.

"No - no!" exclaimed the others.

"And the passengers?"

"Very sorry for them," replied the former spokesman; "but we shall have enough to do to save
our own lives."

"Well, my lads, I agree with you," said Mackintosh. "Charity begins at home. What do you say
I - shall it be so?"

"Yes," replied the seamen, unanimously; and Ready knew that it was in vain to expostulate.
They now set about preparing the boat, and providing for their wants. Biscuits, salt pork,
two or three small casks of water, and a barrel of rum were collected at the gangway; Mackintosh
brought up his quadrant and a compass, some muskets, powder and shot; the carpenter, with the
assistance of another man, cut away the ship's bulwarks down to the gunnel, so as to enable
them to launch the boat overboard, for they could not, of course, hoist her out now that the
masts were gone. In an hour everything was prepared. A long rope was made fast to the boat,
which was brought to the gunnel ready for launching overboard, and the ship's broadside was
brought to the wind. As this was done, Mr. Seagrave came on deck and looked around him.

He perceived the boat ready for launching, the provisions and water at the gangway, the ship
brought to the wind, and rolling slowly to the heave of the sea; at last he saw Ready sitting
down by Captain Osborn, who was apparently dead. "What is all this, Ready?" inquired Seagrave.
"Are they going to leave the ship? have they killed Captain Osborn?"

"No, sir, - not quite so bad as that. Poor Captain Osborn was struck down by the fall of the
yard, and has been insensible ever since; but, as to the other matter, I fear that is decided:
you see they are launching the boat."

"But my poor wife, she will never be able to go - she cannot move - she is so ill!"

"I'm afraid, Mr. Seagrave, that they have no idea of taking either you, or your wife, or your
children, with them."

"What! leave us here to perish I Merciful Heaven! how cruel - how barbarous!"

"It is not kind, Mr. Seagrave, but still you see it is the law of nature. When it is a question
of life, it is every one for himself, for life is sweet: they are not more unkind than they
would be to each other, if there were too many for the boat to hold. I've seen all this before
in my time," replied Ready, gravely.

"My wife! my children!" cried Mr. Seagrave, covering his face with his hands. "But I will speak
to them," continued he after a pause; "surely they will listen to the dictates of humanity;
at all events Mr. Mackintosh will have some power over them. Don't you think so, Ready?"

"Well, Mr. Seagrave, if I must speak, I confess to you that there is not a harder heart among
them than that of Mr. Mackintosh, and it's useless speaking to him or any one of them; and
you must not be too severe upon them neither: the boat is small, and could not hold more people
with the provisions which they take with them - that is the fact. If they were to take you
and your family into the boat, it might be the cause of all perishing together; if I thought
otherwise I would try what I could do to persuade them, but it is useless."

"What must be done, then, Ready?"

"We must put our trust in a merciful God, Mr. Seagrave, who will dispose of us as he thinks fit."

"We must? What! do not you go with them?"

"No, Mr. Seagrave. I have been thinking about it this last hour, and I have made up my mind
to remain with you. They intend to take poor Captain Osborn with them, and give him a chance,
and have offered to take me; but I shall stay here."

"To perish?" replied Mr. Seagrave, with surprise.

"As God pleases, Mr. Seagrave I am an old man, and it is of little consequence. I care little
whether I am taken away a year or two sooner, but I do not like to see blossoms cut off in
early spring: I may be of use if I remain, for I've an old head upon my shoulders, and I could
not leave you all to perish when you might be saved if you only knew how to act. But here the
seamen come - the boat is all ready, and they will now take poor Captain Osborn with them."

The sailors came aft, and lifted up the still insensible captain. As they were going away one
of them said, "Come, Ready, there's no time to lose."

"Never mind me, Williams; I shall stick to the ship," replied Ready. "I wish you success with
all my heart; and, Mr. Mackintosh, I have but one promise to exact from you, and I hope you
will not refuse me: which is, that if you are saved, you will not forget those you leave here
on board, and take measures for their being searched for among the islands."

"Nonsense, Ready! come into the boat," replied the first mate.

"I shall stay here, Mr. Mackintosh; and I only beg that you will promise me what I ask. Acquaint
Mr. Seagrave's friends with what has happened, and where it is most likely we may be found,
if it please God to save us. Do you promise me that?"

"Yes, I do, if you are determined to stay; but," continued he, going up to Ready, and whispering
to him, "it is madness:- come away, man!"

"Good-bye, Mr. Mackintosh," replied Ready, extending his hand. "You will keep your promise?"

After much further expostulation on the part of Mackintosh and the seamen, to which Ready gave
a deaf ear, the boat was pushed off, and they made sail to the north-east.

Chapter VII

For some time after the boat had shoved off from the ship, old Ready remained with his arms
folded, watching it in silence. Mr. Seagrave stood by him; his heart was too full for utterance,
for he imagined that as the boat increased her distance from the vessel, so did every ray of
hope depart, and that his wife and children, himself, and the old man who was by his side were
doomed to perish. His countenance was that of a man in utter despair. At last old Ready spoke.

"They think that they will be saved and that we must perish, Mr. Seagrave; they forget that
there is a Power above, who will himself decide that point - a power compared to which the
efforts of weak man are as nought."

"True," replied Mr. Seagrave, in a low voice; "but still what chance we can have on a sinking
ship, with so many helpless creatures around us, I confess I cannot imagine."

"We must do our best, and submit to His will," replied Ready, who then went aft, and shifted
the helm, so as to put the ship again before the wind.

As the old man had foretold to the seamen before they quitted the vessel, the gale was now
over, and the sea had gone down considerably. The ship, however, dragged but slowly through
the water, and after a short time Ready lashed the wheel, and went forward. On his return to
the quarter-deck, he found Mr. Seagrave had thrown himself down (apparently in a state of despair)
upon the sail on which Captain Osborn had been laid after his accident.

"Mr. Seagrave, do not give way," said Ready; "if I thought our situation hopeless, I would
candidly say so; but there always is hope, even at the very worst, - and there always ought
to be trust in that God without whose knowledge not a sparrow falls to the ground. But, Mr.
Seagrave, I shall speak as a seaman, and tell you what our probabilities are. The ship is half-full
of water, from her seams having opened by the straining in the gale, and the heavy blows which
she received; but, now that the gale has abated, she has recovered herself very much. I have
sounded the well, and find that she has not made many inches within the last two hours, and
probably, as she closes her seams, will make less. If, therefore, it pleases God that the fine
weather should continue, there is no fear of the vessel sinking under us for some time; and
as we are now amongst the islands, it is not impossible, nay, it is very probable, that we
may be able to run her ashore, and thins save our hives. I thought of all this when I refused
to go in the boat, and I thought also, Mr. Seagrave, that if you were to have been deserted
by me as well as by all the rest, you would have been unable yourself to take advantage of
any chances which might turn up in your favour, and therefore I have remained, hoping, under
God's providence, to be the means of assisting you and your family in this sore position. I
think now it would be better that you should go down into the cabin, and with a cheerful face
encourage poor Mrs. Seagrave with the change in the weather, and the hopes of arriving in some
place of safety. If she does not know that the men have quitted the ship, do not tell her;
say that the steward is with the other men, which will be true enough, and, if possible, leave
her in the dark as to what has taken place. Master William can be trusted, and if you will
send him here to me, I will talk to him."

"I hardly know what to think, Ready, or how sufficiently to thank you for your self-devotion,
if I may so term it, in this exigency. That your advice is excellent and that I shall follow
it, you may be assured; and, should we be saved from the death which at present stares us in
the face, my gratitude--"

"Do not speak of that, sir; I am an old man with few wants, and whose life is of little use
now. All I wish to feel is, that I am trying to do my duty in that situation into which it
has pleased God to call me. What can this world offer to one who has roughed it all his life,
and who has neither kith nor kin that he knows of to care about his death?"

Mr. Seagrave pressed the hand of Ready, and went down without making any reply. He found that
his wife had been asleep for the last hour, and was not yet awake. The children were also quiet
in their beds. Juno and William were the only two who were sitting up.

William made a sign to his father that his mother was asleep, and then said in a whisper, "I
did not like to leave the cabin while you were on deck, hut the steward has not been here these
two hours: he went to milk the goat for baby and has not returned. We have had no breakfast,
none of us."

"William, go on deck," replied his father; "Ready wishes to speak to you."

William went on deck to Ready, who explained to him the position in which they were placed;
he pointed out to him the necessity of his doing all he could to assist his father and him,
and not to alarm his mother in her precarious state of health. William, who, as it may be expected,
looked very grave, did, however, immediately enter into Ready's views, and proceeded to do
his best. "The steward," said he, "has left with the other men, and when my mother wakes she
will ask why the children have had no breakfast. What can I do?"

"I think you can milk one of the goats if I show you how, while I go and get the other things
ready; I can leave the deck, for you see the ship steers herself very nicely; - and, William,
I have sounded the well just before you came up, and I don't think she makes much water; and,"
continued he, looking round him, and up above, "we shall have fine weather, and a smooth sea
before night."

By the united exertions of Ready and William the breakfast was prepared while Mrs. Seagrave
still continued in a sound sleep. The motion of the ship was now very little: she only rolled
very slowly from one side to the other; the sea and wind had gone down, and the sun shone brightly
over their heads; the boat had been out of sight some time, and the ship did not go through
the water faster than three miles an hour, for she had no other sail upon her than the main-topgallant
sail hoisted up on the stump of the foremast. In the full glare of the lamp, so shaded as to throw
the rest of the room in deep shadow, hung a painting that seemed to fill the rude chamber
with its beauty. It was the picture of a young woman, standing by a spring of water, a cup
brimming full in her outstretched hand.

On a bed in the shadow, facing the picture, lay a man. A voice faltered, "Father. Dr. Coughlan."

CHAPTER
XXXIX.

A MATTER OF HOURS.

"Father--Father; can--you--can--you--forgive me?"

The man on his knees raised his head.

"Forgive you, my son? Forgive you? My dear boy, there has never been in my heart a thought
but of love and sympathy.

Pain there has been, I can't deny, but it has helped me to know what
you have suffered.

I understand it now, my boy. I understand it all, for I, too, have felt it. But when I first
knew, even beneath all the hurt, I was glad--glad to know, I mean. It is a father's right to
suffer with his child, my son. It hurt most, when the secret stood between us, and I could
not enter into your life, but I understand that, too.

I understand why you could not tell me. I, too, came away because I was not strong enough."

"I--I thought it would be easier for you never to know," said the son as he lay on the bed. "I
am--sorry, now. And I am glad that you know. But I must tell you all about it just the same.
I must tell you myself, you see, so that it will be all clear and
straight when I--when I go."

He turned his eyes to the picture on the wall.

"When you go?"

Howard laid a hand upon the gray head. "Poor father; yes, I am going. It was an accident, but it
was a kindness. It will be much better that way--only--only I am sorry for you, father. I thought
I could save you all this. I intended to slip quietly away without your ever knowing, but when
Pete said that Dr. Coughlan was here, I could not go without--without--"

The little doctor came forward. "I am a fool, Howard, an old fool. Blast it all; no business to
go poking into this; no business at all! Daniel would have sent if he had wanted me. Ought to have
known. Old native can give me lessons on being a gentleman every time. Blast it all! What's
wrong, Howard? Get hurt?

Now I am here, might as well be useful."

"Indeed, Doctor, you did right to come. You will be such a help to father. You will help us
both, just as you have always done.

Will you excuse us, father, while Dr. Coughlan looks at this thing here in my side?"

The physician arranged the light so that it shone full upon the man
on the bed, then carefully removed the bandages from an ugly wound
in the artist's side.

Dr. Coughlan looked very grave. "When did this happen, Howard?"

"I--I can't tell exactly.

You see I thought at first I could get along with Pete to help, and I did, for a week, I guess.
Then things--didn't go so well. Some fever, I think, for she--she came." He turned his eyes
toward the picture again. "And I--I lost all track of time. It was the night of the eighteenth.
Father will know."

"Two weeks," muttered the physician.

A low exclamation came from the shepherd. "It was you--you who brought the horses to the ranch
that night?"

The artist smiled grimly. "The officers saw me, and thought that I was one of the men they wanted.
It's alright, though." The old scholar instinctively lifted his hands and looked at them.
He remembered the saddle, wet with blood.

Making a careful examination, the doctor asked more questions. When he had finished and had skilfully
replaced the bandages, the wounded man asked, "What about it, Dr. Coughlan?" The kind hearted
physician jerked out a volley of scientific words and phrases that
meant nothing, and busied himself with his medicine case.

When his patient had taken the medicine, the doctor watched him for a few minutes, and then
asked, "Feel stronger, Howard?"

The artist nodded. "Tell me the truth, now, Doctor. I know that I am going. But how long have
I? Wait a minute first. Where's Pete? Come here, my boy." The lad drew near. "Father." Mr. Howitt
seated himself on the bedside. "You'll be strong, father? We are ready now, Dr. Coughlan."

"Yes,
tell us, David," said the shepherd, and his voice was steady.

The physician spoke, "Matter of hours, I would say. Twenty-four, perhaps; not more; not more."

"There
is no possible chance, David?" asked the shepherd.

Again the little doctor took refuge behind a broadside of scientific terms before replying, "No;
no possible chance."

A groan slipped from the gray bearded lips of the father.

The artist turned to the picture and smiled. Pete looked wonderingly from face to face.

"Poor father," said the artist. "One thing more, Doctor; can you keep up my strength for awhile?"

"Reasonably
well, reasonably well, Howard."

"I am so glad of that because there is much to do before I go. There is so much that must be
done first, and I want you both to help me."

CHAPTER XL.

THE SHEPHERD'S MISSION.

During the latter part of that night and most of the day, it rained;
a fine, slow, quiet rain, with no wind to shake the wet from burdened
leaf or blade.

But when the old shepherd left the cave by a narrow opening on the side of the mountain, near
Sammy's Lookout, the sky was clear. The mists rolled heavily over the valley, but the last of
the sunlight was warm on the knobs and ridges.

The old man paused behind the rock and bushes that concealed the mouth
of the underground passage.

Not a hundred feet below was the Old Trail; he followed the little path with his eye until
it vanished around the shoulder of Dewey. Along that way he had come
into the hills.

Then lifting his eyes to the far away lines of darker blue, his mind
looked over the ridge to the world that is on the other side, the
world from which he had fled.

It all seemed very small and mean, now; it was so far--so far away.

He started as the sharp ring of a horse's iron shoe on the flint rocks
came from beyond the Lookout, and, safely hidden, he saw a neighbor
round the hill and pass on his way to the store on Roark.

He watched, as horse and rider followed the Old Trail around the rim of the Hollow; watched,
until they passed from sight in the belt of timber.

Then his eyes were fixed on a fine thread of smoke that curled above the trees on the Matthews
place; and, leaving the shelter of rock and bush, he walked along the Old Trail toward the big
log house on the distant ridge.

Below him, on his left, Mutton Hollow lay submerged in the drifting mists, with only a faint
line of light breaking now and then where Lost Creek made its way; and on the other side Compton
Ridge lifted like a wooded shore from the sea. A black spot in the red west shaped itself into
a crow, making his way on easy wing toward a dead tree on the top
of Boulder Bald.

The old shepherd walked wearily; the now familiar objects wore a strange look. It was as though
he saw them for the first time, yet had seen them somewhere before,
perhaps in another world.

As he went his face was the face of one crushed by shame and grief, made desperate by his
suffering.

Supper was just over and Young Matt was on the porch when Mr. Howitt
entered the gate.

The young fellow greeted his old friend, and called back into the
house, "Here's Dad, Father."

As Mr. Matthews came out, Aunt Mollie and Sammy appeared in the doorway. How like it all was to
that other evening.

The mountaineer and the shepherd sat on the front porch, while Young
Matt brought the big sorrel and the brown pony to the gate, and with
Sammy rode away.

They were going to the Postoffice at the Forks. "Ain't had no news for a week," said Aunt Mollie,
as she brought her chair to join the two men. "And besides, Sammy needs the ride. There's
goin' to be a moon, so it'll be light by the time they start home."

The sound of the horses' feet and the voices of the young people died away in the gray woods.
The dusk thickened in the valley below, and, as the light in the west went out, the three friends
saw the clump of pines etched black and sharp against the blood red background of the sky.

Old Matt spoke, "Reckon everything's alright at the ranch, Dad.

How's the little doctor? You ought to brung him up with you." He watched the shepherd's face
curiously from under his heavy brows, as he pulled at his cob pipe.

"Tired out trampin' over these hills, I reckon," ventured Aunt Mollie. Mr. Howitt tried to
answer with some commonplace, but his friends could not but note his confusion. Mrs. Matthews
continued, "I guess you'll be a leavin' us pretty soon, now. Well, I ain't a blamin' you;
and you've sure been a God's blessin' to us here in the woods.

I don't reckon we're much 'long 'side the fine friends you've got back where you come from in the
city; and we--we can't do nothin' for you, but--but--" The good soul could say no more.

"We've often wondered, sir," added Old Matt, "how you've stood it
here, an educated man like you.

I reckon, though, there's somethin' deep under it all, keepin' you up; somethin' that ignorant folks,
without no education, like us, can't understand."

The old scholar could have cried aloud, but he was forced to sit dumb
while the other continued, "You're goin' won't make no difference,
though, with what you've done.

This neighborhood won't never go back to what it was before you come. It can't with all you've
taught us, and with Sammy stayin' here to keep it up. It'll be mighty hard, though, to have
you go; it sure will, Mr. Howitt."

Looking up, the shepherd said quietly, "I expect to live here until the end if you will let me.
But I fear you will not want me to stay when you know what I've come to tell you this evening."

The
mountaineer straightened his huge form as he returned, "Dad, there ain't nothin' on earth or in
hell could change what we think of you, and we don't want to hear nothin' about you that you
don't like to tell us.

We ain't a carin' what sent you to the hills. We're takin' you for what you are. And there ain't
nothin' can change that."

"Not even if it should be the grave under the pine yonder?" asked the other in a low voice.

Old Matt looked at him in a half frightened way, as though, without knowing why, he feared
what the shepherd would say next. Mr. Howitt felt the look and hesitated. He was like one on
a desperate mission in the heart of an enemy's country, feeling his way. Was the strong man's passion
really tame? Or was his fury only sleeping, waiting to destroy the one who should wake it? Who
could tell?

The old scholar looked away to Dewey Bald for strength. "Mr. Matthews,"
he said, "you once told me a story.

It was here on this porch when I first came to you.

It was a sad tale of a great crime. To-night I know the other side of that story. I've come
to tell you."

At the strange words, Aunt Mollie's face turned as white as her apron.

Old Matt grasped the arms of his chair, as though he would crush the wood, as he said shortly,
"Go on."

At the tone of his voice, the old shepherd's heart sank.

CHAPTER XLI.

THE OTHER SIDE OF THE STORY.

With a prayer in his heart for the boy who lay dying in that strange underground chamber, the artist's
father began.

"It is the story, Mr. Matthews, of a man and his only son, the last of their family. With them
will perish--has perished one of the oldest and proudest names in
our country.

"From his childhood this man was taught the honored traditions of his people, and, thus trained
in pride of ancestry, grew up to believe that the supreme things
of life are what his kind call education, refinement, and culture.

In his shallow egotism, he came to measure all life by the standards
of his people.

"It was in keeping with this that the man should enter the pulpit
of the church of his ancestors, and it was due very largely, no doubt,
to the same ancestral influence that he became what the world calls
a successful minister of the gospel.

But Christianity to him was but little more than culture, and his place in the church merely
an opportunity to add to the honor of his name. Soon after leaving the seminary, he married.
The crowning moment of his life was when his first born--a boy--was
laid in his arms.

The second child was a girl; there were no more.

"For ten years before her death the wife was an invalid. The little girl, too, was never strong,
and six months after they buried the mother the daughter was laid beside her.

"You, sir, can understand how the father lavished every care upon his son. The first offspring
of the parents' love, the sole survivor of his home, and the last to bear the name of a family
centuries old, he was the only hope of the proud man's ambition.

"The boy was a beautiful child, a delicate, sensitive soul in a body of uncommon physical grace
and strength, and the proud father loved to think of him as the flower
of long ages of culture and refinement.

The minister, himself, jealously educated his son, and the two grew to be friends, sir, constant
companions. This, also, YOU will understand--you and your boy. But with all this the young man
did not follow his father in choosing his profession. He--he became an artist."

Old Matt started from his seat. Aunt Mollie uttered an exclamation.

But the shepherd, without pausing, continued: "When his schooling was completed the boy came
into the Ozarks one summer to spend the season painting. The man had expected to go with his
son. For months they had planned the trip together, but at last something prevented, and the
father could not go--no, he could not go--"

The speaker's voice broke; the big mountaineer was breathing hard; Aunt Mollie was crying.

Presently
Mr. Howitt went on. "When the young artist returned to his father, among many sketches of
the mountains, he brought one painting that received instant recognition.

The people stood before it in crowds when it was exhibited in the art gallery; the papers were
extravagant in their praise; the artist became famous; and wealthy
patrons came to his studio to sit for their portraits.

The picture was of a beautiful girl, standing by a spring, holding out a dripping cup of water."

At
this a wild oath burst from the giant. Springing to his feet, he started toward the speaker.
Aunt Mollie screamed, "Grant, oh Grant! Think what Dad has done for
us." The mountaineer paused.

"Mr. Matthews," said the shepherd, in trembling tones, "for my sake,
will you not hear me to the end? for my sake?"

The big man dropped
back heavily into his chair. "Go on," he said. But his voice was as
the growl of a beast.

"The boy loved your girl, Mr. Matthews. It
was as though he had left his soul in the hills. Night and day he
heard her calling. The more his work was praised, the more his friends
talked of honors and planned his future, the keener was his suffering,
and most of all there was the shadow that had come between him and
his father, breaking the old comradeship, and causing them to shun
each other; though the father never knew why. The poor boy grew morose
and despondent, giving way at times to spells of the deepest depression.
He tried to lose himself in his work. He fled abroad and lived alone.
It seemed a blight had fallen on his soul. The world called him mad.
Many times he planned to take his life, but always the hope of meeting
her again stopped him.

"At last he returned to this country determined
to see her at any cost, and, if possible, gain her forgiveness and
his father's consent to their marriage. He came into the hills only
to find that the mother of his child had died of a broken heart.

"Then
came the end. The artist disappeared, leaving a long, pitiful letter,
saying that before the word reached his father, he would be dead.
The most careful investigation brought nothing but convincing evidence
that the unhappy boy had taken his own life. The artist knew that
it would be a thousand times easier for the proud man to think his
son dead than for him to know the truth, and he was right. Mr. Matthews,
he was right. I cannot tell you of the man's suffering, but he found
a little comfort in the reflection that such extravagant praise of
his son's work had added to the honor of the family, for the lad's
death was held by all to be the result of a disordered mind. There
was not a whisper of wrong doing. His life, they said, was without
reproach, and even his sad mental condition was held to be evidence
of his great genius.

"The minister was weak, sir. He knew something
of the intellectual side of his religion and the history of his church,
but he knew little, very little, of the God that could sustain him
in such a trial. He was shamefully weak. He tried to run away from
his trouble, and, because the papers had made so much of his work
as a preacher, and because of his son's fame, he gave only the first
part of his name, thinking thus to get away from it all for a season.

"But
God was to teach the proud man of culture and religious forms a great
lesson, and to that end directed his steps. He was led here, here,
sir, to your home, and you--you told him the story of his son's crime."

The
shepherd paused. A hoarse whisper came from the giant in the chair,
"You--you, Dad, your--name is--"

The other threw out his hand, as
if to guard himself, and shrank back; "Hush, oh hush! I have no name
but the name by which you know me. The man who bore that name is dead.
In all his pride of intellect and position he died. Your prayers for
vengeance were answered, sir. You--you killed him; killed him as truly
as if you had plunged a knife into his heart; and--you--did--well."

Aunt
Mollie moaned.

"Is that all?" growled the mountaineer.

"All! God,
no! I--I must go on. I must tell you how the man you killed staid
in the hills and was born again. There was nothing else for him to
do but stay in the hills. With the shame and horror of his boy's disgrace
on his heart, he could not go back-- back to the city, his friends
and his church--to the old life. He knew that he could not hope to
deceive them. He was not skilled in hiding things. Every kind word
in praise of himself, or in praise of his son, would have been keenest
torture. He was a coward; he dared not go back. His secret would have
driven him mad, and he would have ended it all as his son had done.
His only hope for peace was to stay here; here on the very spot where
the wrong was done, and to do what little he could to atone for the
crime.

"At first it was terrible; the long, lonely nights with no
human friend near; the weight of shame; the memories; and the lonely
wind--always the wind--in the trees--her voice, Pete said, calling
for him to come. God, sir, I wonder the man did not die under his
punishment!

"But God is good, Mr. Matthews. God is good and merciful.
Every day out on the range with the sheep, the man felt the spirit
of the hills, and little by little their strength and their peace
entered into his life. The minister learned here, sir, what he had
not learned in all his theological studies. He learned to know God,
the God of these mountains. The hills taught him, and they came at
last to stand between him and the trouble from which he had fled.
The nights were no longer weary and long. He was never alone. The
voices in the wilderness became friendly voices, for he learned their
speech, and the poor girl ceased to call in the wailing wind. Then
Dr. Coughlan came, and--" While he was down below, Ready had cast off the lashings of the two
spars which had formed the sheers, and dragging them forward, had launched them over the gunnel,
with lines fast to them, ready for towing on shore. In a few minutes Juno and Tommy made their
appearance on deck; Ready put some tools into the boat, and a couple of shovels, which he brought
up when he went for the dogs, and once more they landed at the sandy cove. Tommy stared about
him a great deal, but did not speak, until he saw the shells lying on the beach, when he screamed
with delight, and began to pick them up as fast as he could; the dogs barked and galloped about,
overjoyed at being once more on shore; and Juno smiled as she looked around her, saying to
Ready, "What a nice place!"

"Now, Mr. Seagrave, I'll remain on shore with you a little. First, we'll load the musket in
case of need, and then you can put it out of the way of Tommy, who fingers everything, I observe.
We will take up the sail between us. Juno, you can carry the tools; and then we can come back
again for the spars, and the rope, and the other things. Come, Tommy, you can carry a shovel
at all events, and that will make you of some use."

Having taken all these things to the little knoll which Ready had pointed out before, they
returned for the spars; and in two trips they had carried everything there, Tommy with the
second shovel on his shoulder, and very proud to be employed.

"Here are two trees which will answer our purpose pretty well," said Ready, "as they are far
enough apart: we must lash the spars up to them, and then throw the sail over, and bring it
down to the ground at both ends; that will be a beginning, at all events; and I will bring
some more canvas on shore, to set up the other tent between these other trees, and also to
shut up the two ends of both of them; then we shall have a shelter for Madam, and Juno, and
the younger children, and another for William, Tommy, and ourselves. Now, sir, I'll just help
you to lash the spars, and then I'll leave you to finish while I go on board again."

"But how can we reach so high, Ready?"

"Why, sir, we can manage that by first lashing a spar as high as we can conveniently reach,
and then standing on that while we lash the other in its proper place. I shall bring another
spar on shore, that we may do the same when we set up the other tent."

Having by this plan succeeded in lashing the spar high enough, and throwing the sail over the
spar, Ready and Mr. Seagrave spread it out, and found that it made a very good-sized tent.

"Now, sir, I'll return on board; in the meantime, if you can cut pegs from the brush wood to
fasten the sail down to the ground, and then with the shovel cover the bottom of it with sand
to keep it down, it will be close enough when it is all finished."

"I shall do very well," replied Mr. Seagrave; "Juno can help me to pull the canvas out tight
when I am ready."

"Yes; and in the meantime, Juno, take a shovel, and level the inside of the tent nice and smooth,
and throw out all those old cocoa-nut leaves, and look if you see any vermin lurking among
them. Master Tommy, you must not run away; and you must not touch the axes, they will cut you
if you do. It may be as well to say, Mr. Seagrave, that should anything happen, and you require
my assistance, you had better fire off the gun, and I will come on shore to you immediately."

Chapter X

When Ready returned on board, he first went down into the cabin to acquaint Mrs. Seagrave and
William with what they had done. Mrs. Seagrave naturally felt anxious about her husband being
on shore alone, and Ready informed her that they had agreed that if anything should occur Mr.
Seagrave would fire the musket. He then went down into the sail-room to get some canvas, a
new topgallant sail which was there, and a palm and needles with twine. Scarcely had he got
them out, and at the foot of the ladder, when the report of the musket was heard, and Mrs.
Seagrave rushed out of the cabin in the greatest alarm; Ready seized another musket, jumped
into the boat, and pulled on shore as fast as he could. On his arrival, quite out of breath,
for as he pulled on shore he had his back towards it, and could see nothing, he found Mr. Seagrave
and Juno busy with the tent, and Tommy sitting on the ground crying very lustily. It appeared
that, while Mr Seagrave and Juno were employed, Tommy had crept away to where the musket was
placed up on end against a cocoa-nut tree, and, after pulling it about some little while, had
touched the trigger. The musket went off; and, as the muzzle was pointed upwards, the charge
had brought down two large cocoa-nuts. Mr. Seagrave, who was aware what an alarm this would
produce on board the vessel, had been scolding him soundly, and now Master Tommy was crying,
to prove how very penitent he was.

"I had better return on board immediately, sir, and tell Mrs. Seagrave," said Ready.

"Do, pray," replir. Seagrave.

Ready then returned to the ship, and explained matters, and then recommenced his labour.

Having put into the boat the sailmaker's bag, with palm and needles, two mattresses, and blankets
from the captain's state room, the saucepan with the beef and pork, and a spar which he towed
astern, Ready found that he had as much as he could carry; but, as there was nobody but himself
in it, he came on shore very well. Having, with the assistance of Mr. Seagrave and Juno, got
all the things up to the knoll, Ready lashed the spar up for the second tent, and then leaving
them to fix it up like the other, he returned again on board. He made two other trips to the
ship, bringing with him more bedding, a bag of ship's biscuits, another of potatoes, plates,
knives and forks, spoons, frying-pans and other cooking utensils, and a variety of other articles.
He then showed Juno how to fill up the ends of the first tent with the canvas and sails he
had brought on shore, so as to inclose it all round; Juno took the needle and twine, and worked
very well. Ready, satisfied that she would be able to get on without them, now said: "Mr. Seagrave,
we have but two hours more daylight, and it is right that Mrs. Seagrave should come on shore
now; so, if you please, we'll go off and fetch her and the children. I think we shall be able
to do very well for the first night; and if it pleases God to give us fine weather, we may
do a great deal more to-morrow."

As soon as they arrived on board, Mr. Seagrave went down to his wife to propose her going on
shore. She was much agitated, and very weak from her illness, but she behaved courageously
notwithstanding, and, supported by her husband, gained the deck, William following with the
baby, and his little sister Caroline carried by Ready. With some difficulty they were all at
last placed in the boat and shoved off; but Mrs. Seagrave was so ill, that her husband was
obliged to support her in his arms, and William took an oar. They landed very safely, and carried
Mrs. Seagrave up to the tent, and laid her down on one of the mattresses. She asked for a little
water.

"And I have forgotten to bring any with me: well, I am a stupid old man; but I'll go on board
directly," said Ready: "to think that I should be so busy in bringing other things on shore
and forget the greatest necessary in life! The fact is, I intended to look for it on the island
as soon as I could, as it would save a great deal of trouble."

Ready returned on board as fast as he could, and brought on shore two kegs of fresh water,
which he and William rolled up to the tent.

Juno had completely finished her task, and Mrs. Seagrave having drank some water, declared
that she was much better.

"I shall not return on board any more to-night," said Ready, "I feel tired - very tired indeed."

"You must be," replied Mr. Seagrave; "do not think of doing any more."

"And I haven't touched food this day, or even quenched my thirst," replied Ready, sitting down.

"You are ill, are you not, Ready?" said William.

"A little faint, William; I'm not so young as I was. Could you give me a little water?"

"Stop, William, I will," said Mr. Seagrave, taking up a tin can which had been filled for his
wife: "here, Ready, drink this."

"I shall be better soon, sir; I'll just lie down a little, and then I'll have a biscuit and
a little meat."

Poor old Ready was indeed quite tired out; but he ate something, and felt much revived. Juno
was very busy; she had given the children some of the salt meat and biscuit to eat. The baby,
and Tommy, and Caroline had been put to bed, and the second tent was nearly ready.

"It will do very well for to-night, Juno," said Mr. Seagrave; "we have done work enough for
this day."

"Yes, sir," replied Ready, "and I think we ought to thank God for his mercies to us before
we go to sleep."

"You remind me of my duty, Ready; let us thank him for his goodness, and pray to him for his
protection before we go to sleep."

Mr. Seagrave then offered up a prayer of thankfulness; and they all retired to rest.

Chapter XI

Mr. Seagrave was the first who awoke and rose from his bed on the ensuing morning. He stepped
out of the tent, and looked around him. The sky was clear and brilliant. A light breeze ruffled
o'er the surface of the water, and the tiny waves rippled one after another upon the white
sand of the cove. To the left of the cove the land rose, forming small hills, behind which
appeared the continuation of the cocoa-nut groves. To the right, a low ridge of coral rocks
rose almost as a wall from the sea, and joined the herbage and brushwood at about a hundred
paces, while the wreck of the Pacific, lying like some huge stranded monster, formed the prominent
feature in the landscape. The sun was powerful where its beams could penetrate; but where Mr.
Seagrave stood, the cocoa-nuts waved their feathery leaves to the wind, and offered an impervious
shade. A feeling of the extreme beauty of the scene, subdued by the melancholy created by the
sight of the wrecked vessel, pervaded the mind of Mr. Seagrave as he meditated over it.

"Yes," thought he, "if, tired with the world and its anxieties, I had sought an abode of peace
and beauty, it would have been on a spot like this. How lovely is the scene! - what calm -
what content - what a sweet sadness does it create! How mercifully have we been preserved when
all hope appeared to be gone; and how bountifully have we been provided for, now that we have
been saved, - and yet I have dared to repine, when I ought to be full of gratitude! May God
forgive me! Wife, children, all safe, nothing to regret but a few worldly goods and a seclusion
from the world for a time - yes, but for how long a time - What! rebellious still! - for the
time that it shall please God in his wisdom to ordain." Mr. Seagrave turned back to his tent.
William, Tommy, and old Ready still remained fast asleep. "Excellent old man!" thought Mr.
Seagrave. "What a heart of oak is hid under that rugged bark! - Had it not been for his devotion
where might I and all those dear helpless creatures have been now?"

The dogs, who had crept into the tent and laid themselves down upon the mattresses by the side
of William and Tommy, now fawned upon Mr. Seagrave. William woke up with their whining, and
having received a caution from his father not to wake Ready, he dressed himself and came out.

"Had I not better call Juno, father?" said William; "I think I can, without waking mamma, if
she is asleep."

"Then do, if you can, my boy; and I will see what cooking utensils Ready has brought on shore."

William soon returned to his father, stating that his mother was in a sound sleep, and that
Juno had got up without waking her or the two children.

"Well, we'll see if we cannot get some breakfast ready for them, William. Those dry cocoa-nut
leaves will make an excellent fire."

"But, father, how are we to light the fire? we have no tinder-box or matches."

"No; but there are other ways, William, although, in most of them, tinder is necessary. The
savages can produce fire by rubbing a soft piece of wood against a hard one. But we have gunpowder;
and we have two ways of igniting gunpowder - one is by a flint and steel, and the other is
by collecting the sun's rays into one focus by a magnifying-glass."

"But, father, when we have lighted the fire, what have we to cook? we have no tea or coffee."

"No, I do not think we have," replied Mr. Seagrave.

"But we have potatoes, father."

"Yes, William, but don't you think it would be better if we made our breakfast off the cold
beef and pork and ship's biscuit for once, and not use the potatoes? we may want them all to
plant, you know. But why should we not go on board of the ship ourselves? you can pull an oar
pretty well, and we must all learn to work now, and not leave everything for poor old Ready
to do. Come, William."

Mr. Seagrave then went down to the cove; the little boat was lying on the beach, just lifted
by the rippling waves; they pushed her off, and got into her. "I know where the steward kept
the tea and coffee, father," said William, as they pulled on board; "mamma would like some
for breakfast, I'm sure, and I'll milk the goats for baby."

Although they were neither of them very handy at the oar, they were soon alongside of the ship;
and, having made the boat fast, they climbed on board.

William first went down to the cabin for the tea and coffee, and then left his father to collect
other things while he went to milk the goats, which he did in a tin pan. He then poured the
milk into a bottle, which he had washed out, that it might not be spilt, and went back to his
father.

"I have filled these two baskets full of a great many things, William, which will be very acceptable
to your mamma. What else shall we take?"

"Let us take the telescope, at all events, father; and let us take a whole quantity of clothes
- they will please mamma: the clean ones are all in the drawers - we can bring them up in a
sheet; and then, father, let us bring some of the books on shore; and I'm sure mamma will long
for her Bible and prayer-book; - here they are."

"You are a good boy, William," replied Mr. Seagrave. "I will now take those things up to the
boat, and then return for the rest."

In a short time everything was put into the boat, and they pulled on shore again. They found
Juno, who had been washing herself, waiting for them at the cove, to assist to take up the things.

"Well, Juno, how do you find yourself this morning?"

"Quite well, massa," said Juno: and then pointing to the clear water, she said, "Plenty fish here."

"Yes, if we only had lines," replied Mr. Seagrave. "I think Ready has both hooks and lines
somewhere. Come, Juno, take up this bundle of linen to your tent: we can manage all the rest."

When they arrived at the tent they found that every one was awake except Ready, who appeared
still to sleep very sound. Mrs. Seagrave had passed a very good night, and felt herself much
refreshed. William made some touch-paper, which he lighted with one of the glasses from the
telescope, and they soon had a good fire. Mr. Seagrave went to the beach, and procured three
large stones to rest the saucepan on; and in half an hour the water was boiling and the tea made.

Chapter XII

Juno had taken the children down to the cove, and, walking out into the water up to her knees,
had dipped them in all over, as the shortest way of washing them, and had then dressed them
and left them with their mother, while she assisted William to get the cups and saucers and
plates for breakfast. Everything was laid out nice and tidy between the two tents, and then
William proposed that he should awaken Ready.

"Yes, my boy, you may as well now - he will want his breakfast."

William went and pushed Ready on the shoulder. "Ready, have you had sleep enough?" said William,
as the old man sat up.

"Yes, William. I have had a good nap, I expect; and now I will get up, and see what I can get
for breakfast for you all."

"Do," replied William, laughing.

Ready was soon dressed, for he had only taken off his jacket when he lay down. He put it on,
and came out of the tent; when, to his astonishment, he found the whole party (Mrs. Seagrave
having come out with the children) standing round the breakfast, which was spread on the ground.

"Good-morning, Ready!" said Mrs. Seagrave, extending her hand. Mr. Seagrave also shook hands
with him.

"You have had a good long sleep, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave, "and I would not waken you after
your fatigue of yesterday."

"I thank you, sir; and I am glad to see that Madam is so well: and I am not sorry to see that
you can do so well without me," continued Ready, smiling.

"Indeed, but we cannot, I'm afraid," replied Mrs. Seagrave; "had it not been for you and your
kindness, where should we have been now?"

"We can get a breakfast ready without you," said Mr. Seagrave; "but without you, I think we
never should have required another breakfast by this time. But we will tell Ready all we have
done while we eat our breakfast: now, my dear, if you please." Mrs. Seagrave then read a chapter
from the Bible, and afterwards they all knelt down while Mr. Seagrave offered up a prayer.

While they were at breakfast, William told Ready how they had gone on board, and what they
had brought on shore, and he also mentioned how Juno had dipped all the children in the sea.

"But Juno must not do that again," replied Ready, "until I have made all safe; you know that
there are plenty of sharks about these islands, and it is very dangerous to go into the water."

"Oh, what an escape they have had!" cried Mrs. Seagrave, shuddering.

"It's very true," continued Ready; "but they don't keep so much to the windward of the islands
where we are at present; but still that smooth cove is a very likely place for them to come
into; so it's just as well not to go in again, Juno, until I have time to make a place for
you to bathe in in safety. As soon as we can get as much as we want from the ship, we must
decide whether we shall stay here or not."

"Stay here or not, Ready! - what do you mean?"

"Why, we have not yet found any water, and that is the first necessary of life - if there is
no water on this side of the island, we must pitch our tents somewhere else."

"That's very true," replied Mr. Seagrave; "I wish we could find time to explore a little."

"So we can, sir; but we must not lose this fine weather to get a few things from the ship.
We had better go now. You and William can remain on board to collect the things, and I will
land them on the beach for Juno to bring up."

The whole day was spent in landing every variety of article which they thought could be useful.
All the small sails, cordage, twine, canvas, small casks, saws, chisels, and large nails. and
elm and oak plank, were brought on shore before dinner. After they had taken a hearty dinner,
the cabin tables and chairs, all their clothes, some boxes of candles, two bags of coffee,
two of rice, two more of biscuits, several pieces of beef and pork and bags of flour, some
more water, the grindstone, and Mrs. Seagrave's medicine-chest were landed. When Ready came
off again, he said, "Our poor boat is getting very leaky, and will not take much more on shore
without being repaired; and Juno has not been able to get half the things up - they are too
heavy for one person. I think we shall do pretty well now, Mr. Seagrave; and we had better,
before it is dark, get all the animals on shore. I don't much like to trust them to swim on
shore, but they are awkward things in a boat. We'll try a pig, at all events; and while I get
one up, do you and William tie the legs of the fowls, and put them into the boat; as for the
cow, she cannot be brought on shore, she is still lying down, and, I expect, won't get up again
any more; however, I have given her plenty of hay, and if she don't rise, why I will kill her,
and we can salt her down."

Ready went below, and the squealing of the pig was soon heard; he came on deck with it hanging
over his back by the hind legs, and threw it into the sea over the gunnel: the pig floundered
at first; but after a few seconds, turned its head away from the ship and swam for the shore.

"He goes ashore straight enough," said Ready, who, with Mr. Seagrave and William, was watching
the animal; but a minute afterwards, Ready exclaimed:

"I thought as much - we've lost him!"

"How?" replied Mr. Seagrave.

"D'ye see that black thing above water pushing so fast to the animal? - that's the back fin
of a shark, and he will have the poor thing - there, he's got him!" said Ready, as the pig
disappeared under the water with a heavy splash. "Well, he's gone; better the pig than your
little children, Mr. Seagrave."

"Yes, indeed, God be praised! - that monster might have been close to them at the time that
Juno took them into the water."

"He was not far off; I reckon," replied Ready. "We'll go down now and tie the legs of the other
four pigs, and bring them up; with what's already in the boat they will be a good load."

As soon as the pigs were in the boat, Ready sculled it on shore, while Mr. Seagrave and William
brought up the goats and sheep ready for the next trip. Ready soon returned. "Now this will
be our last trip for to-day, and, if I am any judge of the weather, our last trip for some
days; it is banking up very thick in the offing. This trip we'll be able to put into the boat
a bag of corn for the creatures, in case we require it, and then we may say good-bye to the
ship for a day or two at least."

They then all got into the boat, which was very deeply laden, for the corn was heavy, but they
got safe on shore, although they leaked very much. Having landed the goats and sheep, William
led them up to the tent, where they remained very quietly; the pigs had run away, and so had
the fowls.

"That's what I call a good day's work, Mr. Seagrave," said Ready; "the little boat has done
its duty well; but we must not venture in her again until I have put her into a little better
condition."

They were not at all sorry, after their hard day's work, to find that Juno had prepared coffee
for them; and while they were drinking it, they narrated to Mrs. Seagrave the tragically death
of the poor pig by the shark. Poor Juno appeared quite frightened at the danger which the children
had been in, even now that it was all over.

"We shall have plenty to do here to-morrow," observed Mr. Seagrave, "in getting things into
their places."

"We shall have plenty to do for some time, I expect," replied Ready. "In two months, or thereabouts,
we shall have the rainy season come on, and we must be under cover before that time, if we
possibly can."

"What's the first thing we must do, Ready?" inquired Mr. Seagrave.

"To-morrow we had better fix up another tent or two, to stow away all the articles we have
brought on shore: that will be one good day's work; we shall then know where to lay our hands
upon everything, and see what we want."

"That's very true; and what shall we do then?"

"Why then, sir, I think we must make a little expedition to explore the island, and find out
where we must build our house."

"Can we build a house?" said William.

"Oh, yes, sir, and with more ease than you would think. There's no tree so valuable as the
cocoa-nut tree; and the wood is so light that we can easily move it about."

"Why, what are the great merits of the cocoa-nut tree?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"I'll tell you, madam: in the first place, you have the wood to build the house with; then
you have the bark with which you can make ropes and lines, and fishing-nets if you please;
then you have the leaves for thatching your house; then you have the fruit, which, as a nut,
is good to eat, and very useful in cooking; and in the young nut is the milk, which is also
very wholesome; then you have the oil to burn, and the shell to make cups of, if you haven't
any, and then you can draw toddy from the tree, which is very pleasant to drink when fresh,
but will make you tipsy if it is kept too long. There is no tree which yields so many useful
things to man, for it supplies him with almost everything."

"At all events, we've plenty of them," said William.

"Yes, William, there's no want of them; and I am glad of it, for had there been but few, I
should not have liked to destroy them. People might be wrecked here, as well as ourselves,
and without the good fortune that we have had in getting so many necessaries on shore; and
they might be obliged to depend wholly upon the cocoa-nut trees for their support."

Chapter XIII

When breakfast was over the next morning, Ready observed, "Now, Mr. Seagrave, we must hold
a council of war, and decide upon an exploring party for to-morrow; and, when we have settled
that, we will find some useful way of employing ourselves for the rest of the day. The first
question is, of whom is the party to consist? - and upon that I wish to hear your opinion."

"Why, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave, "it appears to me that you and I should go."

"Surely not both of you, my dear," interrupted Mrs. Seagrave. "You can do without my husband,
can you not, Ready?"

"I certainly should have liked to have Mr. Seagrave to advise with, ma'am," replied Ready;
"but still I have thought upon it, and do not think that William would be quite sufficient
protection for you; or, at all events, you would not feel that he was, which is much the same
thing; and so, if Mr. Seagrave has no objection, it would perhaps be better that he remained
with you."

"Would you go alone, then, Ready?" said Mr. Seagrave.

"No, sir, I do not think that would be right either, - some accident might happen; there is
no saying what might happen, although there is every appearance of safety. I should like, therefore,
to have some one with me; the question is, whether it be William or Juno?"

"Take me," said Tommy.

"Take you, Tommy!" said Ready, laughing; "then I must take Juno to take care of you. No; I
think they cannot spare you. Your mamma will want you when we are gone; you are so useful in
gathering wood for the fire, and taking care of your little sister and brother, that your mother
cannot part with you; so I must have either Juno or William."

"And which would you prefer, Ready?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"William, certainly, ma'am, if you will let him go with me, as you could ill spare the girl."

"Indeed, I do not like it; I would rather lose Juno for a time," replied Mrs. Seagrave.

"My dear wife," said Mr. Seagrave, "recollect how Providence has preserved us in such awful
dangers - how we are landed in safety. And now, will you not put trust in that Providence,
when the dangers are, as I trust, only imaginary?"

"I was wrong, my dear husband; but sickness and suffering have made me, I fear, not only nervous
and frightened, but selfish: I must and will shake it off. Hitherto I have only been a clog
and an incumbrance to you; but I trust I shall soon behave better, and make myself useful.
If you think, then, that it would be better that you should go instead of William, I am quite
content. Go, then, with Ready, and may Heaven protect you both!"

"No, ma'am," replied Ready, "William will do just as well. Indeed, I would go by myself with
pleasure; but we know not what the day may bring forth. I might be taken ill - I might hurt
myself - I am an old man, you know; and then I was thinking that if any accident was to happen
to me, you might miss me - that's all."

"Pardon me," replied Mrs Seagrave; "a mother is foolish at times."

"Over-anxious, ma'am, perhaps, but not foolish," replied Ready.

"Well, then, William shall go with you, Ready; - that point's settled," observed Mr. Seagrave:
"what is the next?"

"The next is to prepare for our journey. We must take some provisions and water with us, a
gun and some ammunition, a large axe for me, and one of the hatchets for William; and, if you
please, Romulus and Remus had better come with us. Juno, put a piece of beef and a piece of
pork into the pot. William, will you fill four quart bottles with water, while I sew up a knapsack
out of canvas for each of us?"

"And what shall I do, Ready?" said Mr. Seagrave.

"Why, sir, if you will sharpen the axe and the hatchet on the grindstone, it would be of great
service, and Tommy can turn it, he is so fond of work."

Tommy jumped up directly; he was quite strong enough to turn the grindstone, but he was much
fonder of play than work; but as Ready had said that he was fond of it, he wished to prove
that such was the case, and worked very hard. Before they went to prayers and retired for the
night, the axe was sharpened, the knapsacks made, and everything else ready.

"When do you intend to start, Ready?" said Mr. Seagrave.

"Why, sir, I should like to get off at the dawn of day, when the heat is not so great."

"And when do you intend to come back?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Why, madam, we have provisions enough for three days: if we start to-morrow morning, which
is Wednesday, I hope to be back some time on Friday evening; but I won't be later than Saturday
morning if I can help it."

"Good-night - and good-bye, mother," said William, "for I shall not see you to-morrow!"

"God bless and protect you, my dear child!" replied Mrs. Seagrave. "Take care of him, Ready,
and good-bye to you till we meet."

Mrs. Seagrave went into the tent to hide the tears which she could not suppress.

Chapter XIV

Ready was up before the sun had appeared, and he awakened William. The knapsacks had been already
packed, with two bottles of water in each, wrapped round with cocoa-nut leaves, to prevent
their breaking, and the beef and pork divided between each knapsack. Ready's, which was larger
than William's, held the biscuit and several other things which Ready had prepared in case
they might require them.

As soon as the knapsacks were on, Ready took the axe and gun, and asked William if he thought
he could carry a small spade on his shoulder, which they had brought on shore along with the
shovels. William replied that he could; and the dogs, who appeared to know they were going,
were all ready standing by them. Then, just as the sun rose, they turned into the cocoa-nut
grove, and were soon out of sight of the tents.

"Now, William, do you know," said Ready, stopping after they had walked twenty yards, "by what
means we may find our way back again; for you see this forest of trees is rather puzzling,
and there is no path to guide us?"

"No, I am sure I cannot tell; I was thinking of the very same thing when you spoke; and of
Tom Thumb, who strewed peas to find his way back, but could not do it, because the birds picked
them all up."

"Well, Tom Thumb did not manage well, and we must try to do better; we must do as the Americans
always do in their woods, - we must blaze the trees."

"Blaze them! what, set fire to them?" replied William.

"No, no, William. Blaze is a term they use when they cut a slice of the bark off the trunk
of a tree, just with one blow of a sharp axe, as a mark to find their way back again. They
do not blaze every tree, but about every tenth tree as they go along, first one to the right,
and then one to the left, which is quite sufficient; and it is very little trouble, - they
do it as they walk along, without stopping. So now we'll begin: you take the other side, it
will be more handy for you to have your hatchet in your right hand; I can use my left. See
now - just a slice off the bark - the weight of the axe does it almost."

"What an excellent plan!" observed William.

"But I have another friend in my pocket," replied Ready, "and I must use him soon."

"What is that?"

"Poor Captain Osborn's pocket-compass. You see, William, the blazing will direct us how to
go back again; but it will not tell us what course we are now to steer. At present, I know
we are going right, as I can see through the wood behind us; but by and by we shall not be
able, and then I must make use of the compass."

"I understand that very well; but tell me, Ready, why do you bring the spade with us - what
will be the use of it? You did not say yesterday that you were going to bring me."

"No, William, I did not, as I did not like to make your mother anxious; but the fact is, I
am very anxious myself as to whether there is any water on this island; if there is not, we
shall have to quit it sooner or later, for although we may get water by digging in the sand,
it would be too brackish to use for any time, and would make us all ill. Very often there will
be water if you dig for it, although it does not show above-ground; and therefore I brought
the spade."

"You think of everything, Ready."

"No, I do not, William; but, in our present situation, I think of more things than perhaps
your father and mother would: they have never known what it is to be put to their shifts; but
a man like me, who has been all his life at sea, and who has been wrecked, and suffered hardships
and difficulties, and has been obliged to think or die, has a greater knowledge, not only from
his own sufferings, but by hearing how others have acted when they were in distress. Necessity
sharpens a man's wits; and it is very curious what people do contrive when they are compelled
to do so, especially seamen."

"And where are we going to now, Ready?"

"Right to the leeward side of the island."

"Why do you call it the leeward side of the island?"

"Because among these islands the winds almost always blow one way; we landed on the windward
side; the wind is at our back; now put up your finger, and you will feel it even among the trees."

"No, I cannot," replied William, as he held up his finger.

"Then wet your finger, and try again."

William wet his finger, and held it up again. "Yes, I feel it now," said he; "but why is that?"

"Because the wind blows against the wet, and you feel the cold."

As Ready said this the dogs growled, then started forward and barked.

"What can be there?" cried William.

"Stand still, William," replied Ready, cocking his gun, "and I will go forward to see." Ready
advanced cautiously with the gun to his hip. The dogs barked more furiously; and at last, out
of a heap of cocoa-nut leaves collected together, burst all the pigs which had been brought
on shore, grunting and galloping away as fast as they could, with the dogs in pursuit of them.

"It's only the pigs," said Ready, smiling; "I never thought I should be half-frightened by
a tame pig. Here, Romulus! here, Remus! come back!" continued Ready, calling to the dogs. "Well,
William, this is our first adventure."

"I hope we shall not meet with any one more dangerous," replied William, laughing; "but I must
say that I was alarmed."

"No wonder; for, although not likely, it is possible there may be wild animals on this island,
or even savages; but being alarmed is one thing, and being afraid is another: a man may be
alarmed, and stand his ground; but a man that is afraid will run away."

"I do not think I shall ever run away and leave you, Ready, if there is danger."

"I'm sure you will not; but still you must not be rash; and now we will go on again, as soon
as I have uncocked my gun. I have seen more accidents happen from people cocking their guns,
and forgetting to uncock them afterwards, than you can have any idea of. Recollect, also, until
you want to fire, never cock your gun."

Ready and William continued their way through the cocoa-nut grove for more than an hour longer,
marking the trees as they went along; they then sat down to take their breakfast.

"Don't give the dogs any water, William, nor any of the salt meat; give them biscuit only."

"But they are very thirsty; may not I give them a little?"

"No: we shall want it all ourselves, in the first place; and, in the next, I wish them to be
thirsty. I shall hold myself in readiness to attend your summons. Deign to accept, Monsieur,
the assurance of my profound consideration.

J. RENARD.

This communication sufficed to put Graham into very high spirits.

Anything that promised success to his research seemed to deliver his thoughts from a burden and
his will from a fetter. Perhaps in a few days he might frankly and honourably say to Isaura
words which would justify his retaining longer, and pressing more
ardently, the delicate hand which trembled in his as they took leave.

On arriving at Paris, Graham despatched a note to M. Renard requesting to see him, and received
a brief line in reply that M. Renard feared he should be detained
on other and important business till the evening, but hoped to call
at eight o'clock.

A few minutes before that hour he entered Graham's apartment.

"You have discovered the uncle of Louise Duval!" exclaimed Graham;
"of course you mean M. de Mauleon, and he is at Paris?"

"True so far, Monsieur; but do not be too sanguine as to the results of the information I can give
you. Permit me, as briefly as possible, to state the circumstances. When you acquainted me with
the fact that M. de Mauleon was the uncle of Louise Duval, I told you that I was not without
hopes of finding him out, though so long absent from Paris.

I will now explain why.

Some months ago, one of my colleagues engaged in the political department
(which I am not) was sent to Lyons, in consequence of some suspicions
conceived by the loyal authorities there of a plot against the emperor's
life.

The suspicions were groundless, the plot a mare's nest.

But my colleague's attention was especially drawn towards a man not mixed up with the circumstances
from which a plot had been inferred, but deemed in some way or other a dangerous enemy to the
Government.

Ostensibly, he exercised a modest and small calling as a sort of
courtier or agent de change; but it was noticed that certain persons
familiarly frequenting his apartment, or to whose houses he used to
go at night, were disaffected to the Government,--not by any means
of the lowest rank,--some of them rich malcontents who had been devoted
Orleanists; others, disappointed aspirants to office or the 'cross;'
one or two well-born and opulent fanatics dreaming of another Republic.

Certain very able articles in the journals of the excitable Midi,
though bearing another signature, were composed or dictated by this
man, --articles evading the censure and penalties of the law, but
very mischievous in their tone.

All who had come into familiar communication with this person were impressed with a sense of
his powers; and also with a vague belief that he belonged to a higher
class in breeding and education than that of a petty agent de change.

My colleague set himself to watch the man, and took occasions of
business at his little office to enter into talk with him.

Not by personal appearance, but by voice, he came to a conclusion that the man was not wholly
a stranger to him,--a peculiar voice with a slight Norman breadth of pronunciation, though
a Parisian accent; a voice very low, yet very distinct; very masculine,
yet very gentle.

My colleague was puzzled till late one evening he observed the man
coming out of the house of one of these rich malcontents, the rich
malcontent himself accompanying him.

My colleague, availing himself of the dimness of light, as the two passed into a lane which
led to the agent's apartment, contrived to keep close behind and
listen to their conversation; but of this he heard nothing,--only,
when at the end of the lane, the rich man turned abruptly, shook his
companion warmly by the hand, and parted from him, saying, 'Never
fear; all shall go right with you, my dear Victor.' At the sound of
that name 'Victor,' my colleague's memories, before so confused, became
instantaneously clear.

Previous to entering our service, he had been in the horse business,
a votary of the turf; as such he had often seen the brilliant 'sportman,'
Victor de Mauleon; sometimes talked to him.

Yes, that was the voice,--the slight Norman intonation (Victor de Mauleon's father had it strongly,
and Victor had passed some of his early childhood in Normandy), the subdued modulation of speech
which had made so polite the offence to men, or so winning the courtship to women,--that was
Victor de Mauleon. But why there in that disguise? What was his real business and object? My
confrere had no time allowed to him to prosecute such inquiries. Whether Victor or the rich
malcontent had observed him at their heels, and feared he might have overheard their words,
I know not; but the next day appeared in one of the popular journals circulating among the
ouvriers a paragraph stating that a Paris spy had been seen at Lyons, warning all honest men
against his machinations, and containing a tolerably accurate description of his person. And
that very day, on venturing forth, my estimable colleague suddenly found himself hustled by a
ferocious throng, from whose hands he was with great difficulty rescued by the municipal guard.
He left Lyons that night; and for recompense of his services received
a sharp reprimand from his chief.

He had committed the worst offence in our profession, trop de zele. Having only heard the outlines
of this story from another, I repaired to my confrere after my last
interview with Monsieur, and learned what I now tell you from his
own lips.

As he was not in my branch of the service, I could not order him
to return to Lyons; and I doubt whether his chief would have allowed
it.

But I went to Lyons myself, and there ascertained that our supposed
Vicomte had left that town for Paris some months ago, not long after
the adventure of my colleague.

The man bore a very good character generally,--was said to be very
honest and inoffensive; and the notice taken of him by persons of
higher rank was attributed generally to a respect for his talents,
and not on account of any sympathy in political opinions.

I found that the confrere mentioned, and who alone could identify M. de Mauleon in the disguise
which the Vicomte had assumed, was absent on one of those missions abroad in which he is chiefly
employed. I had to wait for his return, and it was only the day before yesterday that I obtained
the following particulars.

M. de Mauleon bears the same name as he did at Lyons,--that name is Jean Lebeau; he exercises
the ostensible profession of a 'letter-writer,' and a sort of adviser on business among the workmen
and petty bourgeoisie, and he nightly frequents the cafe Jean Jacques, Rue Faubourg Montmartre.
It is not yet quite half-past eight, and, no doubt, you could see him at the cafe this very night,
if you thought proper to go."

"Excellent! I will go! Describe him!"

"Alas! that is exactly what I cannot do at present; for after hearing what I now tell you, I put
the same request you do to my colleague, when, before he could answer
me, he was summoned to the bureau of his chief, promising to return
and give me the requisite description.

He did not return; and I find that he was compelled, on quitting
his chief, to seize the first train starting for Lille upon an important
political investigation which brooked no delay.

He will be back in a few days, and then Monsieur shall have the description."

"Nay;

I think I will seize time by the forelock, and try my chance tonight. If the man be really a conspirator,
and it looks likely enough, who knows but what he may see quick reason
to take alarm and vanish from Paris at any hour?--Cafe Jean Jacques,
Rue ------; I will go.

Stay; you have seen Victor de Mauleon in his youth: what was he like
then?"

"Tall, slender, but broad-shouldered, very erect, carrying his head high, a profusion of dark
curls, a small black mustache, fair clear complexion, light-coloured eyes with dark lashes,
fort bel homme. But he will not look like that now."

"His present age?"

"Forty-seven or forty-eight. But before you go, I must beg you to
consider well what you are about.

It is evident that M. de Mauleon has some strong reason, whatever
it be, for merging his identity in that of Jean Lebeau.

I presume, therefore, that you could scarcely go up to M. Lebeau, when you have discovered
him, and say, 'Pray, Monsieur le Vicomte, can you give me some tidings of your niece, Louise
Duval?' If you thus accosted him, you might possibly bring some danger on yourself, but you would
certainly gain no information from him."

"True."

On the other hand, if you make his acquaintance as M. Lebeau, how
can you assume him to know anything about Louise Duval?"

"Parbleu! Monsieur Renard, you try to toss me aside on both horns of the dilemma; but it seems to
me that, if I once make his acquaintance as M. Lebeau, I might gradually and cautiously feel
my way as to the best mode of putting the question to which I seek
reply.

I suppose, too, that the man must be in very poor circumstances to
adopt so humble a calling, and that a small sum of money may smooth
all difficulties."

"I am not so sure of that," said M. Renard, thoughtfully; "but grant
that money may do so, and grant also that the Vicomte, being a needy
man, has become a very unscrupulous one,--is there anything in your
motives for discovering Louise Duval which might occasion you trouble
and annoyance, if it were divined by a needy and unscrupulous man;
anything which might give him a power of threat or exaction?

Mind, I am not asking you to tell me any secret you have reasons for concealing, but I suggest
that it might be prudent if you did not let M. Lebeau know your real name and rank; if, in
short, you could follow his example, and adopt a disguise. But no; when I think of it, you would
doubtless be so unpractised in the art of disguise that he would detect you at once to be other
than you seem; and if suspecting you of spying into his secrets,
and if those secrets be really of a political nature, your very life
might not be safe."

"Thank you for your hint; the disguise is an excellent idea, and combines
amusement with precaution.

That this Victor de Mauleon must be a very unprincipled and dangerous
man is, I think, abundantly clear.

Granting that he was innocent of all design of robbery in the affair of the jewels, still,
the offence which he did own--that of admitting himself at night by a false key into the rooms
of a wife, whom he sought to surprise or terrify into dishonour--was a villanous action; and
his present course of life is sufficiently mysterious to warrant
the most unfavourable supposition.

Besides, there is another motive for concealing my name from him:
you say that he once had a duel with a Vane, who was very probably
my father, and I have no wish to expose myself to the chance of his
turning up in London some day, and seeking to renew there the acquaintance
that I had courted at Paris.

As for my skill in playing any part I may assume, do not fear; I am no novice in that. In my
younger days I was thought clever in private theatricals, especially in the transformations of
appearance which belong to light comedy and farce. Wait a few minutes, and you shall see."

Graham
then retreated into his bedroom, and in a few minutes reappeared so changed, that Renard at
first glance took him for a stranger.

He had doffed his dress--which habitually, when in Capitals, was characterized by the quiet, indefinable
elegance that to a man of the great world, high-bred and young, seems
"to the manner born"--for one of those coarse suits which Englishmen
are wont to wear in their travels, and by which they are represented
in French or German caricatures,--loose jacket of tweed with redundant
pockets, waistcoat to match, short dust-coloured trousers.

He had combed his hair straight over his forehead, which, as I have said somewhere before, appeared
in itself to alter the character of his countenance, and, without any resort to paints or cosmetics,
had somehow or other given to the expression of his face an impudent, low- bred expression,
with a glass screwed on to his right eye,--such a look as a cockney journeyman, wishing to pass
for a "swell" about town, may cast on a servant-maid in the pit of a suburban theatre.

"Will it do, old fellow?" he exclaimed, in a rollicking, swaggering
tone of voice, speaking French with a villanous British accent.

"Perfectly," said Renard, laughing. "I offer my compliments, and if ever you are ruined, Monsieur,
I will promise you a place in our police. Only one caution,--take care not to overdo your
part."

"Right. A quarter to nine; I'm off."

CHAPTER VI.

There is generally a brisk exhilaration of spirits in the return to
any special amusement or light accomplishment associated with the
pleasant memories of earlier youth; and remarkably so, I believe,
when the amusement or accomplishment has been that of the amateur
stage-player.

Certainly I have known persons of very grave pursuits, of very dignified character and position,
who seem to regain the vivacity of boyhood when disguising look and
voice for a part in some drawing-room comedy or charade.

I might name statesmen of solemn repute rejoicing to raise and to join in a laugh at their expense
in such travesty of their habitual selves.

The reader must not therefore be surprised, nor, I trust, deem it inconsistent with the more
serious attributes of Graham's character, if the Englishman felt the sort of joyful excitement
I describe, as, in his way to the cafe Jean Jacques, he meditated the role he had undertaken;
and the joyousness was heightened beyond the mere holiday sense of
humouristic pleasantry by the sanguine hope that much to effect his
lasting happiness might result from the success of the object for
which his disguise was assumed.

It was just twenty minutes past nine when he arrived at the cafe Jean Jacques. He dismissed
the fiacre and entered.

The apartment devoted to customers comprised two large rooms. The first was the cafe properly
speaking; the second, opening on it, was the billiard-room. Conjecturing that he should probably
find the person of whom he was in quest employed at the billiard-table, Graham passed thither
at once. A tall man, who might be seven-and-forty, with a long black beard, slightly grizzled,
was at play with a young man of perhaps twenty-eight, who gave him
odds,--as better players of twenty-eight ought to give odds to a player,
though originally of equal force, whose eye is not so quick, whose
hand is not so steady, as they were twenty years ago.

Said Graham to himself, "The bearded man is my Vicomte."

He called for a cup of coffee, and seated himself on a bench at the end of the room.

The bearded man was far behind in the game. It was his turn to play; the balls were placed in
the most awkward position for him. Graham himself was a fair billiard-player, both in the English
and the French game.

He said to himself, "No man who can make a cannon there should accept odds." The bearded man made
a cannon; the bearded man continued to make cannons; the bearded man did not stop till he had
won the game. The gallery of spectators was enthusiastic. Taking care to speak in very bad,
very English-French, Graham expressed to one of the enthusiasts seated beside him his admiration
of the bearded man's playing, and ventured to ask if the bearded
man were a professional or an amateur player.

"Monsieur," replied the enthusiast, taking a short cutty-pipe from his mouth, "it is an amateur,
who has been a great player in his day, and is so proud that he always takes less odds than he
ought of a younger man.

It is not once in a month that he comes out as he has done to-night; but to-night he has steadied
his hand. He has had six petits verres."

"Ah, indeed! Do you know his name?"

"I should think so: he buried my father, my two aunts, and my wife."

"Buried?" said Graham, more and more British in his accent; "I don't understand."

"Monsieur, you are English."

"I confess it."

"And a stranger to the Faubourg Montmartre."

"True."

"Or you would have heard of M. Giraud, the liveliest member of the State Company for conducting
funerals. They are going to play La Poule."

Much disconcerted, Graham retreated into the cafe, and seated himself
haphazard at one of the small tables.

Glancing round the room, he saw no one in whom he could conjecture
the once brilliant Vicomte.

The company appeared to him sufficiently decent, and especially what
may be called local.

There were some blouses drinking wine, no doubt of the cheapest and thinnest; some in rough,
coarse dresses, drinking beer.

These were evidently English, Belgian, or German artisans. At one table, four young men, who looked
like small journeymen, were playing cards.

At three other tables, men older, better dressed, probably shop-keepers, were playing dominos.
Graham scrutinized these last, but among them all could detect no one corresponding to his
ideal of the Vicomte de Mauleon. "Probably," thought he, "I am too late, or perhaps he will
not be here this evening. At all events, I will wait a quarter of an hour." Then, the garcon approaching
his table, he deemed it necessary to call for something, and, still
in strong English accent, asked for lemonade and an evening journal.

The garcon nodded and went his way. A monsieur at the round table next his own politely handed
to him the "Galignani," saying in very good English, though unmistakably
the good English of a Frenchman, "The English journal, at your service."

Graham

bowed his head, accepted the "Galignani," and inspected his courteous neighbour. A more respectable-looking
man no Englishman could see in an English country town. He wore an unpretending flaxen wig, with
limp whiskers that met at the chin, and might originally have been the same colour as the wig, but
were now of a pale gray,--no beard, no mustache.

He was dressed with the scrupulous cleanliness of a sober citizen,--a high white neckcloth,
with a large old-fashioned pin, containing a little knot of hair
covered with glass or crystal, and bordered with a black framework,
in which were inscribed letters,-- evidently a mourning pin, hallowed
to the memory of lost spouse or child, --a man who, in England, might
be the mayor of a cathedral town, at least the town-clerk.

He seemed suffering from some infirmity of vision, for he wore green spectacles. The expression
of his face was very mild and gentle; apparently he was about sixty years old,--somewhat more.

Graham
took kindly to his neighbour, insomuch that, in return for the "Galignani," he offered him
a cigar, lighting one himself.

His neighbour refused politely.

"Merci! I never smoke, never; mon medecin forbids it. If I could be tempted, it would be by,
an English cigar. Ah, how you English beat us in all things,--your ships, your iron, your tabac,--which
you do not grow!"

This speech rendered literally as we now render it may give the idea of a somewhat vulgar speaker.
But there was something in the man's manner, in his smile, in his courtesy, which did not strike
Graham as vulgar; on the contrary, he thought within himself, "How instinctive to all Frenchmen
good breeding is!"

Before, however, Graham had time to explain to his amiable neighbour
the politico-economical principle according to which England, growing
no tobacco, had tobacco much better than France, which did grow it,
a rosy middle-aged monsieur made his appearance, saying hurriedly
to Graham's neighbour, "I'm afraid I'm late, but there is still a
good half-hour before us if you will give me my revenge."

"Willingly, Monsieur Georges. Garcon, the dominos."

"Have you been playing at billiards?" asked M. Georges.

"Yes, two games."

"With success?"

"I won the first, and lost the second through the defect of my eyesight; the game depended on
a stroke which would have been easy to an infant,-- I missed it."
 Had they been called up but one week since, where would have been those who
have now been, as it were, intrusted to my weak help? The father, the mother, the children,
the infant at the breast, and I, the gray-headed old man, - all buried fathoms deep, awaiting
our summons; but they were restrained by his will, and by his will we were saved. Will those
timbers which bore us here so miraculously hold together till morning? I should think not.
What are the iron bolts and fastenings of weak man, compared with the force of God's elements:
they will snap as yarns; and by to-morrow's dawn, the fragments of the stout ship will be washing
and tossing on the wild surf. Well, it will be a kindness to us, for the waters will perform
the labour which we could not; they will break up the timbers for our use, and throw on shore
from the hold those articles which we could not reach with our little strength."

A sharp flash of lightning struck upon the old man's eyes, and obstructed his vision for the
moment. "The storm will soon be at its height," thought he; "I will watch the tents, and see
how they stand up against its force." Then the rain came pattering down, and the wind howled
louder than before. In a minute or two the darkness became so intense that he could hardly
find his way back to the tents. He turned round, but could not see, for he was blinded by the
heavy rain. As nothing could be done, he went into the tent and sheltered himself from the
storm, although he would not lie down, lest his services might be required. The others had
retired to bed, but with the exception of Tommy and the children, they had not taken off their
clothes.

Chapter XVIII

The storm now raged furiously, the lightning was accompanied by loud peals of thunder, and
the children awoke and cried with fright, till they were hushed to sleep again. The wind howled
as it pressed with all its violence against the tents, while the rain poured off in torrents.
One moment the canvas of the tents would bulge in, and the cords which held it strain and crack;
at another, an eddy of wind would force out the canvas, which would flap and flap, while the
rain found many an entrance. The tent in which Mrs. Seagrave and the children reposed was on
the outside of the others, and therefore the most exposed. About midnight the wind burst on
them with greater violence than before. A loud crash was heard by Ready and Mr. Seagrave, followed
by the shrieks of Mrs. Seagrave and Juno; the pegs of the tent had given way, and the inmates
were exposed to the fury of the elements. Ready rushed out, followed by Mr. Seagrave and William.
So strong was the wind and beating rain, and such was the darkness, that it was with some difficulty
that by their united efforts the women and children could be extricated. Tommy was the first
taken up by Ready: his courage had all gone, and he was bellowing furiously. William took Albert
in charge and carried him into the other tent, where Tommy sat in his wet shirt roaring most
melodiously. Juno, Mrs. Seagrave, and the little girl were at last carried away and taken into
the other tent: fortunately no one was hurt, although the frightened children could not be
pacified, and joined in chorus with Tommy. Nothing more could be done except to put the children
into bed, and then the whole party sat up the remainder of the night listening to the noise
of the wind, the roaring of the sea, and the loud patter of the rain against the canvas. At
dawn of day, Ready went out, and found that the gale had spent its force, and had already much
abated; but it was not one of those bright glorious mornings to which they had been accustomed
since their arrival at the island: the sky was still dark, and the clouds were chasing each
other wildly; there was neither sun nor blue sky to be seen: it still rained, but only at intervals,
and the earth was soft and spongy; the little cove, but the day before so beautiful, was now
a mass of foaming and tumultuous waves, and the surf was thrown many yards upon the beach:
the horizon was confused - you could not distinguish the line between the water and the sky,
and the whole shore of the island was lined with a white foam. Ready turned his eyes to where
the ship had been fixed on the rocks: it was no longer there - the whole frame had disappeared;
but the fragments of it, and the contents of the holds, were floating about in every direction,
or tossing amongst the surf on the beach.

"I thought as much," said Ready, pointing to where the ship had lain, as he turned round and
found that Mr. Seagrave had followed him; "look, sir, this gale has broken her up entirely.
This is a warning to us not to remain here any longer: we must make the most of the fine weather
which we may have before the rainy season sets in."

"I agree with you, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave, - "and there is another proof of it," pointing
to the tent which had been blown down. "It was a mercy that none of them were hurt."

"Very true, sir; but the gale is breaking, and we shall have fine weather to-morrow. Let us
now see what we can do with the tent, while William and Juno try if they can get any breakfast."

They set to work. Ready and Mr. Seagrave made it fast with fresh cords and pegs, and very soon
had it all ready; but the beds and bedding were wet through. They hauled over the wet canvas,
and then left it to go to their breakfast, to which Juno had summoned them.

"We need do no more at present," said Ready, "by night-time it will not be so wet, and we can
handle it easier. I see a break in the sky now which promises fine weather soon. And now we
had better work hard to-day, for we may save a great many things, which may be dashed to pieces
on the rocks, if we do not haul them on the beach."

Chapter XIX

They went down to the beach. Ready first procured from the stores a good stout rope; and as
the waves threw up casks and timbers of the vessel, they stopped them from being washed back
again, and either rolled or hauled them up with the rope until they were safely landed. This
occupied them for the major part of the day; and yet they had not collected a quarter of the
articles that were in their reach, independent of the quantity which floated about out at sea
and at the entrance of the cove.

"I think," said Ready, "we have done a good day's work; tomorrow we shall be able to do much
more, for the sea is going down, and the sun is showing himself from the corner of that cloud.
Now we will go to supper, and then see if we can make ourselves more comfortable for the night."

The tent which had not been blown down was given to Mrs. Seagrave and the children, and the
other was fitted up as well as it could be. The bedding being all wet, they procured some sails
from the stores, which, being stowed away farther in the grove, had not suffered much from
the tempest; and, spreading the canvas, they lay down, and the night passed without any disaster,
for the wind was now lulled to a pleasant breeze.

The next morning the sun shone bright - the air was fresh and bracing; but a slight breeze
rippled the waters, and there was little or no surf. The various fragments of the wreck were
tossed by the little surf that still remained; many things were lying on the beach which had
landed during the night, and many more required but a little trouble to secure them. There
appeared to be a sort of in draught into the cove, as all the articles which had been floating
out at sea were now gradually coming on shore in that direction. Ready and Mr. Seagrave worked
till breakfast-time, and had by that time saved a great many casks and packages.

After breakfast they went down again to the beach and resumed their labours. "Look, Ready;
what is that?" said William, who was with them, as he pointed to a white-looking mass floating
in the cove.

"That, sir, is the poor cow; and if you look again, you will see the sharks are around, making
a feast of her: don't you see them?"

"Yes, I do - what a quantity!"

"Yes, there's no want of them, William; so be very careful how you get into the water, and
never let Tommy go near it, for they don't care how shallow it is when they see their food.
But now, sir," said Ready, "I must leave you and William to do what you can in saving any more
of the wreck, while I set to and put the boat in proper repair."

Ready left them at their own employment, and went away for his tools. During this time Mr.
Seagrave and William occupied themselves in collecting the different articles thrown on shore,
and rolling up the casks as far as they could.

As it would take some days for Ready to put the boat into proper order, Mr. Seagrave determined
that he would go to the other side of the island with William, that he might examine it himself;
and, as Mrs. Seagrave had no objection to be left with Ready and Juno, on the third day after
the gale they set off. William led the way, guiding his footsteps through the grove by the
blazing of the cocoa-nut trees; and in two hours they reached their destination.

"Is not this beautiful, father?" said William.

"Yes, indeed it is, my dear boy," replied Mr. Seagrave. "I fancied that nothing could be more
beautiful than the spot where we reside, but this surpasses it, not only in variety, but in
extent."

"And now let us examine the spring, father," said William, leading the way to the ravine.

The spring was full and flowing, and the water excellent. They then directed their steps towards
the sandy beach, and, having walked some time, sat down upon a coral rock.

"Who would have ever imagined, William," said Mr. Seagrave, "that this island, and so many
more which abound in the Pacific Ocean, could have been raised by the work of little insects
not bigger than a pin's head?"

"Insects, father?" replied William.

"Yes, insects. Give me that piece of dead coral, William. Do you see that on every branch there
are a hundred little holes? Well, in every one of these little holes once lived a sea-insect;
and as these insects increase, so do the branches of the coral-trees."

"Yes, I understand that; but how do you make out that this island was made by them?"

"Almost all the islands in these seas have been made by the labour and increase of these small
animals. The coral grows at first at the bottom of the sea, where it is not disturbed by the
winds or waves: by degrees, as it increases, it advances higher and higher to the surface,
till at last it comes near to the top of the water; then it is stopped in its growth by the
force of the winds and waves, which break it off, and of course it never grows above the water,
for if it did the animals would die."

"Then how does it become an island?"

"By very slow degrees; the time, perhaps, much depending upon chance: for instance, a log of
wood floating about, and covered with barnacles, may ground upon the coral reefs; that would
be a sufficient commencement, for it would remain above water, and then shelter the coral to
leeward of it, until a flat rock had formed, level with the edge of the water. The sea-birds
are always looking for a place to rest upon, and they would soon find it, and then their droppings
would, in course of time, form a little patch above water, and other floating substances would
be thrown on it; and land-birds, who are blown out to sea, might rest themselves on it, and
the seeds from their stomachs, when dropped, would grow into trees or bushes."

"I understand that."

"Well then, William, you observe there is an island commenced, as it were, and, once commenced,
it soon increases, for the coral would then be protected to leeward, and grow up fast. Do you
observe how the coral reefs extend at this side of the island, where they are protected from
the winds and waves; and how different it is on the weather side, which we have just left?
Just so the little patch above water protects the corals to leeward, and there the island increases
fast; for the birds not only settle on it, hut they make their nests and rear their young,
and so every year the soil increases; and then, perhaps, one cocoa-nut in its great outside
shell at last is thrown on these little patches - it takes root, and becomes a tree, every
year shedding its large branches, which are turned into mould as soon as they decay, and then
dropping its nuts, which again take root and grow in this mould; and thus they continue, season
after season, and year after year, until the island becomes as large and as thickly covered
with trees as the one we are now standing upon. Is not this wonderful, my dear boy? Is not
he a great and good God who can make such minute animals as these work his pleasure, and at
the time he thinks fit produce such a beautiful island as this?"

"Indeed he is!" exclaimed William.

"We only need use our eyes, William, and we shall love as well as adore. Look at that shell
- is it not beautifully marked? - could the best painter in the world equal its colouring?"

"No, indeed, - I should think not."

"And yet there are thousands of them in sight, and perhaps millions more in the water. They
have not been coloured in this way to be admired, like the works of man; for this island has
been till now probably without any one upon it, and no one has ever seen them. It makes no
difference to Him, who has but to wish, and all is complete."

For a few minutes after this conversation, Mr. Seagrave and William were both silent. Mr. Seagrave
then rose from where he was sitting: "Come, William, let us now find our way back again; we
have three hours' daylight left, and shall be home in good time."

Chapter XX

Everything was now preparing for their removal to the leeward side of the island. Ready had
nearly completed the boat; he had given it a thorough repair, and fitted a mast and sail. William
and Mr. Seagrave continued to collect and secure the various articles thrown on shore, particularly
such as would be injured by their exposure to the weather: these they rolled or carried into
the cocoa-nut grove, so as to be sheltered from the sun; but there were so many things thrown
on shore day after day, that they hardly knew what they had: but they secured case and cask
one after another, waiting for a better opportunity to examine their contents. At last they
collected a great many articles together, and, with their shovels, covered them over with sand,
it being impossible to get them from the beach without more time than they could spare.

Neither was Mrs. Seagrave, who was now getting quite strong, or Juno, idle. They had made up
everything that they could in packages, ready for moving. On the eighth day after the gale,
they were ready, and it was arranged that Ready should put into the boat the bedding and canvas
of one tent, and should take William with him on his expedition. Having transported this safe,
he should return for a load of the most necessary articles, and then the family should walk
through the grove to the other side of the island, and remain there with Mr. Seagrave while
Ready and William returned for the other tent; and after that, the boat should make as many
trips as the weather would permit, till they had brought all the things absolutely required.
It was a lovely calm morning when Ready and William pushed off in the boat, which was well
loaded; and as soon as they were clear of the cove they hoisted the sail, and went away before
the wind along the coast. In two hours they had run to the eastern end of the island, and hauled
up close inshore: the point which ran out, and at the end of which there was an inlet, was
not a mile from them, and in a very short time they had lowered the sail, and were pulling
in for the sandy beach.

"You see, William, it is fortunate for us that we shall always have a fair wind when we come
down loaded, and only have to pull our empty boat back again."

"Indeed it is. How many miles do you think it is from the cove to this part of the island?"

"About six or seven, not more: the island, you see, is long and narrow. Now let us get the
things out and carry them up, and then we will be back to the cove long before dark."

The boat was soon unloaded, but they had some way to carry up the things. "We shall not mind
such a gale as we had the other day when our tents are pitched here, William," said Ready,
"for we shall be protected by the whole width of the cocoa-nut grove. We shall hardly feel
the wind, although we shall the rain, for that will come down in torrents."

"I must go and see how our spring gets on," said William, "and get a drink from it."

Willy reported the spring to be up to the brim with water, and that he had never drunk water
so excellent. They then pushed off the boat, and, after rowing for about two hours or more,
found themselves at the entrance of the cove, and Mrs. Seagrave, with Tommy by her side, waving
her handkerchief to them.

They very soon pulled in to the beach, and, landing, received the congratulations of the whole
party at their first successful voyage, and all expressed their delight at its having proved
so much shorter than had been anticipated.

"Tommy will go next time," said Master Tommy.

"By and by, when Tommy grows a little taller," replied Ready.

"Massa Tommy, you come help me to milk the goats," said Juno.

"Yes, Tommy milk the goats," said the little urchin, running after Juno.

"You must be almost tired of eating nothing but salt meat and biscuit, ma'am," said Ready,
as they sat down to their meal; "but when we are all safe on the other side of the island we
hope to feed you better. At present it is hard work and hard fare."

"As long as the children are well, I care very little about it; but I must say that, after
the last gale, I am as anxious as you to be on the other side of the island, especially after
the account William has given me of it. It must be a paradise! When do we set off?"

"Not till the day after to-morrow, ma'am, I should think; for you see I must have another trip
for the cooking utensils and the bundles which you have made up. If you will spare Juno to
walk through the wood with William to-morrow, we will then have the tent ready for you and
the children."

Chapter XXI

Old Ready had his boat loaded and had made sail for the other side of the island long before
the family were up; indeed, before they were dressed he had landed his whole cargo on the beach,
and was sitting down quietly taking his breakfast. As soon as he had eaten the beef and biscuit
which he had taken with him, he carried up the things which he had brought, and commenced arrangements
for setting up the tent, intending to await the arrival of William and Juno, that they might
assist him in getting up the spars and canvas over it.

About ten o'clock William made his appearance, leading one of the goats by a string, followed
by the others. Juno came after with the sheep, also holding one with a cord; the rest had very
quietly joined the procession. "Here we are at last!" said William laughing; "we have had terrible
work in the woods, for Nanny would run on one side of a tree when I went on the other, and
then I had to let go the string. We fell in with the pigs again, and Juno gave such a squall!"

"I tink 'em wild beast," said Juno. "Ah! what a nice place! Missis will like to live here."

"Yes, it is a very nice place, Juno; and you'll be able to wash here, and never mind about
saving the water."

"I am thinking," said William, "how we are to get the fowls here; they are not very wild, but
still we cannot catch them."

"I'll bring them with me to-morrow, William."

"But how will you catch them?"

"Wait till they are gone to roost, and then you may catch them when you please."

"And I suppose the pigeons and the pigs must run wild?"

"The best thing we can do with them."

"Then we shall have to shoot them, I suppose?"

"Well, William, so we shall; and the pigeons also, when they have become plentiful, if we remain
here so long. We shall soon be well stocked and live in plenty. But now you must help me to
get the tent up and everything in order, so that your mamma may find things comfortable on
her arrival, for she will be very tired, I dare say, walking through the wood."

"Mamma is much better than she was," replied William. "I think she will soon be quite strong
again, especially when she comes to live at this beautiful place."

"We have a great deal of work to do, more than we can get through before the rainy season;
which is a pity, but it can't helped; by this time next year we shall be more comfortable."

"Why, what have we to do besides putting up the tents and shifting over here?"

"In the first place we have to build a house, and that will take a long while. Then we ought
to make a little garden, and sow the seeds which your father brought from England with him."

"0h! that will be nice; where shall we make it, Ready?"

"We must put a fence across that point of land, and dig up all the brushwood; the mould is
very good."

"Then what next?"

"Then we shall want a storehouse for all the things we have got, and all that are in the wood
and on the beach: and consider what a many trips we shall have to make with the little boat
to bring them all round."

"Yes, that is very true, Ready. Have we anything more to do?"

"Plenty; we have to build a turtle-pond and a fish-pond, and a bathing-place for Juno to wash
the children in. But first we must make a proper well at the spring, so as to have plenty of
fresh water: now there's enough for a year's hard work at least."

"Well, let us once get mamma and the children here, and we will work hard."

"I should wish very much to see it all done, William," said Ready. "I hope my life will be
spared till it is done, at all events."

"But why do you say that, Ready? you are an old man, but you are strong and healthy."

"I am so now; but what does the Book say? - `In the midst of life we are in death'. You are
young and healthy, and promise a long life; but who knows but you may be summoned away tomorrow.
Can I, then, an old man, worn out with hardships, expect to live long? No - no, William! Still
I should like to remain here as long as I can be useful, and then I trust I may depart in peace.
I never wish to leave this island; and I have a kind of feeling that my bones will remain on
it. God's will be done!"

For some time after Ready had finished, neither of them said a word, but continued their employment,
stretching out the canvas of the tent, and fastening it down to the ground with pegs. At last
William broke the silence.

"Ready, did you not say your Christian name was Masterman?"

"So it is, William."

"It is a very odd Christian name! You were called after some other person?"

"Yes, I was, William; he was a very rich man."

"Do you know, Ready, I should like very much if you will one day tell me your history - I mean
your whole life, from the time you were a boy."

"Well, perhaps I may, William; for there are many parts of my life which would prove a lesson
to others: but that must be after we have got through our work."

"How old are you, Ready?"

"I am turned of sixty-four; a very old age for a seaman. I could not obtain employment on board
of a vessel if it were not that I am well known to several captains."

"But why do you say `old for a seaman'?"

"Because sailors live faster than other people, partly from the hardships which they undergo,
and partly from their own fault in drinking so much spirits; and then they are too often reckless
and care nothing for their healths."

"But you never drink spirits now?"

"No, never, William; but in my early days I was as foolish as others. Now, Juno, you may bring
in the bedding. We have two or three hours yet, William; what shall we do next?"

"Had we not better make the fireplace all ready for cooking?"

"It was what I was going to propose, if you had not. I shall be here to-morrow long before
any of you, and I will take care that supper is ready on your arrival."

"I brought a bottle of water in my knapsack," replied William, "not so much for the water,
as because I want to milk the goats and take back the milk for baby."

"You proved yourself not only thoughtful but kind, William: now while you and Juno fetch the
stones for the fireplace, I will stow away under the trees the things I have brought in the boat."

"Shall we let the goats and sheep loose, Ready?"

"Oh, yes, - there is no fear of their straying; the herbage here is better than on the other
side, and there is plenty of it."

"Well, I will let Nanny go as soon as Juno has milked her. Now, Juno, let us see how many stones
we can carry at once."

In an hour the fireplace was made, Ready had done all that he could, the goats were milked
and let loose, and then William and Juno set off on their journey back.

Ready went down to the beach. On his arrival there, he observed a small turtle: creeping up
softly he got between it and the water, and succeeded in turning it over. "That will do for
to-morrow," said he, as he stepped into the boat; and laying hold of the oars, he pulled out
of the bay to return to the cove.

Chapter XXII

Ready arrived at the cove, and proceeded to the tents, where he found the whole party listening
to William, who was detailing what had been done. The arrangements for the next day were made
as soon as Ready joined them. They then separated for the night, but Ready and William remained
until it was dark, to catch the fowls and tie their legs, ready for their being put in the
boat the next morning. At daylight all were summoned to dress themselves as soon as possible,
as Ready wanted to take down the tent in which Mrs. Seagrave and the children had slept. For,
with the exception of Tommy, the others had slept upon some canvas, which they had spread out
under the cocoa-nut trees. As soon as Mrs. Seagrave was dressed, the tent was taken down, and,
with all the bedding, put into the boat. Then, when they had breakfasted, the plates, knives
and forks, and some other necessaries, were also put in; Ready laid the fowls on the top of
all, and set off by himself for their new location.

After he was gone, the rest of the party prepared for their journey through the cocoa-nut grove.
William led the way, with the three dogs close to his heels, Mr. Seagrave with the baby in
his arms, Juno with little Caroline, and Mrs. Seagrave with Master Tommy holding her hand.
They cast a last look round at the cove, and the fragments of the wreck and cargo, strewed
about in every direction, and then turned into the wood. Ready arrived at the point, and was
again on shore in less than two hours after he had set off. As soon as the boat was safe in,
he did not wait to land his cargo, but going up to the turtle which he had turned the day before,
he killed it, and cleaned it on the beach. He then went to where they had built up the fireplace
with stones, made a fire, filled the iron saucepan full of water, and set it on to boil; he
then cut up a portion of the turtle, and put it into the pot, with some slices of salt pork,
covered it up, and left it to boil; and having hung up the rest of the turtle in the shade,
he went back to the beach to unload the boat. He released the poor fowls, and they were soon
busy seeking for food.

It was two or three hours before he had carried everything up, for it was a good distance,
and some of the articles were heavy, and the old man was not sorry when he had finished his
task, and could sit down to rest himself.

"It's almost time they arrived," thought Ready; "they must have started nearly four hours ago."
Ready remained a quarter of an hour more watching the fire, and occasionally skimming the top
of the pot, when the three dogs came bounding towards him.

"Well, they are not far off now," observed Old Ready.

In six or seven minutes afterwards the party made their appearance, very hot and very fatigued.
It appeared that poor little Caroline had been tired out, and Juno had to carry her; then Mrs.
Seagrave complained of fatigue, and they had to rest a quarter of an hour; then Tommy, who
refused to remain with his mamma, and had been running backwards and forwards from one to the
other, had declared that he was tired, and that someone must carry him; but there was no one
to carry him, so he began to cry until they stopped for another quarter of an hour till he
was rested; then as soon as they went on again he again complained of being tired. William
then carried him pickaback for some time, and in so doing he missed the blaze-cut on the trees,
and it was a long while before he could find it again; then baby became hungry, and he cried,
and little Caroline was frightened at being so long in the wood, and she cried. But finally
they got on better, and arrived at last so warm and exhausted, that Mrs. Seagrave went into
the tent with the children to repose a little, before she could even look at the place which
was to be their future residence.

"I think," said Mr. Seagrave, "that this little journey of to-day has been a pretty good proof
of how helpless we should have been without you, Ready."

"I am glad that you are here, sir," replied Ready, "it is a weight off my mind; now you will
get on better. I think that after a while you may live very comfortably here; but still we
have much to do. As soon as Madam has rested, we will have our dinner and then fix up our own
tent, which will be quite enough after such a hard day's work."

"Do you go back to the cove to-morrow, Ready?"

"Yes, sir, we want our stores here; it will take about three trips to empty our storehouses;
and as to the other things, we can examine them and bring them down at our leisure. As soon
as I have made those three trips in the boat, we can then work here altogether."

"But I can do something in the meantime."

"Oh yes, there is plenty for you to do."

Mr. Seagrave went into the tent, and found his wife much refreshed; but the children had all
fallen fast asleep on the beds. They waited another half-hour, and then woke Tommy and Caroline,
that they might all sit down to dinner.

"Dear me," exclaimed William, as Ready took the cover off the saucepan, "what is it that you
have so good there?"

"It's a treat I have prepared for you all," replied Ready. "I know that you are tired of salt
meat, so now you are going to feed like aldermen."

"Why, what is it, Ready?" said Mrs. Seagrave; "it smells very good."

"It is turtle-soup, ma'am; and I hope you will like it; for, if you do, you may often have
it, now that you are on this side of the island."

"Indeed, it really is excellent; but it wants a little salt. Have you any salt, Juno?"

"Got a little, ma'am. Very little left," replied Juno.

"What shall we do when all our salt is gone?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Juno must get some more," replied Ready.

"How I get salt? - hab none left," replied Juno, looking at Ready.

"There's plenty out there, Juno," said Mr. Seagrave, pointing to the sea.

"I don't know where," said Juno, looking in that direction.

"What do you mean, my dear?" inquired Mrs. Seagrave.

"I only mean if we want salt we can have as much as we please by boiling down salt-water in
the kettle, or else making a salt-pan in the rocks, and obtaining it by the sun drying up the
water and leaving the salt. Salt is always procured in that way, either by evaporation, or
boiling."

"I'll soon arrange that for you, ma'am," said Ready, "and show Juno how to get it when she
wants it."

"I am very glad to hear you say so; for I should feel the want of salt very much," replied
Mrs. Seagrave, "I really never enjoyed a dinner so much as I have to-day."

The soup was pronounced excellent by everybody. As soon as they had finished, Mrs. Seagrave
remained with the children; and Ready and Mr. Seagrave, assisted by Juno and William, got the
second tent up, and everything ready for the night. They then all assembled, and returned thanks
to God for their having gained their new abode; and, tired out with the fatigue of the day,
were soon fast asleep.

Chapter XXIII

Mr. Seagrave was the first up on the ensuing morning; and when Ready came out of the tent,
he said to him, "Do you know, Ready, I feel much happier and my mind much more at ease since
I find myself here. On the other side of the island everything reminded me that we had been
shipwrecked; and I could not help thinking of home and my own country; but here we appear as
if we had been long settled, and as if we had come here by choice."

"I trust that feeling will be stronger every day, sir; for it's no use, and indeed sinful,
to repine."

"I acknowledge it, and with all humility. What is the first thing which you wish we should
set about?"

"I think, sir, the first object is to have a good supply of fresh water; and I therefore wish
you and William - Here he is. Good-morning, William - I was saying that I thought it better
that Mr. Seagrave and you should clear out the spring while I am away in the boat. I brought
another shovel with me yesterday, and you both can work; perhaps we had better go there, as
Juno, I see, is getting the breakfast ready. You observe, Mr. Seagrave, we must follow up the
spring till we get among the cocoa-nut trees, where it will be shaded from the sun; that is
easily done by digging towards them, and watching how the water flows. Then, if you will dig
out a hole large enough to sink down in the earth one of the water-casks which lie on the beach,
I will bring it down with me this afternoon; and then, when it is fixed in the earth in that
way, we shall always have the cask full of water for use, and the spring filling it as fast
as we empty it."

"I understand," replied Mr. Seagrave; "that shall be our task while you are absent."

"Now, I have nothing more to do than to speak to Juno about dinner," replied Ready; "and then
I'll just take a mouthful, and be off."

Ready directed Juno to fry some pork in the frying-pan, and then to cut off some slices from
the turtle, and cook turtle-steaks for dinner, as well as to warm up the soup which was left;
and then, with a biscuit and a piece of beef in his hand, he went down to the boat and set
off for the cove. Mr. Seagrave and William worked hard; and, by twelve o'clock, the hole was
quite large and deep enough, according to the directions Ready had given. They then left their
work and went to the tent.

"You don't know how much happier I am now that I am here," said Mrs. Seagrave, taking her husband's
hand, as he seated himself by her.

"I trust it is a presentiment of future happiness, my dear," said Mr. Seagrave. "I assure you
that I feel the same, and was saying so to Ready this morning."

"I feel that I could live here for ever, it is so calm and beautiful; but I miss one thing
- there are no birds singing here as at home."

"I have seen no birds except sea-birds, and of them there is plenty. Have you, William?"

"Only once, father. I saw a flight a long way off. Ready was not with me, and I could not tell
what they were; but they were large birds, as big as pigeons, I should think. There is Ready
coming round the point," continued William. "How fast that little boat sails! It is a long
pull, though, for the old man when he goes to the cove."

"Let us go down and help Ready carry up some of the things before dinner," said Mrs. Seagrave.

They did so; and William rolled up the empty water-cask which Ready had brought with him.

The turtle-steaks were as much approved of as the turtle-soup; indeed, after having been so
long on salt meat, a return to fresh provisions was delightful.

"And now to finish our well," said William, as soon as dinner was over.

"How hard you do work, William!" said his mother.

"So I ought, mother. I must learn to do everything now."

"And that you will very soon," said Ready.

They rolled the cask to the spring, and, to their astonishment, found the great hole which
they had dug not two hours before quite full of water.

"Oh dear," said William, "we shall have to throw all the water out to get the cask down."

"Think a little, William," said Mr. Seagrave, "for the spring runs so fast that it will not
be an easy task. Cannot we do something else?"

"Why, father, the cask will float, you know," replied William.

"To be sure it will as it is; but is there no way of making it sink?"

"Oh yes. I know - we must bore some holes in the bottom, and then it will fill and sink down
of itself."

"Exactly," replied Ready. "I expected that we should have to do that, and have the big gimlet
with me."

Ready bored three or four holes in the bottom of the cask, and as it floated the water ran
into it, and by degrees it gradually sank down. As soon as the top of the cask was level with
the surface they filled in all round with the spade and shovel, and the well was completed.

Chapter XXIV

The next morning, as soon as breakfast was over, Mr. Seagrave observed: "Now that we have so
many things to do, I think, Ready, we ought to lay down a plan of operations; method is everything
when work is to be done: now tell me what you propose shall be our several occupations for
the next week, for to-morrow is Sunday; and although we have not yet been able to honour the
day as we should, I think that now we must and ought to keep it holy."

"Yes, sir," replied Ready. "To-morrow we will rest from our labour, and ask God's blessing
upon our endeavours during the six days of the week; and now, as to your proposition, Mr. Seagrave,
shall we begin first with the lady?"

"You must not consider that you have ladies with you now, Ready," said Mrs. Seagrave, "at least,
not fine ladies. My health and strength are recovering fast, and I mean to be very useful.
I propose to assist Juno in all the domestic duties, such as the cookery and washing, to look
after and teach the children, mend all the clothes, and make all that is required, to the best
of my ability. If I can do more I will."

"I think we may be satisfied with that, Mr. Seagrave," replied Ready. "Now, sir, the two most
pressing points, with the exception of building the house, are to dig up a piece of ground,
and plant our potatoes and seeds; and to make a turtle-pond, so as to catch the turtle and
put them in before the season is over."

"You are right," replied Mr. Seagrave; "but which ought to be done first?"

"I should say the turtle-pond, as it will be only a few days' work for you, Juno, and William.
I shall not want your assistance for this next week. I shall fix upon some spot, not far from
here, where the trees are thickest in the grove, and cut them down so as to clear out a space
in which we will, by and by, build our storerooms; and, as soon as the rainy season has gone
by, we can remove all our stores from the other side of the island. It will occupy me the whole
of the week, cutting down the trees and sawing them into proper lengths, ready for building
the house, and then we must all join our strength and get it up without delay."

"Can you really manage to get it up in time? How soon do you expect the rains will come on?"

"In three or four weeks. After next week, I shall probably have the assistance of two of you,
if not of all. Now I think of it, I must return to the cove."

"What for?"

"Don't you recollect, sir, your two-wheeled carriage, packed up in matting, which was thrown
on shore in the gale? You laughed when you saw it, and said it would be of little use now;
but the wheels and axle will he very useful, as we can make a wide path to the place when I
cut down the trees, and wheel out the logs much more easily than we can drag or carry them."

"That is an excellent idea. It will save a great deal of labour."

"I expect that it will, sir. William and I will go away early on Monday morning, and be back
before breakfast. To-day we will fix upon the spots where our garden is to be, our turtle-pond
to be made, and the trees to be cut down. That shall be our business, Mr. Seagrave; and William
and Juno may put things a little more to rights here."

Mr. Seagrave and Ready then walked down to the beach, and, after surveying the reefs for some
time, Ready said, "You see, Mr. Seagrave, we do not want too much water for a turtle-pond,
as, if it is too deep, there is a difficulty in catching them when we want them: what we want
is a space of water surrounded by a low wall of stones, so that the animals cannot escape,
for they cannot climb up, although they can walk on the shelving sand with their flippers.
Now the reef here is high out of the water, and the space within the reef and the beach is
deep enough, and the rocks on the beach nearly fill up that side and prevent them crawling
away by the shore. We have, therefore, little more to do than to fill up the two other sides,
and then our pond will be complete."

"I see it will not be a long job either, if we can find loose rocks enough," replied Mr. Seagrave.

"Almost all those which are on the beach are loose," replied Ready, "and there are plenty close
to us: some of them will be too heavy to carry, but they can be brought here by the aid of
handspikes and crowbars. Suppose we make a signal for William and Juno, and set them to work."

Mr. Seagrave called and waved his hat, and Juno and William came down to them. Juno was ordered
to go back for two handspikes, while Ready explained to William what was to be done. Having
stayed with them and assisted them for some time after Juno had returned with the implements,
Mr. Seagrave and Ready proceeded to the point, to fix upon a spot for a garden, leaving William
and Juno to continue their labour.

Chapter XXV

Mr. Seagrave and Ready then continued their way along the beach, until they arrived at the
point which the latter had considered as a convenient place to make the garden. They found
a sufficiency of mould; and as the point was narrow at its joining on to the mainland, no great
length of enclosure would be required.

"You see, sir," said Ready, "we can wait till after the rainy season is over before we put
up the fence, and we can prepare it in the meantime, when the weather will permit us to work.
The seeds and potatoes will not come up until after the rains are finished; so all we have
to do is to dig up the ground, and put them in as fast as we can. We cannot make a large garden
this year; but our potatoes we must contrive to get in, if we cannot manage anything else."

"If we have no fence to make," replied Mr. Seagrave, "I think we shall be able to clear away
quite enough ground in a week to put in all that we require."

"The first job will be to pull up the small brushwood," said Ready, "and turn up the ground;
the larger plants we must leave, if we have not time. Tommy might be of some use here in taking
away the shrubs as you pull them up; but we had better now go on to the grove, and choose the
spot for cutting down the trees. I have made my mark."

Ready and Mr. Seagrave proceeded in the direction which the former had pointed out, until they
arrived at a spot on a rising ground, where the trees were so thick that it was not very easy
to pass through them.

"There is the place," said Ready. "I propose to cut all the timber we want for the houses out
of this part of the grove, and to leave an open square place, in the centre of which we will
build our storerooms. You see, sir, if necessary, with a very little trouble we might turn
it into a place of protection and defence, as a few palisades here and there between the trees
would make it, what they call in the East Indies, a stockade."

"Very true, but I trust we shall not require it for such a purpose."

"I hope so too, but there is nothing like being prepared; however, we have plenty to do before
we can think of that. Now, sir, as dinner is ready, suppose we return, and after dinner we
will both commence our tasks."

Juno and William returned to the dinner which Mrs. Seagrave had prepared. They were both very
warm with their work, which was very hard, but very eager to finish their task. After dinner
was over, Mrs. Seagrave requested her husband, as he was about to go down to the point, with
the spade and a small hatchet in his hand, to take Tommy with him, as she had a great deal
to do, and could not watch him as well as the baby and Caroline. So Mr. Seagrave took Tommy
by the hand, and led him to the point, and made him sit down close to him while he cleared
away the brushwood.

Mr. Seagrave worked very hard, and when he had cut down and cleared a portion of the ground,
he made Tommy carry away to a little distance, and pile in a heap, the bushes which he had
cleared away. When Mr. Seagrave had cleared away a large piece of ground with his hatchet,
he then took his spade to dig at the roots and turn up the mould, leaving Tommy to amuse himself.
What Tommy did for about an hour, during which Mr. Seagrave worked very diligently, his father
did not observe; but all of a sudden he began to cry; and when his father asked him the reason,
he did not answer, but only cried the more, until at last he put his hands to his stomach,
and roared most lustily. As he appeared to be in very great pain, his father left off work,
and led him up to the tent, when Mrs. Seagrave came out, alarmed at his cries. Ready, who had
heard Tommy screaming for so long a while, thought that there might be something serious, and
left his work to ascertain the cause. When he heard what had passed, he said:

"Depend upon it, the child has eaten something which has made him ill. Tell me, Tommy, what
did you eat when you were down there?"

"Berries," roared Tommy.

"I thought as much, ma'am," said Ready. "I must go and see what the berries were." And the
old man hastened down to the place where Mr. Seagrave had been at work. In the meantime Mrs.
Seagrave was much alarmed lest the child should have poisoned himself, and Mr. Seagrave went
to search among the medicines for some castor-oil.

Ready returned just as he came back to the tent with the bottle of castor-oil, and he told
Ready that he was about to give Tommy a dose.

"Well, sir," replied Ready, who had a plant in his hand, "I don't think you should give him
any, for it appears to me that he has taken too much already. This is, if I recollect right,
the castor-oil plant, and here are some of the castor-oil beans which Master Tommy has been
eating. Tell me, Tommy, did you eat them?"

"Yes," cried Tommy.

"I thought so: give him a little warm drink, ma'am, and he'll soon be better: it will teach
him not to eat berries or beans again."

What Ready said was true; nevertheless Master Tommy was very ill for the whole of the day,
and was put early to bed.

Chapter XXVI

The next day, when Mr. Seagrave, William, Juno, and Ready were all at work at their allotted
tasks, Mrs. Seagrave was sitting down at the front of the tent, the little baby, Albert, crawling
close to her, Caroline trying to work with her needle, and Tommy was making holes in the ground,
and putting a small stone into each hole.

"What are you doing, Tommy?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"I'm making a garden," replied Tommy.

"Making a garden! Then you ought to plant some trees in it."

"No; I'm sowing seeds: look here," replied Tommy, pointing to the stones.

"But these are stones, not seeds."

"Well, but I pretend, and that's the same thing," replied Tommy.

"Not exactly, Tommy; suppose, instead of eating those beans yesterday, you had only pretended
to eat them, wouldn't it have been better?"

"I won't eat any more," replied Tommy.

"No, not of those beans; but if you saw anything else which you thought you would like, I am
afraid you would eat it, and be as ill and even worse than you were."

"I like cocoa-nuts; why don't we have some? there's plenty upon the trees."

"But who is to climb up so high, Tommy? Can you?"

"No; but why don't Ready climb, or papa, or William?"

"I suppose they will get some by and by, when they are not so busy, but they have no time now."

"I like turtle-soup," replied Tommy.

"William and Juno are making a pond to put turtle in, and then we shall have it oftener; but
we cannot have everything we like when we wish for it."

"I like fried fish," said Tommy; "why don't we have fried fish?"

"Because every one is too busy to catch them just now. Tommy, go and bring your brother Albert
back; he has crawled too near to Billy, and he butts sometimes."

Tommy went after the baby, who was crawling towards the kid, which had now grown pretty large,
and as he took up his brother he kicked at the goat's head.

"Don't do that, Tommy; he'll butt at you, and hurt you."

"I don't care," replied Tommy, holding the baby by one hand while he continued to kick at Billy.
Billy, however, would not stand it; he lowered his head, made a butt at Tommy, and he and Albert
rolled on the ground one over the other. The baby roared, and Tommy began to whimper. Mrs.
Seagrave ran up to them and caught up the baby; and Tommy, alarmed, caught hold of his mother's
dress for protection, looking behind him at Billy, who appeared inclined to renew the attack.

"Why don't you mind what is said to you, Tommy? I told you that he would butt you," said Mrs.
Seagrave, pacifying the child.

"I don't care for him," replied Tommy, who perceived that the goat was walking away.

"No, you are very brave now that he has gone; but you're a very naughty boy not to mind what
is said to you."

"Billy never butts at me, mamma," said Caroline.

"No, my dear, because you do not tease him; but your brother is very fond of teasing animals,
and so he gets punished and frightened. It is very wrong of him to do so, especially as he
is told by his father and me that he ought not."

"You said I was a good boy when I learnt my lesson this morning," replied Tommy.

"Yes, but you should always be good," replied his mother.

"I can't be always good," said Tommy; "I want my dinner."

"It is dinner-time, Tommy, that is certain, but you must wait until they all come home from
their work."

"There's Ready coming, with a bag on his shoulder," replied Tommy.

Ready soon came up to where Mrs. Seagrave was sitting, and laid down the bag. "I've brought
you some young cocoa-nuts, and some old ones also, from the trees that I have been cutting down."

"Oh! cocoa-nuts - I like cocoa-nuts!" cried Tommy.

"I told you, Tommy, that we should have some by and by, and they have come sooner than we thought.
You are very warm, Ready."

"Yes, ma'am," replied Ready, wiping his face; "it is rather warm work, for there is no breeze
in the grove to cool one. Is there anything you want from the other side of the island, for
I shall go there directly after dinner?"

"What for?"

"I must bring the wheels to get the timber out; for I must clear it away as I go, until the
path is finished. I must have William to help me."

"William will like the trip, I do not doubt. I do not recollect anything in particular that
we want, Ready," replied Mrs. Seagrave. "There he comes with Juno, and I see Mr. Seagrave has
laid down his spade; so Caroline, dear, take care of Albert, while I get the dinner for them."

Ready assisted Mrs. Seagrave, and the dinner was spread out on the ground, for they had not
brought the chairs and tables with them to their new residence, as they thought that they could
do without them till the house was built. William reported that Juno and he would have the
turtle-pond complete by the next day. Mr. Seagrave had cleared sufficient ground to plant the
half-sack of potatoes that they had saved, so that in a day or two they would be able to put
all their strength upon the cutting and drawing of the timber.

After dinner, William and Ready set off in the boat, and, before it was dark, returned with
the wheels and axle of the carriage, and several other articles to make up their load.

Chapter XXVII

"Now, William," said Ready, "if you are not very sleepy, perhaps you would like to come with
me to-night, and see if we cannot turn some of the turtle, for the season is going away fast,
and they will leave the island very soon."

As soon as the sun had disappeared, William and Ready went down to the beach, and sat quietly
on a rock. In a short time, Ready perceived a turtle crawling on the sand, and, desiring William
to follow him without speaking, walked softly down by the water's edge, so as to get between
the animal and the sea.

As soon as the turtle perceived them, it made for the water, but they met it; and Ready, seizing
hold of one of its fore-flippers, turned it over on its back.

"You see, William, that is the way to turn a turtle: take care that he does not catch you with
his mouth, for, if he did, he would bite the piece out. Now the animal cannot get away, for
he can't turn over again, and we shall find him here to-morrow morning; so we will now walk
along the beach, and see if we cannot find some more."

Ready and William remained till past midnight, and turned sixteen turtle.

"I think that will do, William, for once: we have made a good night's work of it, for we have
provided food for many days. Tomorrow we must put them all into the pond."

"How shall we carry such large animals?"

"We need not carry them; we must put some old canvas under them, and haul them along by that
means; we can easily do that on the smooth sand."

"Why don't we catch some fish, Ready? We might put them into the turtle-pond."

"They would not stay there long, William, nor could we easily get them out if they did. I have
often thought of getting some lines ready, and yet the time has never come, for I feel sleepy
after our day's work; but as soon as the house is built, we will have them, and you shall be
fisherman-in-chief."

"But the fish will bite at night, will they not?"

"Oh yes, and better than they do in the daytime."

"Well, then, if you will get me a line and show me how, I will fish for an hour or so after
the work is done; I know mamma is getting tired of salt meat, and does not think it good for
Caroline."

"Well, then, I will get a bit of candle to-morrow night, and fit up two fishing-lines. But
I must go with you, William. We don't use much candle, at all events."

"No, we are too glad to go to bed: but there are two or three boxes of one sort or another
up in the cove."

The next morning before breakfast all hands were employed in getting the turtle into the pond.
After breakfast, William and Juno finished the pond where the walls had not been raised high
enough; and, when they returned to dinner, reported that their task was completed. Mr. Seagrave
also said that he had, he thought, cleared quite ground enough for the present; and as Mrs.
Seagrave wanted Juno to help her to wash the linen that afternoon, it was agreed that William,
Ready, and Mr. Seagrave should all go down to the garden, and put in the potatoes.

Ready worked with the spade, while Mr. Seagrave and William cut the potatoes in pieces, so
as to have an eye in each piece. When they had finished this work, Mr. Seagrave said - "Now
that we have finished cutting the potatoes, let us go and assist Ready in planting them and
the seeds which we have brought down with us."

Chapter XXVIII

That night Ready sat up for two or three hours working by candle-light (William keeping him
company), very busily engaged fitting up the fishing-lines with leads and hooks. At last two
were complete.

"What bait must we use, Ready?"

"I should think that the best would be one of the fish out of the shells which are in the sand;
but a piece of pork fat will, I dare say, do as well."

"And whereabouts would you fish, Ready?"

"The best place, I should think, would be at the farthermost end of the point, where I got
the boat through the reef - the water is deep there close to the rocks."

"I was thinking, Ready, if those gannets and men-of-war birds would be good eating."

"Not very, William; they are very tough and very fishy: we must try for those when we can get
nothing better. Now that we have got in the seeds and potatoes, we must all set to to-morrow
morning to fell and carry the timber. I think Mr. Seagrave had better use the axe with me;
and you and Juno can, when I have shown you how, hang the timber to the axle, and wheel it
out to the place where we have decided upon building the house. And now we had better go to bed."

William, however, had made up his mind to do otherwise: he knew that his mother would be very
glad to have some fish, and he determined, as the moon shone bright, to try if he could not
catch some before he went to bed; so he waited very quietly till he thought Ready was asleep
as well as the others, and then went out with the lines, and went down to the beach, where
he picked up three or four shells, and, breaking them between two pieces of rock, took out
the fish and baited his hooks. He then walked to the point. It was a beautiful night; the water
was very smooth, and the moonbeams pierced deep below the surface. William threw in his line,
and as soon as the lead touched the bottom he pulled it up about a foot, as Ready had instructed
him; and he had not held his line more than half a minute, when it was jerked so forcibly,
that not expecting it he was nearly hauled into the water; as it was, the fish was so strong
that the line slipped through his hand and scored his fingers; but after a time he was able
to pull it in, and he landed on the beach a large silver-scaled fish, weighing nine or ten
pounds. As soon as he had dragged it so far away from the edge of the rocks as to prevent its
flapping into the water again, William took out the hook and determined to try for another.
His line was down as short a time as before, when it was again jerked with violence; but William
was this time prepared, and he let out the line and played the fish till it was tired, and
then pulled it up, and found that the second fish was even larger than the first. Satisfied
with his success, he wound up his lines, and, running a piece of string through the gills of
the fish, dragged them back to the tents, and hanged them to the pole, for fear of the dogs
eating them; he then went in, and was soon fast asleep. The next morning William was the first
up, and showed his prizes with much glee; but Ready was very much displeased with him.

"You did very wrong, William, to run the risk which you did. If you were resolved to catch
fish, why did you not tell me, and I would have gone with you? You say, yourself, that the
fish nearly hauled you into the water; suppose it had done so, or suppose a small shark instead
of one of these gropers (as we call them) had taken the bait, you must have been jerked in;
and the rocks are so steep there, that you would not have been able to get out again before
a shark had hold of you. Think a moment what would have been the distress of your father and
the agony and despair of your poor mother, when this news should have arrived."

"I was very wrong, Ready," replied William, "now that I think of it; but I wanted to surprise
and please my mother."

"That reason is almost sufficient to plead your pardon, my dear boy," replied Ready; "but don't
do so again. And now let us say no more about it; nobody will know that you have been in danger,
and there's no harm done; and you mustn't mind an old man scolding you a little."

"No, indeed, Ready, I do not, for I was very thoughtless; but I had no idea that there was danger."

"There's your mother coming out of her tent," replied Ready. "Good-morning, madam. Do you know
what William has done for you last night? Look, here are two beautiful fish, and very excellent
eating they are, I can tell you."

"I am quite delighted," replied Mrs. Seagrave.

Tommy clapped his hands and danced about, crying, "Fried fish for dinner;" and Juno said, "Have
very fine dinner to-day, Missy Caroline."

After breakfast they all set out for the grove, where Ready had been cutting down the trees,
taking with them the wheels and axle, and a couple of stout ropes. Mr. Seagrave and Ready cut
down the trees and slung them to the axle, and Juno and William dragged them to the spot where
the house was to be built.

They were not sorry when dinner was ready, for it was very hard work.

That night, tired as they were, Ready and William went out, and turned eight more turtle. They
continued felling the cocoa-nut trees and dragging the timber for the remainder of the week,
when they considered that they had nearly enough, and on Tuesday morning they commenced building
the house.

Chapter XXIX

Ready had cut out and prepared the door-posts and window-frames from timber which he had towed
round from the cove. He now fixed four poles in the earth upright at each corner, and then,
with the assistance of Mr. Seagrave, notched every log of cocoa-nut wood on both sides, where
it was to meet with the one crossing it, so that, by laying log upon log alternately, they
fitted pretty close, and had only to have the chinks between them filled in with cocoa-nut
leaves twisted very tight, and forced between them: this was the work of William and Juno when
no more logs were ready for carrying; and, by degrees, the house rose up from its foundation.
The fireplace could not be made at once, as they had either to find clay, or to burn shells
into lime and build it up with rocks and mortar; but a space was left for it. For three weeks
they worked very hard: as soon as the sides were up, they got on the whole of the roof and
rafters; and then, with the broad leaves of the cocoa-nut trees which had been cut down, Ready
thatched it very strong and securely. At the end of the three weeks the house was secure from
the weather; and it was quite time, for the weather had begun to change, the clouds now gathered
thick, and the rainy season was commencing.

"We have no time to lose, sir," said Ready to Mr. Seagrave. "We have worked hard, but we must
for a few days work harder still. We must fit up the inside of the house, so as to enable Madam
to get into it as soon as possible."

The earth in the inside of the house was then beaten down hard, so as to make a floor; and
a sort of bedstead, about two feet from the ground, running the whole length of the house,
was raised on each side of the interior: these were fitted with canvas screens to let down
by night. And then Ready and William took the last trip in the boat to fetch the chairs and
tables, which they did just before the coming on of the first storm of the season. The bedding
and all the utensils were now taken into the house; and a little outhouse was built up to cook
in, until the fireplace could be made.

It was late on the Saturday night that the family shifted into the new house; and fortunate
it was that they had no further occasion for delay, for on the Sunday the first storm burst
upon them; the wind blew with great force; and, although they were shielded from it, still
the cocoa-nut trees ground and sawed each other's stems as they bent their heads to its force.
The lightning was vivid, and the thunder appalling, while the rain descended in a continual
torrent. The animals left the pastures, and sheltered themselves in the grove; and, although
noonday, it was so dark that they could not see to read.

"This, then, is the rainy season which you talked about, Ready," said Mrs. Seagrave. "Is it
always like this? If so, what shall we do?"

"No, madam; the sun will shine sometimes, but not for long at a time. We shall be able to get
out and do something every now and then almost every day, but still we shall have rain, perhaps,
for many days without intermission, and we must work indoors."

"How thankful we ought to be that we have a house over our heads; we should have been drowned
in the tents."

"That I knew, madam, and therefore I was anxious to get a house over your head; let us thank
God for it."

"Indeed we ought," observed Mr. Seagrave; "and it is, indeed, time for us to read the service."

The morning service was then performed in the new house. Violent as the rain was, it did not
penetrate through the thatch which had been put on. Ready and William went out to secure the
boat, which they were afraid would be injured, and returned wet to the skin. The storm continued
without intermission the whole of the night, but they slept dry and safe; and, when awakened
by the noise of the thunder and the pelting of the rain, they thanked God that they had found
a dwelling in the wilderness upon which they had been cast.

Chapter XXX

When they all rose up the next morning, the clouds had cleared off, and the sun was shining
bright. Ready and Juno were the first out of the house - Ready with the telescope under his
arm, which he always took with him when he went his rounds, as he termed it, in the morning.

"Well, Juno," said Ready, "this is a fine morning after the rain."

"Yes, Massa Ready, very fine morning; but how I get fire light, and make kittle boil for breakfast,
I really don't know - stick and cocoa-nut trash all so wet."

"Before I went to bed last night, Juno, I covered up the embers with ashes, put some stones
over them, and then some cocoa-nut branches, so I think you will find some fire there yet.
I was going my morning's round, but I will stay a little and help you."

"Tank you, Massa Ready; plenty rain fell last night."

"Yes, not a little, Juno; you must not expect to find the water at the well very clear this
morning; indeed, I doubt if you will see the well at all. Here's some stuff which is not very wet."

"I got plenty of fire, too," replied Juno, who had removed the branches and stones, and was
now on her knees blowing up the embers.

"You'll do very well now, Juno," said Ready; "besides, William will be out directly - so I'll
leave you."

Ready whistled to the dogs, who came bounding out, and then set off on his round of inspection.
He first directed his steps to the well in the ravine; but, instead of the gushing spring and
the limpid clear water, with which the cask sunk for a well had been filled, there was now
a muddy torrent, rushing down the ravine, and the well was covered with it, and not to be distinguished.

"I thought as much," said Ready, musing over the impetuous stream; "well, better too much water
than too little." Ready waded through, as he wished to examine the turtle-pond, which was on
the other side of the stream. Finding all right, he again crossed the water, where it was now
spread wide over the sandy beach, until he came to the other point where he had moored his
boat, both by the head and stern, with a rope, and a heavy stone made fast to it, as an anchor.

From this point, as usual, he surveyed the horizon with his telescope; not that he thought
that there was a chance of a vessel arriving among these islands; but, still, as it was possible,
he took the trouble; but never except when he went out in the morning alone, as he was aware
that the very circumstance of his so doing would make Mr. Seagrave melancholy and unsettled.
As usual, he dropped the telescope on his arm, after his survey, saying to himself, "Little
use doing that."

The gale having blown offshore, the boat had dragged her moorings, and was so far out that
Ready could not get at her.

"Here's a puzzle," said the old man; "how foolish of me not to have made a line fast to the
shore! I'll not trust myself to John Shark by swimming to the boat."

"Let me see." Ready took the halyards and sheets belonging to the boat's sails, which be had
left on the beach, and bent one on to the other until he had sufficient length of rope. He
then made a piece of wood, about two feet long, fast by the middle to the end of the rope,
and, after one or two attempts, contrived to throw it into the boat. The piece of wood caught
under one of the thwarts, and this enabled him to draw the boat to the shore.

Having baled out the water which had fallen into her during the storm, he then landed again
and examined the garden.

"Now to find the sheep and goats," said Ready, "and then my morning's walk is over. Now, Romulus,
now, Remus, boys, find them out," continued he; and the dogs, who appeared to know what he
was in search of, went away in pursuit, and soon found the sheep and two of the goats, but
the third goat was not with them.

"Why, where can Black Nanny be?" muttered Ready, stopping a little while; at last he heard
a bleat, in a small copse of brush wood, to which he directed his steps, followed by the dogs.
"I thought as much," said he, as be perceived Nanny lying down in the copse with two new-born
kids at her side. "Come, my little fellows, we must find some shelter for you," said he, taking
one up under each arm. "Come, Nanny."

Ready walked back to the house, and brought in the kids, followed by Nanny. He found Mr. and
Mrs. Seagrave and the children all dressed. Caroline and Tommy gave a scream of delight when
they saw the little kids, and even little Albert clapped his hands. As soon as Ready put them
down on the ground, Tommy and Caroline had each their arms round one.

"I've brought an addition to our family, Mrs. Seagrave," said Ready: "we must allow them to
remain in the house until I can knock up a little shelter for them. This is only a beginning;
I expect we shall soon have more."

As soon as the children could be persuaded to part with the kids, Nanny was tied up in a corner,
and was very content with fondling and nursing her progeny. Juno and William brought in the
breakfast, and as soon as it was over, Mr. Seagrave said, "Now, Ready, I think we must hold
a council, and make arrangements as to our allotted duties and employments during the rainy
season. We have a great deal to do, and must not be idle."

"Yes, sir, we have a great deal to do, and, to get through our work, we must have order and
method in our doings. I've lived long enough to know how much can be done by regularity and
discipline. Why, sir, there is more work got out of men in a well-conducted man-of-war than
there can in the merchant service in double the time. And why so? Because everything is in
its place, and there is a place for everything."

"I agree with you," said Mrs. Seagrave; "method is everything. While one careless little girl
is looking for her thimble, another will have finished her work."

"I assure you I never should have known what can be done by order and arrangement, if I had
not been pressed on board of a man-of-war. I found that everything was done in silence. Every
man was to his post; everyone had a rope to haul upon, or a rope to let go; the boatswain piped,
and in a few seconds every sail was set or taken in as was required. It seemed to me at first
like magic. And you observe, Mr. Seagrave, that when there is order and discipline, every man
becomes of individual importance. If I learnt nothing else on board of a man-of-war, I learnt
to make the most of time, and the most of the strength which you could command."

"You are very right, Ready; you must teach us to do the same," replied Mr. Seagrave.

"We have so much to do, that I hardly know where to begin; yet, sir, we must work at present
how we can, and when we can, until we have got things into a little better order. We have done
well up to the present."

"What do you think we ought to do first?"

"Well, sir, our first job will be to haul up the boat and secure her from harm; we will half-dock
her in the sand, and cover her over, for I do not think it will be safe to go in her now to
the other side of the island, where the sea will always be rough."

"There I perfectly agree with you. Now what is the next?"

"Why, sir, we must not leave the tents where they are, but take them down, and as soon as they
are dry, stow them away, for we may want them by and by; then, sir, we must build a large outhouse
for our stores and provisions, with a thatched roof, and a floor raised about four feet from
the ground; and then, under the floor, the sheep and goats will have a protection from the
weather. Then there is the fish-pond to make, and also a salt-pan to cut out of the rock. Then
we have two more long jobs. One is, to go through the woods and examine the stores we have
left on the other side of the island, sort and arrange them all ready for bringing here after
the rains are over; and we must also explore the island a little, and find out what it produces;
for at present we know nothing of it: we may find a great many things useful to us, a great
many trees and fruits, and I hope and trust we may be able to find some more grass for our
live stock."

"I agree with you in all you say, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave; "now how shall we divide our
strength?"

"We will not divide at present, sir, if you please. Juno has plenty to do indoors with Mrs.
Seagrave; William, and you, and I, will first secure the boat and stow away the tents and gear;
after that, we will set about the outbuilding, and work at it when we can. If Juno has any
time to spare, she had better collect the cocoa-nut leaves, and pile them up for fuel; and
Tommy will, I dare say, go with her, and show her how to draw them along."

"Yes, I'll show her," said Tommy, getting on his feet.

"Not just now, Tommy," said Ready, "but as soon as your mamma can spare her to go with you.
Come, sir, a few hours of weather like this is not to be lost," continued Ready; "we shall
have more rain before the day is over, I expect. I will first go to the tent for the shovels;
then I will haul the boat round to the beach and meet you there. You and William can take some
cord, tie up a large bundle of cocoa-nut boughs, sling it to the wheels, and draw it down to
the beach and meet me."

Chapter XXXI

As so many cocoa-nut trees had been cut down to build the house, there were plenty of boughs
lying in every direction, and William and Mr. Seagrave had soon procured sufficient. In a very
short time the boat was drawn up about ten yards from the water's edge, which Ready said was
quite sufficient; they then dug from under with their shovels until the boat was sunk about
half down in the sand.

Having filled in the sand all round her up to her gunnel, the boat was then carefully covered
over with the boughs, which were weighed down with sand that they might not be blown away.

"I don't see why you should cover the boat up in this way, Ready; the rain won't hurt her,"
observed William.

"No, sir, the rain won't do her any harm, but the sun will, when it bursts out occasionally;
for it's very powerful when it does shine, and it would split her all to pieces."

"I forgot that," replied William. "What shall we do now?"

"Suppose, as we have two hours to dinner-time, you run for the lines, William, and we'll try
for some fish."

"We cannot all three of us fish with only two lines," said Mr. Seagrave.

"No, sir; and as William knows how to catch them, suppose you remain with him, and I will go
up and collect wood and chips for Juno's fire. She was hard pressed for it this morning, it
was so wet; but, if once piled up, it will soon be dry. Be careful, Mr. Seagrave, not to hold
the lines tight in your hands, or you may be jerked into the water."

Mr. Seagrave and William were very fortunate; before the two hours were expired they had caught
eight large fish, which they brought up to the house slung on the boat-hook. Tommy hallooed
loudly for fish for dinner, and as they had caught so many, it was agreed that the dinner should
be put off until some could be got ready, and they were not sorry to eat them instead of salt pork.

They had hardly sat down to table, when the rain came pattering down on the roof, and in a
quarter of an hour the storm was as violent, and the thunder and lightning as terrific as on
the day before. All outdoor labour was again suspended. Mrs. Seagrave, Juno, and Caroline took
their work, for there was plenty to do with the needle and thread, and Ready soon found employment
for the rest. William and Mr. Seagrave unlaid some thick rope, that Ready might make smaller
and more useful rope with the yarns. Ready took up his sailing needles, and worked eyelet-holes
in the canvas screens (which they had put up in a hurry), so that they might be drawn to and
fro as required.

As soon as Ready had hung up the curtains, he looked under the bedsteads for a large bundle,
and said, as he opened it, "I shall now decorate Madam Seagrave's sleeping-place. It ought
to be handsomer than the others." The bundle was composed of the ship's ensign, which was red,
and a large, square, yellow flag with the name of the ship Pacific in large black letters upon
it. These two flags Ready festooned and tied up round the bed-place, so as to give it a very
gay appearance, and also to hide the rough walls of the cottage.

"Indeed, Ready, I am much obliged to you," said Mrs. Seagrave, when he had finished; "it is
really quite grand for this place."

"It's the best use we can put them to now, madam," said Ready.

"I am afraid so," replied Mr. Seagrave, thoughtfully.

"Ready," said William, after the candles were lighted, "you once half-promised me that you
would tell me your history; I wish you would tell us some of it now, as it will pass away the
evening."

"Well, William, I did say so, and I shall keep my word. When you have heard my story, you will
say that I have been very foolish in my time; and so I have; but if it proves a warning to
you, it will, at all events, be of some use."

Ready then commenced his history as follows:

History of Old Ready.

"Of course, you wish to know who my father and mother were: that is soon told. My father was
the captain of a merchant vessel, which traded from South Shields to Hamburg, and my poor mother,
God bless her, was the daughter of a half-pay militia captain, who died about two months after
their marriage. The property which the old gentleman had bequeathed to my mother was added
to that which my father had already vested in the brig, and he then owned one-third of the
vessel; the other two-thirds were the property of a very rich ship-builder and owner, of the
name of Masterman. What with the profits of the share he held of the vessel and his pay as
captain, my father was well to do. Mr. Masterman, who had a very high opinion of my father,
and gained much money by his exertions and good management, was present at the marriage, and
when I was born, about a year afterwards, he stood for me as godfather. Every one considered
that this was a most advantageous circumstance for me, and congratulated my father and mother;
for Mr. Masterman was a bachelor, of nearly sixty years, without any near relations. It is
true, that he was very fond of money; but that, they said, was all the better, as he could
not take it away with him when he died. An end, however, was soon put to all their worldly
ideas, for a year after I was born, my father was drowned at sea, his vessel and the whole
of her crew being lost on the Texel sands; and my mother found herself a widow, with a child
scarcely weaned, when she was but twenty-two years of age.

"It was supposed that my mother would still have sufficient to live upon, as the ship had been
insured at two-thirds of her value; but, to the astonishment of everybody, Mr. Masterman contrived
to make it appear that it was his two-thirds of the vessel which had been insured."

"What is insurance?" inquired William.

"Insurance, my dear boy, is paying a certain sum to people who are called underwriters, that
in case the vessel or cargo is lost or damaged, the loss or damage is made good to the owners
of the vessel or cargo. You pay in proportion to the risk incurred. Supposing you wished to
insure one thousand pounds on a vessel or cargo, and ten per cent was required, you would,
if the vessel came home safe, pay the underwriters one hundred pounds; if, on the contrary,
the vessel was lost, the underwriters would have to pay you one thousand pounds, the sum which
you had insured. I beg your pardon for the interruption, Ready."

"No need, Mr. Seagrave; we never should lose an opportunity of teaching the young. Well, how
far the assertion of Mr. Masterman was correct or not, it was impossible at the time to say;
but I do know that everybody cried out `shame', and that if he did deprive the widow, he had
much to answer for; for the Bible says, `Pure religion is to visit the fatherless and the widows
in their affliction, and to keep yourself unspotted in the world'. The consequence was, that
my mother had little or nothing to live upon; but she found friends who assisted her, and she
worked embroidery, and contrived to get on somehow until I was eight or nine years of age."

"But did not your godfather come forward to the assistance of your mother?" inquired Mr. Seagrave.

"No, sir, strange to say, he did not; and that made people talk the more. I believe it was
the abuse of him, which he did not fail to hear, and which he ascribed to my mother, which
turned him away from us; perhaps it was his own conscience, for we always dislike those we
have injured."

"Unfortunately, there is great truth in that remark of yours, Ready," observed Mr. Seagrave;
"still, it is strange that he did not do something."

"It was very strange, sir, - at least, so it appeared at the time, but he was very fond of
money, and irritated at the reports and observations which were made about him. But, to go
on, sir, I was a strong, hardy boy, and, whenever I could escape from my mother or school,
was always found by the water-side or on board of the vessels. In the summer-time I was half
the day in water, and was a very good swimmer. These adventurous spirits were not squeamish. They thrust
their hands into the lathery mouths of their brutes to show the state of their teeth, and wiped
their fingers on their trousers or grass afterwards, without a tremor,
though my friend could never forbear a shudder at the sight.

If sometimes they came with a desirable animal, the price was far beyond his modest figure; but
generally they seemed to think that he did not want a desirable animal. In most cases, the
pony-horse pronounced sentence upon himself by some gross and ridiculous blemish; but sometimes
my friend failed to hit upon any tenable excuse for refusing him. In such an event, he would
say, with an air of easy and candid comradery, "Well, now, what's the matter with him?" And then
the dealer, passing his hand down one of the pony-horse's fore-legs, would respond, with an
upward glance of searching inquiry at my friend, "Well, he's a leetle
mite tender for'a'd."

I am afraid my friend grew to have a cruel pleasure in forcing them
to this exposure of the truth; but he excused himself upon the ground
that they never expected him to be alarmed at this tenderness forward,
and that their truth was not a tribute to virtue, but was contempt
of his ignorance.

Nevertheless, it was truth; and he felt that it must be his part thereafter to confute the common
belief that there is no truth in horse-trades.

These people were not usually the owners of the horses they brought, but the emissaries or
agents of the owners. Often they came merely to show a horse, and were not at all sure that his
owner would part with him on any terms, as he was a favorite with the ladies of the family.
An impenetrable mystery hung about the owner, through which he sometimes
dimly loomed as a gentleman in failing health, who had to give up
his daily drives, and had no use for the horse.

There were cases in which the dealer came secretly, from pure zeal, to show a horse whose owner
supposed him still in the stable, and who must be taken back before his absence was noticed. If
my friend insisted upon knowing the owner and conferring with him, in any of these instances,
it was darkly admitted that he was a gentleman in the livery business over in Somerville or down
in the Lower Port. Truth, it seemed, might be absent or present in a horse-trade, but mystery
was essential.

The dealers had a jargon of their own, in which my friend became an expert. They did not say
that a horse weighed a thousand pounds, but ten hundred; he was not worth a hundred and twenty-five
dollars, but one and a quarter; he was not going on seven years old,
but was coming seven.

There are curious facts, by the way, in regard to the age of horses
which are not generally known.

A horse is never of an even age: that is, he is not six, or eight, or ten, but five, or seven,
or nine years old; he is sometimes, but not often, eleven; he is never thirteen; his favorite
time of life is seven, and he rarely gets beyond it, if on sale.
 My mother, who felt how useful he might be to me, received
him very kindly; but I had been often told of his neglect of me and my mother, and of his supposed
unfair conduct towards my father, and had taken a violent dislike to him; his advances towards
me were therefore very coolly received. I felt glad that I had saved him; but although I could
not exactly understand my own feelings at the time, I am ashamed to say that my pleasure was
not derived from having done a good action, so much as indulging a feeling of revenge in having
put one under an obligation who had treated me ill; this arose from my proud spirit, which
my mother could not check. So you see, William, there was very little merit in what I had done,
as, after I had done it, I indulged those feelings which I ought to have checked."

"I think I could not have helped feeling the same, Ready, under such circumstances," replied
William.

"The impulse which induced me to act was good," replied Ready; "but the feeling which I indulged
in afterwards took away the whole merit of the deed. I am stating what I believe to be the
truth; and an old man like me can look upon the past without bias, but not without regret.
Mr. Masterman made but a short visit; he told my mother that he would now take care of me and
bring me up to the business of a ship-builder as soon as I was old enough to leave school,
and that in the meantime he would pay all my expenses. My poor mother was very grateful, and
shed tears of joy; and when Mr. Masterman went away, she embraced me, and said that now she
was happy, as I should have a profession on shore and not go to sea. I must do justice to Mr.
Masterman; he kept his word and sent money to my mother, so that she became quite cheerful
and comfortable, and everyone congratulated her, and she used to fondle me, and say, it was
all through me that she was relieved from her distress."

"How happy that must have made you, Ready!" said William.

"Yes, it did, but it made me also very proud. Strange to say, I could not conquer my dislike
to Mr. Masterman; I had nourished the feeling too long. I could not bear that my mother should
be under obligations to him, or that he should pay for my schooling; it hurt my foolish pride,
young as I then was; and although my mother was happy, I was not. Besides, as I was put to
a better school, and was obliged to remain with the other boys, I could no longer run about
the wharfs, or go on board the vessels, as before. I did not see then, as I do now, that it
was all for my good but I became discontented and unhappy, merely because I was obliged to
pay attention to my learning, and could no longer have my own way. The master complained of
me; and Mr. Masterman called and scolded me well. I became more disobedient, and then I was
punished. This irritated me, and I made up my mind that I would run away to sea. You see, William,
I was all in the wrong; and so will all boys be who think they know better than those who have
charge of them; and now only see what I probably lost by my foolish conduct. I say <i>probably</i>,
for no one can calculate or foresee what is to take place; but, as far as appearances went,
I had every prospect of receiving a good education - of succeeding Mr. Masterman in his business,
and, very probably, of inheriting his large fortune; so that I might have been at this time
a rich and well-educated man, surrounded with all the comforts and luxuries of life; perhaps
with an amiable wife and large family round me, to make me still happier, instead of being
what I now am, a poor, worn-out old seaman upon a desert isle. I point this out to you, William,
to show how one false and foolish step in the young may affect their whole prospects in life;
and, instead of enabling them to sail down with the stream of prosperity, may leave them to
struggle against the current of adversity, as has been the case with me."

"It is, indeed, a good lesson, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave.

"It is; not that I repine at my lot, even while I regret the errors that led to it. An all-wise
and gracious God disposes of us as he thinks best; and I can now say with perfect sincerity,
`Thy will, not mine, be done'."

"Your misfortunes have, however, proved an incalculable benefit to us, Ready," observed Mrs.
Seagrave; "for had you not gone to sea, and been on board the ship when the crew deserted us,
what would have become of us?"

"Well, madam, it is some comfort to think that a worn-out old seaman like myself has been of
some use."

Chapter XXXII

The bleating of the kids woke them the next morning earlier than usual. The weather was again
fine, and the sun shining brightly, and Ready turned out Nanny and her progeny. They had an
excellent breakfast of fried fish, and then Mr. Seagrave, Ready, and William went out to their
work: the two first took down the tents, and spread the canvas on the ground, that it might
be well dried, while William went in pursuit of the fowls, which had not been seen for a day
or two. After half-an-hour's search in the cocoa-nut grove, he heard the cock crow, and soon
afterwards found them all. He threw them some split peas, which he had brought with him. They
were hungry enough and followed him home to the house, where he left them and went to join
Ready and his father.

"William," said Ready, "I think, now that we have spread out the tents, we will, if Mr. Seagrave
approves, all set to at once and knock up a fowl-house; it won't be more than a day's job,
and then the creatures will have a home. There are four very thick cocoa-nut trees close to
the house; we will build it under them; it will be a good job over." Mr. Seagrave assented,
and they set immediately to work. There were many thin poles left, the tops of the cocoa-nut
trees which had been cut down to build the house; these they nailed to the trunks of the four
trees, so as to make a square, and then they ran up rafters for a pitched roof.

"Now, sir, this is only rough work; we will first put up a perch or two for them, and then
close in the side, and thatch the roof with cocoa-nut branches; but there's Juno taking in
the dinner, so we'll finish it afterwards."

After their meal the work was renewed; Mr. Seagrave collected the branches while William and
Ready worked upon the sides and roof, and before the evening closed in, the fowl-house was
complete. William enticed the fowls down to it with some more split peas, and then walked away.

"Now, sir, the creatures will soon find their way in; and by and by, when I have time, I'll
make a door to the entrance."

"And now," said William, "I think we had better roll up the canvas of the tents; we have had
a splendid day, and may not be so fortunate to-morrow."

"Very true; we will get them housed, and stow them away under the bed-places; there is plenty
of room." By the time that they had folded up the canvas, and William had brought in Nanny
and the kids, the sun had set, and they went into the house. Ready was requested to go on with
his history, which he did as follows:--

"I said last night that I determined to run away from school and go to sea, but I did not tell
you how I managed it. I had no chance of getting out of the school unperceived, except after
the boys were all put to bed. The room that I slept in was at the top of the house - the doors
I knew were all locked; but there was a trap-door which led out on the roof, fastened by a
bolt inside, and a ladder leading up to it; and I determined that I would make my escape by
that way. As soon as all the other boys were fast asleep, I arose and dressed myself very quietly,
and then left the room.

"The moon shone bright, which was lucky for me, and I gained the trap-door without any noise.
I had some difficulty in forcing it up, as it was heavy for a boy of my age; but I contrived
to do so at last, and gained the roof of the house. I then began looking about me, to see how
I was to get to the ground, and after walking to and fro several times, I decided that I could
slip down by a large water-pipe; it was so far detached from the bricks, that I could get my
small fingers round it. I climbed over the parapet, and, clinging to the pipe firmly with my
hands and knees, I slid down, and arrived at the bottom in safety."

"It's a wonder you did not break your neck, Ready," observed Mrs. Seagrave.

"It was, indeed, ma'am. As soon as I was landed in the flowerbed, which was below, I hastened
to the iron gates at the entrance, and soon climbed up and got to the other side into the road.
I started as fast as I could towards the port, and when I arrived at the wharf, I perceived
that a vessel had her topsails loose, and meant to take advantage of the ebb-tide which had
just made; the men were singing `Yo heave yo', getting the anchor up; and as I stood watching,
almost making up my mind that I would swim off to her, I perceived that a man pushed off in
her jolly-boat, and was sculling to a post a little higher up, where a hawser had been made
fast; I ran round, and arrived there before he had cast off the rope; without saying a word,
I jumped into the boat.

"`What do you want, youngster?' said the seaman.

"`I want to go to sea,' said I, breathless; `take me on board - pray do.'

"`Well,' said he, `I heard the captain say he wanted an apprentice, and so you may come.'

"He sculled the boat back again to the vessel, and I climbed up her side.

"`Who are you?' said the captain.

"I told him that I wanted to go to sea.

"`You are too little and too young.'

"`No, I am not,' replied I.

"`Why, do you think that you dare go aloft?'

"`I'll show you,' replied I; and I ran up the rigging like a cat, and went out at the topgallant
yard-arm.

"When I came down, the captain said, `Well, I think you'll make a sharp seaman by and by; so
I'll take you, and, as soon as I get to London, I'll bind you apprentice.'

"The ship, which was a collier, was soon out of port, and before the day had dawned I found
myself on the wide ocean, which was hereafter to be my home.

"As soon as the hurry and confusion were over, I was examined by the captain, who appeared
to me to be a very rough, harsh man; indeed, before the day was over I almost repented of the
step which I had taken, and when I sat down cold and wet upon some old sail at night, the thoughts
of my mother, and what distress I should occasion her, for the first time rushed into my mind,
and I wept bitterly; but it was too late then. I have often thought, Mr. Seagrave, that the
life of hardship which I have since gone through has been a judgment on me for my cruelty to
my mother, in leaving her the way I did. It broke her heart; a poor return, William, for all
her care and kindness! God forgive me!"

Old Ready left off for some little time, and the remainder of the party kept silence. Then
he said - "I'll leave off now, if you please: I don't feel inclined to go on; my heart is full
when I recall that foolish and wicked deed of mine."

Chapter XXXIII

The next morning was fine, and as soon as breakfast was over, they took the wheels down to
the turtle-pond, and Ready having speared one of the largest by means of a pike with a barb
to it, which he had made on purpose, they hauled it on shore, slung it under the wheels, and
took it up to the house. Having killed the turtle, and cut it up, Juno, under the directions
of Ready, chose such portions as were required for the soup; and when the pot was on the fire,
Ready, Mr. Seagrave, and William set off with the cross-cut saw and hatchets, to commence felling
the cocoa-nut trees for the building of the outhouse, which was to hold their stores, as soon
as they could be brought round from the other side of the island.

"I mean this to be our place of refuge in case of danger, sir," observed Ready; "and therefore
I have selected this thick part of the wood, as it is not very far from the house, and by cutting
the path to it in a zigzag, it will be quite hidden from sight; and we must make the path just
wide enough to allow the wheels to pass, and stump up the roots of the trees which we are obliged
to cut down, otherwise the stumps would attract attention."

"I agree with you, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave; "there is no saying what may happen."

"You see, sir, it is often the custom for the natives, in this part of the world, to come in
their canoes from one island to another, merely to get cocoa-nuts. I can't say that the other
islands near us are inhabited, but still it is probable, and we cannot tell what the character
of the people may be. I tell you this, but we had better not say a word to Mrs. Seagrave, as
it may distress her."

Mr. Seagrave agreed, and Ready continued:

"We are now near the spot, sir. You see, when we have got over this hill, where the trees are
so very thick, the fall in the ground will assist in the concealment of the building. I should
say we are very near right where we now stand."

"How far are we now from the house? We must not be too distant."

"I reckon we are not 150 yards in a straight line, although the road will, by its turning,
make it double the distance."

"Then I think this spot will do very well."

"I'll just mark out the trees which are to stand, Mr. Seagrave, and those which are to be cut
down, so as to leave about four feet of stump standing."

As soon as they had planned the building, the axes and saw were in full use, and tree after
tree fell one upon the other. They worked hard till dinner-time, and were not sorry at the
prospect of sitting down to a rich mess of turtle-soup.

"My dear William, and you too, Mr. Seagrave, how very warm you are!" said Mrs. Seagrave; "you
must not work so hard."

"Cutting down trees is very warm work, mother," replied William, "and hard work will never
hurt any one, especially when he dines off turtle-soup. Why, Tommy, what's the matter with you?"

"Tommy and I are at variance," replied Mrs. Seagrave. "I had my thimble this morning, and had
commenced my sewing, when I was called out by Juno, and Caroline went with me, and Tommy was
left in the house. When I came back I found him outside, and on going back to my work, there
was no thimble to be found; I asked him if he had touched it, and his answer was that he would
look for it. He did look, and said he could not find it; I have asked him several times if
he took it away, and his only answer is that he will find it by and by."

"Tommy, did you take the thimble?" said Mr. Seagrave, gravely.

"I'll find it by and by, papa."

"That's not an answer. Did you take the thimble?"

"I'll find it by and by, papa," said Tommy, whimpering.

"That's all the answer he will give me," said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Well, then, he shall have no dinner till the thimble makes its appearance," replied Mr. Seagrave.

Master Tommy began to cry at this intelligence. Juno appeared with the turtle-soup; and Tommy
cried louder when they had said grace and commenced their dinner. They were all very hungry,
and William sent his plate for another portion, which he had not commenced long before he put
his finger in his mouth and pulled out something.

"Why, mother, here's the thimble in my soup," cried William.

"No wonder he said he would find it by and by," said Ready, smiling; "he meant to have fished
it up, I suppose, from what was left of the soup after dinner. Well, Mrs. Seagrave, I don't
mean to say that Tommy is a good boy, but still, although be would not tell where the thimble
was, he has not told a falsehood about it."

"No, he has not," replied William. "I think, now that the thimble is found, if he begs pardon,
papa will forgive him."

"Tommy, come here," said Mr. Seagrave. "Tell me why you put that thimble into the soup?"

"I wanted to taste the soup. I wanted to fill the thimble; the soup burnt my fingers, and I
let the thimble drop in."

"Well, a thimbleful wasn't much, at all events," observed Ready. "And why didn't you tell your
mamma where the thimble was?"

"I was afraid mamma throw all the soup away, and then I get none for dinner."

"Oh! that was it, was it? Well, sir, I said you should have no dinner till the thimble was
found, so, as it is found, you may have your dinner; but if you ever refuse to answer a question
again, I shall punish you more severely."

Tommy was glad the lecture was over, and more glad to get his turtle-soup; he finished one
plate, and, as he asked for another, he said, "Tommy won't put thimble in again; put tin pot
in next time."

After dinner they went to their work again, and did not come in again till sunset.

"The clouds are gathering fast, sir," observed Ready; "we shall have rain to-night."

"I fear we shall; but we must expect it now, Ready."

"Yes, sir; and by and by we shall have it for days together."

"Ready," said Mrs. Seagrave, "if you are not too tired, perhaps you will go on with your history."

"Certainly, ma'am, if you wish it," replied Ready. "When I left off, I was on board of the
collier, bound to London. We had a very fair wind, and a quick passage. I was very sick until
we arrived in the Nore, and then I recovered, and, as you may suppose, was astonished at the
busy scene, and the quantity of vessels which were going up and down the river. But I did not
like my captain; he was very severe and brutal to the men; and the apprentice who was on board
told me to run away, and get into another vessel, and not to bind myself apprentice to this
captain, or I should be beat all day long, and be treated as bad as he was. I knew this was
the case, as the captain kicked and cuffed him twenty times a day. The men said that he did
not do so to me, for fear I should refuse to be his apprentice; but that, as soon as my indentures
were signed, he would treat me in the same way.

"Well, I made up my mind that I would not remain in the collier; and, as the captain had gone
on shore, I had plenty of time to look about me. There was a large ship, which was ready to
sail, lying in the stream; I spoke to two boys who were at the stairs in her boat, and they
told me that they were very comfortable on board, and that the captain wanted two or three
apprentices. I went on board with them, and offered myself. The captain asked me a great many
questions, and I told him the truth, and why I did not like to remain in the collier. He agreed
to take me; and I went on shore with him, signed my indentures, and received from him a sufficient
supply of clothes; and, two days afterwards, we sailed for Bombay and China." 

And although, like some other natural rights, this has not yet entered
into any declaration of rights, it is no less a law, and ought to
be acted on by honest governments.

It is, at the same time, a salutary curb on the spirit of war and indebtment, which, since the modern
theory of the perpetuation of debt, has drenched the earth with blood, and crushed its inhabitants
under burthens ever accumulating. Had this principle been declared in the British bill of rights,
England would have been placed under the happy disability of waging
eternal war, and of contracting her thousand millions of public debt.

In seeking, then, for an ultimate term for the redemption of our
debts, let us rally to this principle, and provide for their payment
within the term of nineteen years, at the farthest.

Our government has not, as yet, begun to act on the rule, of loans
and taxation going hand in hand.

Had any loan taken place in my time, I should have strongly urged a redeeming tax. For the
loan which has been made since the last session of Congress, we should
now set the example of appropriating some particular tax, sufficient
to pay the interest annually, and the principal within a fixed term,
less than nineteen years.

And I hope yourself and your committee will render the immortal service of introducing this
practice. Not that it is expected that Congress should formally declare such a principle. They
wisely enough avoid deciding on abstract questions. But they may be induced to keep themselves
within its limits.

I am sorry to see our loans begin at so exorbitant an interest. And yet, even at that, you will
soon be at the bottom of the loan-bag. We are an agricultural nation. Such an one employs its
sparings in the purchase or improvement of land or stocks. The lendable money among them is chiefly
that of orphans and wards in the hands of executors and guardians, and that which the farmer lays by
till he has enough for the purchase in view. In such a nation there is one and one only resource
for loans, sufficient to carry them through the expense of a war; and that will always be sufficient,
and in the power of an honest government, punctual in the preservation of its faith. The fund
I mean, is the mass of circulating coin. Every one knows, that, although not literally, it is nearly
true, that every paper dollar emitted banishes a silver one from the circulation. A nation,
therefore, making its purchases and payments with bills fitted for circulation, thrusts an equal
sum of coin out of circulation. This is equivalent to borrowing that sum, and yet the vendor,
receiving payment in a medium as effectual as coin for his purchases or payments, has no claim
to interest. And so the nation may continue to issue its bills as far as its wants require, and
the limits of the circulation will admit. Those limits are understood to extend with us, at
present, to two hundred millions of dollars, a greater sum than would be necessary for any war.
But this, the only resource which the government could command with certainty, the States have
unfortunately fooled away, nay corruptly alienated to swindlers and shavers, under the cover
of private banks. Say, too, as an additional evil, that the disposable funds of individuals,
to this great amount, have thus been withdrawn from improvement and useful enterprise, and
employed in the useless, usurious, and demoralizing practices of bank directors and their
accomplices.

In the war of 1755, our State availed itself of this fund by issuing a paper money, bottomed
on a specific tax for its redemption, and, to insure its credit, bearing an interest of five
per cent. Within a very short time, not a bill of this emission was to be found in circulation.
It was locked up in the chests of executors, guardians, widows, farmers, &tc. We then issued
bills, bottomed on a redeeming tax, but bearing no interest.

These were readily received, and never depreciated a single farthing.

In the revolutionary war, the old Congress and the States issued bills without interest, and
without tax. They occupied the channels of circulation very freely, till those channels were
overflowed by an excess beyond all the calls of circulation. But although we have so improvidently
suffered the field of circulating medium to be filched from us by
private individuals, yet I think we may recover it in part, and even
in the whole, if the States will co-operate with us.

If treasury bills are emitted on a tax appropriated for their redemption
in fifteen years, and (to insure preference in the first moments of
competition) bearing an interest of six per cent., there is no one
who would not take them in preference to the bank-paper now afloat,
on a principle of patriotism as well as interest: and they would be
withdrawn from circulation into private hoards to a considerable amount.

Their credit once established, others might be emitted, bottomed also on a tax, but not bearing
interest: and if ever their credit faltered, open public loans, on
which these bills alone should be received as specie.

These, operating as a sinking fund, would reduce the quantity in
circulation, so as to maintain that in an equilibrium with specie.

It is not easy to estimate the obstacles which, in the beginning, we should encounter in ousting
the banks from their possession of the circulation: but a steady and judicious alternation of
emissions and loans, would reduce them in time. But while this is going on, another measure
should be pressed, to recover ultimately our right to the circulation.

The States should be applied to, to transfer the right of issuing
circulating paper to Congress exclusively, in perpetuum, if possible,
but during the war at least, with a saving of charter rights.

I believe that every State west and south of Connecticut river, except
Delaware, would immediately do it; and the others would follow in
time.

Congress would, of course, begin by obliging unchartered banks to wind up their affairs within
a short time, and the others as their charters expired, forbidding the subsequent circulation of
their paper.

This they would supply with their own, bottomed, every emission, on an adequate tax, and bearing
or not bearing interest, as the state of the public pulse should indicate. Even in the non-complying
States, these bills would make their way, and supplant the unfunded
paper of their banks, by their solidity, by the universality of their
currency, and by their receivability for customs and taxes.

It would be in their power, too, to curtail those banks to the amount
of their actual specie, by gathering up their paper, and running it
constantly on them.

The national paper might thus take place even in the non-complying
States.

In this way, I am not without a hope, that this great, this sole resource for loans in an agricultural
country, might yet be recovered for the use of the nation during
war: and, if obtained in perpetuum, it would always be sufficient
to carry us through any war; provided, that, in the interval between
war and war, all the outstanding paper should be called in, coin be
permitted to flow in again, and to hold the field of circulation until
another war should require its yielding place again to the national
medium.

But it will be asked, are we to have no banks?

Are merchants and others to be deprived of the resource of short
accommodations, found so convenient?

I answer, let us have banks: but let them be such as are alone to be found in any country on earth,
except Great Britain. There is not a bank of discount on the continent of Europe (at least
there was not one when I was there), which offers any thing but cash
in exchange for discounted bills.

No one has a natural right to the trade of a money-lender, but he who has the money to lend.
Let those then among us, who have a monied capital, and who prefer employing it in loans rather
than otherwise, set up banks, and give cash or national bills for
the notes they discount.

Perhaps, to encourage them, a larger interest than is legal in the other cases might be allowed
them, on the condition of their lending for short periods only. It is from Great Britain we
copy the idea of giving paper in exchange for discounted bills: and while we have derived from
that country some good principles of government and legislation, we unfortunately run into the
most servile imitation of all her practices, ruinous as they prove to her, and with the gulph
yawning before us into which those very practices are precipitating her. The unlimited emission
of bank-paper has banished all her specie, and is now, by a depreciation acknowledged by her
own statesmen, carrying her rapidly to bankruptcy, as it did France,
as it did us, and will do us again, and every country permitting paper
to be circulated, other than that by public authority, rigorously
limited to the just measure for circulation.

Private fortunes, in the present state of our circulation, are at
the mercy of those self-created money-lenders, and are prostrated
by the floods of nominal money with which their avarice deluges us.

He who lent his money to the public or to an individual, before the
institution of the United States bank, twenty years ago, when wheat
was well sold at a dollar the bushel, and receives now his nominal
sum when it sells at two dollars, is cheated of half his fortune:
and by whom?

By the banks, which, since that, have thrown into circulation ten
dollars of their nominal money where there was one at that time.

Reflect, if you please, on these ideas, and use them or not as they appear to merit. They comfort
me in the belief, that they point out a resource ample enough, without overwhelming war-taxes, for
the expense of the war, and possibly still recoverable; and that they hold up to all future
time a resource within ourselves, ever at the command of government, and competent to any wars into
which we may be forced. Nor is it a slight object to equalize taxes through peace and war.

*****

Ever
affectionately yours.

Th: Jefferson.

LETTER CXI.--TO JOHN ADAMS, June 21, 1813

TO JOHN ADAMS.

Monticello, June 21, 1813.

And I too, my dear Sir, like the wood-cutter of Ida, should doubt where to begin, were I to enter
the forest of opinions, discussions, and contentions which have occurred in our day. I should
say with Theocritus,

But I shall not do it.

The summum bonum with me is now truly epicurean, ease of body and
tranquillity of mind; and to these I wish to consign my remaining
days.

Men have differed in opinion, and been divided into parties by these opinions, from the first
origin of societies; and in all governments, where they have been
permitted freely to think and to speak.

The same political parties which now agitate the United States, have existed through all time.
Whether the power of the people, or that of the

should prevail, were questions which kept the States of Greece and Rome in eternal convulsions;
as they now schismatize every people whose minds and mouths are not
shut up by the gag of a despot.

And in fact, the terms of whig and tory belong to natural, as well
as to civil history.

They denote the temper and constitution of mind of different individuals. To come to our own
country, and to the times when you and I became first acquainted:
we well remember the violent parties which agitated the old Congress,
and their bitter contests.

There you and I were together, and the Jays, and the Dickinsons,
and other anti-independents were arrayed against us.

They cherished the monarchy of England, and we the rights of our
countrymen.

When our present government was in the mew, passing from Confederation to Union, how bitter
was the schism between the Feds and Antis. Here you and I were together
again.

For although, for a moment, separated by the Atlantic from the scene of action, I favored the opinion
that nine States should confirm the constitution, in order to secure
it, and the others hold off, until certain amendments, deemed favorable
to freedom, should be made.

I rallied in the first instant to the wiser proposition of Massachusetts, that all should
confirm, and then all instruct their delegates to urge those amendments. The amendments were
made, and all were reconciled to the government.

But as soon as it was put into motion, the line of division was again
drawn.

We broke into two parties, each wishing to give the government a different direction; the one
to strengthen the most popular branch, the other the more permanent branches, and to extend
their permanence. Here you and I separated for the first time: and as we had been longer than
most others on the public theatre, and our names therefore were more familiar to our countrymen,
the party which considered you as thinking with them, placed your
name at their head; the other, for the same reason, selected mine.

But neither decency nor inclination permitted us to become the advocates of ourselves, or to
take part personally in the violent contests which followed. We suffered ourselves, as you
so well expressed it, to be passive subjects of public discussion. And these discussions,
whether relating to men, measures, or opinions, were conducted by the parties with an animosity,
a bitterness, and an indecency, which had never been exceeded. All the resources of reason
and of wrath were exhausted by each party in support of its own,
and to prostrate the adversary opinions; one was upbraided with receiving
the anti-federalists, the other the old tories and refugees, into
their bosom.

Of this acrimony, the public papers of the day exhibit ample testimony, in the debates of Congress,
of State legislatures, of stump-orators, in addresses, answers, and newspaper essays; and to
these, without question, may be added the private correspondences of individuals; and the less
guarded in these, because not meant for the public eye, not restrained by the respect due to
that, but poured forth from the overflowings of the heart into the bosom of a friend, as a momentary
easement of our feelings. In this way and in answers to addresses, you and I could indulge
ourselves. We have probably done it, sometimes with warmth, often with prejudice, but always,
as we believed, adhering to truth. I have not examined my letters of that day. I have no stomach
to revive the memory of its feelings. But one of these letters, it seems, has got before the public,
by accident and infidelity, by the death of one friend to whom it was written, and of his friend to
whom it had been communicated, and by the malice and treachery of a third person, of whom I had
never before heard, merely to make mischief, and in the same Satanic spirit, in which the
same enemy had intercepted and published, in 1776, your letter animadverting
on Dickinson's character.

How it happened that I quoted you in my letter to Doctor Priestley,
and for whom, and not for yourself, the strictures were meant, has
been explained to you in my letter of the 15th, which had been committed
to the post eight days before I received yours of the 10th, 11th,
and 14th.

That gave you the reference which these asked to the particular answer alluded to in the one
to Priestley. The renewal of these old discussions, my friend, would be equally useless and
irksome. To the volumes then written on these subjects, human ingenuity can add nothing new,
and the rather, as lapse of time has obliterated many of the facts. And shall you and I, my
Dear Sir, at our age, like Priam of old, gird on the

Shall we, at our age, become the athletes of party, and exhibit ourselves, as gladiators, in the
arena of the newspapers? Nothing in the universe could induce me to it. My mind has been long fixed
to bow to the judgment of the world, who will judge by my acts, and will never take counsel from
me as to what that judgment shall be. If your objects and opinions have been misunderstood,
if the measures and principles of others have been wrongfully imputed to you, as I believe
they have been, that you should leave an explanation of them, would be an set of justice to
yourself.

I will add, that it has been hoped that you would leave such explanations as would place every
saddle on its right horse, and replace on the shoulders of others
the burdens they shifted to yours.

But all this, my friend, is offered merely for your consideration
and judgment, without presuming to anticipate what you alone are qualified
to decide for yourself.

I mean to express my own purpose only, and the reflections which have led to it. To me, then,
it appears, that there have been differences of opinion and party differences, from the first establishment
of governments to the present day, and on the same question which now divides our own country:
that these will continue through all future time: that every one takes his side in favor of
the many, or of the few, according to his constitution, and the circumstances in which he is
placed: that opinions, which are equally honest on both sides, should not affect personal
esteem or social intercourse: that as we judge between the Claudii and the Gracchi, the Wentworths
and the Hampdens of past ages, so, of those among us whose names may happen to be remembered for
a while, the next generations will judge, favorably or unfavorably, according to the complexion
of individual minds, and the side they shall themselves have taken: that nothing new can be added
by you or me to what has been said by others, and will be said in every age in support of the
conflicting opinions on government: and that wisdom and duty dictate an humble resignation to
the verdict of our future peers. I doing this myself, I shall certainly not suffer moot questions
to affect the sentiments of sincere friendship and respect, consecrated to you by so long a
course of time, and of which I now repeat sincere assurances,

Th: Jefferson.

LETTER CXII.--TO JOHN ADAMS, August 22, 1813

TO JOHN ADAMS.

Monticello, August 22, 1813.

Dear Sir,

Since my letter of June the 27th, I am in your debt for many; all of which I have read with infinite
delight. They open a wide field for reflection, and offer subjects enough to occupy the mind
and the pen indefinitely. I must follow the good example you have set; and when I have not
time to take up every subject, take up a single one.
 It is my opinion we shall have a fine day to-morrow, sir; but there's
no saying."

"I do so want to hear what happened to you afterwards, Ready," said William.

"Well, so you shall; but there's a time for everything, and this is bed-time, unless you like
to go with me; the weather has cleared up, and I want to catch a fish or two for to-morrow."

Chapter XXXV

As Ready had predicted, the weather set in fine after the violent storm of which we have made
mention. For a fortnight, with little intermission, it continued fine, and during that time,
Ready, Mr. Seagrave, and William worked from daylight till dusk at the storehouse, which they
were so anxious to complete, and were so tired when their work was over, that even William
did not ask Ready to go on with his history. At last the storehouse was complete, thatched
and wattled in on three sides, leaving one open for ventilation; the lower part, which had
been arranged for the folding of the stock at night and during the rainy season, was also wattled
in with cocoa-nut boughs on three sides, and made a very comfortable retreat for the animals.
The winding path to the storehouse was also cut through the cocoa-nut grove, but the stumps
were not removed, as they could not spare the time. All the stores that they had brought round
were put into the storehouse, and they were now ready to take up some other job. It was, however,
agreed that, on the day after the building was finished, they should all have a day's holiday,
which they certainly did require. William caught some fish, a turtle was speared and wheeled
up to the house; and they not only had a holiday, but a feast. Mr. Seagrave and William had
been walking on the beach with Mrs. Seagrave and the children, while Ready was assisting Juno
in cutting up the turtle; they had shown Mrs. Seagrave the storehouse, and the goats with the
four kids had been led there, as there was no longer any occasion for them to remain in the
house. The weather was beautiful, and they agreed to go and examine the garden. They found
that the seeds had not yet commenced sprouting, notwithstanding the heavy rains.

"I should have thought that so much rain would have made them come up," said Mrs. Seagrave.

"No, my dear," replied Mr. Seagrave; "they require more of the sun than they will have till
the rainy season is nearly over; a few days like this, and they will soon be above-ground."

"Let us sit down on this knoll, it is quite dry," said Mrs. Seagrave. "I little thought," continued
she, "that I could have been so happy in a desert island. I thought I should feel the loss
of books very severely, but I really do not think that I could have found time to read."

"Employment is a source of happiness, especially when you are usefully employed. An industrious
person is always a happy person, provided he is not obliged to work too hard; and even where
you have cause for unhappiness, nothing makes you forget it so soon as occupation."

"But, mamma, we shall not always have so much to do as we have now," said William.

"Of course not," replied Mr. Seagrave; "and then we shall find our books a great source of
enjoyment. I am anxious to go to the other side of the island, and see what have been spared
to us, and whether they have been much damaged; but that cannot be until after the rains are
over, and we can use the boat again.

"Look at this minute insect which is crawling on my finger," said Mr. Seagrave, turning to
William: "what a number of legs it has!"

"Yes, I have seen something like it in old books. How fast it runs with its little legs; thinner
than hairs - how wonderful!"

"Yes, William," replied Mr. Seagrave, "we have only to examine into any portion, however small,
of creation, and we are immediately filled with wonder. There is nothing which points out to
us the immensity and the omniscience of the Almighty more than the careful provision which
has been made by Him for the smallest and most insignificant of created beings. This little
animal is perhaps one of many millions, who have their term of existence, and their enjoyment,
as well as we have. What is it? - an insect of the minutest kind, a nothing in creation; yet
has the same care been bestowed upon its formation: these little legs, hardly visible, have
their muscles and their sinews; and every other portion of its body is as complete, as fearfully
and wonderfully fashioned, as our own. Such is his will; and what insects we ought to feel
ourselves, when compared to the God of power and of love!"

"Let me also point out to you, William," continued Mr. Seagrave, "the infinity of his creative
power, displayed in endless variety. Amongst the millions of men that have been born, and died,
if ever yet were there seen two faces or two bodies exactly alike; nay, if you could examine
the leaves upon the trees, although there may be millions upon millions in a forest, you could
not discover two leaves of precisely the same form and make."

"I have often tried in vain," replied William; "yet some animals are so much alike, that I
cannot perceive any difference between them - sheep, for instance."

"Very true; you cannot tell the difference, because you have not examined them; but a shepherd,
if he has seven hundred sheep under his care, will know every one of them from the others;
which proves that there must be a great difference between them, although not perceptible to
the casual observer; and the same, no doubt, is the case with all other classes of animals."

"Yes, William," observed Ready; "I have often wondered over the things that I have seen, and
I have even in my ignorance felt what your papa has now told you; and it has brought into my
mind the words of Job: `When I consider, I am afraid of him'."

"Papa," said William, after a pause in the conversation, "you have referred to the variety
- the wonderful variety - shown in the works of the Deity. Tell me some other prominent feature
in creation."

"One of the most remarkable, William, is order."

"Point out to me, papa, where and in what that quality is most observable."

"Everywhere and in everything, my dear boy; whether we cast our eyes up to the heavens above
us, or penetrate into the bowels of the earth, the principle of order is everywhere - everything
is governed by fixed laws, which cannot be disobeyed: we have order in the seasons, in the
tides, in the movement of the heavenly bodies, in the instinct of animals, in the duration
of life assigned to each; from the elephant who lives more than a century, to the ephemeral
fly, whose whole existence is limited to an hour.

"Inanimate nature is subject to the same unvarying laws. Metals, and rocks, and earths, and
all the mineral kingdom follow one law in their crystallization, never varying from the form
assigned to them; each atom depositing itself in the allotted place, until that form is complete:
we have order in production, order in decay; but all is simple to him by whom the planets were
thrown out into space, and were commanded to roll in their eternal orbits."

"Yes; the stars in the heavens are beautiful," said William, "but they are not placed there
in order."

"The fixed stars do not appear to us to be in order - that is, they do not stud the heavens
at equal distances from each other as we view them; but you must recollect that they are at
very different distances from this earth, spreading over all infinity of space; and we have
reason to suppose that this our earth is but a mere unit in the multitude of created worlds,
only one single portion of an infinite whole. As the stars now appear to us, they are useful
to the mariner, enabling him to cross the trackless seas; and to the astronomer, who calculates
the times and seasons."

"What do you mean, papa, by saying that this world of ours is supposed to be but one of a multitude
of created worlds?"

"Our little knowledge is bounded to this our own earth, which we have ascertained very satisfactorily
to be but one of several planets revolving round our own sun. I say our own sun, because we
have every reason to suppose that each of those fixed stars, and myriads now not visible to
the naked eye, are all suns, bright and glorious as our own, and of course throwing light and
heat upon unseen planets revolving round them. Does not this give you some idea of the vastness,
the power, and the immensity of God?"

"One almost loses one's self in the imagination," said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Yes," replied Mr. Seagrave; "and it has been surmised by some, who have felt in their hearts
the magnificence of the Great Architect, that there must be some point of view in space where
all those glorious suns, which seem to us confused in the heavens above us, will appear all
symmetrically arranged, will there be viewed in regular order, whirling round in one stupendous
and perfect system of beauty and design; and where can that be, if it is not in that heaven
which we hope to gain?"

There was a silence for a few moments, when William said, "They say that there are people who
are atheists, papa. How can they be so if they only look around them? I am sure a mere examination
of the works of God ought to make them good Christians."

"No, my child," replied Mr. Seagrave; "there you are in error. Few deny the existence of a
Deity, and an examination of his works may make them good and devout men, but not Christians.
There are good men to be found under every denomination, whether they be Jews, Mahomedans,
or Pagans; but they are not Christians."

"Very true, papa."

"Faith in things seen, if I may use the term, my dear child, may induce men to acknowledge
the power and goodness of the Almighty, but it will not make them wise to salvation; for that
end, it is necessary, as the Apostle saith, to have faith in things not seen."

Chapter XXXVI

"Well, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave, after breakfast, "which is to be our next job?"

"Why, sir, I think we had better all set to, to collect the branches and ends of the cocoa-nut
trees cut down, and stack them for fuel. Tommy and Juno have already made a good large pile,
and I think, by to-night, we shall have made the stack, and so arranged it that the rain will
not get into it much. After that, as the weather will not permit us to leave the house for
any time, we will cut our salt-pan and make our fish-pond; they will take a week at least,
and then we shall have little more to do near home. I think the strength of the rains is over
already, and perhaps in a fortnight we may venture to walk through the wood, and examine what
we have saved from the wreck."

"And we are to explore the island; are we not, Ready?" said William. "I long to do that."

"Yes, William, but that must be almost the last job; for we shall be away for two or three
nights, perhaps, and we must look out for fine weather. We will, however, do that before we
bring the stores round in the boat."

"But how are we to make the salt-pan, Ready? We must cut it out of the solid rock."

"Yes, William; but I have three or four of what they call cold chisels, and with one of them
and a hammer, we shall get on faster than you think; for the coral rock, although hard at the
surface, is soft a little below it."

The whole of that day was employed in piling up the cocoa-nut branches and wood. Ready made
a square stack, like a haystack, with a gable top, over which he tied the long branches, so
that the rain would pour off it.

"There," said Ready, as he came down the ladder, "that will be our provision for next year;
we have quite enough left to go on with till the rainy season is over, and we shall have no
difficulty in collecting it afterwards when the weather is dry."

Mr. Seagrave sighed and looked grave; Ready observed it, and said, "Mr. Seagrave, it is not
that we may want it; but still we must prepare for the next rainy season, in case we do want
it. That Captain Osborn, if he lives, will send to look for us, I have no doubt; nay, I believe
that Mackintosh will do the same; but still you must not forget that they all may have perished,
although we have been so mercifully preserved. We must put our trust in God, sir."

"We must, Ready; and if it is his will, we must not murmur. I have schooled myself as much
as possible; but thoughts will come in spite of my endeavours to restrain them."

"Of course they will, sir; that's natural: however, sir, you must hope for the best; fretting
is no good, and it is sinful."

"I feel it is, Ready; and when I see how patient, and even happy, my wife is under such privations,
I am angry with myself."

"A woman, sir, bears adversity better than a man. A woman is all love, and if she has but her
husband and children with her, and in good health, she will make herself happy almost anywhere:
but men are different: they cannot bear being shut out of the world as you are now."

"It is our ambition which makes us unhappy, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave; "but let us say no
more about it: God must dispose of me as he thinks fit."

After supper, Ready, being requested by William, continued his narrative.

"I left off, if I recollect right, William, just as the Hottentot, with the cattle under his
care, had frightened away the baboons who were tormenting us. Well, we came out of the cave
and sat down under the rock, so that the Hottentot could not see us, and we had a sort of council
of war. Romer was for going back and giving ourselves up again; for he said it was ridiculous
to be wandering about without any arms to defend ourselves against wild beasts, and that we
might fall in with something worse than the baboons very soon; and he was right. It would have
been the wisest thing which we could have done; but Hastings said, that if we went back we
should be laughed at, and the idea of being laughed at made us all agree that we would not.
Bear this in mind, William, and never let the fear of ridicule induce you to do what is wrong;
or if you have done wrong, prevent you from returning to what is your duty."

"Many thanks for your advice, Ready; I hope William will not forget it," said Mr. Seagrave.

"Well, sir, such was our reason for not giving up our mad scheme; and having so decided, the
next point of consultation between us was, how we were to procure arms and ammunition, which
we could not do without. As we were talking this over, I peeped from behind the rock to see
where the Hottentot might be; I perceived that he had laid himself down, and wrapped himself
up in his kross, a mantle of sheep-skins which they always wear. Now we had observed that he
carried his musket in his hand, when we first saw him, as the Hottentots always go out armed,
and I pointed out to Hastings and Romer that if he was asleep, we might get possession of his
musket without his perceiving it. This was a good idea, and Hastings said he would crawl to
him on his hands and knees, while we remained behind the rock. He did so very cautiously, and
found the man's head covered up in his kross and fast asleep; so there was no fear, for the
Hottentots are very hard to wake at any time; that we knew well. Hastings first took the musket
and carried it away out of the reach of the Hottentot, and then he returned to him, cut the
leather thong which slung his powder-horn and ammunition, and retreated with all of them without
disturbing the man from his sleep. We were quite overjoyed at this piece of good luck, and
determined to walk very cautiously some distance from where the Hottentot lay, that in case
he awoke he should not see us. Keeping our eyes about in every direction, lest we should meet
with anybody else, we proceeded nearly a mile towards Table Bay, when we fell in with a stream
of water. This was another happy discovery, for we were very thirsty; so we concealed ourselves
near the stream after we had quenched our thirst, and made a dinner off the provisions we had
brought with us."

"But, Ready, did you not do wrong to steal the Hottentot's musket?"

"No, William; in that instance it could not be considered as a theft. We were in an enemy's
country, trying to escape; we were therefore just as much at war with the country as we were
when they took us prisoners, and we no more stole the musket than they could be said to have
stolen our ship. Am I not right, Mr. Seagrave?"

"I believe you are justified in what may seem extreme acts for the recovery of your liberty,
after you have been made prisoners. It has always been so considered."

"Well, sir, to go on: we waited till dusk, and then we continued our march towards False Bay
as fast as we could. We knew that there were farmers down in the valley, or rather on the sides
of the hills, and we hoped to obtain, by some means or other, two more muskets. It was near
twelve o'clock at night, with a bright moon, when we had a sight of the water in False Bay,
and soon afterwards we heard the baying of a large dog, and not far from us we distinguished
two or three farmhouses, with their cattle-folds and orchards. We then looked for a hiding-place,
where we might remain till the morning; we found one between some large pieces of rock. We
agreed that one should watch while the other two slept; this Hastings undertook to do, as he
was not inclined to sleep. At daylight he woke Romer and me, and we made our breakfast. From
the place we were concealed in, we had a bird's-eye view of the farmhouse, and of what was
going on.

"The farmhouse and buildings just below us were much smaller than the other two, which were
more distant. We watched the people as they went about. In about an hour the Hottentots came
out, and we perceived that they were yoking the oxen to the waggon; they yoked twelve pair,
and then the Hottentot driver got in and drove off towards Cape Town. Soon after that, another
Hottentot drove the cows up the valley to feed; and then a Dutch woman came out of the house
with two children, and fed the poultry.

"We watched for another hour, and then the farmer himself made his appearance, with a pipe
in his mouth, and sat down on a bench. When his pipe was out, he called to the house, and a
Hottentot woman came to him with more tobacco and a light. During the whole of the day we did
not see any other people about the house, so we concluded that there were no more than the
farmer, his wife, the Hottentot woman, and two children. About two hours after noon the farmer
went to the stable and led out his horse, mounted, mid rode away; we saw him speak to the Hottentot
woman when he rode off, and she soon after went down the valley with a basket on her head,
and a long knife in her hand. Then Hastings said it was time that we moved, for there was but
one woman in the house, and we could easily overpower her and get what we wanted; still there
was a great risk, as she might give the alarm, and we should have to escape in the day-time,
and might be seen and taken prisoners again. However, as it was our only chance, we resolved
to go down to the farmhouse very cautiously, and be all ready to seize any opportunity. We
crept down the hill, and gained the fence, which was at the back of the farmhouse, without
being discovered: we remained there for about a quarter of an hour, when, to our great joy,
we observed the farmer's wife go out of the house, leading a child in each hand; apparently
she was going to visit one of her neighbours, for she went in the direction of one of the other
farms. As soon as she was a hundred yards off, Hastings crept softly through the fence, and
entered the farmhouse by the back-door; he came out again, and made a sign for us to come in.
We found him already in possession of a rifle and a musket, which had been hanging over the
fire-place, and we soon handed down the powder-horns and ammunition pouches, which were hung
up at a different part of the room, away from the fire-place.

"Having gained these, Hastings set me to watch at the front door, lest anybody should return,
while Romer and he looked out for something else in the way of provisions. We got possession
of three hams, and a large loaf of bread as big as a small washing-tub. With these articles
we made our way safe back to our retreat. We then looked round, and could see nobody in any
direction, so we presumed that we were not discovered. As there was a sort of ravine full of
rocks dividing the hill, which we were obliged to pass before we could get into the valley,
unless we went down close to the farmhouse, we agreed that it would be better at once to cross
it during the day-time, so that we should get that difficulty over, and, at the same time,
be further from the farmhouse. We did so; and found a very secure hiding-place, where we lay
down, waiting for the sun to set before we started on our journey into the interior. I think
I had better leave off now, William, as it is getting late."

Chapter XXXVII

The fishpond was commenced the next morning. Ready, Mr. Seagrave, and William went down together
to the beach, and, after much examination, chose a spot about one hundred yards from the turtle-pond
as most eligible for the purpose; the water being shallow, so that at the part farthest from
the shore there would not be more than three feet.

"Now, sir," said Ready, "this is a very simple job; all we have to do is to collect small rocks
and stones, pile them up wall-fashion inside, and with a slope outside, so as to break the
force of the waves when the water is a little rough; of course, the water will find its way
through the stones, and will be constantly changed. It's very true, that we can at most times
catch fish when we want them, but it is not always that we can spare the time, so it's just
as well to have always a certain quantity at hand, to take out at a moment's warning; and we
can, of course, catch them and put them in here when we have nothing else to do. Juno will
be able to come down and take them out with a spear, when we are away and she wants something
for dinner."

"But there are few stones about here, Ready; we shall have to fetch them a long way," said William.

"Well, then, William, let us get the wheels down here, and then we can carry a quantity at a time."

"But how shall we carry them, Ready?"

"We will sling a tub on the axle; I will go up and get that ready and bring it down; in the
meantime, you and Mr. Seagrave can collect all the stones which are near at hand."

Ready soon returned with the wheels, and the tub slung with rope on the axle, and by that means
they found that they could collect the stones very fast; Mr. Seagrave and William bringing
them, and Ready in the water, building up the wall.

"We have quite forgot another job which we must put in hand, sir," observed Ready; "but the
fish-pond reminds me of it."

"What is that, Ready?"

"A bathing-place for the children, and indeed for us all; we shall want it when the hot weather
comes on, but we will put it off till then. I can tell you, sir, that although I don't mind
building this wall in the shallow water, I shall be very careful when the water is up to my
knees, for you don't know how bold the sharks are in these latitudes. When I was at St. Helena,
not very long ago, we had a melancholy proof of it."

"Tell us the story, Ready."

"Well, two soldiers were standing on the rocks at St. Helena; the rocks were out of the water,
but the swell just broke over them. Two sharks swam up to them, and one of them, with a blow
of his tail, turning round the same way, tripped one of them into the water, which was very
deep. His comrade was very much frightened, and ran to the barracks to tell the story. About
a week afterwards, a schooner was in Sandy Bay, on the other side of the island, and the people
seeing a very large shark under the stern, put out a hook with a piece of pork, and caught
him; they opened him, and found inside of him, to their horror, the whole of the body of the
soldier, except the legs below the knees: the monster had swallowed him whole, with the exception
of his legs, which it had nipped off when it closed its jaws."

"I really had no idea that they were so bold, Ready."

"It is a fact, I assure you; and therefore we cannot be too careful how we go into the water:
you saw how soon the poor pig was despatched."

"I wonder how the pigs get on, Ready," said William.

"I dare say they have littered by this time, sir; they have no want of food."

"But can they eat the cocoa-nuts?"

"Not the old ones, but they can the young ones, which are constantly dropping from the trees,
and then there's plenty of roots for them. If we stay long here we shall soon have good sport
hunting them; but we must be very careful; for although they were tame pigs when we brought
them on shore, they will be wild and very savage in a very short time."

"How must we hunt them?" said Mr. Seagrave.

"Why, sir, with the dogs, and then shoot them. I am glad that Vixen will have pups soon; we
shall want more dogs."

"Shall we not have more mouths than we can find food for?"

"Never fear that, sir, as long as we have the sea to fish in. Dogs live very well upon fish,
even if it is raw."

"We shall have some lambs soon, Ready, shall we not?"

"Yes, sir, I expect very soon. I wish we had more food for the animals: they are put rather
hard to it just now; but next year, if we find more food on the island, we must keep the grass
near home, to make hay and stack it for the winter time - or the rainy season rather, for there
is no winter in these latitudes. I'm pretty sure we shall find some clear land on the south
of the island, for the cocoa-nut grove does not extend so close to the water on that side as
it does on the north."

"I do so long to go on our exploring party," said William.

"We must wait a little," replied Ready; "but I don't know whether you will go; we must not
all three go at once, and leave Mrs. Seagrave alone."

"No," replied Mr. Seagrave, "that would not be fair; either you or I must remain, William."

William made no reply, but it was evident that he was annoyed at the idea of not being of the
party. They worked very hard that day, and the walls rose fast out of the water.

After supper, Ready continued his narrative. "We remained concealed until it was dark, and
then Hastings and Romer, each with a musket on his shoulders and a ham at his back; and I,
being the smallest, with the rifle and the great loaf of bread, set off on our journey. Our
intention was to travel north, as we knew that was the road leading from the colony; but Hastings
had decided that we should first go to the eastward, so as to make what we sailors call a circumbendibus,
which would keep us out of the general track. We passed through the deep sands of False Bay,
and after that gradually ascended, getting among brushwood and young trees; but we saw no signs
of cultivation, nor did we pass one house after we had left False Bay astern of us. About twelve
o'clock we were very much fatigued, and longed for a drink of water, but we did not find any,
although the moon shone as bright as day. We distinctly heard, however, what we did not much
like, the howling and cries of the wild beasts which increased as we went on; still we did
not see any, and that was our comfort. At last we were so tired that we all sat down on the
ledge of a rock. We dared not go to sleep, so we remained there till daylight, listening to
the howling of the animals. We none of us spoke, and I presume that Hastings' and Romer's thoughts
were the same as my own, which were, that I would have given a great deal to find myself safe
and sound again within the prison walls. However, daylight came at last; the wild beasts did
not prowl any more; we walked on till we found a stream of water, where we sat down and took
our breakfast, after which our courage revived, and we talked and laughed as we walked on,
just as we had done before. We now began to ascend the mountains, which Hastings said must
be the Black Mountains that the soldiers had talked to us about. They were very desolate; and
when night came on we collected brushwood, and cut down branches with our knives, that we might
make a fire, not only to warm ourselves, but to scare away the wild beasts, whose howling had
already commenced. We lighted our fire and ate our supper; the loaf was half gone, and the
hams had been well cut into - we knew, therefore, that very soon we should have to trust to
our guns for procuring food. As soon as we had finished our meal, we lay down by the fire,
with our muskets loaded close to us, and our ammunition placed out of danger. We were so tired
that we were soon fast asleep. It had been agreed that Romer should keep the first watch, and
Hastings the middle, and I the morning; but Romer fell asleep, and the consequence was, that
the fire was not kept up. It was about midnight that I was awakened by something breathing
hard in my face, and just as I could recall my senses and open my eyes, I found myself lifted
up by my waistband, and the teeth of some animal pinching my flesh. I tried to catch at my
musket, but I put out my wrong hand, and laid hold of a still lighted brand out of the fire,
which I darted into the animal's face; it let me drop directly, and ran away."

"What a providential escape!" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Yes, it was, ma'am; the animal was a hyena. Fortunately they are a very cowardly sort of beast;
still, had it not been for the lighted stick, it would have carried me off, for I was very
small then, and it lifted me up as if I was a feather in its mouth. The shout I gave woke Hastings,
who seized his musket and fired. I was very much frightened, as you may suppose. As for Romer,
he never woke till we pushed him hard, he was so completely knocked up. This affair, of course,
made us more cautious, and afterwards we lighted two fires, and slept between them, one always
remaining on the watch. For a week we travelled on, and as soon as we were over the mountains,
we turned our heads to the northward. Our provisions were all gone, and we were one day without
any; but we killed an antelope called a spring-bock, which gave us provisions for three or
four days: there was no want of game after we had descended into the plain. I forgot to mention,
however, a narrow escape we had, just before we had left an extensive forest on the side of
the mountain. We had walked till past noon, and were very much tired; we decided upon taking
our dinner under a large tree, and we threw ourselves down in the shade. Hastings was lying
on his back, with his eyes looking upwards, when he perceived on the lower branch of the tree
a panther, which lay along it, his green eyes fixed upon us, and ready to spring; he seized
his musket, and fired it without taking aim, for there was no time; but the ball entered the
stomach of the animal, and, as it appeared, divided its back-bone. Down came the beast, within
three or four feet of where we lay, with a loud roar, and immediately crouched to spring upon
Romer; but it could not, for the back-bone being broken, it had not any power in its hinder
quarters, so it raised up its fore quarters, and then dropped down again. I never saw such
rage and fury in an animal in my life. At first we were too much frightened to fire; but, perceiving
that the beast could not spring, Hastings snatched the musket from Romer and shot it through
the head.

"We were now obliged to hunt for our livelihood, and we became bolder than ever. Our clothes
were all in rags; but we had plenty of powder and ammunition; there were hundreds and hundreds
of antelopes and gnus in the plain - indeed, sometimes it was impossible to count them. But
this plentiful supply of game was the cause of our being in greater danger, for now, for the
first time, we heard the roar of the lions every night. We made large fires to keep them off,
but they often made us tremble when they came near to us."

"Did you ever meet with one in the day-time?" said William.

"Yes, sir; we often saw them, but they never attacked us, and we were too much afraid to fire
at them. Once we met one face to face. We had killed an antelope called a hartebeest, and,
with our muskets on our shoulders, were running to secure it. Just as we came up to the spot,
we beard a roar, and found ourselves not ten yards from a lion, who was lying on the top of
the beast we had killed, his eyes flashing fire at us, and half raising himself, as if ready
for a spring. We all took to our heels as fast as we could. I never looked back till I was
out of breath: but the lion was content with our running away, and did not take the trouble
to follow us. Well, sir, we had been travelling, we really hardly knew where, but certainly
in a northerly direction, for three weeks, and were quite worn out: we now all agreed that
we had done a very foolish thing, and would gladly have gone back again. For my part, I declare
that I was willing to lie down and die, if I could have so done, and I became quite indifferent
to the roaring of the lions, and felt as if I should be glad if one would have made a meal
of me. At length, one morning, we fell in with a party of natives. They were of the Karroo
tribe, as they told us by pointing to themselves, and saying, `Karroos', and then they pointed
to us, and said `Dutch'. We shot game, and gave it to them, which pleased them very much, and
they remained with us for five or six days. We tried by signs to inquire of them, if there
were any Dutch settlement about there; and they understood us, and said that there was, in
a direction which they pointed out to us, to the north-east. We offered them a present if they
would show us the way. Two of the men agreed to go with us; the rest of the tribe, with the
women and children, went southward. The next day we arrived at a Dutch settlement of three
or four farmhouses, called Graaff Reinet; but I must leave off now, for it is past bed-time."

Chapter XXXVIII

The construction of the fish-pond proceeded rapidly, and on the third day it was nearly complete.
As soon as all the walls were finished, Ready threw out sand and shingle, so as to make the
part next to the beach nearly as deep as the other; so that there might be sufficient water
to prevent the gulls and man-of-war birds from darting down, and striking the fish. While Ready
was thus employed, Mr. Seagrave and William collected more rocks, so as to divide the pond
into four parts, at the same time allowing a communication between each part. These inside
walls, as well as the outside, were made of sufficient width to walk upon; by which means they
would have all the fish within reach of the spear, in case they wished to take them out. The
day after the pond was completed the weather changed. The rain poured down with great force,
but it was not accompanied with such terrific thunder and lightning, nor were the storms of
so long continuance, as at the commencement of the rainy season. In the intervals of fine weather
they caught a great many fish, which they put into the pond, so that it was well stocked. But
a circumstance occurred, which was the occasion of great alarm to them all; which was, that
one evening William was taken with a shivering, and complained very much of a pain in his head.
Ready had promised to continue his narrative on that evening, but William was too ill to sit
up. He was put into bed, and the next morning he was in a violent fever. Mr. Seagrave was much
alarmed, as the symptoms were worse every hour; and Ready, who had sat up with him during the
night, called Mr. Seagrave out of the house, and said, "This is a bad case, sir: William was
working yesterday with his hat off, and I fear that he has been struck by the sun."

The poor boy was for many days in great danger; and the cheerful house was now one of gloom
and silence. How fervent were now the morning and evening prayers; how often during the day
did his parents offer up a petition to heaven for their dear boy's recovery. The weather became
finer every day, and it was almost impossible to keep Tommy quiet: Juno went out with him and
Albert every morning, and kept them with her while she cooked; and, fortunately, Vixen had
some young ones, and when Juno could no longer amuse them, she brought them two of the puppies
to play with. As for the quiet, meek little Caroline, she would remain during the whole day
holding her mother's hand, and watching her brother, or working with her needle by the side
of his bed.

Ready, who could not be idle, had taken the hammer and cold chisel to make the salt-pan, at
which he worked during those portions of the day in which his services were not required indoors;
and as he sat chipping away the rock, his thoughts were ever upon William, for he dearly loved
the boy for his amiable disposition and his cleverness; and many a time during the day would
he stop his work, and the tears would run down his cheeks as he offered up his petition to
the Almighty that the boy might be spared to his afflicted parents. And those prayers were
heard, for on the ninth day William was pronounced by Ready and Mr. Seagrave to have much less
fever, and shortly afterwards it left him altogether; but he was so weak that he could not
raise himself in his bed for two or three days; and it was not till more than a fortnight after
the fever had left him that he could go out of the house. The joy that was expressed by them
all when the change took place may be imagined: nor were the thanksgivings less fervent than
had been the prayers.

During his convalescence, as there was nothing else to do, Mr. Seagrave and Ready, who now
went gladly to their work, determined, as the salt-pan was finished, that they would make a
bathing-place. Juno came to their assistance, and was very useful in assisting to drag the
wheels which brought the rocks and stones; and Tommy was also brought down, that he might be
out of the way while Mrs. Seagrave and Caroline watched the invalid. By the time that William
was able to go out of the house, the bathing-place was finished, and there was no longer any
fear of the sharks. William came down to the beach with his mother, and looked at the work
which had been done; he was much pleased with it, and said, "Now, Ready, we have finished everything
at home for the present; all we have to do is to explore the island, and to go to the cove
and examine our collection from the wreck."

"Very true, William; and the weather has been so fine, that I think we may venture upon one
or the other in a few days more; but not till you are stronger."

"I shall soon be strong again, Ready."

"I have no doubt of it, William; and we have good reason to thank God, for we could ill spare you."

"It's a long while since you have gone on with your story, Ready," said William, after they
had taken their supper; "I wish you would do so now, as I am sure I shall not be tired."

"With pleasure, William," replied Ready; "but can you remember where I left off, for my memory
is none of the best?"

"Oh, yes; if you recollect, you had just arrived at a Dutch farmer's house, in company with
the savages, at a place called Graaff Reinet, I think."

"Well then, the Dutch farmer came out when he saw us coming, and asked us who we were. We told
him that we were English prisoners, and that we wished to give ourselves up to the authorities.
He took away our arms and ammunition, and said that he was the authority in that part, which
was true enough; and then he said, `You'll not run away without arms and ammunition, that's
certain. As for sending you to the Cape, that I may not be able to do for months; so if you
wish to be fed well, you must work well while you're here.' We replied, that we should be very
glad to make ourselves useful, and then he sent us some dinner by a Hottentot girl. But we
soon found out that we had to deal with an ill-tempered, brutal fellow; and that he gave us
plenty of hard work, but by no means plenty of food. He would not trust us with guns, so the
Hottentots went out with the cattle, but he gave us plenty of work to do about the house; and
at last he treated us very cruelly. When he was short of provisions for the Hottentots and
other slaves, of whom he bad a good many, he would go out with the other farmers who lived
near him, and shoot quaggas for them to eat. Nobody but a Hottentot could live upon such flesh."

"What is quagga?"

"A wild ass, partly covered with stripes, but not so much as the zebra; a pretty animal to
look at, but the flesh is very bad. At last he would give us nothing to eat but quaggas, the
same as the Hottentots, while he and his family - for he had a wife and five children - lived
upon mutton and the flesh of the antelope, which is very excellent eating. We asked him to
allow us a gun to procure better food, and he kicked Romer so unmercifully, that he could not
work for two days afterwards. Our lives became quite a burden to us; we were employed all day
on the farm, and every day he was more brutal towards us. At last we agreed that we would stand
it no longer, and one evening Hastings told him so. This put him into a great rage, and he
called two of the slaves, and ordered them to tie him to the waggon wheel, swearing that he
would cut every bit of skin off his body, and he went into his house to get his whip. The slaves
had hold of Hastings, and were tying him up, for they dared not disobey their master, when
he said to us, `If I am flogged this way, it will be all over with us. Now's your time; run
back behind the house, and when he comes out with the whip, do you go in and seize the muskets,
which are always ready loaded. Hold him at bay till I get clear, and then we will get away
somehow or other. You must do it, for I am sure he will flog me till I am dead, and he will
shoot you, as runaway prisoners, as he did his two Hottentots the other day.' As Romer and
I thought this very probable, we did as Hastings told us; and when the Dutchman had gone towards
him where he was tied up, about fifty yards from the house, we went in. The farmer's wife was
in bed, having just had an addition to her family, and the children we cared not for. We seized
two muskets and a large knife, and came out just as the Dutchman had struck the first blow
with the rhinoceros whip, which was so severe, that it took away poor Hastings' breath. We
went up; he turned round and saw us: we levelled our muskets at him, and he stopped. `Another
blow, and we'll shoot you,' cried Romer. `Yes,' cried I; `we are only boys, but you've Englishmen
to deal with.' When we came up, Romer kept his piece levelled at the Dutchman, while I passed
him, and with the knife cut the thongs which bound Hastings. The Dutchman turned pale and did
not speak, he was so frightened, and the slaves ran away. As soon as Hastings was free, he
seized a large wooden mallet, used for driving in stakes, and struck the Dutchman down to the
earth, crying out, `That for flogging an Englishman, you rascal!'

"While the man lay senseless or dead - I didn't know which at the time - we tied him to the
waggon wheels, and returning to the house, seized some ammunition and other articles which
might be useful. We then went to the stables, and took the three best horses which the Dutchman
had, put some corn in a sack for each of them, took some cord for halters, mounted, and rode
away as fast as we could. As we knew that we should be pursued, we first galloped away as if
we were going eastward to the Cape; and then, as soon as we were on ground which would not
show the tracks of our horses' hoofs, we turned round to the northward, in the direction of
the Bushman country. It was dark soon after we had altered our course; but we travelled all
night, and although we heard the roaring of the lions at a distance, we met with no accident.
At daylight we rested our horses, and gave them some corn, and then sat down to eat some of
the provision we had brought with us."

"How long were you with the farmer at Graaff Reinet?"

"Nearly eight months, sir; and during that time we could not only speak Dutch, but we could
make ourselves understood by the Hottentots and other natives. While we were eating we held
a consultation how we should proceed. We were aware that the Dutchmen would shoot us if they
came up with us, and that they would come out in strong force against us; and we were afraid
that we had killed the man, and if so, they would hang us as soon as we got to the Cape; so
we were at a great loss to know how to act. At last we decided that we would cross the country
of the Bushmen, and get to the sea-side, to the northward of the Cape. We determined that it
would be better to travel at night, as there would be less fear of the wild beasts, or of being
seen; so we went fast asleep for many hours. Towards the evening, we found water for the horses,
and then we fed them again, and proceeded on our journey. I won't tell what passed every day
for a fortnight, by which time we had pretty well killed our horses, and we were compelled
to stop among a tribe of Gorraguas, a very mild, inoffensive people, who supplied us with milk,
and treated us very kindly. We had some adventures, nevertheless. One day as we were passing
by a tuft of small trees, a rhinoceros charged upon my horse, which very narrowly escaped by
wheeling short round and getting behind him; the beast then made off without meddling with
us any more. Every day we used to shoot some animal or other, for provision: sometimes it was
a gnu, something between an antelope and a bull; at other times it was one of the antelope kind.

"Well, we stayed for three weeks with these people, and gave our horses time to refresh themselves;
and then we set off again, keeping more towards the coast as we went southward, for the Gorraguas
told us that there was a fierce native tribe, called Kaffers, to the northward, who would certainly
kill us if we went there. The fact is, we did not know what to do. We had left the Cape without
any exact idea where we should go to, like foolish boys as we were, and we became more entangled
with difficulties every day. At last we decided that it would be better to find our way back
to the Cape, and deliver ourselves up as prisoners, for we were tired out with fatigue and
constant danger. All that we were afraid of was that we had killed the Dutch farmer at Graaff
Reinet, who had treated us so brutally; but Hastings said he did not care; that was his business,
and he would take his chance: so when we bade adieu to the Gorraguas, we turned our horses'
heads to the south-east, so as to make the sea and go to the southward at the same time.

"I have now to mention a most melancholy event which occurred. Two days after we had recommenced
our travels, in passing through some high grass, we stumbled on a lion, which was devouring
a gnu. Romer, who happened to be some ten yards foremost of the three, was so alarmed that
he fired at the animal, which we had agreed never to do, as it was folly to enrage so powerful
a beast, when our party was so small. The lion was slightly wounded; he gave a roar that might
have been heard for a mile, sprang upon Romer, and with one blow of his paw knocked him off
the saddle into the bushes. Our horses, which were frightened, wheeled round and fled, for
the animal was evidently about to attack us. As it was, he did make one bound in our direction;
we could not pull up until we had gone half a mile; and when we did, we saw the lion had torn
down the horse which Romer had ridden, and was dragging away the carcass to the right at a
sort of a canter, without any apparent effort on his part. We waited till he was well off,
and then rode back to the spot where Romer had fallen: we soon found him, but he was quite
dead; the blow with the lion's paw had fractured his skull.

"I ought to have said that the Gorraguas told us not to travel by night, but by day; and we
had done so in consequence of their advice. I believe it was very good advice, notwithstanding
this unfortunate accident, for we found that when we had travelled all night the lions had
more than once followed us the whole time; and indeed I have often thought since that we were
altogether indebted to his mercy who ordereth all things, both in heaven and earth, that we
escaped so well as we did. Three days after poor Romer's death we first saw the wide ocean
again. We kept near the coast, but we soon found that we could not obtain the supply of game,
or fuel for our fires at night, so well as we could in the interior, and we agreed to get away
from the coast again. We had a dreary plain to pass over, and we were quite faint for want
of food - for we had been without any for nearly two days - when we came upon an ostrich. Hastings
put his horse to his speed, but it was of no use - the ostrich ran much faster than the horse
could. I remained behind, and, to my great joy, discovered his nest, with thirteen large eggs
in it. Hastings soon came back, with his horse panting and out of wind. We sat down, lighted
a fire, and roasted two of the eggs: we made a good dinner of them, and having put four more
on our saddle-bows, we continued our journey. At last, one forenoon, we saw the Table Mountain,
and were as glad to see it as if we had seen the white cliffs of Old England. We pushed on
our horses with the hopes of being once more comfortably in prison before night; when, as we
neared the bay, we noticed that English colours were flying on board of the vessels in the
road. This surprised us very much; but soon after that we met an English soldier, who told
us that the Cape had been taken by our forces more than six months ago. This was a joyful surprise,
as you may suppose. We rode into the town, and reported ourselves to the main guard; the governor
sent for us, heard our story, and sent us to the admiral, who took us on board of his own ship."

Chapter XXXIX

The next morning, as there was no particular work on hand, Ready and Mr. Seagrave took the
lines to add to the stock of the fish-pond. As the weather was fine and cool, William accompanied
them, that he might have the benefit of the fresh air. As they passed the garden, they observed
that the seeds sown had already sprung up an inch or two above the ground, and that, apparently
none of them had missed. While Ready and Mr. Seagrave were fishing, and William sitting near
them, William said to his father--

"Many of the islands near us are inhabited; are they not, papa?"

"Yes, but not those very near us, I believe. At all events, I never heard any voyagers mention
having seen inhabitants on the isles near which we suppose the one we are on to be."

"What sort of people are the islanders in these seas?"

"They are various. The New Zealanders are the most advanced in civilization. The natives of
Van Diemen's Land and Australia are some portions of them of a very degraded class - indeed,
little better than the beasts of the field."

"I have seen them," said Ready; "and I think I can mention a people, not very numerous indeed,
who are still more like the beasts of the field. I saw them once; and, at first, thought they
were animals, and not human beings."

"Indeed, Ready; where may that be?"

"In the Great Andaman Isles, at the mouth of the Bay of Bengal. I once anchored in distress
in Port Cornwallis, and the morning after we anchored, we saw some black things going upon
all fours under the trees that came down to the water's edge. We got the telescope, and perceived
then that they were men and women, for they stood upright."

"Did you ever come into contact with them?"

"No, sir, I did not; but I met, at Calcutta, a soldier who had; for at one time the East India
Company intended making a settlement on the island, and sent some troops there. He said that
they caught two of them; that they were not more than four feet high, excessively stupid and
shy; they had no houses or huts to live in, and all that they did was to pile up some bushes
to keep the wind off."

"Had they any arms?"

"Yes, sir, they had bows and arrows; but so miserably made, and so small, that they could not
kill anything but very small birds."

"Where did the people come from who inhabited these islands, papa?"

"That is difficult to say, William; but it is supposed that they have become inhabited in much
the same way as this our island has been - that is, by people in canoes or boats driven out
to sea, and saving their lives by effecting a landing, as we have done."

"I believe that's the truth," replied Ready; "I heard say that the Andaman Isles were supposed
to have been first inhabited by a slaver full of negroes, who were wrecked on the coast in
a typhoon."

"What is a typhoon, Ready?"

"It is much the same as a hurricane, William; it comes on in India at the change of the monsoons."

"But what are monsoons?"

"Winds that blow regular from one quarter so many months during the year, and then change round
and blow from another just as long."

"And what are the trade-winds, which I heard poor Captain Osborn talking about after we left
Madeira?"

"The trade-winds blow on the equator, and several degrees north and south of it, from the east
to the west, following the course of the sun."

"Is it the sun which produces these winds?"

"Yes, the extreme heat of the sun between the tropics rarefies the air as the earth turns round,
and the trade-winds are produced by the rushing in of the less heated air."

"Yes, William; and the trade-winds produce what they call the Gulf Stream," observed Ready.

"How is that? I have heard it spoken of, papa."

"The winds, constantly following the sun across the Atlantic Ocean, and blowing from east to
west, have great effect upon the sea, which is forced up into the Gulf of Mexico (where it
is stopped by the shores of America), so that it is many feet higher in the Gulf than in the
eastern part of the Atlantic. This accumulation of water must of course find a vent somewhere,
and it does in what is called the Gulf Stream, by which the waters are poured out, running
very strong to the northward, along the shores of America, and then eastward, passing not far
from Newfoundland, until its strength is spent somewhere to the northward of the Azores."

"The Gulf Stream, William," said Ready, "is always several degrees warmer than the sea in general,
which is, they say, owing to its waters remaining in the Gulf of Mexico so long, where the
heat of the sun is so great."

"What do you mean by the land and sea breezes in the West Indies, and other hot climates, papa?"

"It is the wind first blowing off from the shore, and then blowing from the sea towards the
shore, during certain hours of the day, which it does regularly every twenty-four hours. This
is also the effect of the heat of the sun. The sea breeze commences in the morning, and in
the afternoon it dies away, when the land breeze commences, which lasts till midnight."

"There are latitudes close to the trade-winds," said Ready, "where the wind is not certain,
where ships have been becalmed for weeks; the crews have exhausted the water on board, and
they have suffered dreadfully. We call them the Horse latitudes - why, I do not know. But it
is time for us to leave off, and for Master William to go into the house."

They returned home, and after supper Ready went on with his narrative.

"I left off at the time that I was sent on board of the man-of-war, and I was put down on the
books as a supernumerary boy. I was on board of her for nearly four years, and we were sent
about from port to port, and from clime to clime, until I grew a strong, tall lad, and was
put into the mizen-top. I found it very comfortable. I did my duty, and the consequence was,
I never was punished; for a man may serve on board of a man-of-war without fear of being punished,
if he only does his duty, and the duty is not very hard either; not like on board of the merchant
vessels, where there are so few hands - there it is hard work. Of course, there are some captains
who command men-of-war who are harsh and severe; but it was my good fortune to be with a very
mild and steady captain, who was very sorry when he was obliged to punish the men, although
he would not overlook any improper conduct. The only thing which was a source of constant unhappiness
to me was, that I could not get to England again, and see my mother. I had written two or three
letters, but never had an answer; and at last I became so impatient that I determined to run
away the very first opportunity which might offer. We were then stationed in the West Indies,
and I had very often consultations with Hastings on the subject, for he was quite as anxious
to get away as I was; and we had agreed that we would start off together the very first opportunity.
At last we anchored in Port Royal, Jamaica, and there was a large convoy of West India ships,
laden with sugar, about to sail immediately. We knew that if we could get on board of one,
they would secrete us until the time of sailing, for they were short-handed enough, the men-of-war
having pressed every man they could lay their hands upon. There was but one chance, and that
was by swimming on board of one of the vessels during the night-time, and that was easy enough,
as they were anchored not a hundred yards from our own ship. What we were afraid of was the
sharks, which were so plentiful in the harbour. However, the night before the convoy was to
sail we made up our minds that we would run the risk, for we were so impatient to escape that
we did not care for anything. It was in the middle watch - I recollect it, and shall recollect
it all my life, as if it were last night - that we lowered ourselves down very softly from
the bows of the ship, and as soon as we were in the water we struck out for one of the West
Indiamen close to us. The sentry at the gangway saw the light in the water made by our swimming
through it, and he hailed, of course; we gave no answer, but swam as fast as we could; for
after he had hailed we heard a bustle, and we knew that the officer of the watch was manning
a boat to send after us. I had just caught hold of the cable of the West Indiaman, and was
about to climb up by it, for I was a few yards before Hastings, when I heard a loud shriek,
and, turning round, perceived a shark plunging down with Hastings in his jaws. I was so frightened,
that for a short time I could not move: at last I recovered myself, and began to climb up by
the cable as fast as I could. I was just in time, for another shark made a rush at me; and
although I was clear out of the water more than two feet, he sprung up and just caught my shoe
by the heel, which he took down with him. Fear gave me strength, and in a second or two afterwards
I was up at the hawse-holes, and the men on board, who had been looking over the bows, and
had witnessed poor Hastings' death, helped me on board, and hurried me down below, for the
boat from our ship was now nearly alongside. When the officer of the boat came on board, they
told him they had perceived us both in the water, close to their vessel, and that the sharks
had taken us down. As the shriek of Hastings was heard by the people in the boat, the officer
believed that it was the case, and returned to the ship. I heard the drum beat to quarters
on board of the man-of-war, that they might ascertain who were the two men who had attempted
to swim away, and a few minutes afterwards they beat the retreat, having put down D. D. against
my name on the books, as well as against that of poor Hastings."

"What does D. D. mean?"

"D. stands for discharged from the service; D. D. stands for dead," replied Ready; "and it
was only through the mercy of Providence that I was not so."

"It was a miraculous escape indeed," observed Mr. Seagrave.

"Yes, indeed, sir; I can hardly describe my sensations for some hours afterwards. I tried to
sleep, but could not - I was in agony. The moment I slumbered, I thought the shark had hold
of me, and I would start up and shriek; and then I said my prayers and tried to go to sleep
again, but it was of no use. The captain of the West Indiaman was afraid that my shrieks would
be heard, and he sent me down a tumbler of rum to drink off; this composed me, and at last
I fell into a sound sleep. When I awoke, I found that the ship was under weigh and with all
canvas set, surrounded by more than a hundred other vessels; the men-of-war who took charge
of the convoy, firing guns and making signals incessantly. It was a glorious sight, and we
were bound for Old England. I felt so happy, that I thought I would risk the jaws of another
shark to have regained my liberty, and the chance of being once more on shore in my own country,
and able to go to Newcastle and see my poor mother."

"I am afraid that your miraculous escape did you very little good, Ready," observed Mrs. Seagrave,
"if you got over it so soon."

"Indeed, madam, it was not so; that was only the feeling which the first sight of the vessels
under weigh for England produced upon me. I can honestly say that I was a better and more serious
person. The very next night, when I was in my hammock, I prayed very fervently; and there happened
to be a very good old Scotchman on board, the second mate, who talked very seriously to me,
and pointed out how wonderful had been my preservation, and I felt it. It was he who first
read the Bible with me, and made me understand it, and, I may say, become fond of it. I did
my duty on our passage home as a seaman before the mast, and the captain was pleased with me.
The ship I was in was bound to Glasgow, and we parted company with the convoy at North Foreland,
and arrived safe in port. The captain took me to the owners, who paid me fifteen guineas for
my services during the voyage home; and as soon as I received the money, I set off for Newcastle
as fast as I could. I had taken a place on the outside of the coach, and I entered into conversation
with a gentleman who sat next to me. I soon found out that he belonged to Newcastle, and I
first inquired if Mr. Masterman, the ship-builder, was still alive. He told me that he had
been dead about three months. `And to whom did he leave his money?' I asked, `for he was very
rich, and had no kin.' `He had no relations,' replied the gentleman, `and he left all his money
to build an hospital and almshouses. He had a partner in his business latterly, and he left
the yard and all the stores to him, I believe, because he did not know whom to leave it to.
There was a lad whom I knew for certain he intended to have adopted and to have made his heir
- a lad of the name of Ready; but he ran away to sea, and has never been heard of since. It
is supposed that he was lost in a prize, for he was traced so far. Foolish boy that he was.
He might now have been a man of fortune.'

"`Very foolish indeed,' replied I.

"`Yes; but he has harmed more than himself. His poor mother, who doted upon him, as soon as
she heard that he was lost, pined away by degrees, and--'

"`You don't mean to say that she is dead?' interrupted I, seizing the gentleman by the arm.

"`Yes,' replied he, looking at me with surprise; `she died last year of a broken heart.'

"I fell back on the luggage behind me, and should have fallen off the coach if the gentleman
had not held me. He called to the coachman to pull up the horses, and they took me down, and
put me inside; and as the coach rolled on, I cried as if my heart would break."

Ready appeared so much affected, that Mr. Seagrave proposed that he should leave off his history
for the present.

"Thank you, sir, it will be better; for I feel my old eyes dim with tears, even now. It's a
dreadful thing in after-life to reflect upon, that your foolish conduct has hastened the death
of a most kind mother; but so it was, William, and I give you the truth for your advantage."

Chapter XL

A few mornings afterwards, Juno came in before breakfast with six eggs in her apron, which
she had found in the hen-house.

"Look, Missy Seagrave - fowls lay eggs - soon have plenty - plenty for Master William - make
him well again - and plenty for chickens by and by."

"You haven't taken them all out of the nests, Juno; have you?"

"No; leave one in each nest for hen to see."

"`Well, then, we will keep them for William, and I hope, as you say, they will make him strong
again."

"I am getting quite strong now, mother," replied William; "I think it would be better to leave
the eggs for the hens to sit upon."

"No, no, William; your health is of more consequence than having early chickens."

For a few days Mr. Seagrave and Ready were employed at the garden clearing away the weeds,
which had begun to sprout up along with the seeds which had been sown; during which time William
recovered very fast. The two first days, Juno brought in three or four eggs regularly; but
on the third day there were none to be found. On the fourth day the hens appeared also not
to have laid, much to the surprise of Mrs. Seagrave; as when hens commence laying eggs they
usually continue. On the fifth morning, when they sat down to breakfast, Master Tommy did not
make his appearance, and Mrs. Seagrave asked where he was.

"I suspect, madam," said Old Ready, laughing, "that Tommy will not come either to his breakfast
or his dinner to-day."

"What can you mean, Ready?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Why, madam, I will tell you. I thought it very odd that there were no eggs, and I thought
it probable that the hens might have laid astray; so I went about yesterday evening to search.
I could not find any eggs, but I found the egg-shells, hid under some cocoa-nut leaves; and
I argued, that if an animal, supposing there was any on the island, had taken the eggs, it
would not have been so careful to hide the egg-shells. He also found that most hard-working
horses were sick or ailing, as most hard-working men and women are; that perfectly sound horses
are as rare as perfectly sound human beings, and are apt, like the latter, to be vicious.

He
began to have a quick eye for the characteristics of horses, and could walk round a proffered
animal and scan his points with the best. "What," he would ask, of a given beast, "makes him
let his lower lip hang down in that imbecile manner?"

"Oh, he's got a parrot-mouth. Some folks like 'em." Here the dealer would pull open the creature's
flabby lips, and discover a beak like that of a polyp; and the cleansing process on the grass or
trousers would take place.

Of another. "What makes him trot in that spread-out, squatty way, behind?" he demanded, after
the usual tour of the block.

"He travels wide. Horse men prefer that."

They preferred any ugliness or awkwardness in a horse to the opposite grace or charm, and all
that my friend could urge, in meek withdrawal from negotiation, was
that he was not of an educated taste.

In the course of long talks, which frequently took the form of warnings, he became wise in
the tricks practiced by all dealers except his interlocutor. One of these, a device for restoring
youth to an animal nearing the dangerous limit of eleven, struck him as peculiarly ingenious.
You pierce the forehead, and blow into it with a quill; this gives an agreeable fullness, and
erects the drooping ears in a spirited and mettlesome manner, so that a horse coming eleven will
look for a time as if he were coming five.

After a thorough course of the volunteer dealers, and after haunting the Chevaliers' stables
for several weeks, my friend found that not money alone was needed to buy a horse. The affair
began to wear a sinister aspect.

He had an uneasy fear that in several cases he had refused the very horse he wanted with the
aplomb he had acquired in dismissing undesirable beasts. The fact was he knew less about horses
than when he began to buy, while he had indefinitely enlarged his idle knowledge of men, of
their fatuity and hollowness. He learned that men whom he had always envied their brilliant
omniscience in regard to horses, as they drove him out behind their
dashing trotters, were quite ignorant and helpless in the art of buying;
they always got somebody else to buy their horses for them. "Find
a man you can trust," they said, "and then put yourself in his hands.
And never trust anybody about the health of a horse. Take him to a
veterinary surgeon, and have him go all over him."

My friend grew
sardonic; then he grew melancholy and haggard. There was something
very strange in the fact that a person unattainted of crime, and not
morally disabled in any known way, could not take his money and buy
such a horse as he wanted with it. I then went to the house
my mother used to live in. I knew that she was not there; yet I was disappointed and annoyed
when I heard merry laughter within. I looked in, for the door was open; in the corner where
my mother used to sit, there was a mangle, and two women busily at work; others were ironing
at a large table; and when they cried out to me, `What do you want?' and laughed at me, I turned
away in disgust, and went to a neighbouring cottage, the inmates of which had been very intimate
with my mother. I found the wife at home, but she did not know me; and I told her who I was.
She had attended my mother during her illness, till the day of her death; and she told me all
I wished to know. It was some little relief to my mind to hear that my poor mother could not
have lived, as she had an incurable cancer; but at the same time the woman told me that I was
ever in her thoughts, and that my name was the last word on her lips. She also said that Mr.
Masterman had been very kind to my mother, and that she had wanted nothing. I then asked her
to show me where my mother had been buried. She put on her bonnet, and led me to the grave,
and then, at my request, she left me. I seated myself down by the mound of turf which covered
her, and long and bitterly did I weep her loss and pray for forgiveness.

"It was quite dark when I left the spot and went back to the cottage of the kind woman who
had attended my mother. I conversed with her and her husband till late, and then, as they offered
me a bed, I remained with them that night. Next morning I went to keep my appointment with
the gentleman whom I had met in the coach: I found by the brass plate on the door that he was
a lawyer. He desired me to sit down, and then he closed the door carefully, and having asked
me many questions, to ascertain if I was really Masterman Ready, he said he was the person
employed at Mr. Masterman's death, and that he had found a paper which was of great consequence,
as it proved that the insurance of the vessel which had belonged to my father and Mr. Masterman,
and which had been lost, had not been made on Mr. Masterman's share only, but upon my father's
as well, and that Mr. Masterman had defrauded my mother. He said he had found the paper in
a secret drawer some time after Mr. Masterman's death, and that my mother being dead, and I
being supposed to be dead, he did not see any use in making known so disagreeable a circumstance;
but that, now I had re-appeared, it was his duty so to do, and that he would arrange the matter
for me, if I pleased, with the corporation of the town, to whom all Mr. Masterman's property
had been left in trust to build an hospital and almshouses. He said that the insurance on the
vessel was three thousand pounds, and that one-third of the vessel belonged to my father, so
that a thousand pounds were due to him, which the interest for so many years would increase
to above two thousand pounds. This was good news for me, and you may suppose I readily agreed
to all he proposed. He set to work at once, and having called together the mayor and corporation
of the town, and proved the document, they immediately agreed that I was entitled to the money,
and that it should be paid to me without any contest. Thus you see, Master William, was a new
temptation thrown in my way."

"How do you mean a temptation? It surely was very fortunate, Ready," said William.

"Yes, William, it was, as people say, fortunate, according to the ideas of the world; every
one congratulated me, and I was myself so inflated with my good fortune, that I forgot all
the promises of amendment, all the vows of leading a good life, which I made over my poor mother's
grave. Now do you perceive why I called it a temptation, Master William?"

"My dear child," said Mr. Seagrave, "riches and prosperity in this world prove often the greatest
of temptations; it is adversity that chastens and amends us, and which draws us to God."

"As soon as the money was in my own hands," continued Ready, "I began to squander it away in
all manner of folly. Fortunately, I had not received it more than ten days, when the Scotch
second mate came like a guardian angel to save me. As soon as I had made known to him what
had taken place, he reasoned with me, pointed out to me that I had an opportunity of establishing
myself for life, and proposed that I should purchase a part of a vessel, on condition that
I was captain of her. I liked this idea very much, and being convinced that I had been making
a fool of myself, I resolved to take his advice; but one thing only restrained me: I was still
very young, not more than twenty years old; and although I could navigate at one time, I had
latterly paid no attention. I told Sanders this, and he replied, that if I would take him as
my first mate, that difficulty would be got over, as he could navigate well, and that I could
learn to do so in the first voyage; so all was arranged.

"Fortunately, I had not spent above one hundred pounds of the money. I set off for Glasgow
in company with Sanders, and he busied himself very hard in looking about for a vessel that
would suit. At last, he found that there was one ready for launching, which, in consequence
of the failure of the house for which it was built, was to be sold. He made inquiries, and
having found who was likely to purchase her - that it was a very safe and respectable firm
- he made a proposal for me that I should take one-fourth share of her, and command her. As
Sanders was very respectable, and well known to be a steady man, his recommendation was attended
to so far that the parties wished to see and speak to me. They were satisfied with me, young
as I was, and the bargain was made. I paid down my two thousand pounds for my share, and as
soon as the vessel was launched, was very busy with Sanders, whom I had chosen as first mate,
in fitting her out. The house which had purchased her with me was a West India firm, and the
ship was of course intended for the West India trade. I had two or three hundred pounds left,
after I had paid my share of the vessel, and this I employed in purchasing a venture on my
own account, and providing nautical instruments, &c. I also fitted myself out, for you see,
William, although Sanders had persuaded me to be rational, I was still puffed up with pride
at the idea of being captain of my own ship; it was too great a rise for one who had just before
been a lad in the mizen-top of a man-of-war. I dressed myself very smart - wore white shirts,
and rings on my fingers. Indeed, as captain and part owner of a fine vessel, I was considered
as somebody, and was often invited to the table of the other owners of the vessel. I was well
off, for my pay was ten pounds a month, independent of what my own venture might produce, and
my quarter-share of the profits of the vessel. This may be considered as the most prosperous
portion of my life; and so, if you please, we will leave off here for to-night, for I may as
well tell you at once that it did not last very long."

Chapter XLI

For several days after, they were employed in clearing away the stumps of the cocoa-nut trees
in the winding path to the storehouse; and as soon as that work was finished, Ready put up
a lightning-conductor at the side of the storehouse, like the one which he had put up near
to the cottage. They had now got through all the work that they had arranged to do during the
rainy season. The ewes had lambed, but both the sheep and the goats began to suffer for want
of pasture. For a week they had no rain, and the sun burst out very powerfully; and Ready was
of opinion that the rainy season was now over. William had become quite strong again, and he
was very impatient that they should commence the survey of the island. After a great deal of
consultation, it was at last settled, that Ready and William should make the first survey to
the southward, and then return and report what they had discovered. This was decided upon on
the Saturday evening, and on the Monday morning they were to start. The knapsacks were got
ready, and well filled with boiled salt pork, and flat cakes of bread. They were each to have
a musket and ammunition, and a blanket was folded up to carry on the shoulders, that they might
sleep on it at night. Ready did not forget his compass, or the small axes, for them to blaze
the trees as they went through the wood.

The whole of Saturday was occupied in making their preparations. After supper, Ready said,
"Now, William, before we start on our travels, I think I may as well wind up my history. I
haven't a great deal more to tell, as my good fortune did not last long; and after my remaining
so long in a French prison, my life was one continued chapter of from bad to worse. Our ship
was soon ready, and we sailed with convoy for Barbadoes. Sanders proved a good navigator, and
from him, before we arrived at Barbadoes, I gained all the knowledge which I required to enable
me to command and navigate my vessel. Sanders attempted to renew our serious conversation,
but my property had made me vain; and now that I felt I could do without his assistance, I
not only kept him at a distance, but assumed the superior. This was a very ungrateful return
for his kindness to me; but it is too often the case in this world. Sanders was very much annoyed,
and on our arrival at Barbadoes, he told me that it was his intention to quit the vessel. I
replied very haughtily, that he might do as he pleased; the fact is, I was anxious to get rid
of him, merely because I was under obligations to him. Well, sir, Sanders left me, and I felt
quite happy at his departure. My ship was soon with a full cargo of sugar on board of her,
and we waited for convoy to England. When at Barbadoes, I had an opportunity to buy four brass
guns, which I mounted on deck, and had a good supply of ammunition on board. I was very proud
of my vessel, as she had proved in the voyage out to be a very fast sailer: indeed, she sailed
better than some of the men-of-war which convoyed us; and now that I had guns on board, I considered
myself quite safe from any of the enemies' privateers. While we were waiting for convoy, which
was not expected for a fortnight, it blew a very heavy gale, and my ship, as well as others,
dragged their anchors, and were driven out of Carlisle Bay. We were obliged to make sail to
beat into the bay again, it still blowing very fresh. What with being tired waiting so long
for convoy, and the knowledge that arriving before the other West Indiamen would be very advantageous,
I made up my mind that, instead of beating up into the bay again, I would run for England without
protection, trusting to the fast sailing of my vessel and the guns which I had on board. I
forgot at the time that the insurance on the vessel was made in England as `sailing with convoy',
and that my sailing without would render the insurance void, if any misfortune occurred. Well,
sir, I made sail for England, and for three weeks everything went on well. We saw very few
vessels, and those which did chase us could not come up with us; but as we were running with
a fair wind up channel, and I had made sure of being in port before night, a French privateer
hove in sight and gave chase. We were obliged to haul our wind, and it blowing very fast, we
carried away our main-top mast. This accident was fatal; the privateer came alongside of us
and laid us by the board, and that night I was in a French prison, and, I may say, a pauper;
for the insurance of the vessel was void, from my having sailed without convoy. I felt that
I had no one to thank but myself for the unfortunate position I was in; at all events, I was
severely punished, for I remained a prisoner for nearly six years. I contrived to escape with
three or four others; we suffered dreadfully, and at last arrived in England, in a Swedish
vessel, without money, or even clothes that would keep out the weather. Of course, I had nothing
to do but to look out for a berth on board of a ship, and I tried for that of second mate,
but without success; I was too ragged and looked too miserable; so I determined, as I was starving,
to go before the mast. There was a fine vessel in the port; I went on board to offer myself;
the mate went down to the captain, who came on deck, and who should he be but Sanders? I hoped
that he would not remember me, but he did immediately, and held out his hand. I never did feel
so ashamed in my life as I did then. Sanders perceived it, and asked me down into the cabin.
I then told him all that had happened, and he appeared to forget that I had behaved so ill
to him; he offered me a berth on board, and money in advance to fit me out. But if he would
not remember my conduct, I could not forget it, and I told him so, and begged his forgiveness.
Well, sir, that good man, as long as he lived, was my friend. I became his second mate before
he died, and we were again very intimate. My misfortunes had humbled me, and I once more read
the Bible with him; and I have, I trust, done so ever since. When he died, I continued second
mate for some time, and then was displaced. Since that, I have always been as a common seaman
on board of different vessels; but I have been well treated and respected, and I may add, I
have not been unhappy, for I felt that property would have only led me into follies, and have
made me forget, that in this world we are to live so as to prepare ourselves for another. Now,
William, you have the history of Masterman Ready; and I hope that there are portions of it
which may prove useful to you. To-morrow we must be off betimes, and as we are all to breakfast
early together, why, I think the sooner we go to bed the better."

"Very true," replied Mr. Seagrave, "William, dear, bring me the Bible."

Chapter XLII

They were all up early the next morning, and breakfasted at an early hour. The knapsacks and
guns, and the other requisites for the journey, were all prepared; William and Ready rose from
the table, and taking an affectionate leave of Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave, they started on their
journey. The sun was shining brilliantly, and the weather had become warm; the ocean in the
distance gleamed brightly, as its waters danced, and the cocoa-nut trees moved their branches
gracefully to the breeze. They set off in high spirits, and having called the two shepherd
dogs, and driven back Vixen, who would have joined the party, they passed the storehouse, and
ascending the hill on the other side, they got their hatchets ready to blaze the trees; and
Ready having set his course by his pocket compass, they were fairly on their way. For some
time they continued to cut the bark of the trees with their hatchets, without speaking, and
then Ready stopped again to look at his compass.

"I think the wood is thicker here than ever, Ready," observed William.

"Yes, sir, it is; but I suspect we are now in the thickest part of it, right in the middle
of the island; however, we shall soon see. We must keep a little more away to the southward.
We had better get on as fast as we can. We shall have less work by and by, and then we can
talk better."

For half-an-hour they continued their way through the wood, and, as Ready had observed, the
trees became more distant from each other; still, however, they could not see anything before
them but the stems of the cocoa-nuts. It was hard work, chopping the trees every second, and
their foreheads were moist with the exertion.

"I think we had better pull up for a few minutes, William; you will be tired."

"I have not been so used to exercise, Ready, and therefore I feel it more," replied William,
wiping his face with his handkerchief. "I should like to stop a few minutes. How long do you
think it will be before we are out of the wood?"

"Not half-an-hour more, sir, I should think; even before that, perhaps."

"What do you expect to find, Ready?"

"That's a difficult question to answer. I can tell you what I hope to find, which is, a good
space of clear ground between the beach and the wood, where we may pasture our sheep and goats;
and perhaps we may find some other trees besides cocoa-nuts: at present, you know, we have
seen only them and the castor-oil beans, that Tommy took such a dose of. You see, William,
there is no saying what new seeds may have been brought here by birds, or by the winds and waves."

"But will those seeds grow?"

"Yes, William; I have been told that seeds may remain hundreds of years under-ground, and come
up afterwards when exposed to the heat."

They continued their way, and had not walked for more than a quarter of an hour, when William
cried out, "I see the blue sky, Ready; we shall soon be out; and glad shall I be, for my arm
aches with chopping."

"I dare say it does, sir. I am just as glad as you are, for I'm tired of marking the trees;
however, we must continue to mark, or we shall not find our way back when we want it."

In ten minutes more they were clear of the cocoa-nut grove, and found themselves among brushwood
higher than their heads; so that they could not see how far they were from the shore.

"Well," said William, throwing down his hatchet, "I'm glad that's over; now let us sit down
a little before we go any further."

"I'm of your opinion, sir," replied Ready, sitting down by the side of William; "I feel more
tired to-day than I did when we first went through the wood, after we set off from the cove.
I suppose it's the weather. Come back, dogs; lie down."

"The weather is very fine, Ready."

"Yes, now it is; but I meant to have said that the rainy season is very trying to the health,
and I suppose I have not recovered from it yet. You have had a regular fever, and, of course,
do not feel strong; but a man may have no fever, and yet his health suffer a great deal from
it. I am an old man, William, and feel these things now."

"I think that before we go on, Ready, we had better have our dinner; that will do us good."

"Well, we will take an early dinner, and we shall get rid of one bottle of water, at all events;
indeed, I think that, as we must go back by the same way we came, we may as well leave our
knapsacks and everything but our guns under these trees; I dare say we shall sleep here too,
for I told Mr. Seagrave positively not to expect us back to-night. I did not like to say so
before your mother, she is so anxious about you."

They opened their knapsacks, and made their meal, the two dogs coming in for their share; after
which they again started on their discoveries. For about ten minutes they continued to force
their way through the thick and high bushes, till at last they broke out clear of them, and
then looked around them for a short time without speaking. The sea was about half a mile distant,
and the intervening land was clear, with fresh blades of grass just bursting out of the earth,
composing a fine piece of pasture of at least fifty acres, here and there broken with small
patches of trees and brushwood; there was no sandy beach, but the rocks rose from the sea about
twenty to thirty feet high, and were in one or two places covered with something which looked
as white as snow.

"Well, Ready," said William, "there will be no want of pasture for our flock, even if it increases
to ten times its number."

"No," replied Ready, "we are very fortunate, and have great reason to be thankful; this is
exactly what we required; and now let us go on a little, and examine these patches of wood,
and see what they are. I see a bright green leaf out there, which, if my eyes do not fail me,
I have seen many a time before." When they arrived at the clump of trees which Ready had pointed
out, he said, "Yes, I was right. Look there, this is the banana; it is just bursting out now,
and will soon be ten feet high, and bearing fruit which is excellent eating; besides which
the stem is capital fodder for the beasts."

"Here is a plant I never saw before," said William, pulling off a piece of it, and showing
it to Ready.

"But I have, William. It is what they call the bird's-eye pepper; they make Cayenne pepper
out of it. Look, the pods are just formed; it will be useful to us in cooking, as we have no
pepper left. You see, William, we must have some birds on the island; at least it is most probable,
for all the seeds of these plants and trees must have been brought here by them. The banana
and the pepper are the food of many birds. What a quantity of bananas are springing up in this
spot; there will be a little forest of them in a few weeks."

"What is that rough-looking sort of shrub out there, Ready?"

"I can't see so well as you, William, so let us walk up to it. Oh, I know it now; it is what
they call the prickly pear in the West Indies. I am very glad to have found that, for it will
be very useful to us."

"Is it good eating, Ready?"

"Not particularly; and the little spikes run into your fingers, and are very difficult to get
rid of; but it is not bad by way of a change. No, the use it will be to us is to hedge in our
garden, and protect it from the animals; it makes a capital fence, and grows very fast, and
without trouble. Now let us go on to that patch of trees, and see what they are."

"What is this plant, Ready?"

"I don't know, William."

"Then I think I had better make a collection of all those you don't know, and take them back
to father; he is a good botanist."

William pulled a branch of the plant off, and carried it with him. On their arrival at the
next patch of trees, Ready looked at them steadfastly for some time.

"I ought to know that tree," said he. "I have often seen it in hot countries. Yes, it's the guava."

"What! is it the fruit they make guava jelly of?" said William.

"Yes, the very same."

"Let us now walk in the direction of those five or six trees," said William; "and from there
down to the rocks; I want to find out how it is that they are so white."

"Be it so, if you wish," replied Ready.

"Why, Ready, what noise is that? Hark! such a chattering, it must be monkeys."

"No, they are not monkeys; but I'll tell you what they are, although I cannot see them; they
are parrots - I know their noise well. You see, William, it's not very likely that monkeys
should get here, but birds can, and it is the birds that we have to thank for the bananas and
guavas, and other fruits we may find here."

As soon as they came under the trees, there was a great rioting and fluttering, and then away
flew, screaming as loud as they could, a flock of about three hundred parrots, their beautiful
green and blue feathers glistening in the beams of the sun.

"I told you so; well, we'll have some capital pies out of them, William."

"Pies! do they make good pies, Ready?"

"Yes, excellent; and very often have I had a good dinner from one in the West Indies, and in
South America. Stop, let us come a little this way; I see a leaf which I should like to examine."

"The ground is very swampy just here, Ready; is it not?"

"Yes; there's plenty of water below, I don't doubt. So much the better for the animals; we
must dig some pools when they come here.

"Oh! I thought I was not wrong. Look! this is the best thing I have found yet - we now need
not care so much about potatoes."

"Why, what are they, Ready?"

"Yams, which they use instead of potatoes in the West Indies. Indeed, potatoes do not remain
potatoes long, when planted in hot climates."

"How do you mean, Ready?"

"They turn into what they call sweet-potatoes, after one or two crops: yams are better things,
in my opinion."

At this moment the dogs dashed among the broad yam leaves, and commenced baying; there was
a great rustling and snorting.

"What's that?" cried William, who had been stooping down to examine the yam plant, and who
was startled at the noise.

Ready laughed heartily. "It isn't the first time that they've made you jump, William."

"Why, it's our pigs, isn't it?" replied William.

"To be sure; they're in the yam patch, very busy feeding on them, I'll be bound."

Ready gave a shout, and a grunting and rushing were heard among the broad leaves, and, very
soon, out rushed, instead of the six, about thirty pigs large and small; who, snorting and
twisting their tails, galloped away at a great rate, until they gained the cocoa-nut grove.

"How wild they are, Ready!" said William.

"Yes, and they'll be wilder every day; but we must fence these yams from them, or we shall
get none ourselves."

"But they'll beat down the fence before it grows up."

"We must pale it with cocoa-nut palings, and plant the prickly pears outside. Now, we'll go
down to the sea-side."

As they neared the rocks, which were bare for about fifty yards from the water's edge, Ready
said, "I can tell you now what those white patches on the rocks are, William; they are the
places where the sea-birds come to every year to make their nests, and bring up their young.
They always come to the same place every year, if they are not disturbed." They soon arrived
at the spot, and found it white with the feathers of birds, mixed up with dirt.

"I see no nests, Ready, nor the remains of any."

"No, they do not make any nests, further than scratching a round hole, about half an inch deep,
in the soil, and there they lay their eggs, sitting quite close to one another; they will soon
be here, and begin to lay, and then we will come and take the eggs, if we want any, for they
are not bad eating."

"Why, Ready, what a quantity of good things we have found out already! This has been a very
fortunate expedition of ours."

"Yes, it has; and we may thank God for his goodness, who thus provides for us so plentifully
in the wilderness."

"Do you know, Ready, I cannot help thinking that we ought to have built our house here."

"Not so, William; we have not the pure water, recollect, and we have not the advantages of
the sandy beach, where we have our turtle- and fish-pond. No; we may feed our stock here; we
may gather the fruit, taking our share of it with the poor birds; we may get our yams, and
every other good provided for us; but our house and home must be where it is now."

"You are right, Ready; but it will be a long walk."

"Not when we are accustomed to it, and have made a beaten path; besides, we may bring the boat
round, perhaps."

Then they walked along the sea-side for about a quarter of a mile, until they came to where
the rocks were not so high, and there they discovered a little basin, completely formed in
the rocks, with a narrow entrance.

"See, William, what a nice little harbour for our boat! we may here load it with yams and take
it round to the bay, provided we can find an entrance through the reefs on the southern side
of it, which we have not looked for yet, because we have not required it."

"Yes, Ready - it is, indeed, a nice, smooth little place for the boat. What is that thing on
the bottom, there?" said William, pointing in the direction.

"That is a sea crawfish, quite as good eating as a lobster. I wonder if I could make a lobster-pot;
we should catch plenty, and very good they are."

"And what are those little rough things on the rock?"

"They are a very nice little sort of oyster; not like those we have in England, but much better
- they are so delicate."

"Why, Ready, we have two more good things for our table, again," replied William; "how rich
we shall be!"

"Yes; but we have to catch them, recollect: there is nothing to be had in this world without
labour."

"Ready," said William, "we have good three hours' daylight; suppose we go back and tell what
we have seen: my mother will be so glad to see us."

"I agree with you, William. We have done well for one day; and may safely go back again, and
remain for another week. There are no fruits at present, and all I care about are the yams;
I should like to protect them from the pigs. But let us go home and talk the matter over with
Mr. Seagrave."

They found out the spot where they had left their knapsacks and hatchets, and again took their
path through the cocoa-nut trees, following the blaze which they had made in the morning. One
hour before sunset they arrived at the house, where they found Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave sitting
outside, and Juno standing on the beach with the two children, who were amusing themselves
with picking up the shells which were strewed about. William gave a very clear account of all
they had seen, and showed his father the specimens of the plants which he had collected.

"This," said Mr. Seagrave, "is a well-known plant; and I wonder Ready did not recognize it;
it is hemp."

"I never saw it except in the shape of rope," replied Ready. "I know the seed well enough."

"Well, if we require it, I can tell you how to dress it," replied Mr. Seagrave. "Now, William,
what is the next?"

"This odd-looking, rough thing."

"That's the egg-plant: it bears fruit of a blue colour. I am told they eat it in the hot countries."

"Yes, sir, they do; they fry it with pepper and salt; they call it bringal. I think it must
be that."

"I do not doubt but you are right," replied Mr. Seagrave. "Why, William, you should know this."

"It is like the grape-vine."

"Yes, and it is so; it is the wild grape; we shall eat them by and bye."

"I have only one more, papa: what is this?"

"You don't know it, because it has sprung up so high, William; but it is the common mustard
plant, - what we use in England, and is sold as mustard and cress. I think you have now made
a famous day's work of it; and we have much to thank God for." 

"Not when you force me to stay on the fence," I told him. He seemed to realize, as he sat there slowly
moving his head up and down, that no further advance was to be made along that line. So he
took a deep breath and sat up.

"Something will have to be done about getting a new teacher for that school," he said with an appositeness
which was only too painfully apparent.

"I've already spoken to two of the trustees," I told him. "They're getting a teacher from the
Peg. It's to be a man this time."

Instead of meeting my eye, he merely remarked: "That'll be better for the boy!"

"In what way?" I inquired.

"Because I don't think too much petticoat is good for any boy," responded my lord and master.

"Big
or little!" I couldn't help amending, in spite of all my good intentions.

Dinky-Dunk ignored the thrust, though it plainly took an effort.

"There are times when even kindness can be a sort of cruelty," he
patiently and somewhat platitudinously pursued.

"Then I wish somebody would ill-treat me along that line," I interjected. And this time he smiled,
though it was only for a moment.

"Supposing we stick to the children," he suggested.

"Of course," I agreed.

"And since you've brought the matter up I can't help telling you that I always felt that my love
for my children is the one redeeming thing in my life."

"Thanks," said my husband, with a wince.

"Please don't misunderstand me. I'm merely trying to say that a mother's love for her children
has to be one of the strongest and holiest things in this hard old world of ours. And it seems
only natural to me that a woman should consider her children first, and plan for them, and make
sacrifices for them, and fight for them if she has to."

"It's so natural, in fact," remarked Dinky-Dunk, "that it has been observed in even the Bengal
tigress."

"It is my turn to thank you," I acknowledged, after giving his statement a moment or two of
thought.

"But we're getting away from the point again," proclaimed my husband.

"I've been trying to tell you that children are like rabbits: It's only fit and proper they
should be cared for, but they can't thrive, and they can't even live, if they're handled too
much."

"I haven't observed any alarming absence of health in my children," I found the courage to say.
But a tightness gathered about my heart, for I could sniff what was coming.

"They may be all right, as far as that goes," persisted their lordly parent. "But what I say is, too much
cuddling and mollycoddling isn't good for that boy of yours, or anybody
else's boy."

And he proceeded to explain that my Dinkie was an ordinary, every-day, normal child and should
be accepted and treated as such or we'd have a temperamental little
bounder on our hands.

I knew that my boy wasn't abnormal. But I knew, on the other hand, that he was an exceptionally
impressionable and sensitive child. And I couldn't be sorry for that, for if there's anything
I abhor in this world it's torpor.

And whatever he may have been, nothing could shake me in my firm
conviction that a child's own mother is the best person to watch over
his growth and shape his character.

"But what is all this leading up to?" I asked, steeling myself for the unwelcome.

"Simply to what I've already told you on several occasions," was my
husband's answer.

"That it's about time this boy of ours was bundled off to a boarding-school."

I sat back, trying to picture my home and my life without Dinkie.

But it was unbearable. It was unthinkable.

"I shall never agree to that," I quietly retorted.

"Why?" asked my husband, with a note of triumph which I resented.

"For one thing, because he is still a child, because he is too young," I contended, knowing that
I could never agree with Dinky-Dunk in his thoroughly English ideas
of education even while I remembered how he had once said that the
greatness of England depended on her public-schools, such as Harrow
and Eton and Rugby and Winchester, and that she had been the best
colonizer in the world because her boys had been taken young and taught
not to overvalue home ties, had been made manlier by getting off with
their own kind instead of remaining hitched to an apron-string.

"And you prefer keeping him stuck out here on the prairie?" demanded Dinky-Dunk.

"The prairie has been good enough for his parents, this last seven
or eight years," I contended.

"It hasn't been good enough for me," my husband cried out with quite
unlooked-for passion.

"And I've about had my fill of it!"

"Where would you prefer going?" I asked, trying to speak as quietly as I could.

"That's something I'm going to find out as soon as the chance comes," he retorted with a slow
and embittered emphasis which didn't add any to my peace of mind.

"Then why cross our bridges," I suggested, "until we come to them?"

"But you're not looking for bridges," he challenged. "You don't want to see anything beyond
living like Doukhobours out here on the edge of Nowhere and remembering
that you've got your precious offspring here under your wing and wondering
how many bushels of Number-One-Hard it will take to buy your Dinkie
a riding pinto!"

"Aren't you rather tired to-night?" I asked with all the patience I could command.

"Yes, and I'm talking about the thing that makes me tired. For you know as well as I do that you've
made that boy of yours a sort of anesthetic. You put him on like a nose-cap, and forget the world.
He's about all you remember to think about. Why, when you look at the clock, nowadays, it
isn't ten minutes to twelve. It's always Dinkie minutes to Dink. When you read a book you're
only reading about what your Dinkie might have done or what your Dinkie is some day to write.
When you picture the Prime Minister it's merely your Dinkie grown big, laying down the law to
a House of Parliament made up of other Dinkies, rows and rows of 'em. When the sun shines you're
wondering whether it's warm enough for your Dinkie to walk in, and
when the snow begins to melt you're wondering whether it's soft enough
for the beloved Dinkie to mold into snowballs.

When you see a girl you at once get busy speculating over whether or not she'll ever be beautiful
enough for your Dinkie, and when one of the Crowned Heads of Europe announces the alliance
of its youngest princess you fall to pondering if Dinkie wouldn't
have made her a better husband.

And when the flowers come out in your window-box you wonder if they're
fair enough to bloom beside your Dinkie.

I don't suppose I ever made a haystack that you didn't wonder whether it wasn't going to be a grand
place for Dinkie to slide down. And when Dinkie draws a goggle-eyed man on his scribbler you
see Michael Angelo totter and Titian turn in his grave. And when Dinkie writes a composition
of thirty crooked lines on the landing of Hengist you feel that fate
did Hume a mean trick in letting him pass away before inspecting that
final word in historical record.

And heaven's just a row of Dinkies with little gold harps tucked under their wings. And you
think you're breathing air, but all you're breathing is Dinkies, millions and millions of etherealized
Dinkies.

And when you read about the famine in China you inevitably and adroitly hitch the death of seven
thousand Chinks in Yangchow on to the interests of your immortal offspring. And I suppose Rome
really came into being for the one ultimate end that an immortal young Dinkie might possess his full
degree of Dinkiness and the glory that was Greece must have been merely the tom-toms tuning
up for the finished dance of our Dinkie's grandeur. Day and night, it's Dinkie, just Dinkie!"

I waited until he was through. I waited, heavy of heart, until his foolish fires of revolt
had burned themselves out. And it didn't seem to add to his satisfaction to find that I could
inspect him with a quiet and slightly commiserative eye.

"You are accusing me," I finally told him, "of something I'm proud of.

And I'm afraid I'll always be guilty of caring for my own son."

He turned on me with a sort of heavy triumph.

"Well, it's something that you'll jolly well pay the piper for, some day," he announced.

"What do you mean by that?" I demanded.

"I mean that nothing much is ever gained by letting the maternal instinct
run over.

And that's exactly what you're doing.

You're trying to tie Dinkie to your side, when you can no more tie
him up than you can tie up a sunbeam.

You could keep him close enough to you, of course, when he was small. But he's bound to grow
away from you as he gets bigger, just as I grew away from my mother and you once grew away from
yours.

It's a natural law, and there's no use crocking your knees on it. The boy's got his own life
to live, and you can't live it for him. It won't be long, now, before you begin to notice those
quiet withdrawals, those slippings-back into his own shell of self-interest. And unless you realize
what it means, it's going to hurt. And unless you reckon on that in the way you order your life
you're not only going to be a very lonely old lady but you're going
to bump into a big hole where you thought the going was smoothest!"

I sat thinking this over, with a ton of lead where my heart should have been.

"I've already bumped into a big hole where I thought the going was smoothest," I finally observed.

My
husband looked at me and then looked away again.

"I was hoping we could fill that up and forget it," he ventured in
a valorously timid tone which made it hard, for reasons I couldn't
quite fathom, to keep my throat from tightening.

But I sat there, shaking my head from side to side.

"I've got to love something," I found myself protesting.

"And the children seem all that is left."

"How about me?" asked my husband, with his acidulated and slightly one-sided smile.

"You've changed, Dinky-Dunk," was all I could say.

"But some day," he contended, "you may wake up to the fact that I'm still a human being."

"I've wakened up to the fact that you're a different sort of human being than I had thought."

"Oh, we're all very much alike, once you get our number," asserted my husband.

"You mean men are," I amended.

"I mean that if men can't get a little warmth and color and sympathy
in the home-circle they're going to edge about until they find a substitute
for it, no matter how shoddy it may be," contended Dinky-Dunk.

"But isn't that a hard and bitter way of writing life down to one's own level?" I asked, trying
to swallow the choke that wouldn't stay down in my throat.

"Well, I can't see that we get much ahead by trying to sentimentalize
the situation," he said, with a gesture that seemed one of frustration.

We

sat staring at each other, and again I had the feeling of abysmal gulfs of space intervening
between us.

"Is that all you can say about it?" I asked, with a foolish little gulp I couldn't control.

"Isn't it enough?" demanded Dinky-Dunk.

And I knew that nothing was to be gained, that night, by the foolish
and futile clash of words.

Tuesday the Twenty-Third

I've been doing a good deal of thinking over what Dinky-Dunk said.

I have been trying to see things from his standpoint. By a sort of mental ju-jutsu I've even
been trying to justify what I can't quite understand in him. But it's no use. There's one bald,
hard fact I can't escape, no matter how I dig my old ostrich-beak
of instinct under the sands of self-deception.

There's one cold-blooded truth that will have to be faced. My husband is no longer in love
with me. Whatever else may have happened, I have lost my heart-hold on Duncan Argyll McKail.
I am still his wife, in the eyes of the law, and the mother of his children. We still live
together, and, from force of habit, if from nothing else, go through the familiar old rites
of daily communion.

He sits across the table from me when I eat, and talks casually enough
of the trivially momentous problems of the minute, or he reads in
his slippers before the fire while I do my sewing within a spool-toss
of him.

But a row of invisible assegais stand leveled between his heart and mine. A slow glacier of green-iced
indifferency shoulders in between us; and gone forever is the wild-flower aroma of youth, the
singing spirit of April, the mysterious light that touched our world with wonder. He is merely a
man, drawing on to middle age, and I am a woman, no longer young. Gone now are the spring
floods that once swept us together. Gone now is the flame of adoration that burned clean our altar
of daily intercourse and left us blind to the weaknesses we were too happy to remember. For there
was a time when we loved each other. I know that as well as Duncan does. But it died away,
that ghostly flame. It went out like a neglected fire. And blowing on dead ashes can never revive
the old-time glow.

"So they were married and lived happy ever afterward!" That is the familiar ending to the fairy-tales
I read over and over again to my Dinkie and Poppsy.

But they are fairy-tales.

For who lives happy ever afterward? First love chloroforms us, for a time, and we try to hug
to our bosoms the illusion that Heaven itself is only a sort of endless honeymoon presided over
by Lohengrin marches. But the anesthetic wears away and we find that life isn't a bed of roses
but a rough field that rewards us as we till it, with here and there the cornflower of happiness
laughing unexpectedly up at us out of our sober acres of sober wheat.

And often enough we don't know happiness when we see it. We assuredly find it least where we
look for it most. I can't even understand why we're equipped with
such a hunger for it.

But I find myself trending more and more to that cynic philosophy which defines happiness as the
absence of pain. The absence of pain--that is a lot to ask for, in this life!

I wonder if Dinky-Dunk is right in his implication that I am getting
hard?

There are times, I know, when I grate on him, when he would probably give anything to get away
from me. Yet here we are, linked together like two convicts. And I don't believe I'm as hard
as my husband accuses me of being. However macadamized they may have made life for me, there's
at least one soft spot in my heart, one garden under the walls of
granite.

And that's the spot which my two children fill, which my children keep green, which my children
keep holy.

It's them I think of, when I think of the future--when I should at
least be thinking a little of my grammar and remembering that the
verb "to be" takes the nominative, just as discontented husbands seem
to take the initiative!

That's why I can't quite find the courage to ask for freedom. I have seen enough of life to know
what the smash-up of a family means to its toddlers.

And I want my children to have a chance. They can't have that chance without at least two things.
One is the guardianship of home life, and the other is that curse
of modern times known as money.

We haven't prospered as we had hoped to, but heaven knows I've kept an eagle eye on that savings-account
of mine, in that absurdly new and resplendent red-brick bank in Buckhorn. Patiently I've fed it with
my butter and egg money, joyfully I've seen it grow with my meager Nitrate dividends, and grimly
I've made it bigger with every loose dollar I could lay my hands on.

There's no heroism in my going without things I may have thought I needed, just as there can
be little nobility in my sticking to a husband who no longer loves
me.

For it's not Chaddie McKail who counts now, but her chicks. And I'll
have to look for my reward through them, for I'm like Romanes' rat
now, too big to get into the bottle of cream, but wary enough to know
I can dine from a tail still small enough for insertion. I'm merely
a submerged prairie-hen with the best part of her life behind her.

But
it bothers me, what Duncan says about my always thinking of little
Dinkie first. And I'm afraid I do, though it seems neither right nor
fair. I suppose it's because he was my first-born--and having come
first in my life he must come first in my thoughts. I was made to
love somebody--and my husband doesn't seem to want me to love him.
So he has driven me to centering my thoughts on the child. I've got
to have something to warm up to. And any love I may lavish on this
prairie-chick of mine, who has to face life with the lack of so many
things, will not only be a help to the boy, but will be a help to
me, the part of Me that I'm sometimes so terribly afraid of.

Yet
I can't help wondering if Duncan has any excuses for claiming that
it's personal selfishness which prompts me to keep my boy close to
my side. And am I harming him, without knowing it, in keeping him
here under my wing? Schools are all right, in a way, but surely a
good mother can do as much in the molding of a boy's mind as a boarding-school
with a file of Ph.D.'s on its staff. But am I a good mother? And should
I trust myself, in a matter like this, to my own feelings? Men, in
so many things, are better judges than women. Yet it has just occurred
to me that all men do not think alike. I've been sitting back and
wondering what kindly old Peter would say about it. And I've decided
to write Peter and ask what he advises. He'll tell the truth, I know,
for Peter is as honest as the day is long....

I've just been up to
make sure the children were properly covered in bed. And it disturbed
me a little to find that without even thinking about it I went to
Dinkie first. It seemed like accidental corroboration of all that
Duncan has been saying. But I stood studying him as he lay there asleep.
It frightened me a little, to find him so big. If it's true, as Duncan
threatens, that time will tend to turn him away from me, it's something
that I'm going to fight tooth and nail. And I've seen no sign of it,
as yet. With every month and every year that's added to his age he
grows more companionable, more able to bridge the chasm between two
human souls. We have more interests in common, more things to talk
about. And day by day Dinkie is reaching up to my clumsily mature
way of looking at life. He can come to me with his problems, knowing
I'll always give him a hearing, just as he used to come to me with
his baby cuts and bruises, knowing they would be duly kissed and cared
for. Yet some day, I have just remembered, he may have problems that
can't be brought to me. But that day, please God, I shall defer as
long as possible. Already we have our own little secrets and private
compacts and understandings. I don't want my boy to be a mollycoddle.
But I want him to have his chance in the world. I want him to be somebody.
I can't reconcile myself to the thought of him growing up to wear
moose-mittens and shoe-packs and stretching barb-wire in blue-jeans
and riding a tractor across a prairie back-township. I refuse to picture
him getting bent and gray wringing a livelihood out of an over-cropped
ranch fourteen miles away from a post-office and a world away from
the things that make life most worth living. If he were an ordinary
boy, I might be led to think differently. But my Dinkie is not an
ordinary boy. There's a spark of the unusual, of the exceptional,
in that laddie. And I intend to fan that spark, whatever the cost
may be, until it breaks out into genius.

Sunday the Twenty-Eighth

I've
had scant time for introspection during the last five days, for Struthers
has been in bed with lumbago, and the weight of the housework reverted
to me. But Whinstane Sandy brought his precious bottle of Universal
Ointment in from the bunk-house, and while that fiery mixture warmed
her lame back, the thought of its origin probably warmed her lonely
heart. I have suddenly wakened up to the fact that Struthers is getting
on a bit. She is still the same efficient and self-obliterating mainstay
of the kitchen that she ever was, but she grows more "sot" in her
ways, more averse to any change in her daily routine, and more despairing
of ever finally and completely capturing that canny old Scotsman whom
we still so affectionately designate as Whinnie, in short for Whinstane
Sandy.

During this conversation the canoe had rapidly come towards the land. In a moment or two afterwards,
it passed through the surf and grounded on the beach. The two people in it had just strength
enough left to paddle through the surf, and then they dropped down in the bottom of the canoe,
quite exhausted.

"Let's drag the canoe higher up, William. Poor creatures! they are nearly dead."

While dragging it up, Ready observed that the occupants were both women: their faces were tattooed
all over; otherwise they were young, and might have been good-looking.

"Shall I run up and get something for them, Ready?"

"Do, William; ask Juno to give you some of whatever there is for breakfast; anything warm."

William soon returned with some thin oatmeal porridge, which Juno had been preparing for breakfast;
and a few spoonfuls being forced down the throats of the two natives they gradually revived.
William then left Ready, and went up to acquaint his father and mother with this unexpected event.

William soon returned with Mr. Seagrave, and as the women were now able to sit up, they hauled
up the canoe as far as they could, to prevent her being beat to pieces. They found nothing
in the canoe, except a piece of matting and the two paddles which had been used by the natives.

"You see, sir," said Ready, "it is very clear that these two poor women, having been left in
charge of the canoe, have been blown off from the shore of one of the islands to the south-east;
they must have been contending with the gale ever since the day before yesterday, and, as it
appears, without food or water. It's a mercy that they gained this island."

"It is so," replied Mr. Seagrave; "but to tell the truth, I am not over pleased at their arrival.
It proves what we were not sure of before, that we have very near neighbours, who may probably
pay us a very unwelcome visit."

"That may be, sir," replied Ready; "still these two poor creatures being thrown on shore here
does not make the matter worse, or the danger greater. Perhaps it may turn to our advantage;
for if these women learn to speak English before any other islanders visit us, they will interpret
for us, and be the means, perhaps, of saving our lives."

"Would their visit be so dangerous, then, Ready?"

"Why, sir, a savage is a savage, and, like a child, wishes to obtain whatever he sees; especially
he covets what he may turn to use, such as iron, &c. If they came, and we concealed a portion,
and gave up the remainder of our goods, we might escape; but still there is no trusting to
them, and I would infinitely prefer defending ourselves against numbers to trusting to their
mercy."

"But how can we defend ourselves against a multitude?"

"We must be prepared, sir: if we can fortify ourselves, with our muskets we would be more than
a match for hundreds."

Mr. Seagrave turned away. After a pause he said, "It is not very pleasant to be now talking
of defending ourselves against savages, when we hoped two days ago to be leaving the island.
Oh, that that brig would make its appearance again!"

"The wind is going down fast, sir," observed Ready; "it will be fine weather before the evening.
We may look out for her; at all events, for the next week I shall not give up all hopes."

"A whole week, Ready! Alas! how true it is, that hope deferred maketh the heart sick."

"It is a severe trial, Mr. Seagrave; but we must submit when we are chastened. We had better
get these poor creatures up to the house, and let them recover themselves."

Ready then beckoned to them to get on their feet, which they both did, although with some difficulty.
He then went in advance, making a sign for them to follow; they understood him, and made the
attempt, but were so weak, that they would have fallen if they had not been supported by Mr.
Seagrave and William.

It required a long time for them to arrive at the house. Mrs. Seagrave, who knew what had happened,
received them very kindly, and Juno had a mess ready, which she put before them. They ate a
little and then lay down, and were soon sound asleep.

"It is fortunate for us that they are women," observed Mr. Seagrave: "we should have had great
difficulty had they been men."

"Yes, sir," replied Ready; "but still we must not trust women too much at first, for they are
savages."

"Where shall we put them to-night, Ready?"

"Why, sir, I have been thinking about that. I wish we had a shed close to us; but as we have
not, we must let them sleep in the storehouse."

We must now pass over a space of fifteen days, in which there was nothing done. The expectation
of the vessel returning was still alive, although each day decreased these hopes. Every morning
Ready and William were at the beach with the telescope, and the whole of the day was passed
in surmises, hopes, and fears. In fact, the appearance of the vessel and the expectation of
leaving the island had completely overturned all the regularity and content of our island party.
No other subject was broached - not any of the work proposed was begun, as it was useless to
do anything if they were to leave the island. After the first week had passed, they felt that
every day their chances were more adverse, and at the end of the fortnight all hopes were very
unwillingly abandoned.

The Indian women had, in the meantime, recovered their fatigues, and appeared to be very mild
and tractable. Whatever they were able to do, they did cheerfully, and had already gained a
few words of English. The party to explore was again talked over, and arranged for the following
Monday, when a new misfortune fell on them, which disconcerted all their arrangements.

On the Saturday morning, when Ready, as usual, went his rounds, as he walked along the beach,
he perceived that the Indian canoe was missing. It had been hauled up clear of the water, so
that it could not have floated away. Ready's heart misgave him; he looked through his telescope
in the direction of the large island, and thought he could distinguish a speck on the water
at a great distance. As he was thus occupied, William came down to him.

"William," said Ready, "I fear those island women have escaped in their canoe. Run up, and
see if they are in the outhouse, or anywhere else, and let me know as soon as you can."

William in a few minutes returned, breathless, stating that the women were not to be found,
and that they had evidently carried away with them a quantity of the large nails and other
pieces of iron which were in the small kegs in the storehouse.

"This is bad, William; this is worse than the vessel not coming back."

"Why, we can do without them, Ready."

"Yes; but when they get back to their own people, and show them the iron they have brought
with them, and describe how much more there is to be had, depend upon it, we shall have a visit
from them in numbers, that they may obtain more. I ought to have known better than to leave
the canoe here. We must go and consult with Mr. Seagrave, for the sooner we begin to work now,
the better."

They communicated the intelligence to Mr. Seagrave when they were outside. He at once perceived
their danger, so they held a council, and came to the following resolutions:--

That it would be necessary that they should immediately stockade the storehouse, so as to render
it impossible for any one to get in; and that, as soon as the fortification was complete, the
storehouse should be turned into their dwelling-house; and such stores as could not be put
within the stockade should be removed to their present house, or concealed in the cocoa-nut grove.

It was decided that nothing should be begun on that day, Saturday; that Sunday should be spent
in devout prayer for help and encouragement from the Almighty, who would do towards them as
his wisdom should ordain; and that on Monday, with the blessing of God, they would recommence
their labour.

"I don't know why, but I feel more courage now that there is a prospect of danger, than I felt
when there was little or none," said Mrs. Seagrave.

"How little do we know what the day may bring forth!" exclaimed Mr. Seagrave. "How joyful were
our anticipations when the vessel hoisted her colours! we felt sure that we were to be taken
off the island. The same gale that drove the vessel away brought down to us the island women.
The fair weather after the gale, which we hoped would have brought back the vessel to our succour,
on the contrary enabled the women to escape in the canoe, and make known our existence to those
who may come to destroy us. How true it is that man plans in vain; and that it is only by the
Almighty will and pleasure that he can obtain his ends!"

Chapter XLV

But although they resolved as stated in the last chapter, nothing was done. Finally, one morning
at sunrise, as they were looking round with the telescope, close to the turtle-pond, Masterman
Ready said to Mr. Seagrave, "Indeed, sir, we must no longer remain in this state of idleness;
I have been thinking a great deal of our present position and prospects; as to the vessel coming
back, we must, at present, give up all hopes of it. I only wish that we were quite as sure
that we shall not have a visit from the savages: that is my great fear, and it really haunts
me; the idea of our being surprised some night, and Mrs. Seagrave and the dear children, perhaps,
murdered in their beds, is awful to reflect upon."

"God help us!" exclaimed Mr. Seagrave, covering up his face.

"God will help us, Mr. Seagrave, but at the same time it is necessary that we should help ourselves;
he will give his blessing to our exertions, but we cannot expect that miracles will be performed
for us; and if we remain as we now are, inactive, and taking no steps to meet the danger which
threatens us, we cannot expect the divine assistance. We have had a heavy shock, but it is
now time that we recover from it, and put our own shoulders to the wheel."

"I agree with you, Ready," replied William; "indeed I have been thinking the same thing for
many days past."

"We have all been thinking of it, I believe," said Mr. Seagrave; "I'm sure I have lain awake
night after night, considering our position and what we ought to do, but I have never been
able to come to any satisfactory resolution."

"No more have I till last night, Mr. Seagrave, but I think that I have now something to propose
which, perhaps, will meet with your approval," replied Ready; "so now, sir, suppose we hold
another council, and come to a decision."

"I am most willing, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave, sitting down upon a rock; "and as you are the
oldest, and moreover the best adviser of the three, we will first hear what you have to propose."

"Well then, Mr. Seagrave, it appears to me that it will not do to remain in the house, for
we may, as I have said, be surprised by the savages at any hour in the night, and we have no
means of defence against numbers."

"I feel that, and have felt it for some time," replied Mr. Seagrave. "What shall we do, then;
shall we return to the cove?"

"I should think not, sir," said Ready; "what I propose is this: we have made a discovery on
the south of the island, which is of great importance to us; not that I consider the fruit
and other plants of any great value, as they will only serve to increase our luxuries, if I
may so call them, during the summer season. One great advantage to us, is the feed which we
have found for our live stock, and the fodder for them during the rainy season; but principally,
the patch of yams, which will afford us food during the winter. They are of great importance
to us, and we cannot too soon protect them from the pigs, which will certainly root them all
up, if we do not prevent them. Now, sir, you know what we had arranged to do, but which we
have not done; I think the cocoa-nut rails will take too much time, and it will be sufficient
to make a ditch and hedge round the yams; but it will be very tedious if we are to go backwards
and forwards to do the work, and Mrs. Seagrave and the children will be left alone. I therefore
propose, as the weather is now set in fair, and will remain so for months, that we pitch our
tents on that part of the island, and remove the whole family there; we shall soon be very
comfortable, and at all events much safer there than if we remain here, without any defence,"

"It is an excellent plan, Ready; we shall, as you say, be removed from danger for the time,
and when there, we may consider what we had best do by and by."

"Yes, sir. Those women may not have gained the other island, it is true, for they had the wind
right against them for several days after they went away in the canoe, and, moreover, the current
sets strong this way; but if they have, we must expect that the savages will pay us a visit;
they will, of course, come direct to the house, if they do come."

"But, Ready, you don't mean to say that we are to leave this side of the island altogether,
and all our comfortable arrangements?" said William.

"No, William, not altogether; for now I come to the second part of my proposition. As soon
as we have done our work at the yam plantation, and made everything as comfortable there as
we can, I think we may then leave Mrs. Seagrave and the children in the tents, and work here,
As we before agreed, let us abandon the house in which we live at present, and fit out the
outhouse which is concealed in the cocoa-nut grove, as a dwelling-house, and fortify it so
as to be secure against any sudden attack of the savages: for, return here we must, to live,
as we cannot remain in the tents after the rainy season sets in."

"How do you propose to fortify it, Ready?" said Mr. Seagrave; "I hardly know."

"That I will explain to you by and by, sir. Then, if the savages come here, at all events we
should be able to defend ourselves with fire-arms; one man behind a stockade is better than
twenty who have no other arms but spears and clubs; and we may, with the help of God, beat
them off."

"I think your plan is excellent, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave, "and that the sooner we begin,
the better."

"That there is no doubt of, sir. Now, the first job is for William and me to try for the passage
through this side of the reef with the boat, and then we will look for the little harbour which
we discovered; as soon as that is done, we will return and take the tents and all we require
round in the boat, and when we have pitched the tents and all is arranged, Mrs. Seagrave and
the children can walk through the wood with us, and take possession."

"Let us not lose an hour, Ready; we have lost too much time already," replied Mr. Seagrave.
"What shall we do to-day?"

"After breakfast, William and I will take the boat, and try for the passage. You can remain
here, packing up the tents and such articles as must first be carried round. We shall be back,
I hope, by dinner-time."

They then rose, and walked towards the house; all felt relieved in their minds, after they
had made this arrangement, satisfied that they would be using all human endeavours to ward
off the danger which threatened them, and might then put their confidence in that Providence
who would, if he thought fit, protect them in their need.

Chapter XLVI

The subject was introduced to Mrs. Seagrave, while they were at breakfast, and as she perceived
how much more secure they would be, she cheerfully consented. In less than an hour afterwards,
William and Ready had prepared the boat, and were pulling out among the rocks of the reef to
find a passage, which, after a short time, and by keeping two or three cables from the point,
they succeeded in doing.

"This is very fortunate, William," observed Ready; "but we must now take some marks to find
our way in again. See, the large black rock is on a line with the garden point: so, if we keep
them in one, we shall know that we are in the proper channel; and now for a mark abreast of
us, to find out when we enter it."

"Why, Ready, the corner of the turtle-pond just touches the right wall of the house," replied
William.

"So it does; that will do; and now let us pull away as hard as we can, so as to be back in
good time."

They soon were on the south side of the island, and pulling up along the shore.

"How far do you think that it is by water, Ready?"

"I hardly know; but at least four or five miles, so we must make up our minds to a good hour's
pull. At all events, we shall sail back again with this wind, although there is but little of it."

"We are in very deep water now," observed William, after a long silence.

"Yes, on this side of the island we must expect it; the coral grows to leeward only. I think
that we cannot be very far from the little harbour we discovered. Suppose we leave off rowing
for a minute, and look about us."

"There are two rocks close to the shore, Ready," said William, pointing, "and you recollect
there were two or three rocks outside of the harbour."

"Very true, William, and I should not wonder if you have hit upon the very spot. Let us pull in."

They did so; and, to their satisfaction, found that they were in the harbour, where the water
was as smooth as a pond.

"Now, then, William, we will step the mast, and sail back at our leisure."

"Stop one moment, Ready; give me the boat-hook. I see something between the clefts of the rocks."

Ready handed the boat-hook to William, who, lowering it down into the water, drove the spike
of iron at the end of it into a large crayfish, which he hauled up into the boat.

"That will be an addition to our dinner," said Ready; "we do not go back empty-handed, and,
therefore, as the saying is, we shall be more welcome; now, then, let us start, for we must
pull here again this afternoon, and with a full cargo on board."

They stepped the mast, and as soon as they had pulled the boat clear of the harbour, set sail,
and in less than an hour had rejoined the party at the house.

William had brought up the crayfish, which had only one claw, and Juno put on another pot of
water to boil it, as an addition to the dinner, which was nearly ready. Tommy at first went
with his sister Caroline to look at the animal, and as soon as he had left off admiring it,
he began, as usual, to tease it; first he poked its eyes with a stick, then he tried to unfold
his tail, but the animal flapped, and he ran away. At last he was trying to put his stick into
the creature's mouth, when it raised its large claw, and caught him by the wrist, squeezing
him so tight that Tommy screamed and danced about as the crayfish held on. Fortunately for
him, the animal had been so long out of water, and had been so much hurt by the iron spike
of the boat-hook, that it was more than half-dead, or he would have been severely hurt. Ready
ran to him, and disengaged the crayfish; but Tommy was so frightened, that he took to his heels,
and did not leave off running until he was one hundred yards from the house, while Juno and
Ready were laughing at him till the tears came into their eyes. When he saw the crayfish on
the table, he appeared to be afraid of it, although it was dead.

"Well, Tommy," said Mr. Seagrave, "I suppose you won't eat any of the crayfish?"

"Won't I?" replied Tommy. "I'll eat him, for he tried to eat me."

"Why did you not leave the animal alone, Tommy?" said Mr. Seagrave; "if you had not tormented
it, it would not have bitten you; I don't know whether you ought to have any."

"I don't like it; I won't have any," replied Tommy. "I like salt pork better."

"Well, then, if you don't like it, you shall not have it forced upon you, Tommy," replied Mr.
Seagrave; "so now we'll divide it among the rest of us."

Tommy was not very well pleased at this decision, for he really did wish to have some of it,
so he turned very sulky for the rest of the dinner-time, especially when old Ready told him
that he had had his share of the crayfish before dinner.

Chapter XLVII

As soon as the meal was over, Mr. Seagrave and Juno assisted them in carrying down the canvas
and poles for the tent, with shovels to clear away, and the pegs to fix the tents up properly.
Before they started, William observed, "I think it would be a good thing, if Ready and I were
to take our bedding with us, and then we could fix up one tent this evening, and sleep there;
to-morrow morning we might set up the other, and get a good deal of work over before we come back."

"You are right, William," replied Ready; "let us see what Juno can give us to eat, and then
we will do as you say, for the sooner we are all there the better."

As Mr. Seagrave was of the same opinion, Juno packed up a piece of salt pork and some flour-cakes,
which, with three or four bottles of water, they took down to the boat. Ready having thrown
in a piece of rope to moor the boat with, they shoved off and were soon through the reef, and,
after a smart pull, they arrived again at the small harbour.

As soon as they had landed all the things, they made the boat fast by the rope, and then carried
a portion of the canvas and tent-poles up to the first copse of trees, which were the guavas;
they then returned for the remainder, and after three trips everything was up.

"Now, William, we must see where to pitch the tent; we must not be too near the cocoa-nut grove,
or we shall have too far to go for water."

"Don't you think that the best place will be close to the bananas? the ground is higher there,
and the water is, you know, between the bananas and the yams."

"Very true, I think it will not be a bad place; let us walk there first, and reconnoitre the
ground."

They walked to where the bananas were now throwing out their beautiful large green leaves,
and decided that they would fix the tents upon the north side of them.

"So here let it be," said Ready; "and now let us go and fetch all the things; it is a nice
dry spot, and I think will do capitally."

They were soon hard at work, and long before sunset one tent was ready, and they had put their
bedding in it.

"Well, now, I suppose you are a little tired," said Ready; "I'm sure you ought to be, for you
have worked hard to-day."

"I don't feel very tired, Ready, but it's not time to go to bed yet."

"No; and I think we had better take our shovels and dig the pits for the water, and then we
shall know by to-morrow morning whether the water is good or not."

"Yes, Ready, we can do that before we get our supper."

They walked to where the ground between the bananas and yam patch was wet and swampy, and dug
two large holes about a yard deep and square; the water trickled in very fast, and they were
up to their ankles before they had finished.

"There'll be no want of water, Ready, if it is only fit to drink."

"I've no fear of that," replied Ready.

They returned to the tent and made their supper off the salt pork and flour-cakes, and then
lay down on the mattresses. They were soon fast asleep, for they were tired out with the hard
work which they had gone through.

The next morning, at sunrise, they were up again; the first thing they did was to go and examine
the holes they had dug for water; they found them full and running over, and the water had
settled quite clear; they tasted it, and pronounced it very good.

As soon as they had washed themselves, they went back and made their breakfast, and then set
to work to get up the other tent. They then cleared all the ground near the tents of brushwood
and high grass, and levelled it nicely with their shovels inside.

"Now, William, we have another job, which is to prepare a fireplace for Juno: we must go down
to the beach for stones."

In another hour the fireplace was completed, and Ready and William looked at their work.

"Well, I call this a very comfortable lodging-house," said Ready.

"And I am sure," replied William, "it's very pretty. Mamma will be delighted with it."

"We shall have no want of bananas in a few weeks," said Ready; "look, they are all in blossom
already. Well, now I suppose we had better leave everything here, and go back. We must have
another trip this afternoon, and sleep here to-night."

They went down to the boat, and sailed back as before; by ten o'clock in the morning they had
regained the house, and then they made arrangements for their work during the remainder of
the day. It was agreed that the provisions necessary for a day or two, the table and chairs,
the cooking utensils, and a portion of their clothes, should be taken round that afternoon,
that Ready and William should come back early the next morning, and then they should all set
off together through the wood to the new location. The sheep and lambs (for they had four lambs),
the goats and kids, were to be driven through the wood by Mr. Seagrave; William and Ready and
the dogs would be very useful in driving them. As for the fowls and chickens, it was decided
they should be left, as Ready and William could look after them on their occasional visits.

Chapter XLVIII

The boat was well loaded that afternoon, and they had a heavy pull round, and hard work afterwards
to carry all the articles up. William and Ready were, therefore, not sorry when their work
was done, and they went to bed as soon as they had taken their supper.

At sunrise, they went back to the bay in the boat, which they hauled up, and then proceeded
to the house, where they found that everyone was ready to start. Mr. Seagrave had collected
all the animals, and they set off; the marks on the trees were very plain, and they had no
difficulty in finding their way; but they had a good deal of trouble with the goats and sheep,
and did not get on very fast. It was three hours before they got clear of the cocoa-nut grove,
and Mrs. Seagrave was quite tired out. At last they arrived, and Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave could
not help exclaiming "How beautiful!"

When they came to where the tents were pitched by the side of the bananas, they were equally
pleased: it was quite a fairy spot. Mrs. Seagrave went into her tent to repose after her fatigue;
the goats and sheep were allowed to stray away as they pleased; the dogs lay down, panting
with their long journey; Juno put Albert on the bed while she went with William to collect
fuel to cook the dinner; Ready went to the pits to get some water, while Mr. Seagrave walked
about, examining the different clumps of trees with which the meadow was studded.

When Ready returned with the water, he called the dogs, and went back towards the yam plantation.
Tommy followed them; the dogs went into the yams, and were soon barking furiously, which pleased
Tommy very much; when, of a sudden, out burst again in a drove all the pigs, followed by the
dogs, and so close to Tommy that he screamed with fright, and tumbled head over heels.

"I thought you were there, my gentlemen," said Ready, looking after the pigs; "the sooner we
fence you out the better."

The pigs scampered away, and went into the cocoa-nut grove as they had done before. The dogs
followed the pigs, and did not return for a long while afterwards.

It was late before the dinner was ready, and they were all very glad to go early to bed.

At day dawn, William and Ready had again started, and walked through the cocoa-nut grove back
to the house, to bring round in the boat the articles of furniture and the clothes which had
been left. Having collected everything in the house, and procured some more pork and flour
from the storehouse, they completed the load by spearing one of the turtles which remained,
and putting it into the bottom of the boat; they then set off again for their new residence,
and arrived in time for breakfast.

"What a delightful spot this is!" said Mrs. Seagrave. "I think we ought always to make it our
summer residence, and only go back to the house during the rainy season."

"It is much cooler here, madam, during the summer, and much more pleasant; but we are more
protected in the house by the cocoa-nut grove."

"Yes; that is true, and it is very valuable during the rainy season; but it makes it warmer
in the summer time. I like the change, Ready, and shall be sorry when we have to go back again."

"Now I must go, and help Juno to cut up the turtle," said Ready. "We must make our larder among
the banana trees."

"But what are we all to do, Ready?" said Mr. Seagrave. "We must not be idle."

"No, sir; but I think we must give up this day to putting everything to rights, and making
everything comfortable inside the tents; to-morrow we will commence the ditch and hedge round
the yam plantation. We need not work very hard at it, for I don't think the pigs will venture
here again, as I mean to tie up all the dogs round the yam patch every night, and their barking
will keep them off."

"That will be a very good plan, Ready. What beautiful food there is for the sheep and goats!"

"Yes; this must be their future residence for the best part of the year. I think to-morrow
we will begin a piece of the ditch, and show William how to put in the cuttings of prickly
pear for the hedge, and then, I should propose that you and I go to the cove to examine the
stores and select what it will be necessary to bring round. I think you said that you must
go yourself?"

"Yes, Ready, I wish to go. When we have made our selection, I will return, and then you and
William, who is more used to the boat than I am, can bring the stores round. I presume we shall
not bring them here?"

"No, sir, we will take them round to the storehouse. When we have done that job, we must then
commence our alterations and our stockade."

Chapter XLIX

The next morning they went with their shovels to the yam plantation, and commenced their work.
As the ground was soft and swampy, the labour was very easy. The ditch was dug nearly a yard
wide, and the earth thrown up on a bank inside. They then went to where the large patch of
prickly pears grew, and cut a quantity, which they planted on the top of the bank. Before night,
they had finished about nine or ten yards of the hedge and ditch.

"I don't think that the pigs will get over that when it is finished," said Ready, "and William
will be able to get on by himself when we are gone, as well as if we were with him."

"I'll try if I cannot shoot a pig or two," said William.

"Let it be a young one, then; we must not kill the old ones. Now I think we may as well go
back. Juno is carrying in the supper."

Before Mr. Seagrave and Ready started on the following morning, the latter gave William directions
as to the boat. The provisions and the knapsack having been already prepared, they took leave
of Mrs. Seagrave, and set off, each armed with a musket, and Ready with his axe slung over
his shoulder. They had a long walk before them, as they had first to find their way back to
the house, and from thence had to walk through the wood to the cove.

In two hours after leaving the house they reached the spot where they had first landed. The
rocks near to it were strewed with timber and planks, which lay bleaching in the sun, or half-buried
in the sand. Mr. Seagrave sat down, and sighed deeply as he said, "Ready, the sight of these
timbers, of which the good ship Pacific was built, recalls feelings which I had hoped to have
dismissed from my mind; but I cannot help them rising up. The remains of this vessel appear
to me as the last link between us and the civilised world, which we have been torn from, and
all my thoughts of home and country, and I may say all my longing for them, are revived as
strong as ever."

"And very natural that they should, Mr. Seagrave; I feel it also. I am content, it is true,
because I have nothing to wish or look forward to; but still I could not help thinking of poor
Captain Osborn and my shipmates, as I looked upon the wreck, and wishing that I might take
them by the hand again. It is very natural that one should do so. Why, sir, do you know that
I feel unhappy even about the poor ship. We sailors love our vessels, especially when they
have good qualities, and the Pacific was as fine a vessel as ever was built. Now, sir, I feel
quite melancholy when I see her planks and timbers lying about here. But, sir, if we cannot
help feeling as we do, it is our duty to check the feeling, so that it does not get the mastery
over us. We can do no more."

"Very true, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave, rising up; "it is not only useless, but even sinful
to indulge in them, as they only can lead to our repining at the decrees of heaven. Let us
now examine the rocks, and see if anything has been thrown up that may be of use to us."

They walked round, but, with the exception of spars and a barrel or two of tar, they could
find nothing of value. There was no want of staves and iron hoops of broken casks, and these,
Ready observed, would make excellent palings for the garden when they had time to bring them round.

After they had returned, they sat down to rest themselves, and then they went to the tents
in the cocoa-nut grove, in which they had collected the articles thrown up when the ship went
to pieces.

"Why, the pigs have been at work here!" said Ready; "they have contrived to open one cask of
flour somehow or another; look, sir - I suppose it must have been shaky, or they could not
have routed into it; the canvas is not good for much, I fear; fortunately, we have several
bolts of new, which I brought on shore. Now, sir, we will see what condition the stores are
in. All these are casks of flour, and we run no risk in opening them, and seeing if they are
in good order."

The first cask which was opened had a cake round it as hard as a board; but when it was cut
through with the axe, the inside was found in a good state.

"That's all right, sir; and I presume the others will be the same; the salt water has got in
so far and made a crust, which has preserved the rest. But now let us go to dinner, and to
work afterwards."

Chapter L

After dinner they resumed their labour. "I wonder what's in this case?" said Mr. Seagrave,
pointing to the first at hand. Ready set to work with his axe, and broke off the lid, and found
a number of pasteboard boxes full of tapes, narrow ribbons, stay-laces, whalebones, and cottons
on reels.

"This has been sent out for some Botany Bay milliner," said Mr. Seagrave. "I presume, however,
we must confiscate it for the benefit of Mrs. Seagrave and Miss Caroline. We will take them
to them as soon as we have time."

The next was a box without a lock; the lid was forced up, and they found a dozen half-gallon
square bottles of gin stored in divisions.

"That's Hollands, sir, I know," said Ready; "what shall we do with it?"

"We will not destroy it, Ready, but at the same time we will not use it but as a medicine,"
replied Mr. Seagrave; "we have been so long used to spring-water, that it would be a pity to
renew a taste for spirituous liquors."

"I trust we shall never want to drink a drop of it, sir, either as a medicine or otherwise.
Now for this cask with wooden hoops."

The head was soon out, and discovered a dinner set of painted china with gold edges.

"This, Mr. Seagrave, may be useful, for we are rather short of plates and dishes. Common white
would have served as well."

"And be more suitable with our present outfit," replied Mr. Seagrave.

"Here's a box with your name on it, sir," said Ready; "do you know what is in it?"

"I have no idea, Ready; but your axe will decide the point."

When the box was opened, everything appeared in a sad mouldy state from the salt water which
had penetrated; but on removing the brown paper and pasteboard, it was found to contain stationery
of all sorts, and, except on the outside, it was very little injured.

"This is indeed a treasure, Ready. I recollect now; this is paper, pens, and everything requisite
for writing, besides children's books, copy-books, paint-boxes, and a great many other articles
in the stationery line."

"Well, sir, that is fortunate. Now we may set up our school, and as the whole population of
the island will attend it, it will really be a National School."

"Very true, Ready. Now for that cask."

"I can tell what that is by the outside; it is oil, and very acceptable, for our candles are
nearly out. Now we come to the most valuable of all our property."

"What is that, Ready?"

"All the articles which I brought on shore in the different trips I took in the boat before
the ship went to pieces; for you see, sir, iron don't swim, and, therefore, what I looked after
most was ironware of all sorts, and tools. Here are three kegs of small nails, besides two
bags of large, and there are several axes, hammers, and other tools, besides hanks of twine,
sailing needles, and bees'-wax."

"They are indeed valuable, Ready."

"Here's some more of my plunder, as the Americans say. All these are wash-deck buckets, this
a small harness cask for salting meat, and here's the cook's wooden trough for making bread,
which will please Miss Juno; and in it, you see, I have put all the galley-hooks, ladles, and
spoons, and the iron trivets, and here's two lamps. I think I put some cotton wicks somewhere
- I know I did; we shall find them by and by. Here's the two casks, one of cartridges made
up, and the other of gunpowder, and the other six muskets."

"These are really treasures, Ready, and yet how well we have done without them."

"Very true, sir, but we shall do better with them, and when we fit up the storehouse for a
dwelling, Mr. Seagrave, we shall be able to make it a little more comfortable in every respect
than the present one; for you see there, all the fir-planking and deals, which William and
I buried in the sand."

"I really had quite forgotten them, Ready. If I could but get the fear of the savages coming
over out of my head, I really think we might live very comfortably even on this island."

"Do you know, Mr. Seagrave, I am glad to hear you say that, for it proves that you are more
contented and resigned than you were."

"I am so, Ready - at least I think so; but perhaps it is, that the immediate danger from the
savages so fills my thoughts, that I no longer dwell so much upon our being taken off the island."

"I dare say it is as you state, sir; but now let us go on with our search. Here are the ship's
compasses, and deep sea line and reel, also the land lead. The stuff will be very useful for
our little boat."

"And I am very glad of the compasses, Ready; for with them I shall be able to make a sort of
survey of the island, when I have a little time. Your pocket compass is too small for surveying.
I shall take some bearings now, while I am here, as I may not be back again very soon."

"Well, sir, I think if we open this other case, which I perceive has your name on it, it will
be as much as we need do to-day, for the sun is going down; we can then make up some kind of
bed, eat our suppers, and go to sleep."

"I am very tired, Ready, and shall be glad to do as you propose. That case contains books;
but what portion of my library I do not know."

"But you soon will, sir," replied Ready, wrenching it open with his axe. "They are a little
stained on the outside, but they are jammed so tight that they do not appear to have suffered
much. Here are one or two, sir."

"Plutarch's Lives. I am glad I have them: they are excellent reading for young or old; there
is no occasion to open any more, as I know all the other books in the case are `History'; perhaps
the best case which could have been saved."

Chapter LI

Mr. Seagrave and Ready then set to work, and made a rough sort of bed of cocoa-nut branches;
and, after eating their supper, committed themselves to the divine protection, and went to
sleep. The next morning they resumed their labour, and opened every other case and package
that had been saved from the wreck; they found more hooks, four boxes of candles, three casks
of rice, and several other useful articles, besides many others which were of no value to them.

A chest of tea, and two bags of coffee, which Ready had brought on shore, were, much to their
delight, found in good order; but there was no sugar, the little which they had saved having
been melted away.

"That's unfortunate, sir."

"We cannot expect to get things here, as though we were a hundred yards from a grocer's shop.
Now let us go to where we covered up the other articles with sand."

The sand was shovelled up, and the barrels of beef and pork and the deal boards found in good
order, but many other things were quite spoilt. About noon they had finished, and as they had
plenty of time, Mr. Seagrave took the bearings of the different points of land with the compasses.
They then shouldered their muskets, and set off on their return.

They gained the house in the bay, and having rested a little while at the storehouse, they
proceeded on their way to the tents in the meadow. They had about half a mile to go, when Ready
heard a noise, and made a sign to Mr. Seagrave to stop. Ready, whispering to Mr. Seagrave that
the pigs were all close to them, loaded his musket; Mr. Seagrave did the same, and they walked
very softly to where they now heard their grunting; they did not see them till they were within
twenty yards, and then they came upon the whole herd; the pigs raised their heads; the old
ones gave a loud grunt, and then, just as Ready fired his musket, they all set off at full
speed. Mr. Seagrave had no opportunity of firing, but Ready had shot one, which lay kicking
and struggling under a cocoa-nut tree.

"A piece of fresh pork will be quite a treat, Mr. Seagrave," said Ready, as they walked up
to where the animal was lying.

"It will, indeed, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave; "we must contrive to carry the beast home between
us."

"We will sling it on the musket, sir, and it will not be very heavy. It is one of those born
on the island, and a very fine fellow for his age."

The pig was soon slung, and they carried it between them. As they cleared the wood, they perceived
Mrs. Seagrave and William, who had heard the report of the musket, and had come out to meet them.

William took the load from his father, who walked on with Mrs. Seagrave.

"Well, William, what news have you?" said Ready.

"Why, very good, Ready. Yesterday evening, when I was tired of work, I thought I would take
the boat, and try if there was any fish to he caught on this side of the island in the deep
water, and I caught three large ones, quite different from those we took among the reefs. We
had one for breakfast and dinner to-day, and it was excellent."

"Did you go out in the boat by yourself?"

"No; I took Juno with me. She pulls very well, Ready."

"She is a handy girl, William. Well, we have had our survey, and there will be plenty of work
for you and me, I can tell you; I don't think we can bring everything round in a week; so I
suppose to-morrow we had better be off."

"Well, I like boating better than ditching, I can tell you, Ready," replied William. "I shan't
be sorry to leave that work to my father."

"I suppose it must fall to him; as he will, of course, prefer staying with Mrs. Seagrave and
the children."

As soon as they were at the tents, Ready hung up the pig to the cross pole of the tent in which
he and William and Mr. Seagrave slept, and having propped the muskets up against the side of
the tent, he went with William to get his knife and some stretchers of wood to open the pig
with. While he and William were away, Caroline and Tommy came out to look at it, and Tommy,
after telling Caroline how glad he was that they were to have roast pig for dinner, took up
one of the muskets, and said, "Now, Caroline, I'll shoot the pig."

"Oh! Tommy, you must not touch the gun," cried Caroline; "papa will be very angry."

"I don't care," replied Tommy. "I'll show you how to shoot the pig."

"Don't, Tommy," cried Caroline; "if you do, I'll go and tell mamma."

"Then I'll shoot you," replied Tommy, trying to point the musket at her.

Caroline was so frightened, that she ran away as fast as she could, and then Tommy, using all
his strength, contrived to get the musket up to his shoulder, and pulled the trigger.

It so happened that Tommy had taken up Mr. Seagrave's musket, which had not been fired, and
when he pulled the trigger it went off, and as he did not hold it tight to his shoulder, it
recoiled, and hit him with the butt right on his face, knocking out two of his teeth, besides
making his nose bleed very fast.

Tommy was so astonished and frightened at the musket going off, and the blow which he received,
that he gave a loud yell, dropped the musket, and ran to the tent where his father and mother
were, just as they had started up and had rushed out at hearing the report.

When Mrs. Seagrave saw Tommy all covered with blood, and screaming so loud, she was so alarmed
that she could not stand, and fell fainting in Mr. Seagrave's arms. Ready and William, on hearing
the musket go off, had run as fast as they could, fearing that some accident had happened;
and while Mr. Seagrave supported his wife, Ready went to Tommy, and wiping the blood off his
face with the palm of his hand, perceived that there was no wound or serious mischief, and
cried out to Mr. Seagrave, "He's not hurt, sir; it's only his nose bleeding."

"Musket knocked me down," cried Tommy, sobbing as the blood ran out of his mouth.

"Serve you right, Tommy; you'll take care not to touch the musket again."

"I won't touch it again," cried Tommy, blubbering.

Juno now came up with some water to wash his face; Mrs. Seagrave had recovered, and gone back
into the tent, on Mr. Seagrave telling her that it was only Tommy's nose which was bleeding.

In about half-an-hour Tommy had ceased crying, and his nose had left off bleeding; his face
was washed, and then it was discovered that he had lost two front teeth, and that his cheek
and lips were very much bruised. He was undressed, and put to bed, and was soon fast asleep.

"I should not have left the muskets," said Ready to William; "it was my fault; but I thought
Tommy had been told so often not to touch fire-arms, that he would not dare to do so."

"He pointed it at me, and tried to shoot me," said Caroline, "but I ran away."

"Merciful heavens! what an escape!" cried Mrs. Seagrave.

"He has been well punished this time, madam, and I'll venture to say he will not touch a musket
again in a hurry."

"Yes; but he must be punished more," said Mr. Seagrave. "he must remember it."

"Well, sir, if he is to be punished more, I think you cannot punish him better than by not
allowing him to have any of the pig when it is cooked."

"I think so too, Ready; and therefore that is a settled thing - no pig for Tommy."

Chapter LII

The next morning Tommy's face presented a very woeful appearance. His cheek and lips were swelled
and black, and the loss of his two front teeth made him look much worse.

Tommy looked very glum when he came to breakfast. There was the pig's fry for breakfast, and
the smell of it had been very inviting to Tommy; but when his father scolded him, and told
him that he was not to have one bit of the pig, he began to cry and roar so loud, that he was
sent away from the tents till he had left off.

After breakfast, Ready proposed that he and William should take the boat, and begin their labour
of carrying the articles round from the cove to the bay where the house was, pointing out that
there was not a day to be lost. Juno had, at his request, already baked a large piece of the
pig for them to take with them, and boiled a piece of salt pork, so that they were all ready
to start.

"But, Ready," said Mrs. Seagrave, "how long do you intend to remain absent with William?"

"Why, madam, this is Wednesday; of course we shall be back on Saturday night."

"My dear William, I cannot bear the idea of your being absent so long, and as you will be on
the water every day, I shall be in a continual fright until I see you again."

"Well, mamma, I suppose I must write by the penny post, to let you know how I am."

"Don't laugh at me, William. I do wish there was a penny post, and that you could write every day."

Ready and William made every preparation for a continued absence. They took their blankets
with them, and a small pot for cooking, and when all was prepared they bade Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave
farewell. They were now to pull to the bay, and leave their luggage, and then go round to the
cove. As they shoved off, William took the dog Remus into the boat.

"Why do you take the dog, William? he will be of use here in keeping the pigs away, but of
no use to us."

"Yes, he will, Ready; I must take him; for I have an idea come into my head, so let me have
my own way."

"Well, William, you can always have your own way, as far as I'm concerned; if you wish to take
the dog, there is an end of the matter."

They hoisted the sail, and as the breeze was fresh, were round to the bay in a very short time.
They took their provisions and stores up to the house, and made fast the door, called the fowls,
and gave them some damaged rice which Ready had brought from the cove, and found, to their
great delight, that they had now upwards of forty chickens; some, indeed, quite grown, and
large enough to kill.

They then got into the boat again, and pulled away for the cove; the wind was fresh, and against
them, so they had a long pull; but, as Ready observed, it was much better that it should be
so, as, when the boat was loaded, they could very quickly sail back again to the bay.

As soon as they arrived at the cove, they lost no time in loading the boat; the nails, and
iron work of every description, with the twine and tools, composed the major part of the first
cargo; and calling Remus, who was lying on the sandy beach, they shoved off, hoisted their
sail, and in an hour had regained the bay, and passed through the reef.

"I am glad that this cargo has arrived safe, William, for it is very valuable to us. Now we
will take them all up, and that will be sufficient for to-day; to-morrow, if we can, we will
make two trips."

"We can, if we start early," replied William; "but now let us have our dinner, and carry the
remainder of the things up afterwards."

As they were eating their dinner, and William was giving the bones to the dog, Ready said,
"Pray, William, what was the idea in your head which made you bring Remus with you?"

"I will tell you, Ready; I mean him to carry a letter to mamma; you know that he always goes
back when he is ordered, and now I wish to see if he will not go back to the tents, if he is
told. I have brought a piece of paper and pencil with me."

William then wrote on the paper,

"Dear Mamma:--We are quite well, and just returned with the first cargo quite safe. Your affectionate
son, WILLIAM."

William tied the paper round the dog's neck with a piece of twine, and then calling him out
of the house, said to him, "Remus, go back, sir - go back, sir;" the dog looked wistfully at
William, as if not sure of what he was to do, but William took up a stone, and pretended to
throw it at the dog, who ran away a little distance, and then stopped.

"Go back, Remus - go back, sir." William again pretended to throw the stone, repeating the
order, and then the dog set off as fast as his legs could carry him through the cocoa-nut grove.

"He is gone at all events," said William; "I think he will go home."

"We shall see, sir," replied Ready; "and now that we have finished our dinner, we will bring
up the things, and put them in the storehouse."

Chapter LIII

As soon as they had carried up the whole of the cargo, they secured the boat, and went up to
the house to sleep. Just as they went in, Remus came bounding up to them with a letter round
his neck.

"Here's the dog, William," said Ready; "he won't go home after all."

"How provoking! I made sure he would go back; I really am disappointed. We will give him nothing
to eat, and then he will; but, dear me, Ready! this is not the paper I tied round his neck.
I think not. Let me see." William took the paper, opened it, and read--

"Dear William:--Your letter arrived safe, and we are glad you are well. Write every day, and
God bless you; it was very clever of you and Remus. Your affectionate mother, SELINA SEAGRAVE."

"Well, it is clever," said Ready; "I'm sure I had no idea he had gone; and his coming back
again, too, when he was ordered."

"Dear Remus, good dog," said William, caressing it: "now I'll give you a good supper, for you
deserve it."

"So he does, sir. Well, you've established a post on the island, which is a great improvement.
Seriously, William, it may prove very useful."

"At all events it will be a great comfort to my mother."

"Yes, especially as we shall be obliged all three to be here when we fit up the storehouse,
and make the proposed alterations. Now I think we had better go to bed, for we must be up with
the lark to-morrow."

"Here I suppose we ought to say, up with the parrots; for they are the only land birds on the
island."

"You forget the pigeons; I saw one of them in the wood the other day. Good night!"

The next morning, they were off before breakfast. The boat was soon loaded, and they returned
under sail. They then breakfasted, and having left the things they had brought on the beach,
that they might lose no time, they set off again, and returned with another cargo two hours
before dusk; this they landed, and then secured the boat. As soon as they were in the house,
William wrote on a piece of paper:--

"Dear Mamma:-- We have brought round two cargoes to-day. All well, and very tired. Yours, WILLIAM."

Remus did not require any teaching this time. William patted him, and said, "Good dog. Now,
Remus, go back - go home, sir;" and the dog wagged his tail, and set off immediately.

Before they were in bed, the dog returned with the answer.

"How fast he must run, Ready! he has not been away more than two hours."

"No. So, now, Remus, you shall have plenty of supper, and plenty of patting and coaxing, for
you are a clever, good little dog."

The next day, as they had to take the two cargoes up to the house, they could only make one
trip to the cove. On Saturday they only made one trip, as they had to return to the tents,
which they did by water, having first put a turtle into the boat; on their arrival, they found
them all at the little harbour, waiting to receive them.

"Well, William, you did keep your promise and send me a letter by post," said Mrs. Seagrave.
"How very delightful it is! I shall have no fear now when you are all away."

"I must teach Romulus and Vixen to do the same, mamma."

"And I'll teach the puppies," said Tommy.

"Yes, Tommy; by the time you can write a letter, the puppies will be old enough to carry it,"
said Ready. "Come, Albert, I'll carry you up; you and I haven't had a game of play for a long
while. How does the ditch and hedge get on, Mr. Seagrave?"

"Pretty well, Ready," replied Mr. Seagrave; "I have nearly finished two sides. I think by the
end of next week I shall have pretty well inclosed it."

"Well, sir, you must not work too hard, there is no great hurry; William and I can get through
a great deal together."

"It is my duty to work, Ready; and I may add, it is a pleasure."

As they were at supper the conversation turned upon the cleverness shown by the dog Remus.

Mr. Seagrave narrated many instances of the sagacity of animals, when William asked the question
of his father: "What is the difference then between reason and instinct?"

"The difference is very great, William, as I will explain to you; but I must first observe,
that it has been the custom to say that man is governed by reason, and animals by instinct,
alone. This is an error. Man has instinct as well as reason; and animals, although chiefly
governed by instinct, have reasoning powers."

"In what points does man show that he is led by instinct?"

"When a child is first born, William, it acts by instinct only: the reasoning powers are not
yet developed; as we grow up, our reason becomes every day more matured, and gains the mastery
over our instinct, which decreases in proportion."

"Then when we have grown to a good old age, I suppose we have no instinct left in us?"

"Not so, my dear boy; there is one and a most powerful instinct implanted in man which never
deserts him on this side of the grave. It is the fear, not of death, but of utter annihilation,
that of becoming nothing after death. This instinctive feeling could not have been so deeply
implanted in us, but as an assurance that we shall not be annihilated after death, but that
our souls shall still exist, although our bodies shall have perished. It may be termed the
instinctive evidence of a future existence."

"That is very true, Mr. Seagrave," observed Ready.

"Instinct in animals, William," continued Mr. Seagrave, "is a feeling which compels them to
perform certain acts without previous thought or reflection; this instinct is in full force
at the moment of their birth; it was therefore perfect in the beginning, and has never varied.
The swallow built her nest, the spider its web, the bee formed its comb, precisely in the same
way four thousand years ago, as they do now. I may here observe, that one of the greatest wonders
of instinct is the mathematical form of the honeycomb of the bee, which has been proved by
demonstration to be that by which is given the greatest possible saving of time and labour."

"But that is all pure instinct, papa; now you said that animals had reasoning powers. Will
you point out to me how they show that they have?"

"I will, my dear boy; but we had better defer it till another evening. It is now time to go
to bed."

Chapter LIV

The following day, being Sunday, was devoted to the usual religious exercises. Tommy stole
away out of the tent, while Mr. Seagrave was reading a sermon, to have a peep at the turtle-soup,
which was boiling on the fire; however, Juno suspected him, and had hold of him just as he
was taking the lid off the pot. He was well scolded, and very much frightened lest he should
have no soup for his dinner; however, as it was not a very heavy offence, he was forgiven.

In the evening, William requested his father to renew the conversation about the reasoning
powers of animals.

"With pleasure, William," replied Mr. Seagrave; "it is a fit discourse for a Sunday evening.
Let us, however, first examine the various mental faculties discoverable in animals. In the
first place, they have memory, especially memory of persons and places, quite as tenacious
as our own. A dog will recognize an old master after many years absence. An elephant, who had
again escaped into the woods, after twenty years remaining in a wild state, recognized his
old mahoot, or driver. A dog will find his way back when taken more than a hundred miles from
his master's residence. Another proof of memory in animals, were it required, is that they
dream. Now, a dream is a confused recollection of past events; and how often do you not hear
Romulus and Remus growling, barking, and whining in their sleep!"

"Very true, papa."

"Well, then, they have attention. See how patiently a cat will remain for hours before a hole,
in watch for the mouse to come out. A spider will remain for months watching for the fly to
enter its web; but this quality is to be observed in every animal in the pursuit of its prey.
They have also association of ideas, which is, in fact, reasoning. A dog proves that; he will
allow a gentleman to come up to the door, but fly at a beggar. When he is in charge of any
property he will take no notice of a passer-by; but if a man stops, he barks immediately. In
the elephant this association of ideas is even more remarkable; indeed, he understands what
is said to him better than any other animal; his reasoning powers are most extraordinary. Promise
him rewards, and he will make wonderful exertion. He is also extremely alive to a sense of
shame. The elephants were employed to transport the heavy artillery in India. One of the finest
attempted in vain to force a gun through a swamp. `Take away that lazy beast,' said the director
`and bring another.' The animal was so stung with the reproach, that it used so much exertion
to force the gun on with its head, as to fracture its skull, and it fell dead. When Chunee,
the elephant which was so long in Exeter Change, was ordered as usual to take up a sixpence
with his trunk, it happened one day that the sixpence rolled against the skirting-board, out
of his reach. Chunee stopped, and reflected a little while, and then, drawing the air into
his trunk, he threw it out with all his force against the skirting-board; the rebound of the
air from the skirting-board blew the sixpence towards him, and he was enabled to reach it."

"That was very clever of him," replied William.

"Yes; it was a proof of thought, with a knowledge of cause and effect. There was a curious
instance of a horse, which, by the bye, I consider the most noble animal of creation, which
was ridden round by his master, to deliver newspapers. He invariably stopped at the doors where
papers were to be left; but it happened that two people, living at different houses, took in
a weekly newspaper between them; and it was agreed, that one should have the first reading
of it on one week, and the other on the following. After a short time the horse became accustomed
to this arrangement, and stopped at the one house on the one week, and at the other house on
the following, never making a mistake."

"That was very curious; what a sagacious animal he must have been!" observed William.

"Animals also are, as you know, capable of receiving instruction, which is another proof of
reasoning powers. The elephant, the horse, the dog, the pig, even birds may be taught a great
deal."

"But then, papa, I still wish to know where the line is to be drawn between reason and instinct."

"I was about to come to that very point, William. When animals follow their instinct in providing
their food, bringing up their young, and in their precautions against danger, they follow certain
fixed rules, from which they never deviate. But circumstances may occur against which their
instinct can afford them no regular provision; then it is that their reasoning powers are called
into action. I will explain this by stating a fact relative to the bee, one of the animals
upon which instinct is most powerful in its action. There is a certain large moth, called the
Death's-head moth, which is very fond of honey. It sometimes contrives to force its way through
the aperture of the hive, and gain an entrance. The bees immediately attack it, and it is soon
destroyed by their stings; but the carcass is so large, that they cannot carry it out of the
hive, as they invariably do the bodies of the smaller insects which may have intruded, and
it appears that their sense of smell is very acute. What, then, do they do to avoid the stench
arising from the dead body of this large moth? Why, they embalm it, covering it entirely with
wax, by which it no longer becomes offensive to them."

"But, papa, might not their instinct have provided for such an event?" observed William.

"If such an event could have occurred to the bees in their wild state, you certainly might
have raised the question; but recollect, William, that bees in their wild state live in the
hollows of trees, and that the hole by which they enter is never more than sufficiently large
to admit one bee at a time; consequently, no animal larger than a bee could gain entrance,
and if it did, could of course have been easily removed from the hive; but the bees were here
in a new position, in an artificial state, in a hive of straw with a large aperture, and therefore
met with an exigence they were not prepared for, and acted accordingly."

"Yes, papa, I perceive the difference."

"I will conclude my observations with one remark. It appears to me, that although the Almighty
has thought proper to vary the intellectual and the reasoning powers of animals in the same
way that he has varied the species and the forms, yet even in this arrangement he has not been
unmindful of the interest and welfare of man. For you will observe, that the reasoning powers
are chiefly, if not wholly, given to those animals which man subjects to his service and for
his use - the elephant, the horse, and the dog; thereby making these animals of more value,
as the powers given to them are at the service and under the control of man."

Chapter LV

On the Monday morning, William and Ready went away in the boat, as before, to bring round the
various articles from the cove. It had been arranged that they were not to return till the
Saturday evening, and that the dog Remus was to bring intelligence of them and their welfare
every afternoon. They worked hard during the week, and on Saturday they had completed their
task; with the exception of a portion of the timbers of the ship, everything had been brought
round, but had not been carried up to the storehouse, as that required more time.

On Saturday morning, they went for the last time to the cove, and Ready selected some heavy
oak timber out of the quantity which was lying on the beach, part of which they put into the
boat, and the remainder they towed astern. It was a heavy load, and although the wind was fair
to sail hack again to the bay, the boat went but slowly through the water.

"Well, William," said Ready, "we have done a good week's work, and I must say it is high time
that it is done; for the boat is in rather a crazy condition, and I must contrive to patch
her up by and by, when there is time."

"We shall not want to use her very much after this, Ready," replied William; "a few trips round
to the little harbour will be all that will be required before we come back again to our old
quarters."

"That's true, William; but she leaks very much, and at all events I'll give her a coat of pitch
as soon as possible. For a slight-built little thing as she is, she has done hard duty."

"Pray, Ready, why, when you speak of a ship or boat, do you always call it she?"

"Well, William, I don't know why, but it is certain that we sailors always do so. I believe
it is because a sailor loves his ship. His ship is his wife, is a very common saying with us;
and then you see, Master William, a vessel is almost a thing of life in appearance. I believe
that's the reason, and of course if a vessel is she, a little boat must be a she also."

"Well, I think you have explained it very well, Ready. I suppose on Monday we shall set to
at the storehouse, and alter it for our future residence?"

"Can't begin too soon, William," replied Ready; "I don't doubt but Mr. Seagrave has finished
the hedge and ditch round the yams by this time, and if so, I expect Madam will not like to
be left in the tents alone with Juno and the children, and so we shall all move back to the
house again until we have altered the storehouse; I must say that I would rather your mamma
remained in the tents until all was finished."

"Because you are afraid of a visit from the savages, Ready?"

"I am, sir, and that's the truth."

"But, Ready, if they do come, we shall see them coming, and would it not be better that we
should all be together, even if we are obliged to conceal ourselves in consequence of not being
prepared? Suppose the savages were to overrun the island, and find my mother, my little brother,
and sister, defenceless, at the time we were obliged to retreat from our house; how dreadful
that would be!"

"But I counted upon retreating to the tents."

"So we can all together, unless we are surprised in the night."

"That we must take care not to be. There's not three hours' dark in this season of the year.
Well, William, I doubt not you may be right, and if they are all with us, Juno will be a great
help, and we shall get through our work the faster."

"We had better let the question be decided by my father and mother."

"Very true, William; here's the point at last. We will haul the timber on the beach, and then
be off as fast as we can, for it is getting late."

It was, indeed, much later than they had usually arrived at the little harbour, owing to the
heavy load, which made the boat so long in coming round from the cove; and when they pulled
in, they found Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave and the children all waiting for them.

"You are very late, William," said Mrs. Seagrave. "I was quite uneasy till I saw the boat at
a distance."

"Yes, mamma; but we could not help it; we had a heavy load to bring round, and now our work
is done."

"I am delighted to hear it, William; for I cannot bear you being away so long."

"And my work is done," said Mr. Seagrave; "the hedge and ditch were finished this morning." 

"Billy seems to have passed this way."

At the foot of a stone-wall four feet high lay the phaeton, with three wheels in the air, and
the fourth crushed flat against the axle; the willow back was broken,
the shafts were pulled out, and Billy was gone.

"Good thing there was nobody in it," said the neighbor.

"Good thing it didn't run down some Irish family, and get you in for damages," said a guest.

It
appeared, then, that there were two good things about this disaster. My friend had not thought
there were so many, but while he rejoiced in this fact, he rebelled at the notion that a sorrow
like that rendered the sufferer in any event liable for damages, and he resolved that he never
would have paid them. But probably he would.

Some half-grown boys got the phaeton right-side up, and restored its shafts and cushions, and
it limped away with them towards the carriage-house. Presently another half-grown boy came riding
Billy up the hill. Billy showed an inflated nostril and an excited eye, but physically he was
unharmed, save for a slight scratch on what was described as the off hind-leg; the reader
may choose which leg this was.

"The worst of it is," said the guest,
"that you never can trust 'em after they've run off once."

"Have
some tea?" said the host to my friend.

"No, thank you," said my friend,
in whose heart the worst of it rankled; and he walked home embittered
by his guilty consciousness that Billy ought never to have been left
untied.

All these points being arranged, they had finished their supper, when William again brought
up the conversation about animals, as he was delighted to bear Mr. Seagrave talk on the subject.
The conversation had not commenced more than a few minutes, when William said--

"Papa, they always say `as stupid as an ass'. Is an ass such a stupid animal?"

"No, William; it is a very sagacious one; but the character has been given to the animal more
on account of its obstinacy and untractableness, than on any other account. It is usual to
say, as stupid as an ass, or as stupid as a pig, or a goose. Now, these three animals are very
much maligned, for they are all sagacious animals. But the fact is that, as regards the ass,
we have only very sorry specimens of the animal in England; they are stunted and small, and,
from want of corn and proper food, besides being very ill-treated, are slow and dull-looking
animals. The climate of England is much too cold for the ass; in the south of France and the
Mediterranean, where it is much warmer, the ass is a much finer animal; but to see it in perfection
we must go to the Torrid Zone in Guinea, right on the equator, the hottest portion of the globe,
where the ass, in its native state and in its native country, is a handsome creature and as
fleet as the wind; indeed, supposed to be, and mentioned in the Scriptures as the fleetest
animal in creation. The fact is, that in Asia, especially in Palestine and Syria, asses were
in great repute, and used in preference to horses. We must see an animal in its own climate
to form a true estimate of its value."

"Does climate, then, make so great a difference?" said William.

"Of course it does, not only with animals, but with trees, plants, and even man, until he is
accustomed to the change. With respect to animals, there are some which can bear the different
varieties of climate, and even change of food. The horse, for instance, although originally
indigenous to Arabia, lives as well in the Temperate, and even in the Frigid Zones it may be
said, for they endure the hard winters of Russia and North America; so will domestic cattle,
such as cows, sheep, pigs, &c. It is a curious fact that, during the winter in Canada, a large
proportion of the food of cattle consists of fish."

"Fish, papa! Cows eat fish?"

"Yes, my dear boy, such is the fact. It is a remarkable instance of a graminivorous or grass-eating
animal being changed for a time into a flesh-eating, or rather into fish-eating animal. But
there are other animals which can live under any temperature, as the wolf, the fox, the hare,
and rabbit. It is a curious provision, - that the sheep and goats in the hottest climates throw
off their warm covering of wool, and retain little better than hair; while, removed to a cold
climate, they recover their warm covering immediately."

"But a goat has no wool, papa."

"What are Cashmere shawls made of, William?"

"Very true, papa."

"Most animals have a certain increase of covering as they recede further from the warm climates
to the cold ones. Wolves and foxes, hares and rabbits, change the colour of their skins to
white when they get far north. The little English stoat, which is destroyed by the gamekeepers,
becomes the beautiful snow-white ermine in Russia and other cold countries."

"Well, papa, I think it a great advantage to man, and a proof of the Almighty's care of him
and kindness to him, in permitting all the animals most useful to him to be able to live in
any country; but I don't know whether I am wrong in saying so, papa: I cannot see why an animal
like the wolf should not have been kept to his own climate, like the lion and tiger, and other
ferocious animals."

"You have started a question, William, which I am glad you have done, rather than it should
have remained on your mind, and have puzzled you. It is true that the shepherd might agree
with you, that the wolf is a nuisance; equally true that the husband man may exclaim, What
is the good of thistles, and the various weeds which choke the soil? But, my dear boy, if they
are not, which I think they are, for the benefit of man, at all events they are his doom for
the first transgression. Labour is in itself a benefit: without exercise there would be no
health, and without health there would be no enjoyment."

"I see now, papa. You have mentioned the animals which can live in all climates; will you not
tell us something about other animals?"

"There is but one remark to make, William, which is, that animals indigenous to, that is, originally
to be found in, any one portion of the globe, invariably are so fashioned as to be most fit
for that country, and have the food also most proper for them growing or to be obtained in
that country. Take, for instance, the camel, an animal fashioned expressly for the country
to which he is indigenous, and without whose aid all communication must have been stopped between
Asia and Africa. He is called the `Ship of the Desert'; for the desert is a `sea of sand'.
His feet are so fashioned that he can traverse the sands with facility; he can live upon the
coarsest vegetable food and salt plants which are found there, and he has the capacity of carrying
water in a sort of secondary stomach, for his own supply where no water is to be found. Here
is an animal wonderfully made by the Almighty for an express locality, and for the convenience
of man in that country; for, in England, or elsewhere, he would be of no value. But it is late,
my dear William; so we will first thank him for all his mercies, and then to bed."

Chapter LVII

The next morning was one of bustle; there was packing up and every preparation for departure.
Juno was called here and called there, and was obliged to ask little Caroline to look after
the kettle and call to her if it boiled over. Master Tommy, as usual, was in every one's way,
and doing more harm than good in his attempts to assist.

At last, Ready, to get rid of him, sent him down with a large bundle to the beach. Tommy shouldered
it with great importance, but when he came back, looking rather warm with the exertion, and
Ready asked him to take down another, he said he was too tired, and sat down very quietly till
breakfast-time, before which everything was ready.

Mrs. Seagrave and Juno packed up the breakfast and dinner things in a basket after breakfast
was over, and then Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave and the family set off on their journey, accompanied
by the dogs, through the cocoa-nut grove.

William and Ready lost no time in getting through their work; the crockery, kitchen utensils,
table, and chairs, were the first articles put into the boat. The goat was then led down, and
they set off with a full load, and arrived at the bay long before the party who were walking
through the wood. They landed the things on the beach, and then shoved off again to bring round
the bedding, which was all that was left. By three o'clock in the afternoon they had arrived
at the bay with their second and last load, and found that the other party had been there about
an hour, and Mr. Seagrave and Juno were very busy taking the articles up from the beach.

"Well, William," said Ready, "this is our last trip for some time, I expect; and so much the
better, for our little boat must have something done to her as soon as I can find time."

"Yes, indeed, Ready, she has done her work well. Do you know I feel as if I were coming home,
now that we are back to the bay. I really feel quite glad that we have left the tents. I found
the pigeons among the peas, Ready, so we must pick them as soon as we can. I think there were
near twenty of them. We shall have pigeon pies next year, I expect."

"If it pleases God that we live and do well," replied Ready, who had his eyes fixed upon the sea.

Before night everything was in its place again in the house, and as comfortable as before,
and as they were very tired, they went very early to bed, having first arranged what they should
do in the morning. At daylight Ready and William went down to the turtle-pond and speared a
turtle, for now the time was coming on for turning the turtle again, and the pond would soon
be filled. Having cut it up and put a portion of it into the pot, all ready for Mrs. Seagrave,
as soon as breakfast was over they proceeded to the storehouse.

After a little consultation with Mr. Seagrave, Ready marked out a square of cocoa-nut trees
surrounding the storehouse, so as to leave a space within them of about twenty yards each side,
which they considered large enough for the inclosure. These cocoa-nut trees were to serve as
the posts between which were to be fixed other cocoa-nut trees cut down, and about fourteen
feet high, so as to form a palisade or stockade, which could not be climbed over, and would
protect them from any attack of the savages.

As soon as the line of trees had been marked out, they set to work cutting down all the trees
within the line, and then outside to a distance of ten yards, so as to give them room for their
work. Ready cut out cross-pieces, to nail from tree to tree, and now they found the advantage
of having saved so many of the large spike nails, without which they never could have made
so good or so quick a job of it. Mr. Seagrave cut down trees, William and Juno sawed them off
at a proper length with one of the cross-cut saws, and then carried them to Ready. They soon
had more cut out than be could use, and then they dragged away the tops and branches, and piled
them at a distance on the ground, to use as winter fuel, while Mr. Seagrave helped Ready in
fixing up the palisades. They worked very hard that day, and were not sorry to go to bed. Ready,
however, took an opportunity to speak to William.

"I think," said he, "that now we are here again, it will be necessary to keep a sort of night-watch,
in case of accident. I shall not go to bed till it is quite dark, which it will be by nine
o'clock, and shall have my glass to examine the offing the last thing. You see, there is little
fear of the savages coming here in the night-time, but they may just before night or very early
in the morning, so one of us must be up again before daybreak, that is between two and three
o'clock in the morning, to see if there is anything to be seen of them; if there is not, of
course we may go to bed again, as they cannot arrive till many hours afterwards; and we must
watch the wind and weather, if it is favourable for them to come to us, which, indeed, the
wind will not be except at the commencement of the rainy season but it may be very light, and
then they would not care for its being against them. I've been thinking of it, William, a great
deal, and my idea is, that it will be at the beginning of the rainy season that we shall have
a visit, if we have one at all; for you see that the wind don't blow regular from one quarter,
as it does now, but is variable, and then they can make sail in their canoes, and come here
easily, instead of pulling between thirty and forty miles, which is hard work against wind
and current. Still, we must not be careless and we must keep a good look-out even now. I don't
want to fret your father and Mrs. Seagrave with my fears on the subject, but I tell you what
I really think, and what we ought to do."

"I agree with you, Ready, and I will take care to be up before daybreak, and examine very carefully
with the spy-glass as soon as the day dawns. You take the night part, and I will do the morning
part of the watching."

Chapter LVIII

For nearly a fortnight, the work upon the stockade continued without any intermission, when
a circumstance occurred which created the greatest alarm and excitement. One day, as the party
returned to dinner, Mrs. Seagrave said with surprise, "Why, was not Tommy with you?"

"No," replied Mr. Seagrave; "he has not been near us all day; he went with us after breakfast,
but did not remain a quarter of an hour."

"No, Missy; I tell Massa Tommy to help carry cocoa-nut leaves, and then he go away directly."

"Goodness! where can he be?" exclaimed Mrs. Seagrave, alarmed.

"I dare say he is picking up shells on the beach, ma'am," replied Ready, "or perhaps he is
in the garden. I will go and see."

"I see him - oh, mercy! - I see him," said Juno, pointing with her finger; "he in the boat,
and boat go to sea!"

It was but too true: there was Tommy in the boat, and the boat had drifted from the beach,
and was now a cable's length away from it, among the breakers.

William ran off like the wind, followed close by Mr. Seagrave and Ready, and at a distance
by Mrs. Seagrave and Juno; indeed, there was no time to be lost, for the wind was off the shore,
and in a short time the boat would have been out to sea.

William, as soon as he arrived at the beach, threw off his hat and jacket and dashed into the
water. He was already up to his middle, when old Ready, who had followed him, caught him by
the arm and said:

"William, go back immediately. I insist upon it. Your going can do no good, as you do not understand
the thing so well as I do; and go I will, so there will be double risk for nothing. Mr. Seagrave,
order him back. He will obey you. I insist upon it, sir."

"William," said Mr. Seagrave, "come back immediately, I command you."

William obeyed, but before he was clear of the water Ready had swam across to the first rocks
on the reef, and was now dashing through the pools between the rocks, towards the boat.

"Oh, father!" said William, "if that good old man is lost, I shall never forgive myself. Look,
father, one - two - three sharks, here, close to us. He has no chance. See, he is again in
deep water. God protect him!"

In the meantime, Mr. Seagrave, whose wife was now by his side, after glancing his eye a moment
at the sharks, which were within a few feet of the beach, had kept his gaze steadily upon Ready's
movements. If he passed through the passage of deep water between the rocks he might be considered
safe, as the boat was now beating on a reef on the other side, where the water was shallow.
It was a moment of intense anxiety. At last Ready had gained the reef, and had his hands upon
the rocks, and was climbing on them.

"He is safe, is he not?" whispered Mrs. Seagrave faintly.

"Yes; now I think he is," replied Mr. Seagrave, as Ready had gained a footing on the rocks,
where the water was but a little above his ankles. "I think there is no deep water between
him and the boat."

In another minute Ready was over the rocks, and had seized the gunnel of the boat.

"He is in the boat," cried William. "Thank God!"

"Yes, we must thank God, and that fervently," replied Mr. Seagrave. "Look at those monsters,"
continued he, pointing to the sharks; "how quick they swim to and fro; they have scented their
prey on the water. It is fortunate they are here."

"See, he has the boat-hook, and is pushing the boat off the reef into the deep water. Oh! he
is quite safe now."

Such, however, was not the case. The boat had been beating on the rocks of the reef, and had
knocked a hole in her bottom, and as soon as Ready had forced the boat into deep water, she
began to fill immediately. Ready pushed as hard as he could with the boat-hook, and tearing
off his neck-cloth, forced as much as he could of it into the hole. This saved them; but the
boat was up to the thwarts with water, and the least motion on the part of Ready, or even Tommy,
would have upset her immediately, and they had still to pass the deep water between the reef
and the beach, where the sharks were swimming. Ready, who perceived his danger, called out
to them to throw large stones at the sharks as fast as they could, to drive them away. This
was immediately done by Mr. Seagrave and William, aided by Juno and Mrs. Seagrave.

The pelting of the stones had the desired effect. The sharks swam away, and Ready passed through
to the beach, and the boat grounded just as she was up to the gunnel in water, and about to
turn over. He handed out Tommy, who was so dreadfully frightened that he could not cry.

As soon as Ready landed, William sprang into his arms, crying, "Thank God, you are safe, Ready!"
Mrs. Seagrave, overpowered by her feelings, sank her head upon William's shoulder, and burst
into tears.

"It was touch and go, William," observed Ready, as they walked up to the house, preceded by
Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave. "How much mischief may be created by a thoughtless boy! However, one
can't put old heads on young shoulders, and so Tommy must be forgiven."

"He has been punished enough, as far as fright goes," replied William; "I'll answer for it,
he'll never get into the boat again by himself."

"No, I think not. But now, William, you saw how nearly I was swamped in the boat; indeed, it
was only by his mercy that I was preserved; but taking the question merely as far as our endeavours
could help us, do you think that if you had gained the boat instead of me, you would have brought
her to the beach as I did?"

"No, Ready; I never could have managed her so skilfully as you did, and therefore I must have
been swamped before I got on shore."

"Well, William, as I am an old sailor and you are not, therefore it is not vanity which makes
me say that you could not have managed the boat so well as I did. Now, as I had not three or
four seconds to spare, you, as you say, must have been swamped. I mention this to prove to
you that I was right in desiring your father to order you back."

"Certainly, Ready; but Tommy is my brother, and I felt that it was more my duty than yours
to risk my life for him."

"A very proper feeling, William; but you have other duties, which are, to look after your father
and mother, and be a comfort and solace to them. Your life is more valuable than mine. I am
an old man on the brink of the grave, and a year or two makes no difference, but your life
is, I hope, of more consequence."

That evening the prayers were more than usually solemn, and the thanksgivings more heartfelt
and sincere. Exhausted with the exciting scene of the day, they all retired early to bed.

Chapter LIX

When Tommy was questioned on the following morning as to his inducement to get into the boat,
to their great surprise he replied, that he wanted to go round to the tents again, to see if
the bananas were ripe; that he intended to eat some of them and be back before dinner-time,
that he might not be found out.

"I suspect, Tommy, you would have been very hungry before you ate any bananas if we had not
perceived you," said Ready.

"I won't go into the boat any more," said Tommy.

"I rather think you will keep to that resolution, Tommy," replied Mr. Seagrave; "however, I
must leave your mother to point out to you the danger you were in yourself, and in which you
placed others by your folly."

The stockade was now almost finished; the door was the occasion of a good deal of consultation;
at last, it was agreed that it would be better to have a door of stout oak plank, but with
second door-posts inside, about a foot apart from the door, between which could be inserted
short poles one above the other, so as to barricade it within when required. This would make
the door as strong as any other portion of the stockade. As soon as this was all complete,
the storehouse was to be altered for a dwelling-house, by taking away the wattles of cocoa-nut
boughs on the sides, and filling them up with logs of cocoa-nut trees.

Before the week was ended the stockade and door were complete, and they now began to fell trees,
to form the sides of the house. This was rapid work; and while Mr. Seagrave, William, and Juno
felled the trees, and brought them on the wheels to the side of the stockade, all ready cut
to their proper lengths, Ready was employed in flooring the house with a part of the deal planks
which they had brought round from the cove. But this week they were obliged to break off for
two days, to collect all their crops from the garden.

A fortnight more passed away in continual hard work, but the house was at last finished, and
very complete, compared to the one they were residing in. It was much larger, and divided into
three rooms by the deal planking: the middle room which the door opened into was the sitting
and eating room, with a window behind; the two side rooms were sleeping-rooms, one for Mrs.
Seagrave and the children, and the other for the male portion of the family.

"See, William," said Ready, when they were alone, "what we have been able to do by means of
those deal planks; why, to have floored this house, and run up the partitions, would have taken
us half a year if we had had to saw the wood."

"Yes; and what a comfort it is to have so many shelves about. When shall we shift into this house?"

"The sooner the better. We have plenty of work still to do, but we can work outside of the
stockade."

"And what do you propose to do with the old house?" said William.

"We had better put some of our stores of least value in it for the present, until we can fit
up another storehouse inside the stockade."

"Then we'll put those casks in, for they take up a great deal of room."

"All but that large one, William; we shall want that. I shall fix it up in a corner."

"What for, Ready?"

"To put water in."

"But we are closer to the spring than we were at the other house."

"I know that; but, perhaps, we may not be able to go out of the stockade, and then we shall
want water."

"I understand, Ready; how thoughtful you are!"

"If at my age I did not think a little, William, it would be very odd. You don't know how anxious
I am to see them all inside of this defence."

"But why should we not come in, Ready?"

"Why, sir, as there is still plenty of work, I do not like to press the matter, lest your mamma
should be fidgeted, and think there was danger; but danger there is; I have a kind of forewarning
of it. I wish you would propose that they should come in at once; the standing-bed places are
all ready, except the canvas, and I shall nail on new by to-night."

In consequence of this conversation, William proposed at dinnertime that the next day they
should go into the new house, as it was so much more handy to work there and live there at
the same time. Mr. Seagrave was of the same opinion, but Mrs. Seagrave thought it better that
everything should be tidy first.

"Why, ma'am," said Ready, "the only way to get things tidy is to go yourself and make them
so. Nothing will ever be in its place unless you are there to put it in."

"Well, Ready," said Mrs. Seagrave, "since you are against me as well as all the rest, I give
it up. and if you please we will shift over to-morrow."

"Indeed, ma'am, I think it will be better; this is the last month of fine weather, and we shall
have plenty to do."

"Be it so, Ready; you are the best judge; to-morrow we will take up our quarters in the stockade."

"Thank God!" muttered Ready very softly.

The next day was fully employed in changing their residence, and shifting over the bedding
and utensils; and that night they slept within the stockade. Ready had run up a very neat little
outhouse of plank, as a kitchen for Juno, and another week was fully employed as follows: the
stores were divided; those of least consequence, and the salt provisions, flour, and the garden
produce, &c., were put into the old house; the casks of powder and most of the cartridges were
also put there for security; but a cask of beef, of pork, and flour, all the iron-work and
nails, canvas, &c., were stowed away for the present under the new house, which had, when built
as a storehouse, been raised four feet from the ground to make a shelter for the stock. This
was very spacious, and, of course, quite dry, and contained all they wished to put in. Ready
also took care, by degrees, to fill the large water-butt full of water, and had fixed into
the bottom a spigot for drawing the water off.

"Well, Mr. Seagrave," said Ready on the Saturday, "we have done a good many hard weeks' work
lately, but this is the last of them. We are now comfortably settled in our new house: our
stores are all under cover, and safe from the weather, and so we may now take things a little
easier. William and I must repair the boat, so that we may take a trip round to examine how
the stock and yams get on."

"And the bananas and the guavas," said Tommy.

"Why, we have quite forgotten all about them," observed Mrs. Seagrave.

"Yes, ma am; we have been so busy, that it is no wonder; however, there may be some left yet,
and I will go round as soon as the boat is able to swim, and bring all I can find."

"We must put our seeds and potatoes in before the rainy season, Ready."

"It will be better, sir, if we can find time, as we shall not have much more fine weather now;
at all events, we can get them in at intervals when the weather is fine. Now I shall go my
rounds for turtle. Good-night, ma'am, - good-night, sir. Come, William."

William and Ready succeeded in turning six more turtles to add to their stock, and having taken
a careful survey with the telescope, they came back, fastened the door of the stockade, and
went to bed.

Chapter LX

Another week passed away, during which Ready repaired the boat, and William and Mr. Seagrave
were employed in digging up the garden. It was also a very busy week at the house, as they
had not washed linen for some time. Mrs. Seagrave and Juno, and even little Caroline were hard
at work, and Tommy was more useful than ever he had been, going for the water as they required
it, and watching little Albert. Indeed, he was so active, that Mrs. Seagrave praised him before
his papa, and Tommy was quite proud.

On the Monday William and Ready set off in the boat to the little harbour, and found all the
stock doing well. Many of the bananas and guavas had ripened and withered, but there were enough
left to fill the boat half full.

"We cannot do better than to leave the stock where it is at present, William; they can run
into the cocoa-nut grove for shelter if there is a storm, and there is feed enough for ten
times as many."

"Yes; but will you not dig up a few yams first?"

"I had quite forgotten it, William. I will go for the spade."

Having procured the yams, they set off on their return. Before they arrived at the bay, the
sky clouded over and threatened a storm. It did not, however, rain till after they had landed,
when a small shower announced the commencement of the rainy season. The fruit was very welcome
to all of them, it was so long since they had tasted any.

The following day was beautifully fine, and everything appeared refreshed by the rain which
had fallen. It was, however, agreed, that Ready and William should go round the next morning,
bring home the tents, and as many yams as the boat could carry. William and Ready went out
at night as usual, when Ready observed that the wind had chopped round to the eastward.

"That will be bad for us to-morrow, Ready," replied William. "We may sail to the harbour, but
we shall have to pull back with the loaded boat."

"I trust it will be no worse than that, at all events," replied Ready; "but we must now return,
and go to bed. I shall be up by daylight, so you need not wake without you like."

"I can't help waking," replied William, "and I shall, therefore, be up with you."

"Very well, I am always glad of your company."

The next morning, just before the day dawned, Ready and William unfastened the door of the
stockade, and went down to the beach. The wind was still to the eastward, and blowing rather
fresh, and the sky was cloudy. As the sun rose, Ready, as usual, had his telescope with him,
and looked through it at the offing to the eastward. As he kept the spy-glass to his eye for
some time without speaking, William said:

"Do you see anything, Ready, that you look so long in that direction?"

"Either my old eyes deceive me, or I fear that I do," replied Ready; "but a few minutes more
will decide."

There was a bank of clouds on the horizon to the eastward, but as soon as the sun had risen
above them, Ready, who had the telescope fixed in the same direction, said:

"Yes, William, I am right. I thought that those dark patches I saw there were brown grass sails."

"Sails of what, Ready?" said William, hastily.

"Of the Indian canoes; I knew that they would come. Take the glass and look yourself; my eye
is quite dim from straining it so long."

"Yes, I have them now," replied William, with his eye to the glass. At last he said:

"Why, there are twenty or thirty of them, Ready, at least."

"And with twenty or thirty men in each too, William."

"What must we do, Ready? How frightened my poor mother will be! I'm afraid we can do nothing
against such a number."

"Yes, William, we can do a great deal, and we must do a great deal. That there are hundreds
of savages there is no doubt; but recollect that we have a stockade, which they cannot easily
climb over, and plenty of firearms and ammunition, so that we can make a good fight of it,
and perhaps beat them off, for they have nothing but clubs and spears."

"How fast they come down, Ready; why, they will be here in an hour."

"No, sir, nor in two hours either; those are very large canoes. However, there is no time to
be lost. While I watch them for a few minutes till I make them more clearly out, do you run
up to the house and beckon your father to come down to me; and then, William, get all the muskets
ready, and bring the casks of powder, and of made-up cartridges, from the old house into the
stockade. Call Juno, and she will help you. We shall have time enough to do everything. After
you have done that, you had better come down and join us."

In a very few minutes after William ran up to the house, Mr. Seagrave made his appearance.

"Ready, there is danger, I'm sure; William would not tell me, I presume, because he was afraid
of alarming his mother. What is it?"

"It is, Mr. Seagrave, that the savages are now coming down upon us in large force; perhaps
five or six hundred of them; and that we shall have to defend ourselves with might and main."

"Do you think we have any chance against such a force?"

"Yes, sir, with God's help I have no doubt but that we shall beat them off; but we must fight
hard, and for some days, I fear."

Mr. Seagrave examined the fleet of canoes with the glass. "It is, indeed, dreadful odds to
contend against."

"Yes, sir, but three muskets behind a stockade are almost a match for all their clubs and spears,
provided none of us are wounded."

"Well, Ready, we must put our trust in the Lord, and do our best; I will second you to the
utmost of my power, and William, I'm sure, will do his duty."

"I think, sir," said Ready, "we had better not wait here any more, as we have not long to prepare
for them. We have only to fix up some of our strong deal planks on the inside of the stockade
for us to stand upon when we are attacked, that we may see what the enemy is about, and be
able to fire upon them. But first we had better go to the old house, and take out what provisions
and other articles we shall most want, and roll the casks into the stockade, for to the old
house they will go first, and perhaps destroy everything in it. The casks they certainly will,
for the sake of the iron hoops. An hour's work will do a great deal. I believe we have everything
we want in the stockade; Juno has her fuel, the large butt of water will last us two or three
weeks at least, and if we have time, we will get the wheels down, and spear a couple of turtles
for fresh provisions."

These observations were made as they walked up to the house. As soon as they arrived, they
found William and Juno had just brought in the powder and cartridges. Mr. Seagrave went in
to break the matter to his wife.

"I was told that I had to expect this, my dear," replied Mrs. Seagrave, "so that it has not
come upon me altogether unawares, and anything that a poor weak woman can do, I will."

"I am indeed greatly relieved," said Mr. Seagrave, "by finding you thus prepared and supported.
I shall feel no anxiety - but we have work to be done."

Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave then joined William, Beady, and Juno, who had already proceeded to the
old house. The children were all still in bed and asleep, so that there was no occasion for
any one to watch them.

Chapter LXI

As they could have a very good view of the canoes from where the old house stood, Ready examined
them with his glass every time that he returned from rolling up a cask to the stockade. Every
one worked hard; even Mrs. Seagrave did all she could, either assisting in rolling the casks,
or carrying up what she was able to lift. In an hour they had got into the stockade all that
they most cared for, and the canoes were still about six or seven miles off.

"We have a good hour before they arrive, sir," said Ready, "and even then the reefs will puzzle
them not a little; I doubt if they are disembarked under two hours. We have plenty of time
for all we wish to do. Juno, go for the wheels, and William, come down with the spear, and
we will have some of the turtle into the stockade. Mr. Seagrave, I do not require your assistance,
so if you will have the kindness to get out the muskets, and examine the flints, it will be
as well."

"Yes; and then you have to load them," replied Mrs. Seagrave. "Juno and I can do that at all
events, ready for you to fire them."

"An excellent idea, madam," replied Ready.

In half an hour six turtles were brought up by Juno and William, and then Ready followed them
into the stockade.

They then rolled the casks, and upheaded them by the sides of the stockade, and fixed up deal
planks to stand upon, just high enough to enable them to see over the top of the palisades,
and to fire at the enemy. Mrs. Seagrave had been shown how to load a musket, and Juno was now
taught the same.

"Now, sir, we are all prepared," said Ready, "and Madam and Juno can go and look a little after
the children, and get breakfast."

As soon as the children were dressed, Mr. Seagrave called Ready, who was outside, watching
the canoes, and they went to their morning devotions, and prayed heartily for succour in this
time of need. They then breakfasted in haste; for, as may be supposed, they were almost too
anxious to eat.

"This suspense is worse than all," said Mrs. Seagrave. "I wish now that they were come."

"Shall I go to Ready and hear his report, my dear? - I will not be away three minutes."

In a short time Mr. Seagrave returned, saying that the canoes were close to the beach, that
the savages evidently had a knowledge of the passages through the reefs, as they had steered
right in, and had lowered their sails; that Ready and William were on the look-out, but concealed
behind the cocoa-nut trees.

"I hope they will not stay out too long."

"No fear of that, my dear Selina; but they had better watch their motions to the last minute."

During this conversation between Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave within the stockade, William and Ready
were watching the motions of the savages, a large portion of whom had landed out of ten of
the canoes, and the others were following their example as fast as they could, forcing their
way through the reefs. The savages were all painted, with their war-cloaks and feathers on,
and armed with spears and clubs, evidently having come with no peaceable intentions.

William, who had taken the telescope to examine them more minutely, said to Ready, "What a
fierce, cruel set of wretches they appear to be; if they overpower us they will certainly kill us!"

"Of that there is no doubt, William; but we must fight hard, and not let them overpower us.
Kill us they certainly will, and I am not sure that they may not eat us afterwards; but that
is of little consequence."

William replied in a determined tone, "I'll fight as long as I have breath in my body; but,
Ready, they are coming up as fast as they can."

"Yes; we must wait no longer. Come, William."

"I thought I saw another vessel under sail, out away by the garden point, Ready, just as we
turned away."

"Very likely, sir, a canoe which has separated from the others during the night. Come, quick,
William, they have begun to yell."

Another half-minute, and they arrived at the door of the stockade; they entered, shut the door,
and then barricaded it with the cocoa-nut poles which they had fitted to the inner door-posts.

Chapter LXII

The loud yells of the savages struck terror into the heart of Mrs. Seagrave; it was well that
she had not seen their painted bodies and fierce appearance, or she would have been much more
alarmed. Little Albert and Caroline clung around her neck with terror in their faces; they
did not cry, but looked round and round to see from whence the horrid noise proceeded, and
then clung faster to their mother. Tommy was very busy, finishing all the breakfast which had
been left, for there was no one to check him as usual; Juno was busy outside, and was very
active and courageous. Mr. Seagrave had been employed making the holes between the palisades
large enough to admit the barrels of the muskets, so that they could fire at the savages without
being exposed; while William and Ready, with. their muskets loaded, were on the look-out for
their approach.

"They are busy with the old house just now, sir," observed Ready, "but that won't detain them
long."

"Here they come," replied William; "and look, Ready, is not that one of the women who escaped
from us in the canoe, who is walking along with the first two men? Yes, it is, I am sure."

"You are right, William, it is one of them. Ah! they have stopped; they did not expect the
stockade, that is clear, and it has puzzled them; see how they are all crowding together and
talking; they are holding a council of war how to proceed; that tall man must be one of their
chiefs. Now, William, although I intend to fight as hard as I can, yet I always feel a dislike
to begin first; I shall therefore show myself over the palisades, and if they attack me, I
shall then fire with a quiet conscience."

"But take care they don't hit you, Ready."

"No great fear of that, William. Here they come."

Ready now stood upon the plank within, so as to show himself to the savages, who gave a tremendous
yell, and as they advanced a dozen spears were thrown at him with so true an aim that, had
he not instantly dodged behind the stockade, he must have been killed. Three or four spears
remained quivering in the palisades, just below the top; the others went over it, and fell
down inside of the stockade, at the further end.

"Now, William, take good aim;" but before William could fire, Mr. Seagrave, who had agreed
to be stationed at the corner so that he might see if the savages went round to the other side,
fired his musket, and the tall chief fell to the ground.

Ready and William also fired, and two more of the savages were seen to drop amidst the yells
of their companions. Juno handed up the other muskets which were ready loaded, and took those
discharged, and Mrs. Seagrave, having desired Caroline to take care of her little brother,
and Tommy to be very quiet and good, came out, turned the key of the door upon them, and hastened
to assist Juno in reloading the muskets.

The spears now rushed through the air, and it was well that they could fire from the stockade
without exposing their persons, or they would have had but little chance. The yells increased,
and the savages now began to attack on every quarter; the most active, who climbed like cats,
actually succeeded in gaining the top of the palisades, but, as soon as their heads appeared
above, they were fired at with so true an aim that they dropped down dead outside. This combat
lasted for more than an hour, when the savages, having lost a great many men, drew off from
the assault, and the parties within the stockade had time to breathe.

"They have not gained much in this bout, at all events," said Ready; "it was well fought on
our side, and William, you certainly behaved as if you had been brought up to it."

"Do you think they will go away now?" said Mrs. Seagrave.

"Oh, no, madam, not yet; they will try us every way before they leave us. You see these are
very brave men, and it is clear that they know what gunpowder is, or they would have been more
astonished."

"I should think so too," replied Mr. Seagrave; "the first time that savages hear the report
of firearms, they are usually thrown into great consternation."

"Yes, sir; but such has not been the case with these people, and therefore I reckon it is not
the first time that they have fought with Europeans."

"Are they all gone, Ready?" said William, who had come down from the plank to his mother.

"No; I see them between the trees now; they are sitting round in a circle, and, I suppose,
making speeches."

"Well, I'm very thirsty, at all events," said William; "Juno, bring me a little water."

Juno went to the water-tub to comply with William's request, and in a few moments afterwards
came back in great consternation.

"Oh, Massa! oh, Missy! no water; water all gone!"

"Water all gone!" cried Ready and all of them in a breath.

"Yes; not one little drop in the cask."

"I filled it up to the top!" exclaimed Ready very gravely; "the tub did not leak, that I am
sure of; how can this have happened?"

"Missy, I tink I know now," said Juno; "you remember you send Massa Tommy, the two or three
days we wash, to fetch water from the well in little bucket. You know how soon be come back,
and how you say what good boy he was, and how you tell Massa Seagrave when he come to dinner.
Now, Missy, I quite certain Massa Tommy no take trouble go to well, but fetch water from tub
all the while, and so he empty it."

"I'm afraid you're right, Juno," replied Mrs. Seagrave. "What shall we do?"

"I go speak Massa Tommy," said Juno, running to the house.

"This is a very awkward thing, Mr. Seagrave," observed Ready gravely.

Mr. Seagrave shook his head.

The fact was, that they all perceived the danger of their position: if the savages did not
leave the island, they would perish of thirst or have to surrender; and in the latter case,
all their lives would most certainly be sacrificed.

Juno now returned: her suspicions were but too true. Tommy, pleased with the praise of being
so quick in bringing the water, had taken out the spigot of the cask, and drawn it all off.

"Well," observed Mr. Seagrave, "it is the will of Heaven that all our careful arrangements
and preparations against this attack should be defeated by the idleness of a child, and we
must submit."

"Very true, sir," replied Ready; "all our hopes now are that the savages may be tired out,
and leave the island."

"If I had but a little for the children, I should not care," observed Mrs. Seagrave; "but to
see those poor things suffer - is there not a drop left, Juno, anywhere?"

Juno shook her head.

Mrs. Seagrave said she would go and examine, and went away into the house accompanied by Juno.

"This is a very bad business, Ready," observed Mr. Seagrave. "What would we give for a shower
of rain now, that we might catch the falling drops!"

"There are no signs of it, sir," replied Ready; "we must, however, put our confidence in One
who will not forsake us."

"I wish the savages would come on again," observed William; "for the sooner they come, the
sooner the affair will be decided."

"I doubt if they will to-day; at night-time I think it very probable. We must make preparations
for it."

"Why, what can we do, Ready?"

"In the first place, sir, by nailing planks from cocoa-nut tree to cocoa-nut tree above the
present stockade, we may make a great portion of it much higher, and more difficult to climb
over. Some of them were nearly in, this time. If we do that, we shall not have so large a space
to watch over and defend; and then we must contrive to have a large fire ready for lighting,
that we may not have to fight altogether in the dark. It will give them some advantage in looking
through the palisades, and seeing where we are, but they cannot well drive their spears through,
so it is no great matter. We must make the fire in the centre of the stockade, and have plenty
of tar in it, to make it burn bright, and we must not, of course, light it until after we are
attacked. We shall then see where they are trying for an entrance, and where to aim with our
muskets."

"The idea is very good, Ready," said Mr. Seagrave; "if it had not been for this unfortunate
want of water, I really should be sanguine of beating them off."

"We may suffer very much, Mr. Seagrave, I have no doubt; but who knows what the morrow may
bring forth?"

"True, Ready. Do you see the savages now?"

"No, sir; they have left the spot where they were in consultation. I suppose they are busy
with their wounded and their dead."

As Ready had supposed, no further attack was made by the savages on that day, and he, William,
and Mr. Seagrave, were very busy making their arrangements; they nailed the planks on the trunks
of the trees above the stockade, so as to make three sides of the stockade at least five feet
higher, and almost impossible to climb up; and they prepared a large fire in a tar-barrel full
of cocoa-nut leaves mixed with wood and tar, so as to burn fiercely. Dinner or supper they
had none, for there was nothing but salt pork and beef and live turtle, and, by Ready's advice,
they did not eat, as it would only increase their desire to drink.

The poor children suffered much; and little Albert wailed and cried for "water, water." Ready
remained on the look-out; indeed, everything was so miserable inside of the house, that they
were all glad to go out of it; they could do no good, and poor Mrs. Seagrave had a difficult
and most painful task to keep the children quiet under such severe privation, for the weather
was still very warm and sultry.

Chapter LXIII

But the moaning of the children was very soon after dusk drowned by the yells of the savages,
who, as Ready had prognosticated, now advanced to the night attack.

Every part of the stockade was at once assailed, and their attempts now made were to climb
into it; a few spears were occasionally thrown, but it was evident that the object was to obtain
an entrance by dint of numbers. It was well that Ready had taken the precaution of nailing
the deal planks above the original stockade, or there is little doubt but that the savages
would have gained their object; as it was, before the flames of the fire, which Juno had lighted
by Ready's order, gave them sufficient light, three or four savages had climbed up and had
been shot by William and Mr. Seagrave, as they were on the top of the stockade.

When the fire burnt brightly, the savages outside were more easily aimed at, and a great many
fell in their attempts to get over. The attack continued more than an hour, when at last, satisfied
that they could not succeed, the savages once more withdrew, carrying with them, as before,
their dead and wounded.

"I trust that they will now re-embark, and leave the island," said Mr. Seagrave.

"I only wish they may, sir; it is not at all impossible; but there is no saying. I have been
thinking, Mr. Seagrave, that we might be able to ascertain their movements by making a look-out.
You see, sir, that cocoa-nut tree," continued Ready, pointing to one of those to which the
palisades were fastened, "is much taller than any of the others: now, by driving spike-nails
into the trunk at about a foot apart, we might ascend it with ease, and it would command a
view of the whole bay; we then could know what the enemy were about." 

There was a strong wish on the part of Mrs. Morley to bring about
the union of these two.

She had a great regard and a great admiration for both. To her mind, unconscious of all Graham's
doubts and prejudices, they were exactly suited to each other. A man of intellect so cultivated
as Graham's, if married to a commonplace English "Miss," would surely
feel as if life had no sunshine and no flowers.

The love of an Isaura would steep it in sunshine, pave it with flowers. Mrs. Morley admitted
--all American Republicans of gentle birth do admit--the instincts
which lead "like" to match with "like," an equality of blood and race.

With all her assertion of the Rights of Woman, I do not think that
Mrs. Morley would ever have conceived the possibility of consenting
that the richest and prettiest and cleverest girl in the States could
become the wife of a son of hers if the girl had the taint of negro
blood, even though shown nowhere save the slight distinguishing hue
of her finger-nails.

So had Isaura's merits been threefold what they were and she had been the wealthy heiress
of a retail grocer, this fair Republican would have opposed (more strongly than many an English
duchess, or at least a Scotch duke, would do, the wish of a son),
the thought of an alliance between Graham Vane and the grocer's daughter!

But Isaura was a Cicogna, an offspring of a very ancient and very
noble house.

Disparities of fortune, or mere worldly position, Mrs. Morley supremely despised. Here were
the great parities of alliance,--parities in years and good looks
and mental culture.

So, in short, she in the invitation given to them had planned for the union between Isaura
and Graham.

To this plan she had an antagonist, whom she did not even guess, in Madame Savarin. That lady,
as much attached to Isaura as was Mrs. Morley herself, and still
more desirous of seeing a girl, brilliant and parentless, transferred
from the companionship of Signora Venosta to the protection of a husband,
entertained no belief in the serious attentions of Graham Vane.

Perhaps she exaggerated his worldly advantages, perhaps she undervalued
the warmth of his affections; but it was not within the range of her
experience, confined much to Parisian life, nor in harmony with her
notions of the frigidity and morgue of the English national character,
that a rich and high-born young man, to whom a great career in practical
public life was predicted, should form a matrimonial alliance with
a foreign orphan girl, who, if of gentle birth, had no useful connections,
would bring no correspondent dot, and had been reared and intended
for the profession of the stage.

She much more feared that the result of any attentions on the part
of such a man would be rather calculated to compromise the orphan's
name, or at least to mislead her expectations, than to secure her
the shelter of a wedded home.

Moreover, she had cherished plans of her own for Isaura's future. Madame Savarin had conceived
for Gustave Rameau a friendly regard, stronger than that which Mrs. Morley entertained for
Graham Vane, for it was more motherly. Gustave had been familiarized to her sight and her thoughts
since he had first been launched into the literary world under her husband's auspices; he had
confided to her his mortification in his failures, his joy in his
successes.

His beautiful countenance, his delicate health, his very infirmities and defects, had endeared him
to her womanly heart. Isaura was the wife of all others who, in Madame
Savarin's opinion, was made for Rameau.

Her fortune, so trivial beside the wealth of the Englishman, would be a competence to Rameau;
then that competence might swell into vast riches if Isaura succeeded
on the stage.

She found with extreme displeasure that Isaura's mind had become estranged from the profession
to which she had been destined, and divined that a deference to the
Englishman's prejudices had something to do with that estrangement.

It was not to be expected that a Frenchwoman, wife to a sprightly man of letters, who had intimate
friends and allies in every department of the artistic world, should
cherish any prejudice whatever against the exercise of an art in which
success achieved riches and renown; but she was prejudiced, as most
Frenchwomen are, against allowing to unmarried girls the same freedom
and independence of action that are the rights of women--French women--when
married; and she would have disapproved the entrance of Isaura on
her professional career until she could enter it as a wife, the wife
of an artist, the wife of Gustave Rameau.

Unaware of the rivalry between these friendly diplomatists and schemers,
Graham and Isaura glided hourly more and more down the current, which
as yet ran smooth.

No words by which love is spoken were exchanged between them; in
fact, though constantly together, they were very rarely, and then
but for moments, alone with each other.

Mrs. Morley artfully schemed more than once to give them such opportunities for that mutual
explanation of heart which, she saw, had not yet taken place; with art more practised and more
watchful, Madame Savarin contrived to baffle her hostess's intention. But, indeed, neither Graham
nor Isaura sought to make opportunities for themselves. He, as we know, did not deem himself wholly
justified in uttering the words of love by which a man of honour
binds himself for life; and she!--what girl pure-hearted and loving
truly does not shrink from seeking the opportunities which it is for
the man to court?

Yet Isaura needed no words to tell her that she was loved,--no, nor even a pressure of the hand,
a glance of the eye; she felt it instinctively, mysteriously, by the glow of her own being
in the presence of her lover. She knew that she herself could not so love unless she were beloved.

Here
woman's wit is keener and truthfuller than man's. Graham, as I have said, did not feel confident that
he had reached the heart of Isaura. He was conscious that he had engaged her interest, that
he had attracted her fancy; but often, when charmed by the joyous play of her imagination, he
would sigh to himself, "To natures so gifted what single mortal can
be the all in all."

They spent the summer mornings in excursions round the beautiful neigbbourhood,
dined early, and sailed on the calm lake at moonlight.

Their talk was such as might be expected from lovers of books in summer holidays. Savarin was
a critic by profession; Graham Vane, if not that, at least owed such
literary reputation as he had yet gained to essays in which the rare
critical faculty was conspicuously developed.

It was pleasant to hear the clash of these two minds encountering each other; they differed perhaps
less in opinions than in the mode by which opinions are discussed. The Englishman's range of reading
was wider than the Frenchman's, and his scholarship more accurate;
but the Frenchman had a compact neatness of expression, a light and
nimble grace, whether in the advancing or the retreat of his argument,
which covered deficiencies, and often made them appear like merits.

Graham was compelled, indeed, to relinquish many of the forces of superior knowledge or graver
eloquence, which with less lively antagonists he could have brought into the field, for the
witty sarcasm of Savarin would have turned them aside as pedantry
or declamation.

But though Graham was neither dry nor diffuse, and the happiness at his heart brought out the
gayety of humour which had been his early characteristic, and yet rendered his familiar intercourse
genial and playful, still there was this distinction between his humour and Savarin's wit,--that
in the first there was always something earnest, in the last always something mocking. And in
criticism Graham seemed ever anxious to bring out a latent beauty, even in writers comparatively
neglected; Savarin was acutest when dragging forth a blemish never
before discovered in writers universally read.

Graham did not perhaps notice the profound attention with which Isaura listened to him in these
intellectual skirmishes with the more glittering Parisian.

There was this distinction she made between him and Savarin,-- when
the last spoke she often chimed in with some happy sentiment of her
own; but she never interrupted Graham, never intimated a dissent from
his theories of art, or the deductions he drew from them; and she
would remain silent and thoughtful for some minutes when his voice
ceased.

There was passing from his mind into hers an ambition which she imagined, poor girl, that he would
be pleased to think he had inspired, and which might become a new bond of sympathy between them.
But as yet the ambition was vague and timid,--an idea or a dream to be fulfilled in some indefinite
future.

The last night of this short-lived holiday-time, the party, after
staying out on the lake to a later hour than usual, stood lingering
still on the lawn of the villa; and their host, who was rather addicted
to superficial studies of the positive sciences, including, of course,
the most popular of all, astronomy, kept his guests politely listening
to speculative conjectures on the probable size of the inhabitants
of Sirius, that very distant and very gigantic inhabitant of heaven
who has led philosophers into mortifying reflections upon the utter
insignificance of our own poor little planet, capable of producing
nothing greater than Shakspeares and Newtons, Aristotles and Caesars,--mannikins,
no doubt, beside intellects proportioned to the size of the world
in which they flourish.

As it chanced, Isaura and Graham were then standing close to each other and a little apart from
the rest. "It is very strange," said Graham, laughing low, "how little I care about Sirius.
He is the sun of some other system, and is perhaps not habitable at all, except by Salamanders.
He cannot be one of the stars with which I have established familiar
acquaintance, associated with fancies and dreams and hopes, as most
of us do, for instance, with Hesperus, the moon's harbinger and comrade.

But amid all those stars there is one--not Hesperus--which has always
had from my childhood a mysterious fascination for me.

Knowing as little of astrology as I do of astronomy, when I gaze upon that star I become credulously
superstitious, and fancy it has an influence on my life.

Have you, too, any favourite star?"

"Yes," said Isaura; "and I distinguish it now, but I do not even know its name, and never would
ask it."

"So like me.

I would not vulgarize my unknown source of beautiful illusions by giving it the name it takes in
technical catalogues. For fear of learning that name I never have
pointed it out to any one before.

I too at this moment distinguish it apart from all its brotherhood. Tell me which is yours."

Isaura pointed and explained. The Englishman was startled. By what strange coincidence could they
both have singled out from all the host of heaven the same favourite star? "Cher Vane," cried
Savarin, "Colonel Morley declares that what America is to the terrestrial system Sirius is
to the heavenly. America is to extinguish Europe, and then Sirius is to extinguish the world."

"Not
for some millions of years; time to look about us," said the Colonel, gravely. "But I certainly
differ from those who maintain that Sirius recedes from us.

I say that he approaches. The principles of a body so enlightened
must be those of progress."

Then addressing Graham in English, he added, "there will be a mulling in this fogified planet some
day, I predicate. Sirius is a keener!"

"I have not imagination lively enough to interest myself in the destinies of Sirius in connection
with our planet at a date so remote," said Graham, smiling. Then he added in a whisper to Isaura,
"My imagination does not carry me further than to wonder whether this day twelvemonth-- the 8th
of July-we two shall both be singling out that same star, and gazing
on it as now, side by side."

This was the sole utterance of that sentiment in which the romance of love is so rich that the
Englishman addressed to Isaura during those memorable summer days at Enghien.

CHAPTER V.

The next morning the party broke up. Letters had been delivered both to Savarin and to Graham,
which, even had the day for departure not been fixed, would have summoned them away. On reading
his letter, Savarin's brow became clouded. He made a sign to his wife after breakfast, and wandered
away with her down an alley in the little garden. His trouble was of that nature which a wife
either soothes or aggravates, according sometimes to her habitual frame of mind, sometimes to
the mood of temper in which she may chance to be,--a household trouble, a pecuniary trouble.

Savarin
was by no means an extravagant man.

His mode of living, though elegant and hospitable, was modest compared to that of many French
authors inferior to himself in the fame which at Paris brings a very
good return in francs; but his station itself as the head of a powerful
literary clique necessitated many expenses which were too congenial
to his extreme good-nature to be regulated by strict prudence.

His hand was always open to distressed writers and struggling artists, and his sole income was
derived from his pen and a journal in which he was chief editor and formerly sole proprietor.
But that journal had of late not prospered.

He had sold or pledged a considerable share in the proprietorship. He had been compelled also
to borrow a sum large for him, and the debt obtained from a retired bourgeois who lent out
his moneys "by way," he said, "of maintaining an excitement and interest in life," would in
a few days become due. The letter was not from that creditor; but it was from his publisher,
containing a very disagreeable statement of accounts, pressing for settlement, and declining
an offer of Savarin for a new book (not yet begun) except upon terms that the author valued
himself too highly to accept. Altogether, the situation was unpleasant. There were many times
in which Madame Savarin presumed to scold her distinguished husband for his want of prudence
and thrift. But those were never the times when scolding could be
of no use.

It could clearly be of no use now. Now was the moment to cheer and encourage him; to reassure
him as to his own undiminished powers and popularity, for he talked dejectedly of himself as obsolete
and passing out of fashion; to convince him also of the impossibility that the ungrateful
publisher whom Savarin's more brilliant successes had enriched could encounter the odium of hostile
proceedings; and to remind him of all the authors, all the artists, whom he in their earlier difficulties
had so liberally assisted, and from whom a sum sufficing to pay the bourgeois creditor when the
day arrived could now be honourably asked and would be readily contributed.

In this last suggestion the homely prudent good-sense of Madame Savarin failed her. She did
not comprehend that delicate pride of honour which, with all his
Parisian frivolities and cynicism, dignified the Parisian man of genius.

Savarin could not, to save his neck from a rope, have sent round the begging-hat to friends
whom he had obliged. Madame Savarin was one of those women with large-lobed ears, who can be
wonderfully affectionate, wonderfully sensible, admirable wives and mothers, and yet are deficient
in artistic sympathies with artistic natures. Still, a really good honest wife is such an incalculable
blessing to her lord, that, at the end of the talk in the solitary
alley, this man of exquisite finesse, of the undefinably high-bred
temperament, and, alas! the painful morbid susceptibility, which belongs
to the genuine artistic character, emerged into the open sunlit lawn
with his crest uplifted, his lip curved upward in its joyous mockery,
and perfectly persuaded that somehow or other he should put down the
offensive publisher, and pay off the unoffending creditor when the
day for payment came.

 You have
not looked round lately. Come again in about half an hour. Leave me now, Mr. Seagrave; I shall
be better if I doze a little."

They complied with Ready's request; went up to the planks, and examined carefully all round
the stockade; at last they stopped.

"This is a sad business, William," said Mr. Seagrave.

William shook his head. "He would not let me go," replied he; "I wish he had. I fear that he
is much hurt."

"I should say that he cannot recover, William. We shall miss him to-morrow if they attack us."

"I hardly know what to say, papa; but I feel that since we have been relieved, I am able to
do twice as much as I could have done before."

"I feel the same, but still with such a force against us, two people cannot do much."

"If my mother and Juno load the muskets for us," replied William, "we shall at all events do
as much now as we should have been able to do if there were three, so exhausted as we should
have been."

"Perhaps so; at all events we will do our best, for we fight for our lives and for those most
dear to us."

William went softly up to Ready, and found that he was dozing; he therefore did not disturb
him, but returned to his father. Now that their thirst had been appeased, they all felt the
calls of hunger. Juno and William went and cut off steaks from the turtle, and fried them;
they all made a hearty meal, and perhaps never had they taken one with so much relish in their
lives.

It was nearly daylight, when William, who had several times been softly up to Ready, found
him with his eyes open.

"How do you find yourself, Ready?" said William.

"I am quiet and easy, William, and without much pain; but I think I am sinking, and shall not
last long. Recollect that if you are obliged to escape from the stockade, you take no heed
of me, but leave me where I am. I cannot live, and were you to move me, I should only die the
sooner."

"I had rather die with you, than leave you, Ready."

"No, that is wrong; you must save your mother, and your brothers and sister; promise me that
you will do as I wish."

William hesitated.

"I point out to you your duty, William. I know what your feelings are, but you must not give
way to them; promise me this, or you will make me very miserable."

William squeezed Ready's hand; his heart was too full to speak.

"They will come at daylight, William; you have not much time to spare; climb to the look-out,
and wait there till day dawns; watch them as long as you can, and then come and tell me what
you have seen."

Ready's voice became faint after this exertion of speaking so much.

William immediately climbed up the cocoa-nut tree, and waited there till daylight. At the dawn
of day, he perceived that the savages were at work, that they had collected all the faggots
together opposite to where the old house had stood, and were very busy in making arrangements
for the attack. At last, every one shouldered a faggot, and commenced their advance towards
the stockade; William immediately descended and called his father, who was talking with Mrs.
Seagrave. The muskets were all loaded, and Mrs. Seagrave and Juno took their posts below the
planking, to reload them as fast as they were fired.

"We must fire upon them as soon as we are sure of not missing, William," said Mr. Seagrave,
"for the more we check their advance, the better."

When the first savages were within fifty yards, they both fired, and two of the men dropped;
they continued to fire as their assailants came up, with great success for the first ten minutes;
after which the savages advanced in a larger body, and took the precaution to hold the faggots
in front of them, for some protection as they approached. By these means they gained the stockade
in safety, and commenced laying their faggots. Mr. Seagrave and William still kept up an incessant
fire upon them, but not with so much success as before.

Although many fell, the faggots were gradually heaped up, till they almost reached to the holes
between the palisades, through which they pointed their muskets; and as the savages contrived
to slope them down from the stockade to the ground, it was evident that they meant to mount
up and take them by escalade. At last, it appeared as if all the faggots had been placed, and
the savages retired farther back, to where the cocoa-nut trees were still standing.

"They have gone away, father," said William; "but they will come again, and I fear it is all
over with us."

"I fear so too, my boy," replied Mr. Seagrave; "they are only retreating to arrange for a general
assault, and they now will be able to gain an entrance. I almost wish that they had fired the
faggots; we might have escaped as Ready pointed out to us, but now I fear we have no chance."

"Don't say a word to my mother," said William; "let us defend ourselves to the last, and if
we are overpowered it is the will of God."

"I should like to take a farewell embrace of your dear mother," said Mr. Seagrave; "but, no;
it will be weakness just now. Here they come, William, in a swarm. Well, God bless you, my
boy; we shall all, I trust, meet in Heaven!"

The whole body of savages were now advancing from the cocoa-nut wood in a solid mass; they
raised a yell, which struck terror into the hearts of Mrs. Seagrave and Juno, yet they flinched
not. The savages were again within fifty yards of them, when the fire was opened upon them;
the fire was answered by loud yells, and the savages had already reached to the bottom of the
sloping pile of faggots, when the yells and the reports of the muskets were drowned by a much
louder report, followed by the crackling and breaking of the cocoa-nut trees, which made both
parties start with surprise; another and another followed, the ground was ploughed up, and
the savages fell in numbers.

"It must be the cannon of a ship, father," said William; "we are saved - we are saved!"

"It can be nothing else; we are saved, and by a miracle!" replied Mr. Seagrave in utter astonishment.

The savages paused in the advance, quite stupefied; again, again, again, the report of the
loud guns boomed through the air, and the round-shot and grape came whizzing and tearing through
the cocoa-nut grove; at this last broadside, the savages turned, and fled towards their canoes:
not one was left to be seen.

"We are saved!" cried Mr. Seagrave, leaping off the plank and embracing his wife, who sank
down on her knees, and held up her clasped hands in thankfulness to Heaven.

William had hastened up to the look-out on the cocoa-nut tree, and now cried out to them below,
as the guns were again discharged:

"A large schooner, father; she is firing at the savages, who are at the canoes; they are falling
in every direction: some have plunged into the water; there is a boat full of armed men coming
on shore; they are close to the beach, by the garden-point. Three of the canoes have got off
full of men; there go the guns again; two of the canoes are sunk, father; the boat has landed,
and the people are coming up this way." William then descended from the look-out as fast as
he could.

As soon as he was down, he commenced unbarring the door of the stockade. He pulled out the
last pole just as he heard the feet of their deliverers outside. He threw open the door, and,
a second after, found himself in the arms of Captain Osborn.

Chapter LXVI

Before we wind up this history, it will be as well to state to my young readers how it was
that Captain Osborn made his appearance at so fortunate a moment. It will be recollected how
a brig came off the island some months before this, and the great disappointment that the party
on the island experienced in her not making her appearance again. The fact was, that those
on board of the brig had not only seen their signals, but had read the name of the "Pacific"
upon the flag hoisted; but the heavy gale which came on drove them so far to the southward,
that the master of the brig did not consider that he should do his duty to his owners, if he
lost so much time in beating up for the island again. He therefore decided upon making all
sail for Sydney, to which port he was bound.

When Captain Osborn was put into the boat by Mackintosh and the seamen of the Pacific, he was
still insensible; but he gradually recovered, and after a stormy night, Captain Osborn was
so far recovered as to hear from Mackintosh what had taken place, and why it was that he found
himself in an open boat at sea. The next morning the wind moderated, and they were fortunate
enough to fall in with a vessel bound to Van Diemen's Land, which took them all on board.

From the account given by Mackintosh, Captain Osborn had no doubt in his mind but that the
Seagrave family had perished, and the loss of the vessel, with them on board, was duly reported
to the owners. When at Van Diemen's Land, Captain Osborn was so much taken with the beauty
and fertility of the country, and perhaps not so well inclined to go to sea again after such
danger as he had incurred in the last voyage, that he resolved to purchase land and settle
there. He did so, and had already stocked his farm with cattle, and had gone round to Sydney
in a schooner to await the arrival of a large order from England which he had sent for, when
the brig arrived and reported the existence of some white people on the small island, and also
that they had hoisted a flag with the name Pacific worked on it.

Captain Osborn, hearing this, went to the master of the brig, and questioned him. He found
the latitude and longitude of the island to be not far from that of the ship when she was deserted,
and he was now convinced that, by some miracle, the Seagrave family had been preserved. He
therefore went to the Governor of New South Wales, and made him acquainted with the facts which
had been established, and the Governor instantly replied, that the government armed schooner
was at his service, if he would himself go in quest of his former shipmates. Inconvenient as
the absence at that time was to Captain Osborn, he at once acquiesced, and in a few days the
schooner sailed for her destination. She arrived off the island on the same morning that the
fleet of canoes with the savages effected their landing, and when William made the remark to
Ready as they were hastening into the stockade, that there was another vessel under sail off
the garden-point, had Ready had time to put his eye to the telescope, he would have discovered
that it was the schooner.

The schooner stood in to the reefs, and then hauled off again, that she might send her boat
in to sound for an anchorage. The boat, when sounding, perceived the canoes and the savages,
and afterwards heard the report of firearms on the first attack. On her return on board the
schooner, they stated what they had seen and heard, and their idea that the white people on
the island were being attacked by the savages. As the boat did not return on board till near
dusk, they had not time to canvas, the question when the night attack was made, and they again
heard the firing of the muskets. This made Captain Osborn most anxious to land as soon as possible,
but as the savages were in such numbers, and the crew of the schooner did not consist of more
than twenty-five men, the commander considered it was rash to make the attempt. He did, however,
show the utmost anxiety to bring his schooner to an anchor, so as to protect his men, and then
agreed that they should land.

The boat had reported deep water and good anchorage close to the garden-point, and every preparation
was made for running at daylight on the following morning; but unfortunately, it fell calm
for the best part of the day, and it was not until the morning after, just as the savages were
making their last attack upon the stockade, that she could get in. As soon as she did, she
opened the fire of her carronades, and the result is already known.

My readers must, if they can, imagine the joy of Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave when they beheld their
old friend Captain Osborn. All danger was now over; the party who had landed with him went
out under the command of the mate, to ascertain if there were any more of the savages to be
found; but, except the dead and dying, all had escaped in some of the smaller canoes. Captain
Osborn remained with the Seagraves, and they informed him of the state of poor old Ready, whom
William had gone to attend as soon as Captain Osborn was engaged with his father and mother.
Captain Osborn hurried out to see him; Ready knew his voice, for his eyes were already so dim
that he could not see.

"That is Captain Osborn, I know," said Ready in a faint voice. "You have come in good time,
sir; I knew you would come, and I always said so: you have the thanks of a dying man."

"I hope it is not so bad as that, Ready; we have a surgeon on board, and I will send for him
at once."

"No surgeon can help me, sir," replied Ready; "another hour of time will not pass before I
shall be in Eternity."

The old man then joined his hands across his breast, and remained for some time in silent prayer.
Then he bade them farewell in a faint voice, which at last was changed to a mere whisper. They
still remained, in silence and in tears, standing round him, William only kneeling and holding
his hand, when the old man's head fell back, and he was no more!

"It is all over," said Mr. Seagrave mournfully, "and he has, I have no doubt, gone to receive
the reward of a good and just man. `Happy are those who die in the Lord.'"

Mr. Seagrave then led away his wife and children, leaving Juno and William. William closed
his eyes, and Juno went and fetched the ship's ensign, which they laid over the body, after
which they joined the rest of the party in the house.

It was decided that the following day should be passed in packing up and getting on board their
luggage, and that the day after the family should embark. William then mentioned the wish of
poor old Ready as to his burial. The commander of the schooner immediately gave directions
for a coffin to be made, and for his men to dig the grave at the spot that William should point
out.

Chapter LXVII

The hurry and bustle of preparing for their departure from the island, and the rapid succession
of events which had been crowded together within so very few days, had not allowed time for
much thought or reflection to Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave and William; at length, however, every
preparation had been made, and they were no longer urged by the commander of the schooner to
hasten their packing up and arrangements; for everything had been sent on board during the
afternoon, and it was proposed that they should sail on the following day.

Now they had time to feel, and bitterly did they lament the loss of their old friend, and deplore
that he had not survived to sail with them to Sydney. They had always indulged the hope that
one day they should be taken off the island, and in that hope they had ever looked forward
to old Ready becoming a part of their future household. Now that their wishes had been granted
- so much was the feeling of joy and gratitude mingled with regret - that could he have been
restored to them, they felt as if they would have gladly remained on the island.

Captain Osborn, the commander, and the crew of the schooner had taken leave of them for the
night, and had gone on board, having made arrangements for the interment of Ready, previous
to their sailing, on the following day. The children had been put to bed, and Juno had quitted
the house; Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave and William were sitting together in their now half-dismantled
room, when Juno entered; the poor girl had evidently been weeping.

"Well, Juno," observed Mr. Seagrave, with a view to break the silence which had continued for
some time previous to her entrance, "are you not glad to leave the island?"

"One time I think I would be very glad, but now I not care much," replied Juno. "Island very
nice place, all very happy till savage come. Suppose they not kill old Ready, I not care."

"Yes, indeed," said Mrs. Seagrave, "it is a sad blow to us all; I did hope to have fostered
the good old man, and to have been able to have shown him our gratitude, but--"

"It is the will of Heaven that it should be otherwise," continued Mr. Seagrave; "I would give
half that I am possessed of, that he had not perished."

"Oh, Massa!" said Juno, "I sit by him just now; I take off the flag and look at his face, so
calm, look so happy, so good, I almost tink he smile at me, and then I cry. Oh! Massa Tommy,
all because you idle boy."

"It adds much to my regret," replied Mr. Seagrave, "that his life should have been sacrificed
through the thoughtlessness of one of my own children; what a lesson it will be to Tommy when
he is old enough to comprehend the consequences of his conduct."

"That he must not know, papa," said William, who had been leaning mournfully over the table;
"one of Ready's last injunctions was that Tommy was never to be told of it."

"His last wishes shall be religiously attended to, my dear boy," replied Mr. Seagrave; "for
what do we not owe to that good old man? When others deserted us and left us to perish, he
remained with us to share our fate. By his skill we were saved and landed in safety. He provided
for our wants, added to our comforts, instructed us how to make the best use of our means.
Without his precautions we should have perished by the spears of the savages. What an example
of Christian fortitude and humility did he ever show us! and indeed, I may truly say, that
by his example, sinful as I must ever be, I have become, I trust, a better man. Would that
he were now sitting by us, - but the Lord's will be done!"

"I feel as if I had lost a stay or prop," replied Mrs. Seagrave. "So accustomed have I been
to look to him for advice since we have been on this island. Had he not been thus snatched
from us - had he been spared to us a few years, and had we been permitted to surround his death-bed,
and close his eyes in peace--" and Mrs. Seagrave wept upon the shoulder of her husband.

After a time, Mrs. Seagrave recovered herself; but silence ensued, only broken by an occasional
sob from poor Juno. William's heart was too full; he could not for a long while utter a word;
at last he said in a low voice:

"I feel that, next to my dear father and mother, I have lost my best friend. I cannot forgive
myself for allowing him to go for the water; it was my duty to go, and I ought to have gone."

"And yet we could have ill spared you, my dear boy; you might have perished," replied Mrs.
Seagrave.

"It would have been as God willed," replied William; "I might have perished, or I might not."

"We never know what the morrow may bring forth," said Mr. Seagrave, "or what may be in store
for us. Had not this misfortune happened, had old Ready been spared to us, how joyfully should
I and all of you have quitted this island, full of anticipation, and indulging in worldly prospects.
What a check have I received! I now am all thought and anxiety. I have said to myself, `we
have been happy on this island; our wants have been supplied; even our comforts have been great.
We have been under no temptations, for we have been isolated from the world; am I so sure that
I shall be as happy in future as I have been? Am I confident, now my long-wished-for return
to the world is about to take place, that I shall have no cause to lament that I ever quitted
this peaceful, quiet spot?' I feel that it is a duty to my family that I should return to society,
but I am far from feeling that our happiness may be increased. We have, however, a plain precept
to follow, which is, to do our duty in that state of life to which it has pleased God to call us."

"Yes," replied Mrs. Seagrave; "I feel the truth of all you have just said. We are in his hands;
let us put our trust in him."

"We will," replied Mr. Seagrave; "but it is late, and we have to rise early to-morrow morning.
This is the last evening which we shall pass on this island; let us return our thanks for the
happiness we have enjoyed here. We thought to have quitted this spot in joy, - it is his will
that we should leave it in sorrow."

Mr. Seagrave took down the Bible, and after he had read a chapter, he poured forth a prayer
suited to their feelings, and they all retired to repose.

The next morning they were up early, and packed up the few articles which still remained to
go on board. Mr. Seagrave read the prayers, and they went to breakfast. Few words were exchanged,
for there was a solemn grief upon all of them. They waited for the arrival of Captain Osborn
and the crew of the schooner to attend the funeral of poor old Ready. William, who had gone
out occasionally to look at the vessel, now came in, and said that two boats were pulling on
shore. A few minutes afterwards, Captain Osborn and the commander of the schooner soon made
their appearance. The coffin had been brought on shore; the body of Ready was put into it,
and it was screwed down.

In half an hour all was prepared, and the family were summoned from the house. The coffin,
covered with the Union Jack as a pall, was raised on the shoulders of six of the seamen, and
they bore it to the grave, followed by Mrs. Seagrave and the children, the commander of the
schooner, and several of the men. Mr. Seagrave read the funeral service, the grave was filled
up, and they all walked back in silence. At the request of William, the commander of the schooner
had ordered the carpenter to prepare an oak paling to put round the grave, and a board on which
was written the name of the deceased and day of his death. As soon as this had been fixed up,
William, with a deep sigh, followed the commander of the schooner to the house to announce
that all was finished, and that the boat waited for them to embark.

"Come, my dear," said Mr. Seagrave to his wife.

"I will, I will," replied Mrs. Seagrave, "but I don't know how it is, now that the hour is
come, I really feel such pain at quitting this dear island. Had it not been for poor Ready's
death, I really do think I should wish to remain."

"I don't doubt but that you feel sorrow, my dear, but we must not keep Captain Osborn waiting." 

But from one's own husband--Wow!--they go in like a harpoon. And they have given me a great deal
to think about. There are times, I find, when I can accept that intimation of slipping into
the sere and yellow leaf without revolt. Then the next moment it fills me with a sort of desperation.
I refuse to go up on the shelf. I see red and storm against age. I refuse to bow to the inevitable.
My spirit recoils at the thought of decay. For when you're fading you're surely decaying, and when you're
decaying you're approaching the end.

So stop, Father Time, stop, or I'll get out of the car!

But we can't get out of the car.

That's the tragic part of it. We have to go on, whether we like it
or not. We have to buck up, and grin and bear it, and make the best
of a bad bargain.

"It will indeed be well, my dear, if we never are less happy," replied her husband.

The schooner now ran fast through the water, and the island was every minute less distinct;
after a time, the land was below the horizon, and the tops of the cocoa-nut trees only to be
seen; these gradually disappeared. Juno watched on, and when at last nothing could be seen,
she waved her handkerchief in the direction of the island, as if to bid it farewell, and then
went down below to hide her grief.

The wind continued fair, and, after a favourable passage of little more than four weeks, they
arrived at Sydney Cove, the port to which they were bound when they embarked from England on
board of the good ship Pacific.

P.S. - As my young readers will probably wish to know a little more about the Seagrave family,
I will inform them that Mr. Seagrave, like the patriarch Job after his tribulation, found his
flocks and herds greatly increased on his arrival at Sydney. Mr. and Mrs. Seagrave lived to
see all their children grown up. William inherited the greater part of the property from his
father, after having for many years assisted him in the management of it. Tommy, notwithstanding
all his scrapes, grew up a very fine fellow, and entered the army. Caroline married a young
clergyman, and made him an excellent wife; little Albert went into the navy, and is at present
a commander.

Juno is still alive, and lives at Seagrave plantation with William, and her greatest pleasure
is to take his children on her knee, and tell them long stories about the island, and make
them cry when she goes through the history of old Ready's death and burial.

