They toadied Mrs. Val--poor young women, how little should they be blamed for this fault, which
came so naturally to them in their forlorn position!--they toadied Mrs. Val, and therefore
Mrs. Val bore with them; they bored Gertrude, and Gertrude, for her husband's sake, bore with
them also; they were confidential with Clementina, and Clementina, of course, snubbed them.
They called Clementina 'the sweetest creature.' Lactimel declared that she was born to grace
the position of a wife and mother, and Ugolina swore that her face was perfect poetry. Whereupon
Clementina laughed aloud, and elegantly made a grimace with her nose and mouth, as she turned
the 'perfect poetry' to her mother. Such were the ladies of the party who went to the Chiswick
flower-show, and who afterwards were to figure at Mrs. Val's little evening 'the dansant,'
at which nobody was to be admitted who was not nice.

They were met at the gate of the Gardens by a party of young men, of whom Victoire Jaquetanape
was foremost. Alaric and Charley were to come down there when their office work was done. The effect
of this communication was to leave no doubt in the mind of Cap that there was a secret arrangement
between her commander and the pilot to cast away the Scud; most probably with the hope of effecting
their escape.

He consequently treated the opinion of the latter with the indifference he had manifested towards
that of the former.

"I tell you, brother Dunham," said he, in answer to the remonstrances of the Sergeant against his
turning a deaf ear to this double representation, "that no seaman would give such an opinion honestly.
To anchor on a lee shore in a gale of wind would be an act of madness
that I could never excuse to the underwriters, under any circumstances,
so long as a rag can be set; but to anchor close to breakers would
be insanity." But he did not carry his finery
like a hog in armour, as an Englishman so often does when an Englishman stoops to be fine.
It sat as naturally on Victoire as though he had been born in it. He jumped about in his best
patent leather boots, apparently quite heedless whether he spoilt them or not; and when he
picked up Miss Golightly's parasol from the gravel, he seemed to suffer no anxiety about his
gloves.

He handed out the ladies one after another, as though his life had been passed in handing out
ladies, as, indeed, it probably had--in handing them out and handing them in; and when Mrs.
Val's 'private' carriage passed on, he was just as courteous to the Misses Neverbend and Katie
in their cab, as he had been to the greater ladies who had descended from the more ambitious
vehicle. As Katie said afterwards to Linda, when she found the free use of her voice in their
own bedroom, 'he was a darling little duck of a man, only he smelt so strongly of tobacco.'

But when they were once in the garden, Victoire had no time for anyone but Mrs. Val and Clementina.
He had done his duty by the Misses Neverbend and those other two insipid young English girls,
and now he had his own affairs to look after. He also knew that Miss Golightly had L20,000
of her own!

He was one of those butterfly beings who seem to have been created that they may flutter about
from flower to flower in the summer hours of such gala times as those now going on at Chiswick,
just as other butterflies do. What the butterflies were last winter, or what will become of
them next winter, no one but the naturalist thinks of inquiring. How they may feed themselves
on flower-juice, or on insects small enough to be their prey, is matter of no moment to the
general world. It is sufficient that they flit about in the sunbeams, and add bright glancing
spangles to the beauty of the summer day.

And so it was with Victoire Jaquetanape. He did no work. He made no honey. He appeared to no
one in the more serious moments of life. He was the reverse of Shylock; he would neither buy
with you nor sell with you, but he would eat with you and drink with you; as for praying, he
did little of that either with or without company. He was clothed in purple and fine linen,
as butterflies should be clothed, and fared sumptuously everyday; but whence came his gay colours,
or why people fed him with pate and champagne, nobody knew and nobody asked.

Like most Frenchmen of his class, he never talked about himself. He understood life, and the
art of pleasing, and the necessity that he should please, too well to do so. All that his companions
knew of him was that he came from France, and that when the gloomy months came on in England,
the months so unfitted for a French butterfly, he packed up his azure wings and sought some
more genial climate, certain to return and be seen again when the world of London became habitable.

If he had means of living no one knew it; if he was in debt no one ever heard of it; if he
had a care in the world he concealed it. He abounded in acquaintances who were always glad
to see him, and would have regarded it as quite de trop to have a friend. Nevertheless time
was flying on with him as with others; and, butterfly as he was, the idea of Miss Golightly's
L20,000 struck him with delightful amazement--500,000 francs! 500,000 francs! and so he resolved
to dance his very best, warm as the weather undoubtedly was at the present moment.

'Ah, he was charmed to see madame and mademoiselle look so charmingly,' he said, walking between
mother and daughter, but paying apparently much the greater share of attention to the elder
lady. In this respect we Englishmen might certainly learn much from the manners of our dear
allies. We know well enough how to behave ourselves to our fair young countrywomen; we can
be civil enough to young women--nature teaches us that; but it is so seldom that we are sufficiently
complaisant to be civil to old women. And yet that, after all, is the soul of gallantry. It
is to the sex that we profess to do homage. Our theory is, that feminine weakness shall receive
from man's strength humble and respectful service. But where is the chivalry, where the gallantry,
if we only do service in expectation of receiving such guerdon as rosy cheeks and laughing
eyes can bestow?

It may be said that Victoire had an object in being civil to Mrs. Val. But the truth is, all
French Victoires are courteous to old ladies. An Englishman may probably be as forward as a
Frenchman in rushing into a flaming building to save an old woman's life; but then it so rarely
happens that occasion offers itself for gallantry such as that. A man, however, may with ease
be civil to a dozen old women in one day.

And so they went on, walking through parterres and glass-houses, talking of theatres, balls,
dinner-parties, picnics, concerts, operas, of ladies married and single, of single gentlemen
who should be married, and of married gentlemen who should be single, of everything, indeed,
except the flowers, of which neither Victoire nor his companions took the slightest notice.

'And madame really has a dance to-night in her own house?'

'O yes,' said Mrs. Val; 'that is, just a few quadrilles and waltzes for Clementina. I really
hardly know whether the people will take the carpet up or no.' The people, consisting of the
cook and housemaid--for the page had, of course, come with the carriage--were at this moment
hard at work wrenching up the nails, as Mrs. Val was very well aware.

'It will be delightful, charming,' said Victoire.

'Just a few people of our own set, you know,' said Mrs. Val: 'no crowd, or fuss, or anything
of that sort; just a few people that we know are nice, in a quiet homely way.'

'Ah, that is so pleasing,' said M. Victoire: 'that is just what I like; and is mademoiselle
engaged for--?'

No. Mademoiselle was not engaged either for--or for--or for-- &c., &c., &c.; and then out came
the little tablets, under the dome of a huge greenhouse filled with the most costly exotics,
and Clementina and her fellow-labourer in the cause of Terpsichore went to work to make their
arrangements for the evening.

And the rest of the party followed them. Gertrude was accompanied by an Englishman just as
idle and quite as useless as M. Victoire, of the butterfly tribe also, but not so graceful,
and without colour.

And then came the Misses Neverbend walking together, and with them, one on each side, two tall
Frenchmen, whose faces had been remodelled in that mould into which so large a proportion of
Parisians of the present day force their heads, in order that they may come out with some look
of the Emperor about them. Were there not some such machine as this in operation, it would
be impossible that so many Frenchmen should appear with elongated, angular, hard faces, all
as like each other as though they were brothers! The cut of the beard, the long prickly-ended,
clotted moustache, which looks as though it were being continually rolled up in saliva, the
sallow, half-bronzed, apparently unwashed colour--these may all, perhaps, be assumed by any
man after a certain amount of labour and culture. But how it has come to pass that every Parisian
has been able to obtain for himself a pair of the Emperor's long, hard, bony, cruel-looking
cheeks, no Englishman has yet been able to guess. That having the power they should have the
wish to wear this mask is almost equally remarkable. Can it be that a political phase, when
stamped on a people with an iron hand of sufficient power of pressure, will leave its impress
on the outward body as well as on the inward soul? If so, a Frenchman may, perhaps, be thought
to have gained in the apparent stubborn wilfulness of his countenance some recompense for his
compelled loss of all political wilfulness whatever.

Be this as it may, the two Misses Neverbend walked on, each with a stubborn long-faced Frenchman
at her side, looking altogether not ill pleased at this instance of the excellence of French
manners. After them came Linda, talking to some acquaintance of her own, and then poor dear
little Katie with another Frenchman, sterner, more stubborn-looking, more long-faced, more
like the pattern after whom he and they had been remodelled, than any of them.

Poor little Katie! This was her first day in public. With many imploring caresses, with many
half-formed tears in her bright eyes, with many assurances of her perfect health, she had induced
her mother to allow her to come to the flower-show; to allow her also to go to Mrs. Val's dance,
at which there were to be none but such very nice people. Katie was to commence her life, to
open her ball with this flower-show. In her imagination it was all to be one long bright flower-show,
in which, however, the sweet sorrowing of the sensitive plant would ever and anon invite her
to pity and tears. When she entered that narrow portal she entered the world, and there she
found herself walking on the well-mown grass with this huge, stern, bearded Frenchman by her
side! As to talking to him, that was quite out of the question. At the gate some slight ceremony
of introduction had been gone through, which had consisted in all the Frenchmen taking off
their hats and bowing to the two married ladies, and in the Englishmen standing behind and
poking the gravel with their canes. But in this no special notice had of course been taken
of Katie; and she had a kind of idea, whence derived she knew not, that it would be improper
for her to talk to this man, unless she were actually and bona fide introduced to him. And
then, again, poor Katie was not very confident in her French, and then her companion was not
very intelligible in his English; so when the gentleman asked, 'Is it that mademoiselle lofe
de fleurs?' poor little Katie felt herself tremble, and tried in vain to mutter something;
and when, again essaying to do his duty, he suggested that 'all de beaute of Londres did delight
to valk itself at Chisveek,' she was equally dumb, merely turning on him her large eyes for
one moment, to show that she knew that he addressed her. After that he walked on as silent
as herself, still keeping close to her side; and other ladies, who had not the good fortune
to have male companions, envied her happiness in being so attended.

But Alaric and Charley were coming, she knew; Alaric was her brother-in-law now, and therefore
she would be delighted to meet him; and Charley, dear Charley! she had not seen him since he
went away that morning, now four days since; and four days was a long time, considering that
he had saved her life. Her busy little fingers had been hard at work the while, and now she
had in her pocket the purse which she had been so eager to make, and which she was almost afraid
to bestow.

'Oh, Linda,' she had said, 'I don't think I will, after all; it is such a little thing.'

'Nonsense, child, you wouldn't give him a worked counterpane; little things are best for presents.'

'But it isn't good enough,' she said, looking at her handiwork in despair. But, nevertheless,
she persevered, working in the golden beads with constant diligence, so that she might be able
to give it to Charley among the Chiswick flowers. Oh! what a place it was in which to bestow
a present, with all the eyes of all the world upon her!

And then this dance to which she was going! The thought of what she would do there troubled
her. Would anyone ask her to dance? Would Charley think of her when he had so many grown-up
girls, girls quite grown up, all around him? It would be very sad if at this London party it
should be her fate to sit down the whole evening and see others dance. It would suffice for
her, she thought, if she could stand up with Linda, but she had an idea that this would not
be allowed at a London party; and then Linda, perhaps, might not like it. Altogether she had
much upon her mind, and was beginning to think that, perhaps, she might have been happier to
have stayed at home with her mamma. She had not quite recovered from the effect of her toss
into the water, or the consequent excitement, and a very little misery would upset her. And
so she walked on with her Napoleonic companion, from whom she did not know how to free herself,
through one glass- house after another, across lawns and along paths, attempting every now
and then to get a word with Linda, and not at all so happy as she had hoped to have been.

At last Gertrude came to her rescue. They were all congregated for a while in one great flower-house,
and Gertrude, finding herself near her sister, asked her how she liked it all.

'Oh! it is very beautiful,' said Katie, 'only--'

'Only what, dear?'

'Would you let me come with you a little while! Look here'--and she crept softly around to
the other side of her sister, sidling with little steps away from the Frenchman, at whom, however,
she kept furtively looking, as though she feared that he would detect her in the act. 'Look
here, Gertrude,' she said, twitching her sister's arm; 'that gentleman there--you see him,
don't you? he's a Frenchman, and I don't know how to get away from him.'

'How to get away from him?' said Gertrude. 'That's M. Delabarbe de l'Empereur, a great friend
of Mrs. Val's, and a very quiet sort of man, I believe; he won't eat you.'

'No, he won't eat me, I know; but I can't look at anything, because he will walk so close to
me! Mayn't I come with you?'

Gertrude told her she might, and so Katie made good her escape, hiding herself from her enemy
as well as she could behind her sister's petticoats. He, poor man, was perhaps as rejoiced
at the arrangement as Katie herself; at any rate he made no attempt to regain his prey, but
went on by himself, looking as placidly stern as ever, till he was absorbed by Mrs. Val's more
immediate party, and then he devoted himself to her, while M. Jaquetanape settled with Clementina
the properest arrangement for the waltzes of the evening.

Katie was beginning to be tranquilly happy, and was listening to the enthusiasm of Ugolina
Neverbend, who declared that flowers were the female poet's fitting food--it may be doubted
whether she had ever tried it--when her heart leaped within her on hearing a sharp, clear,
well-known voice, almost close behind her. It was Charley Tudor. After her silent promenade
with M. Delabarbe de l'Empereur, Katie had been well pleased to put up with the obscure but
yet endurable volubility of Ugolina; but now she felt almost as anxious to get quit of Ugolina
as she had before been to shake off the Frenchman.

'Flowers are Nature's chef-d'oeuvre,' said Ugolina; 'they convey to me the purest and most
direct essence of that heavenly power of production which is the sweetest evidence which Jehovah
gives us of His presence.'

'Do they?' said Katie, looking over her shoulder to watch what Charley was doing, and to see
whether he was coming to notice her.

'They are the bright stars of His immediate handiwork,' said Ugolina; 'and if our dim eyes
could read them aright, they would whisper to us the secret of His love.'

'Yes, I dare say they would,' said Katie, who felt, perhaps, a little disappointed because
Charley lingered a while shaking hands with Mrs. Val and Clementina Golightly.

It was, however, but for a moment. There was much shaking of hands to be done, and a considerable
taking off of hats to be gone through; and as Alaric and Charley encountered the head of the
column first, it was only natural that they should work their way through it gradually. Katie,
however, never guessed--how could she?--that Charley had calculated that by reaching her last
he would be able to remain with her.

She was still listening to Ugolina, who was mounting higher and higher up to heaven, when she
found her hand in Charley's. Ugolina might now mount up, and get down again as best she could,
for Katie could no longer listen to her.

Alaric had not seen her yet since her ducking. She had to listen to and to answer his congratulations,
Charley standing by and making his comments.

'Charley says you took to the water quite naturally, and swam like a duck,' said Alaric.

'Only she went in head foremost,' said Charley.

'All bathers ought to do that,' said Alaric; 'and tell me, Katie, did you feel comfortable
when you were in the water?'

'Indeed I don't recollect anything about it,' said she, 'only that I saw Charley coming to
me, just when I was going to sink for the last time.'

'Sink! Why, I'm told that you floated like a deal board.'

'The big hat and the crinoline kept her up,' said Charley; 'she had no idea of sinking.'

'Oh! Charley, you know I was under the water for a long time; and that if you had not come,
just at that very moment, I should never have come up again.'

And then Alaric went on, and Charley and Katie were left together.

How was she to give him the purse? It was burning a hole in her pocket till she could do so;
and yet how was she to get it out of her possession into his, and make her little speech, here
in the public garden? She could have done it easily enough at home in the drawing-room at Surbiton
Cottage.

'And how do you like the gardens?' asked Charley.

'Oh! they are beautiful; but I have hardly been able to see anything yet. I have been going
about with a great big Frenchman --there, that man there--he has such a queer name.'

'Did his name prevent your seeing?'

'No, not his name; I didn't know his name then.

But it seemed so odd to be walking about with such a man as that. But I want to go back, and
look at the black and yellow roses in that house, there. Would you go with me? that is, if
we may. I wonder whether we may!'

Charley was clearly of opinion that they might, and should, and would; and so away they sallied
back to the roses, and Katie began to enjoy the first instalment of the happiness which she
had anticipated. In the temple of the roses the crowd at first was great, and she could not
get the purse out of her pocket, nor make her speech; but after a while the people passed on,
and there was a lull before others filled their places, and Katie found herself opposite to
a beautiful black rose, with no one close to her but Charley.

'I have got something for you,' she said; and as she spoke she felt herself to be almost hot
with blushing.

'Something for me!' said Charley; and he also felt himself abashed, he did not know why.

'It's only a very little thing,' said Katie, feeling in her pocket, 'and I am almost ashamed
to ask you to take it. But I made it all myself; no one else put a stitch in it,' and so saying,
and looking round to see that she was not observed, she handed her gift to Charley.

'Oh! Katie, dearest Katie,' said he, 'I am so much obliged to you--I'll keep it till I die.'

'I didn't know what to make that was better,' said she.

'Nothing on earth could possibly be better,' said he.

'A plate of bread and butter and a purse are a very poor return for saving one's life,' said
she, half laughing, half crying.

He looked at her with his eyes full of love; and as he looked, he swore within himself that
come what might, he would never see Norah Geraghty again, but would devote his life to an endeavour
to make himself worthy of the angel that was now with him. Katie the while was looking up anxiously
into his face. She was thinking of no other love than that which it became her to feel for
the man who had saved her life. She was thinking of no other love; but her young heart was
opening itself to a very different feeling. She was sinking deep, deep in waters which were
to go near to drown her warm heart; much nearer than those other waters which she fancied had
all but closed for ever over her life.

She looked into his face and saw that he was pleased; and that, for the present, was enough
for her. She was at any rate happy now. So they passed on through the roses, and then lost
themselves among the geraniums, and wondered at the gigantic rhododendrons, and beautiful azaleas,
and so went on from house to house, and from flower-bed to flower-bed, Katie talking and Charley
listening, till she began to wonder at her former supineness, and to say both to herself and
out loud to her companion, how very, very, very glad she was that her mother had let her come.
Has she not trembled at the thought of what would have befallen thee, had thy fate been such
as Linda's? Has she not often--oh, how often!--on her knees thanked the Almighty God that Linda's
spirit was not as thine; that this evil had happened to the lamb whose temper had been fitted
by Him to endure it? And yet--here thou art--all unguarded, all unaided, left by thyself to
drink of the cup of sweet poison, and none near to warn thee that the draught is deadly.

Alas!--'twould be useless to warn thee now. The false god has been placed upon the altar, the
temple all shining with gems and gold has been built around him, the incense-cup is already
swinging; nothing will now turn the idolater from her worship, nothing short of a miracle.

Our Katie's childish days are now all gone. A woman's passion glows within her breast, though
as yet she has not scanned it with a woman's intelligence. Her mother, listening to a child's
entreaty, had suffered her darling to go forth for a child's amusement. It was doomed that
the child should return no more; but in lieu of her, a fair, heart-laden maiden, whose every
fondest thought must henceforth be of a stranger's welfare and a stranger's fate.

But it must not be thought that Charley abused the friendship of Mrs. Woodward, and made love
to Katie, as love is usually made-- with warm words, assurances of affection, with squeezing
of the hand, with sighs, and all a lover's ordinary catalogue of resources. Though we have
said that he was a false god, yet he was hardly to be blamed for the temple, and gems, and
gold, with which he was endowed; not more so, perhaps, than the unconscious bud which is made
so sacred on the banks of the Egyptian river. He loved too, perhaps as warmly, though not so
fatally as Katie did; but he spoke no word of his love. He walked among the flowers with her,
laughing and listening to her in his usual light-hearted, easy manner; every now and again
his arm would thrill with pleasure, as he felt on it the touch of her little fingers, and his
heart would leap within him as he gazed on the speaking beauty of her face; but he was too
honest-hearted to talk to the young girl, to Mrs. Woodward's child, of love. He talked to her
as to a child--but she listened to him and loved him as a woman.

And so they rambled on till the hour appointed for quitting this Elysium had arrived. Every
now and again they had a glimpse of some one of their party, which had satisfied Katie that
they were not lost. At first Clementina was seen tracing with her parasol on the turf the plan
of a new dance. Then Ugolina passed by them describing the poetry of the motion of the spheres
in a full flow of impassioned eloquence to M. Delabarbe de l'Empereur: 'C'est toujours vrai;
ce que mademoiselle dit est toujours vrai,' was the Frenchman's answer, which they heard thrice
repeated. And then Lactimel and Captain Val were seen together, the latter having disappointed
the prophecies which had been made respecting him. Lactimel had an idea that as the Scotts
were great people, they were all in Parliament, and she was endeavouring to persuade Captain
Val that something ought to be done for the poor.

'Think,' said she, 'only think, Captain Scott, of all the money that this fete must cost.'

'A doosed sight,' said the captain, hardly articulating from under his thick, sandy-coloured
moustache, which, growing downwards from his nose, looked like a heavy thatch put on to protect
his mouth from the inclemency of the clouds above. 'A doosed sight,' said the captain.

'Now suppose, Captain Scott, that all this money could be collected. The tickets, you know,
and the dresses, and----'

'I wish I knew how to do it,' said the captain.

Lactimel went on with her little scheme for expending the cost of the flower-show in bread
and bacon for the poor Irish of Saffron Hill; but Charley and Katie heard no more, for the
mild philosopher passed out of hearing and out of sight.

At last Katie got a poke in her back from a parasol, just as Charley had expended half a crown,
one of Mr. M'Ruen's last, in purchasing for her one simple beautiful flower, to put into her
hair that night.

'You naughty puss!' said Gertrude, 'we have been looking for you all over the gardens. Mrs.
Val and the Miss Neverbends have been waiting this half-hour.' Katie looked terribly frightened.
'Come along, and don't keep them waiting any longer. They are all in the passage. This was
your fault, Master Charley.'

'O no, it was not,' said Katie; 'but we thought----'

'Never mind thinking,' said Gertrude, 'but come along.' And so they hurried on, and were soon
replaced in their respective vehicles, and then went back to town.

'Well, I do think the Chiswick Gardens is the nicest place in all the world,' said Katie, leaning
back in the cab, and meditating on her past enjoyment.

'They are very pretty--very,' said Lactimel Neverbend. 'I only wish every cottar had such a
garden behind his cottage. I am sure we might manage it, if we set about it in the right way.'

'What! as big as Chiswick?' said Katie.

'No; not so big,' said Lactimel; 'but quite as nicely kept.'

'I think the pigs would get in,' said Katie.

'It would be much easier, and more important too, to keep their minds nicely,' said Ugolina;
and there the pigs could never get in.'

'No; I suppose not,' said Katie.

'I don't know that,' said Lactimel.

CHAPTER XXVI

KATIE'S FIRST BALL

In spite of Mrs. Val's oft-repeated assurance that they would have none but nice people, she
had done her best to fill her rooms, and not unsuccessfully. She had, it is true, eschewed
the Golightly party, who resided some north of Oxford Street, in the purlieus of Fitzroy Square,
and some even to the east of Tottenham Court Road. She had eschewed the Golightlys, and confined
herself to the Scott connexion; but so great had been her success in life, that, even under
these circumstances, she had found herself able to fill her rooms respectably. If, indeed,
there was no absolute crowding, if some space was left in the front drawing-room sufficient
for the operations of dancers, she could still attribute this apparent want of fashionable
popularity to the selections of the few nice people whom she had asked. The Hon. Mrs. Val was
no ordinary woman, and understood well how to make the most of the goods with which the gods
provided her.

The Miss Neverbends were to dine with the Tudors, and go with them to the dance in the evening,
and their brother Fidus was to meet them there. Charley was, of course, one of the party at
dinner; and as there was no other gentleman there, Alaric had an excellent opportunity, when
the ladies went up to their toilets, to impress on his cousin the expediency of his losing
no time in securing to himself Miss Golightly's twenty thousand pounds. The conversation, as
will be seen, at last became rather animated.

'Well, Charley, what do you think of the beautiful Clementina?' said Alaric, pushing over the
bottle to his cousin, as soon as they found themselves alone. 'A 'doosed' fine girl, as Captain
Val says, isn't she?'

'A 'doosed' fine girl, of course,' said Charley, laughing. 'She has too much go in her for
me, I'm afraid.'

'Marriage and children will soon pull that down. She'd make an excellent wife for such a man
as you; and to tell you the truth, Charley, if you'll take my advice, you'll lose no time in
making up to her. She has got that d---- French fellow at her heels, and though I don't suppose
she cares one straw about him, it may be well to make sure.'

'But you don't mean in earnest that you think that Miss Golightly would have me?'

'Indeed I do--you are just the man to get on with girls; and, as far as I can see, you are
just the man that will never get on in any other way under the sun.'

Charley sighed as he thought of his many debts, his poor prospects, and his passionate love.
There seemed, indeed, to be little chance that he ever would get on at all in the ordinary
sense of the word. 'I'm sure she'd refuse me,' said he, still wishing to back out of the difficulty.
'I'm sure she would--I've not got a penny in the world, you know.'

'That's just the reason--she has got lots of money, and you have got none.'

'Just the reason why she should refuse me, you should say.'

'Well--what if she does? There's no harm done. 'Faint heart never won fair lady.' You've everything
to back you--Mrs. Val is led by Undy Scott, and Undy is all on your side.'

'But she has got guardians, hasn't she?'

'Yes--her father's first cousin, old Sam Golightly. He is dying; or dead probably by this time;
only Mrs. Val won't have the news brought to her, because of this party. He had a fit of apoplexy
yesterday. Then there's her father's brother-in-law, Figgs; he's bedridden. When old Golightly
is off the hooks altogether, another will be chosen, and Undy talks of putting in my name as
that of a family friend; so you'll have everything to assist you.'

Charley looked very grave. He had not been in the habit of discussing such matters, but it
seemed to him, that if Alaric was about to become in any legal manner the guardian of Miss
Golightly's fortune, that that in itself was reason enough why he, Alaric, should not propose
such a match as this. Needy men, to be sure, did often marry rich ladies, and the world looked
on and regarded it only as a matter of course; but surely it would be the duty of a guardian
to protect his ward from such a fate, if it were in his power to do so.

Alaric, who saw something of what was going on in his cousin's mind, essayed to remove the
impression which was thus made. 'Besides, you know, Clementina is no chicken. Her fortune is
at her own disposal. All the guardians on earth cannot prevent her marrying you if she makes
up her mind to do so.'

Charley gulped down his glass of wine, and then sat staring at the fire, saying nothing further.
It was true enough that he was very poor--true enough that Miss Golightly's fortune would set
him on his legs, and make a man of him--true enough, perhaps, that no other expedient of which
he could think would do so. But then there were so many arguments that were 'strong against
the deed.' In the first place, he thought it impossible that he should be successful in such
a suit, and then again it would hardly be honest to obtain such success, if it were possible;
then, thirdly, he had no sort of affection whatsoever for Miss Golightly; and fourthly, lastly,
and chiefly, he loved so dearly, tenderly, loved poor Katie Woodward.

As he thought of this, he felt horror-stricken with himself at allowing the idea of his becoming
a suitor to another to dwell for an instant on his mind, and looking up with all the resolution
which he was able to summon, he said--'It's impossible, Alaric, quite impossible! I couldn't
do it.'

'Then what do you mean to do?' said Alaric, who was angry at having his scheme thus thwarted;
'do you mean to be a beggar?--or if not, how do you intend to get out of your difficulties?'

'I trust not a beggar,' said Charley, sadly.

'What other hope have you? what rational hope of setting yourself right?'

'Perhaps I may do something by writing,' said Charley, very bashfully.

'By writing! ha, ha, ha,' and Alaric laughed somewhat cruelly at the poor navvy--' do something
by writing! what will you do by writing? will you make L20,000--or 20,000 pence? Of all trades
going, that, I should say, is likely to be the poorest for a poor man--the poorest and the
most heart-breaking. What have you made already to encourage you?'

'The editor says that 'Crinoline and Macassar' will come to L4 10s.'

'And when will you get it?'

'The editor says that the rule is to pay six months after the date of publication. The Daily
Delight is only a new thing, you know. The editor says that, if the sale comes up to his expectations,
he will increase the scale of pay.'

'A prospect of L4 10s. for a fortnight's hard work! "Major Duncan derides the idea of mathematics
entering into target-shooting; but I tell him philosophy colors,
and enlarges, and improves, and dilates, and explains everything that
belongs to human life, whether it be a shooting-match or a sermon.

In a word, philosophy is philosophy, and that is saying all that the subject requires."

"I trust you exclude love from the catalogue," observed the wife of a captain who knew the history
of the Quartermaster's marriages, and who had a woman's malice against
the monopolizer of her sex; "it seems that philosophy has little in
common with love."

"You wouldn't say that, madam, if your heart had experienced many trials. It's the man or the woman
that has had many occasions to improve the affections that can best speak of such matters; and,
believe me, of all love, philosophical is the most lasting, as it
is the most rational."

"You would then recommend experience as an improvement on the passion?"

"Your

quick mind has conceived the idea at a glance.

The happiest marriages are those in which youth and beauty and confidence on one side, rely
on the sagacity, moderation, and prudence of years--middle age, I
mean, madam, for I'll no' deny that there is such a thing as a husband's
being too old for a wife.

Here is Sergeant Dunham's charming daughter, now, to approve of such sentiments, I'm certain; her
character for discretion being already well established in the garrison, short as has been
her residence among us."

"Sergeant Dunham's daughter is scarcely a fitting interlocutor in
a discourse between you and me, Lieutenant Muir," rejoined the captain's
lady, with careful respect for her own dignity; "and yonder is the
Pathfinder about to take his chance, by way of changing the subject."

"I protest, Major Duncan, I protest," cried Muir hurrying back towards the stand, with both
arms elevated by way of enforcing his words,--"I protest in the strongest terms, gentlemen, against
Pathfinder's being admitted into these sports with Killdeer, which is a piece, to say nothing
of long habit that is altogether out of proportion for a trial of skill against Government rifles."

"Killdeer
is taking its rest, Quartermaster," returned Pathfinder calmly, "and no one here thinks of disturbing
it. I did not think, myself, of pulling a trigger to-day; but Sergeant Dunham has been persuading
me that I shall not do proper honor to his handsome daughter, who came in under my care, if I
am backward on such an occasion. I'm using Jasper's rifle, Quartermaster, as you may see, and
that is no better than your own."

Lieutenant Muir was now obliged to acquiesce, and every eye turned towards the Pathfinder, as
he took the required station. The air and attitude of this celebrated guide and hunter were
extremely fine, as he raised his tall form and levelled the piece,
showing perfect self-command, and a through knowledge of the power
of the human frame as well as of the weapon.

Pathfinder was not what is usually termed a handsome man, though
his appearance excited so much confidence and commanded respect.

Tall, and even muscular, his frame might have been esteemed nearly perfect, were it not for the total
absence of everything like flesh. Whipcord was scarcely more rigid than his arms and legs, or,
at need, more pliable; but the outlines of his person were rather too angular for the proportion
that the eye most approves. Still, his motions, being natural, were graceful, and, being calm and
regulated, they gave him an air and dignity that associated well with the idea, which was so prevalent,
of his services and peculiar merits.

His honest, open features were burnt to a bright red, that comported well with the notion of
exposure and hardships, while his sinewy hands denoted force, and a species of use removed
from the stiffening and deforming effects of labor. Although no one perceived any of those
gentler or more insinuating qualities which are apt to win upon a woman's affections, as he
raised his rifle not a female eye was fastened on him without a silent approbation of the freedom
of his movements and the manliness of his air.
 I did not certainly expect it
from you; but it is not on that account the less welcome. And now, suppose we go upstairs and
dress for Mrs. Val;' and so they went upstairs.

Katie's heart beat high as she got out of the carriage--Mrs. Val's private carriage had been
kept on for the occasion--and saw before and above her on the stairs a crowd of muslin crushing
its way on towards the room prepared for dancing. Katie had never been to a ball before. We
hope that the word ball may not bring down on us the adverse criticism of the Morning Post.
It was probably not a ball in the strictly fashionable sense of the word, but it was so to
Katie to all intents and purposes. Her dancing had hitherto been done either at children's
parties, or as a sort of supplemental amusement to the evening tea-gatherings at Hampton or
Hampton Court. She had never yet seen the muse worshipped with the premeditated ceremony of
banished carpets, chalked floors, and hired musicians. Her heart consequently beat high as
she made her way upstairs, linked arm-in-arm with Ugolina Neverbend.

'Shall you dance much?' said Ugolina.

'Oh, I hope so,' said Katie.

'I shall not. It is an amusement of which I am peculiarly fond, and for which my active habits
suit me.' This was probably said with some allusion to her sister, who was apt to be short
of breath. 'But in the dances of the present day conversation is impossible, and I look upon
any pursuit as barbaric which stops the "feast of reason and the flow of soul."'

Katie did not quite understand this, but she thought in her heart that she would not at all
mind giving up talking for the whole evening if she could only get dancing enough. But on this
matter her heart misgave her. To be sure, she was engaged to Charley for the first quadrille
and second waltz; but there her engagements stopped, whereas Clementina, as she was aware,
had a whole book full of them. What if she should get no more dancing when Charley's good nature
should have been expended? She had an idea that no one would care to dance with her when older
partners were to be had. Ah, Katie, you do not yet know the extent of your riches, or half
the wealth of your own attractions!

And then they all heard another little speech from Mrs. Val. 'She was really quite ashamed--she
really was--to see so many people; she could not wish any of her guests away, that would be
impossible--though perhaps one or two might be spared,' she said in a confidential whisper
to Gertrude. Who the one or two might be it would be difficult to decide, as she had made the
same whisper to every one; 'but she really was ashamed; there was almost a crowd, and she had
quite intended that the house should be nearly empty. The fact was, everybody asked had come,
and as she could not, of course, have counted on that, why, she had got, you see, twice as
many people as she had expected.' And then she went on, and made the same speech to the next
arrival.

Katie, who wanted to begin the play at the beginning, kept her eye anxiously on Charley, who
was still standing with Lactimel Neverbend on his arm. 'Oh, now,' said she to herself, 'if
he should forget me and begin dancing with Miss Neverbend!' But then she remembered how he
had jumped into the water, and determined that, even with such provocation as that, she must
not be angry with him.

But there was no danger of Charley's forgetting. 'Come,' said he, 'we must not lose any more
time, if we mean to dance the first set. Alaric will be our vis-a-vis--he is going to dance
with Miss Neverbend,' and so they stood up. Katie tightened her gloves, gave her dress a little
shake, looked at her shoes, and then the work of the evening began.

'I shouldn't have liked to have sat down for the first dance,' she said confidentially to Charley,'
because it's my first ball.'

'Sit down! I don't suppose you'll be let to sit down the whole evening. You'll be crying out
for mercy about three or four o'clock in the morning.'

'It's you to go on now,' said Katie, whose eyes were intent on the figure, and who would not
have gone wrong herself, or allowed her partner to do so, on any consideration. And so the
dance went on right merrily.

'I've got to dance the first polka with Miss Golightly,' said Charley.

'And the next with me,' said Katie.

'You may be sure I shan't forget that.'

'You lucky man to get Miss Golightly for a partner. I am told she is the most beautiful dancer
in the world.'

'O no--Mademoiselle.......is much better,' said Charley, naming the principal stage performer
of the day. 'If one is to go the whole hog, one had better do it thoroughly.'

Katie did not quite understand then what he meant, and merely replied that she would look at
the performance. In this, however, she was destined to be disappointed, for Charley had hardly
left her before Miss Golightly brought up to her the identical M. Delabarbe de l'Empereur who
had so terribly put her out in the gardens. This was done so suddenly, that Katie's presence
of mind was quite insufficient to provide her with any means of escape. The Frenchman bowed
very low and said nothing. Katie made a little curtsy, and was equally silent. Then she felt
her own arm gathered up and put within his, and she stood up to take her share in the awful
performance. She felt herself to be in such a nervous fright that she would willingly have
been home again at Hampton if she could; but as this was utterly impossible, she had only to
bethink herself of her steps, and get through the work as best she might.

Away went Charley and Clementina leading the throng; away went M. Jaquetanape and Linda; away
went another Frenchman, clasping in his arms the happy Ugolina. Away went Lactimel with a young
Weights and Measures--and then came Katie's turn. She pressed her lips together, shut her eyes,
and felt the tall Frenchman's arms behind her back, and made a start. 'Twas like plunging into
cold water on the first bathing day of the season--'ce n'est que le premier pas que coute.'
When once off Katie did not find it so bad. The Frenchman danced well, and Katie herself was
a wicked little adept. At home, at Surbiton, dancing with another girl, she had with great
triumph tired out the fingers both of her mother and sister, and forced them to own that it
was impossible to put her down. M. de l'Empereur, therefore, had his work before him, and he
did it like a man--as long as he could.

Katie, who had not yet assumed the airs or will of a grown-up young lady, thought that she
was bound to go on as long as her grand partner chose to go with her. He, on the other hand,
accustomed in his gallantry to obey all ladies' wishes, considered himself bound to leave it
to her to stop when she pleased. And so they went on with apparently interminable gyrations.
Charley and the heiress had twice been in motion, and had twice stopped, and still they were
going on; Ugolina had refreshed herself with many delicious observations, and Lactimel had
thrice paused to advocate dancing for the million, and still they went on; the circle was gradually
left to themselves, and still they went on; people stood round, some admiring and others pitying;
and still they went on. Katie, thinking of her steps and her business, did not perceive that
she and her partner were alone; and ever and anon, others of course joined in--and so they
went on--and on--and on.

M. Delabarbe de l'Empereur was a strong and active man, but he began to perceive that the lady
was too much for him. He was already melting away with his exertions, while his partner was
as cool as a cucumber. She, with her active young legs, her lightly filled veins, and small
agile frame, could have gone on almost for ever; but M. de l'Empereur was more encumbered.
Gallantry was at last beat by nature, his overtasked muscles would do no more for him, and
he was fain to stop, dropping his partner into a chair, and throwing himself in a state of
utter exhaustion against the wall.

Katie was hardly out of breath as she received the congratulations of her friends; but at the
moment she could not understand why they were quizzing her. In after times, however, she was
often reproached with having danced a Frenchman to death in the evening, in revenge for his
having bored her in the morning. It was observed that M. Delabarbe de l'Empereur danced no
more that evening. Indeed, he very soon left the house.

Katie had not been able to see Miss Golightly's performance, but it had been well worth seeing.
She was certainly no ordinary performer, and if she did not quite come up to the remarkable
movements which one sees on the stage under the name of dancing, the fault was neither in her
will nor her ability, but only in her education. Charley also was peculiarly well suited to
give her 'ample verge and room enough' to show off all her perfections. Her most peculiar merit
consisted, perhaps, in her power of stopping herself suddenly, while going on at the rate of
a hunt one way, and without any pause or apparent difficulty going just as fast the other way.
This was done by a jerk which must, one would be inclined to think, have dislocated all her
bones and entirely upset her internal arrangements. But no; it was done without injury, or
any disagreeable result either to her brain or elsewhere. We all know how a steamer is manoeuvred
when she has to change her course, how we stop her and ease her and back her; but Miss Golightly
stopped and eased and backed all at once, and that without collision with any other craft.
It was truly very wonderful, and Katie ought to have looked at her.

Katie soon found occasion to cast off her fear that her evening's happiness would be destroyed
by a dearth of partners. Her troubles began to be of an exactly opposite description. She had
almost envied Miss Golightly her little book full of engagements, and now she found herself
dreadfully bewildered by a book of her own. Some one had given her a card and a pencil, and
every moment she could get to herself was taken up in endeavouring to guard herself from perfidy
on her own part. All down the card, at intervals which were not very far apart, there were
great C's, which stood for Charley, and her firmest feeling was that no earthly consideration
should be allowed to interfere with those landmarks. And then there were all manner of hieroglyphics--
sometimes, unfortunately, illegible to Katie herself--French names and English names mixed
together in a manner most vexatious; and to make matters worse, she found that she had put
down both Victoire Jaquetanape and Mr. Johnson of the Weights, by a great I, and she could
not remember with whom she was bound to dance the lancers, and to which she had promised the
last polka before supper. One thing, however, was quite fixed: when supper should arrive she
was to go downstairs with Charley.

'What dreadful news, Linda!' said Charley; 'did you hear it?' Linda was standing up with Mr.
Neverbend for a sober quadrille, and Katie also was close by with her partner. 'Dreadful news
indeed!'

'What is it?' said Linda.

'A man can die but once, to be sure; but to be killed in such a manner as that, is certainly
very sad.'

'Killed! who has been killed?' said Neverbend.

'Well, perhaps I shouldn't say killed. He only died in the cab as he went home.'

'Died in a cab! how dreadful!' said Neverbend. 'Who? who was it, Mr. Tudor?'

'Didn't you hear? How very odd! Why M. de l'Empereur, to be sure. I wonder what the coroner
will bring it in.'

'How can you talk such nonsense, Charley?' said Linda.

'Very well, Master Charley,' said Katie. 'All that comes of being a writer of romances. I suppose
that's to be the next contribution to the Daily Delight.'

Neverbend went off on his quadrille not at all pleased with the joke. Indeed, he was never
pleased with a joke, and in this instance he ventured to suggest to his partner that the idea
of a gentleman expiring in a cab was much too horrid to be laughed at.

'Oh, we never mind Charley Tudor,' said Linda; 'he always goes on in that way. We all like
him so much.'

Mr. Neverbend, who, though not very young, still had a susceptible heart within his bosom,
had been much taken by Linda's charms. He already began to entertain an idea that as a Mrs.
Neverbend would be a desirable adjunct to his establishment at some future period, he could
not do better than offer himself and his worldly goods to the acceptance of Miss Woodward;
he therefore said nothing further in disparagement of the family friend; but he resolved that
no such alliance should ever induce him to make Mr. Charles Tudor welcome at his house. But
what could he have expected? The Internal Navigation had ever been a low place, and he was
surprised that the Hon. Mrs. Val should have admitted one of the navvies inside her drawing-room.

And so the ball went on. Mr. Johnson came duly for the lancers, and M. Jaquetanape for the
polka. Johnson was great at the lancers, knowing every turn and vagary in that most intricate
and exclusive of dances; and it need hardly be said that the polka with M. Jaquetanape was
successful. The last honour, however, was not without evil results, for it excited the envy
of Ugolina, who, proud of her own performance, had longed, but hitherto in vain, to be whirled
round the room by that wondrously expert foreigner.

'Well, my dear,' said Ugolina, with an air that plainly said that Katie was to be treated as
a child, 'I hope you have had dancing enough.'

'Oh, indeed I have not,' said Katie, fully appreciating the purport and cause of her companion's
remark; 'not near enough.'

'Ah--but, my dear--you should remember,' said Ugolina; 'your mamma will be displeased if you
fatigue yourself.'

'My mamma is never displeased because we amuse ourselves, and I am not a bit fatigued;' and
so saying Katie walked off, and took refuge with her sister Gertrude. What business had any
Ugolina Neverbend to interfere between her and her mamma?

Then came the supper. There was a great rush to get downstairs, but Charley was so clever that
even this did not put him out. Of course there was no sitting down; which means that the bashful,
retiring, and obedient guests were to stand on their legs; while those who were forward, and
impudent, and disobedient, found seats for themselves wherever they could. Charley was certainly
among the latter class, and he did not rest therefore till he had got Katie into an old arm-chair
in one corner of the room, in such a position as to enable himself to eat his own supper leaning
against the chimney-piece.

'I say, Johnson,' said he, 'do bring me some ham and chicken-- it's for a lady--I'm wedged
up here and can't get out--and, Johnson, some sherry.'

The good-natured young Weights obeyed, and brought the desired provisions.

'And Johnson--upon my word I'm sorry to be so troublesome--but one more plateful if you please--for
another lady--a good deal, if you please, for this lady, for she's very hungry; and some more
sherry.'

Johnson again obeyed--the Weights are always obedient--and Charley of course appropriated the
second portion to his own purposes.

'Oh, Charley, that was a fib--now wasn't it? You shouldn't have said it was for a lady.'

'But then I shouldn't have got it.'

'Oh, but that's no reason; according to that everybody might tell a fib whenever they wanted
anything.'

'Well, everybody does--everybody except you, Katie.'

'O no,' said Katie--'no they don't--mamma, and Linda, and Gertrude never do; nor Harry Norman,
he never does, nor Alaric.'

'No, Harry Norman never does,' said Charley, with something like vexation in his tone. He made
no exception to Katie's list of truth-tellers, but he was thinking within himself whether Alaric
had a juster right to be in the catalogue than himself. 'Harry Norman never does, certainly.
You must not compare me with them, Katie. They are patterns of excellence. I am all the other
way, as everybody knows.' He was half laughing as he spoke, but Katie's sharp ear knew that
he was more than half in earnest, and she felt she had pained him by what she had said.

'Oh, Charley, I didn't mean that; indeed I did not. I know that in all serious things you are
as truthful as they are--and quite as good--that is, in many ways.' Poor Katie! she wanted
to console him, she wanted to be kind, and yet she could not be dishonest.

'Quite as good! no, you know I am not.'

'You are as good-hearted, if not better; and you will be as steady, won't you, Charley? I am
sure you will; and I know you are more clever, really more clever than either of them.'

'Oh! Katie.'

'I am quite sure you are. I have always said so; don't be angry with me for what I said.'

'Angry with you! I couldn't be angry with you.'

'I wouldn't, for the world, say anything to vex you. I like you better than either of them,
though Alaric is my brother-in-law. Of course I do; how could I help it, when you saved my life?'

'Saved your life! Pooh! I didn't save your life. Any boy could have done the same, or any waterman
about the place. When you fell in, the person who was nearest you pulled you out, that was all.'

There was something almost approaching to ferocity in his voice as he said this; and yet when
Katie timidly looked up she saw that he had turned his back to the room, and that his eyes
were full of tears. He had felt that he was loved by this child, but that he was loved from
a feeling of uncalled-for gratitude. He could not stop to analyse this, to separate the sweet
from the bitter; but he knew that the latter prevailed. It is so little flattering to be loved
when such love is the offspring of gratitude. And then when that gratitude is unnecessary,
when it has been given in mistake for supposed favours, the acceptance of such love is little
better than a cheat!

'That was not all,' said Katie, very decidedly. 'It never shall be all in my mind. If you had
not been with us I should now have been drowned, and cold, and dead; and mamma! where would
she have been? Oh! Charley, I shall think myself so wicked if I have said anything to vex you.'

Charley did not analyse his feelings, nor did Katie analyse hers. It would have been impossible
for her to do so. But could she have done it, and had she done it, she would have found that
her gratitude was but the excuse which she made to herself for a passionate love which she
could not have excused, even to herself, in any other way.

He said everything he could to reassure her and make her happy, and she soon smiled and laughed
again.

'Now, that's what my editor would call a Nemesis,' said Charley.

'Oh, that's a Nemesis, is it?'

'Johnson was cheated into doing my work, and getting me my supper; and then you scolded me,
and took away my appetite, so that I couldn't eat it; that's a Nemesis. Johnson is avenged,
only, unluckily, he doesn't know it, and wickedness is punished.'

'Well, mind you put it into the Daily Delight. But all the girls are going upstairs; pray let
me get out,' and so Katie went upstairs again.

It was then past one. About two hours afterwards, Gertrude, looking for her sister that she
might take her home, found her seated on a bench, with her feet tucked under her dress. She
was very much fatigued, and she looked to be so; but there was still a bright laughing sparkle
in her eye, which showed that her spirits were not even yet weary.

'Well, Katie, have you had enough dancing?'

'Nearly,' said Katie, yawning.

'You look as if you couldn't stand.'

'Yes, I am too tired to stand; but still I think I could dance a little more, only--'

'Only what?'

'Whisper,' said Katie; and Gertrude put down her ear near to her sister's lips. 'Both my shoes
are quite worn out, and my toes are all out on the floor.'

It was clearly time for them to go home, so away they all went.

CHAPTER XXVII

EXCELSIOR

The last words that Katie spoke as she walked down Mrs. Val's hall, leaning on Charley's arm,
as he led her to the carriage, were these--

'You will be steady, Charley, won't you? you will try to be steady, won't you, dear Charley?'
and as she spoke she almost imperceptibly squeezed the arm on which she was leaning. Charley
pressed her little hand as he parted from her, but he said nothing. What could he say, in that
moment of time, in answer to such a request? Had he made the reply which would have come most
readily to his lips, it would have been this: 'It is too late, Katie--too late for me to profit
by a caution, even from you--no steadiness now will save me.' Katie, however, wanted no other
answer than the warm pressure which she felt on her hand.

And then, leaning back in the carriage, and shutting her eyes, she tried to think quietly over
the events of the night. But it was, alas! a dream, and yet so like reality that she could
not divest herself of the feeling that the ball was still going on. She still seemed to see
the lights and hear the music, to feel herself whirled round the room, and to see others whirling,
whirling, whirling on every side of her. She thought over all the names on her card, and the
little contests that had taken place for her hand, and all Charley's jokes, and M. de l'Empereur's
great disaster; and then as she remembered how long she had gone on twisting round with the
poor unfortunate ill-used Frenchman, she involuntarily burst out into a fit of laughter.

'Good gracious, Katie, what is the matter? I thought you were asleep,' said Gertrude.

'So did I,' said Linda. 'What on earth can you be laughing at now?'

'I was laughing at myself,' said Katie, still going on with her half-suppressed chuckle, 'and
thinking what a fool I was to go on dancing so long with that M. de l'Empereur. Oh dear, Gertrude,
I am so tired: shall we be home soon?' and then she burst out crying.

The excitement and fatigue of the day had been too much for her, and she was now completely
overcome. Ugolina Neverbend's advice, though not quite given in the kindest way, had in itself
been good. Mrs. Woodward would, in truth, have been unhappy could she have seen her child at
this moment. Katie made an attempt to laugh off her tears, but she failed, and her sobs then
became hysterical, and she lay with her head on her married sister's shoulder, almost choking
herself in her attempts to repress them.

'Dear Katie, don't sob so,' said Linda--'don't cry, pray don't cry, dear Katie.'

'She had better let it have its way,' said Gertrude; 'she will be better directly, won't you,
Katie?'

In a little time she was better, and then she burst out laughing again. 'I wonder why the man
went on when he was so tired. What a stupid man he must be!'

Gertrude and Linda both laughed in order to comfort her and bring her round.

'Do you know, I think it was because he didn't know how to say 'stop' in English;' and then
she burst out laughing again, and that led to another fit of hysterical tears.

When they reached home Gertrude and Linda soon got her into bed. Linda was to sleep with her,
and she also was not very long in laying her head on her pillow. But before she did so Katie
was fast asleep, and twice in her sleep she cried out, 'Oh, Charley! Oh, Charley!' Then Linda
guessed how it was with her sister, and in the depths of her loving heart she sorrowed for
the coming grief which she foresaw.

When the morning came Katie was feverish, and had a headache. It was thought better that she
should remain in town, and Alaric took Linda down to Hampton. The next day Mrs. Woodward came
up, and as the invalid was better she took her home. But still she was an invalid. The doctor
declared that she had never quite recovered from her fall into the river, and prescribed quiet
and cod-liver oil. All the truth about the Chiswick fete and the five hours' dancing, and the
worn-out shoes, was not told to him, or he might, perhaps, have acquitted the water-gods of
the injury. Nor was it all, perhaps, told to Mrs. Woodward.

'I'm afraid she tired herself at the ball,' said Mrs. Woodward.

'I think she did a little,' said Linda.

'Did she dance much?' said Mrs. Woodward, looking anxiously.

'She did dance a good deal,' said Linda.

Mrs. Woodward was too wise to ask any further questions.

As it was a fine night Alaric had declared his intention of walking home from Mrs. Val's party,
and he and Charley started together. They soon parted on their roads, but not before Alaric
had had time to notice Charley's perverse stupidity as to Miss Golightly.

'So you wouldn't take my advice about Clementina?' said he.

'It was quite impossible, Alaric,' said Charley, in an apologetic voice. 'I couldn't do it,
and, what is more, I am sure I never shall.'

'No, not now; you certainly can't do it now. If I am not very much mistaken, the chance is
gone. I think you'll find she engaged herself to that Frenchman tonight.'

'Very likely,' said Charley.

'Well--I did the best I could for you. Good night, old fellow.'

'I'm sure I'm much obliged to you. Good night,' said Charley.

Alaric's suggestion with reference to the heiress was quite correct: M. Jaquetanape had that
night proposed, and been duly accepted. He was to present himself to his loved one's honourable
mother on the following morning as her future son-in-law, comforted and supported in his task
of doing so by an assurance from the lady that if her mother would not give her consent the
marriage should go on all the same without it. How delightful to have such a dancer for her
lover! thought Clementina. That was her 'Excelsior.'

Charley walked home with a sad heart. He had that day given a pledge that he would on the morrow
go to the 'Cat and Whistle,' and visit his lady-love. Since the night when he sat there with
Norah Geraghty on his knee, now nearly a fortnight since, he had spent but little of his time
there. He had, indeed, gone there once or twice with his friend Scatterall, but had contrived
to avoid any confidential intercourse with either the landlady or the barmaid, alleging, as
an excuse for his extra-ordinary absence, that his time was wholly occupied by the demands
made on it by the editor of the Daily Delight. Mrs. Davis, however, was much too sharp, and
so also we may say was Miss Geraghty, to be deceived. They well knew that such a young man
as Charley would go wherever his inclination led him. Till lately it had been all but impossible
to get him out of the little back parlour at the 'Cat and Whistle'; now it was nearly as difficult
to get him into it. They both understood what this meant.

'You'd better take up with Peppermint and have done with it,' said the widow. 'What's the good
of your shilly-shallying till you're as thin as a whipping-post? If you don't mind what you're
after he'll be off too.'

'And the d---- go along with him,' said Miss Geraghty, who had still about her a twang of the
County Clare, from whence she came.

'With all my heart,' said Mrs. Davis; 'I shall save my hundred pounds: but if you'll be led
by me you'll not throw Peppermint over till you're sure of the other; and, take my word for
it, you're----'

'I hate Peppermint.'

'Nonsense; he's an honest good sort of man, and a deal more likely to keep you out of want
than the other.'

Hereupon Norah began to cry, and to wipe her beautiful eyes with the glass-cloth. Hers, indeed,
was a cruel position. Her face was her fortune, and her fortune she knew was deteriorating
from day to day. She could not afford to lose the lover that she loved, and also the lover
that she did not love. Matrimony with her was extremely desirable, and she was driven to confess
that it might very probably be either now or never. Much as she hated Peppermint, she was quite
aware that she would take him if she could not do better. But then, was it absolutely certain
that she must lose the lover that so completely suited her taste? Mrs. Davis said it was. Norah
herself, confiding, as it is so natural that ladies should do, a little too much in her own
beauty, thought that she couldn't but have a chance left. She also had her high aspirations;
she desired to rise in the world, to leave goes of gin and screws of tobacco behind her, and
to reach some position more worthy of the tastes of a woman. 'Excelsior,' translated doubtless
into excellent Irish, was her motto also. It would be so great a thing to be the wife of Charles
Tudor, Esq., of the Civil Service, and more especially as she dearly and truly loved the same
Charles Tudor in her heart of hearts.

She knew, however, that it was not for her to indulge in the luxury of a heart, if circumstances
absolutely forbade it. To eat and drink and clothe herself, and, if possible, to provide eating
and drinking and clothes for her future years, this was the business of life, this was the
only real necessity. She had nothing to say in opposition to Mrs. Davis, and therefore she
went on crying, and again wiped her eyes with the glass-cloth.

Mrs. Davis, however, was no stern monitor, unindulgent to the weakness of human nature. When
she saw how Norah took to heart her sad fate, she resolved to make one more effort in her favour.
She consequently dressed herself very nicely, put on her best bonnet, and took the unprecedented
step of going off to the Internal Navigation, and calling on Charley in the middle of his office.

Charley was poking over the Kennett and Avon lock entries, with his usual official energy,
when the office messenger came up and informed him that a lady was waiting to see him.

'A lady!' said Charley: 'what lady?' and he immediately began thinking of the Woodwards, whom
he was to meet that afternoon at Chiswick.

'I'm sure I can't say, sir: all that she said was that she was a lady,' answered the messenger,
falsely, for he well knew that the woman was Mrs. Davis, of the 'Cat and Whistle.'

Now the clerks at the Internal Navigation were badly off for a waiting-room; and in no respect
can the different ranks of different public offices be more plainly seen than in the presence
or absence of such little items of accommodation as this. At the Weights and Measures there
was an elegant little chamber, carpeted, furnished with leathern-bottomed chairs, and a clock,
supplied with cream-laid note-paper, new pens, and the Times newspaper, quite a little Elysium,
in which to pass half an hour, while the Secretary, whom one had called to see, was completing
his last calculation on the matter of the decimal coinage. But there were no such comforts
at the Internal Navigation. There was, indeed, a little room at the top of the stairs, in which
visitors were requested to sit down; but even here two men were always at work--at work, or
else at play.

Into this room Mrs. Davis was shown, and there Charley found her. Long and intimately as the
young navvy had been acquainted with the landlady of the 'Cat and Whistle,' he had never before
seen her arrayed for the outer world. It may be doubted whether Sir John Falstaff would, at
the first glance, have known even Dame Quickly in her bonnet, that is, if Dame Quickly in those
days had had a bonnet. At any rate Charley was at fault for a moment, and was shaking hands
with the landlady before he quite recognized who she was.

The men in the room, however, had recognized her, and Charley well knew that they had done so.

'Mr. Tudor,' she began, not a bit abashed, 'I want to know what it is you are a-going to do?'

Though she was not abashed, Charley was, and very much so. However, he contrived to get her
out of the room, so that he might speak to her somewhat more privately in the passage. The
gentlemen at the Internal Navigation were well accustomed to this mode of colloquy, as their
tradesmen not unfrequently called, with the view of having a little conversation, which could
not conveniently be held in the public room.

'And, Mr. Tudor, what are you a-going to do about that poor girl there?' said Mrs. Davis, as
soon as she found herself in the passage, and saw that Charley was comfortably settled with
his back against the wall.

'She may go to Hong-Kong for me.' That is what Charley should have said. But he did not say
it. He had neither the sternness of heart nor the moral courage to enable him to do so. He
was very anxious, it is true, to get altogether quit of Norah Geraghty; but his present immediate
care was confined to a desire of getting Mrs. Davis out of the office.

'Do!' said Charley. 'Oh, I don't know; I'll come and settle something some of these days; let
me see when--say next Tuesday.'

'Settle something,' said Mrs. Davis. 'If you are an honest man, as I take you, there is only
one thing to settle; when do you mean to marry her?'

'Hush!' said Charley; for, as she was speaking, Mr. Snape came down the passage leading from
Mr. Oldeschole's room. 'Hush!' Mr. Snape as he passed walked very slowly, and looked curiously
round into the widow's face. 'I'll be even with you, old fellow, for that,' said Charley to
himself; and it may be taken for granted that he kept his word before long.

'Oh! it is no good hushing any more,' said Mrs. Davis, hardly waiting till Mr. Snape's erect
ears were out of hearing. 'Hushing won't do no good; there's that girl a-dying, and her grave'll
be a-top of your head, Mr. Tudor; mind I tell you that fairly; so now I want to know what it
to you're a-going to do.' And then Mrs. Davis lifted up the lid of a market basket which hung
on her left arm, took out her pocket-handkerchief, and began to wipe her eyes.

Unfortunate Charley! An idea occurred to him that he might bolt and leave her. But then the
chances were that she would make her way into his very room, and tell her story there, out
before them all. He well knew that this woman was capable of many things if her temper were
fairly roused. And yet what could he say to her to induce her to go out from that building,
and leave him alone to his lesser misfortunes?

'She's a-dying, I tell you, Mr. Tudor,' continued the landlady, 'and if she do die, be sure
of this, I won't be slow to tell the truth about it. I'm the only friend she's got, and I'm
not going to see her put upon. So just tell me this in two words--what is it you're a-going
to do?' And then Mrs. Davis replaced her kerchief in the basket, stood boldly erect in the
middle of the passage, waiting for Charley's answer.

Just at this moment Mr. Snape again appeared in the passage, going towards Mr. Oldeschole's
room. The pernicious old man! He hated Charley Tudor; and, to tell the truth, there was no
love lost between them. Charley, afflicted and out of spirits as he was at the moment, could
not resist the opportunity of being impertinent to his old foe: 'I'm afraid you'll make yourself
very tired, Mr. Snape, if you walk about so much,' said he. Mr. Snape merely looked at him,
and then hard at Mrs. Davis, and passed on to Mr. Oldeschole's room.

'Well, Mr. Tudor, will you be so good as to tell me what it is you're going to do about this
poor girl?'

'My goodness, Mrs. Davis, you know how I am situated--how can you expect me to give an answer
to such a question in such a place as this? I'll come to the 'Cat and Whistle' on Tuesday.'

'Gammon!' said the eloquent lady. 'You know you means gammon.'

Charley, perhaps, did mean gammon; but he protested that he had never been more truthfully
in earnest in his life. Mr. Oldeschole's door opened, and Mrs. Davis perceiving it, whipped
out her handkerchief in haste, and again began wiping her eyes, not without audible sobs. 'Confound
the woman!' said Charley to himself; 'what on earth shall I do with her?'

Mr. Oldeschole's door opened, and out of it came Mr. Oldeschole, and Mr. Snape following him.
What means the clerk had used to bring forth the Secretary need not now be inquired. Forth
they both came, and passed along the passage, brushing close by Charley and Mrs. Davis; Mr.
Oldeschole, when he saw that one of the clerks was talking to a woman who apparently was crying,
looked very intently on the ground, and passed by with a quick step; Mr. Snape looked as intently
at the woman, and passed very slowly. Each acted according to his lights.

'I don't mean gammon at all, Mrs. Davis--indeed, I don't--I'll be there on Tuesday night certainly,
if not sooner--I will indeed--I shall be in a desperate scrape if they see me here talking
to you any longer; there is a rule against women being in the office at all.'

'And there's a rule against the clerks marrying, I suppose,' said Mrs. Davis.

The colloquy ended in Charley promising to spend the Saturday evening at the 'Cat and Whistle,'
with the view of then and there settling what he meant to do about 'that there girl'; nothing
short of such an undertaking on his part would induce Mrs. Davis to budge. Had she known her
advantage she might have made even better terms. He would almost rather have given her a written
promise to marry her barmaid, than have suffered her to remain there till Mr. Oldeschole should
return and see her there again. So Mrs. Davis, with her basket and pocket-handkerchief, went
her way about her marketing, and Charley, as he returned to his room, gave the strictest injunctions
to the messenger that not, on any ground or excuse whatever, was any woman to be again allowed
to see him at the office.

When, therefore, on the fine summer morning, with the early daylight all bright around him,
Charley walked home from Mrs. Val's party, he naturally felt sad enough. He had one sixpence
left in his pocket; he was engaged to spend the evening of the following day with the delightful
Norah at the 'Cat and Whistle,' then and there to plight her his troth, in whatever formal
and most irretrievable manner Mrs. Davis might choose to devise; and as he thought of these
things he had ringing in his ears the last sounds of that angel voice, 'You will be steady,
Charley, won't you? I know you will, dear Charley--won't you now?'

Steady! Would not the best thing for him be to step down to Waterloo Bridge and throw himself
over? He still had money enough left to pay the toll--though not enough to hire a pistol. And
so he went home and got into bed.

On that same day, the day that was to witness Charley's betrothal to Miss Geraghty, and that
of M. Jaquetanape with Miss Golightly, Alaric Tudor had an appointment with Sir Gregory Hardlines
at the new office of the Civil Service Examination Board. Alaric had been invited to wait upon
the great man, in terms which made him perfectly understand that the communication to be made
was one which would not be unpleasing or uncomplimentary to himself. Indeed, he pretty well
guessed what was to be said to him. Since his promotion at the Weights and Measures he had
gone on rising in estimation as a man of value to the Civil Service at large. Nearly two years
had now passed since that date, and in these pages nothing has been said of his official career
during the time. It had, however, been everything that he or his friends could have wished
it to be. He had so put himself forward as absolutely to have satisfied the actual chief clerk
of his office, and was even felt by some of the secretaries to be treading very closely on
their heels.

And yet a great portion of his time had been spent, not at the Weights and Measures, but in
giving some sort of special assistance to Sir Gregory's Board. The authorities at the Weights
and Measures did not miss him; they would have been well content that he should have remained
for ever with Sir Gregory.

He had also become somewhat known to the official world, even beyond the confines of the Weights
and Measures, or the Examination Board, He had changed his club, and now belonged to the Downing.
He had there been introduced by his friend Undy to many men, whom to know should be the very
breath in the nostrils of a rising official aspirant. Mr. Whip Vigil, of the Treasury, had
more than once taken him by the hand, and even the Chancellor of the Exchequer usually nodded
to him whenever that o'ertasked functionary found a moment to look in at the official club.

Things had not been going quite smoothly at the Examination Board. Tidings had got about that
Mr. Jobbles was interfering with Sir Gregory, and that Sir Gregory didn't like it. To be sure,
when this had been indiscreetly alluded to in the House by one of those gentlemen who pass
their leisure hours in looking out for raws in the hide of the Government carcass, some other
gentleman, some gentleman from the Treasury bench, had been able to give a very satisfactory
reply. For why, indeed, should any gentleman sit on the Treasury bench if he be not able, when
so questioned, to give very satisfactory replies? Giving satisfactory replies to ill-natured
questions is, one may say, the constitutional work of such gentlemen, who have generally well
learned how to do so, and earned their present places by asking the selfsame questions themselves,
when seated as younger men in other parts of the House.

But though the answer given in this instance was so eminently satisfactory as to draw down
quite a chorus of triumphant acclamations from the official supporters of Government, nevertheless
things had not gone on at the Board quite as smoothly as might have been desirable. Mr. Jobbles
was enthusiastically intent on examining the whole adult male population of Great Britain,
and had gone so far as to hint that female competitors might, at some future time, be made
subject to his all-measuring rule and compass. Sir Gregory, however, who, having passed his
early days in an office, may, perhaps, be supposed to have had some slight prejudice remaining
in favour of ancient customs, was not inclined to travel so quickly. Moreover, he preferred
following his own lead, to taking any other lead whatever that Mr. Jobbles might point out
as preferable.

Mr. Jobbles wanted to crush all patronage at a blow; any system of patronage would lamentably
limit the number of candidates among whom his examination papers would be distributed. He longed
to behold, crowding around him, an attendance as copious as Mr. Spurgeon's, and to see every
head bowed over the posing questions which he should have dictated. No legion could be too
many for him. He longed to be at this great work; but his energies were crushed by the opposition
of his colleagues. Sir Gregory thought --and Sir Warwick, though he hardly gave a firm support
to Sir Gregory, would not lend his countenance to Mr. Jobbles--Sir Gregory thought that enough
would be done for the present, if they merely provided that every one admitted into the Service
should be educated in such a manner as to be fit for any profession or calling under the sun;
and that, with this slight proviso, the question of patronage might for the present remain
untouched. 'Do you,' he would have said to the great officers of Government, 'appoint whom
you like. In this respect remain quite unfettered. I, however, I am the St. Peter to whom are
confided the keys of the Elysium. Do you send whatever candidates you please: it is for me
merely to say whether or not they shall enter.' But Mr. Jobbles would have gone much farther.
He would have had all mankind for candidates, and have selected from the whole mass those most
worthy of the high reward. And so there was a split at the Examination Board, which was not
to be healed even by the very satisfactory reply given by the Treasury gentleman in the House
of Commons.

Neither Sir Gregory nor his rival were men likely to give way, and it soon appeared manifest
to the powers that be, that something must be done. It therefore came to light that Mr. Jobbles
had found that his clerical position was hardly compatible with a seat at a lay board, and
he retired to the more congenial duties of a comfortable prebendal stall at Westminster. 'So
that by his close vicinity,' as was observed by a newspaper that usually supported the Government,
'he might be able to be of material use, whenever his advice should be required by the Board
of Commissioners.' Sir Gregory in the meantime was instructed to suggest the name of another
colleague; and, therefore, he sent for Alaric Tudor.

Alaric, of course, knew well what had been going on at the Board. He had been Sir Gregory's
confidential man all through; had worked out cases for him, furnished him with arguments, backed
his views, and had assisted him, whenever such a course had been necessary, in holding Mr.
Jobbles' head under the pump. Alaric knew well on which side his bread was buttered, and could
see with a glance which star was in the ascendant; he perfectly understood the points and merits
of the winning horse. He went in to win upon Sir Gregory, and he won. When Mr. Jobbles made
his last little speech at the Board, and retired to his house in the Dean's yard, Alaric felt
tolerably certain that he himself would be invited to fill the vacant place.

And he was so invited. 'That is L1,200 a year, at any rate,' said he to himself, as with many
words of submissive gratitude he thanked his patron for the nomination. 'That is L1,200 a year.
So far, so good. And now what must be the next step? Excelsior! It is very nice to be a Commissioner,
and sit at a Board at Sir Gregory's right hand: much nicer than being a junior clerk at the
Weights and Measures, like Harry Norman. But there are nicer things even than that; there are
greater men even than Sir Gregory; richer figures than even L1,200 a year!'

So he went to his old office, wrote his resignation, and walked home meditating to what next
step above he should now aspire to rise. 'Excelsior!' he still said to himself, 'Excelsior!'

At the same moment Charley was leaving the Internal Navigation, and as he moved with unusual
slowness down the steps, he bethought himself how he might escape from the fangs of his Norah;
how, if such might still be possible, he might fit himself for the love of Katie Woodward.
Excelsior! such also was the thought of his mind; but he did not dare to bring the word to
utterance. It was destined that his thoughts should be interrupted by no very friendly hand.

CHAPTER XXVIII

OUTERMAN v TUDOR

Charley sat at his office on the Saturday afternoon, very meditative and unlike himself. What
was he to do when his office hours were over? In the first place he had not a shilling in the
world to get his dinner. His habit was to breakfast at home at his lodgings with Harry, and
then to dine, as best he might, at some tavern, if he had not the good fortune to be dining
out. He had a little dinner bill at a house which he frequented in the Strand; but the bill
he knew had reached its culminating point. It would, he was aware, be necessary that it should
be decreased, not augmented, at the next commercial transaction which might take place between
him and the tavern-keeper.

This was not the first time by many in which he had been in a similar plight--but his resource
in such case had been to tell the truth gallantly to his friend Mrs. Davis; and some sort of
viands, not at all unprepossessing to him in his hunger, would always be forthcoming for him
at the 'Cat and Whistle.' This supply was now closed to him. Were he, under his present circumstances,
to seek for his dinner from the fair hands of Norah Geraghty, it would be tantamount to giving
himself up as lost for ever.

This want of a dinner, however, was a small misfortune in comparison with others which afflicted
him. Should or should he not keep his promise to Mrs. Davis, and go to the 'Cat and Whistle'
that evening? That was the question which disturbed his equanimity, and hindered him from teasing
Mr. Snape in his usual vivacious manner.

And here let it not be said that Charley must be altogether despicable in being so weak; that
he is not only a vulgar rake in his present habits, but a fool also, and altogether spiritless,
and of a low disposition. Persons who may so argue of him, who so argue of those whom they
meet in the real living world, are ignorant of the twists and turns, and rapid changes in character
which are brought about by outward circumstances. Many a youth, abandoned by his friends to
perdition on account of his folly, might have yet prospered, had his character not been set
down as gone, before, in truth, it was well formed. It is not one calf only that should be
killed for the returning prodigal. Oh, fathers, mothers, uncles, aunts, guardians, and elderly
friends in general, kill seven fatted calves if seven should unfortunately be necessary!

And then there was a third calamity. Charley had, at this moment, in his pocket a certain document,
which in civil but still somewhat peremptory language invited him to meet a very celebrated
learned pundit, being no less than one of Her Majesty's puisne judges, at some court in Westminster,
to explain why he declined to pay to one Nathaniel Outerman, a tailor, the sum of &c., &c.,
&c.; and the document then went on to say, that any hesitation on Charley's part to accept
this invitation would be regarded as great contempt shown to the said learned pundit, and would
be treated accordingly. Now Charley had not paid the slightest attention to this requisition
from the judge. It would, he conceived, have been merely putting his head into the lion's mouth
to do so. But yet he knew that such documents meant something; that the day of grace was gone
by, and that Mr. Nathaniel Outerman would very speedily have him locked up.

So Charley sat meditative over his lock entries, and allowed even his proposed vengeance on
Mr. Snape to be delayed.

'I say, Charley,' said Scatterall, coming over and whispering to him, 'you couldn't lend me
half a crown, could you?'

Charley said nothing, but looked on his brother navvy in a manner that made any other kind
of reply quite unnecessary.

'I was afraid it was so,' said Scatterall, in a melancholy voice. And then, as if by the brilliance
of his thought he had suddenly recovered his spirits, he made a little proposition.

'I'll tell you what you might do, Charley. I put my watch up the spout last week. It's a silver
turnip, so I only got fifteen shillings; yours is a Cox and Savary, and it's gold. I'm sure
you'd get L3 for it easily--perhaps L3 3s. Now, if you'll do that, and take my turnip down,
I'll let you have the turnip to wear, if you'll let me have ten shillings of the money. You
see, you'd get clear--let me see how much.' And Scatterall went to work with a sheet of foolscap
paper, endeavouring to make some estimate of what amount of ready cash Charley might have in
his pocket on completion of this delicate little arrangement.

'You be d--,' said Charley.

'You'll not do it, then?' said Dick.

Charley merely repeated with a little more emphasis the speech which he had just before made.

'Oh, very well,' said Scatterall; 'there couldn't have been a fairer bargain; at least it was
all on your side; for you would have had the watch to wear, and nearly all the money too.'

Charley still repeated the same little speech. This was uncivil; for it had evidently been
looked on by Scatterall as unsatisfactory.

'Oh, very well,' said that gentleman, now in a state of mild anger--' only I saw that you had
a fine new purse, and I thought you'd wish to have something to put in it.'

Charley again repeated his offensive mandate; but he did it in a spirit of bravado, in order
to maintain his reputation. The allusion to the purse made him sadder than ever. He put his
hand into his breast-pocket, and felt that it was near his heart: and then he fancied that
he again heard her words--'You will be steady; won't you, dear Charley?'

At four o'clock, he was by no means in his usual hurry to go away, and he sat there drawing
patterns on his blotting-paper, and chopping up a stick of sealing-wax with his penknife, in
a very disconsolate way. Scatterall went. Corkscrew went. Mr. Snape, having carefully brushed
his hat and taken down from its accustomed peg the old cotton umbrella, also took his departure;
and the fourth navvy, who inhabited the same room, went also. The iron-fingered hand of time
struck a quarter past four on the Somerset House clock, and still Charley Tudor lingered at
his office. The maid who came to sweep the room was thoroughly amazed, and knew that something
must be wrong.

Just as he was about to move, Mr. Oldeschole came bustling into the room. 'Where is Corkscrew?'
said he. 'Gone,' said Charley. 'And Scatterall?' asked Oldeschole. 'Gone, sir,' said Charley.
'And Mr. Snape?' said the Secretary. 'Oh, he is gone, of course,' said Charley, taking his
revenge at last.

'Then, Mr. Tudor, I must trouble you to copy these papers for me at once. They are wanted immediately
for Sir Gregory Hardlines.' It was quite clear that Mr. Oldeschole was very much in earnest
about the job, and that he was rejoiced to find that he still had one clerk to aid him.

Charley sat down and did the required work. On any other day he would greatly have disliked
such a summons, but now he did not care much about it. He made the copies, however, as quickly
as he could, and then took them in to Mr. Oldeschole.

The worthy Secretary rewarded him by a lecture; a lecture, however, which, as Charley well
understood, was intended all in kindness. He told him how Mr. Snape complained of him, how
the office books told against him, how the clerks talked, and all Somerset House made stories
of his grotesque iniquities. With penitential air Charley listened and promised. Mr. Oldeschole
promised also that bygones should be bygones. 'I wonder whether the old cock would lend me
a five-pound note! I dare say he would,' said Charley to himself, as he left the office. He
abstained, however, from asking for it.

Returning to his room, he took his hat and went downstairs. As he was sauntering forth through
the archway into the Strand, a man with a decent coat but a very bad hat came up to him.

'I'm afraid I must trouble you to go with me, Mr. Tudor,' said the man.

'All right,' said Charley; 'Outerman, I suppose; isn't it?'

'All right,' said the bailiff.

And away the two walked together to a sponging-house in Cursitor Street.

Charley had been arrested at the suit of Mr. Outerman, the tailor. He perfectly understood
the fact, and made no special objection to following the bailiff. One case was at any rate
off his mind; he could not now, be his will to do so ever so good, keep his appointment with
Norah Geraghty. Perhaps it was quite as well for him to be arrested just at this moment, as
be left at liberty. It must have come sooner or later. So he walked on with the bailiff not
without some feeling of consolation.

The man had suggested to him a cab; but Charley had told him, without the slightest mauvaise
honte, that he had not about him the means of paying for a cab. The man again suggested that
perhaps he had better go home and get some money, as he would find it in Cursitor Street very
desirable to have some. To this Charley replied that neither had he any money at home.

'That's blue,' said the man.

'It is rather blue,' said Charley; and on they went very amicably arm-in-arm.

We need not give any detailed description of Charley's prison- house. He was luckily not detained
there so long as to make it necessary that we should become acquainted with his fellow- captives,
or even have much intercourse with his jailers. He was taken to the sponging-house, and it
was there imparted to him that he had better send for two things--first of all for money, which
was by far the more desirable of the two; and secondly, for bail, which even if forthcoming
was represented as being at best but a dubious advantage.

'There's Mrs. Davis, she'd bail you, of course, and willing,' said the bailiff.

'Mrs. Davis!' said Charley, surprised that the man should know aught of his personal acquaintances.

'Yes, Mrs. Davis of the 'Cat and Whistle.' She'd do it in course, along of Miss Geraghty.'

Charley perceived with a shudder that his matrimonial arrangements were known and talked of
even in the distant world of Cursitor Street. He declined, however, the assistance of the landlady,
which no doubt would have been willingly forthcoming, and was divided between his three friends,
Alaric, Harry, and Mr. M'Ruen. Alaric was his cousin and his natural resource in such a position,
but he had lately rejected Alaric's advice, and now felt a disinclination to call upon him
in his difficulty. Harry he knew would assist him, would at once pay Mr. Outerman's bill, and
relieve him from all immediate danger; but the sense of what he already owed to Norman made
him unwilling to incur further obligations;--so he decided on sending for Mr. M'Ruen. In spite
of his being so poorly supplied with immediate cash, it was surmised from his appearance, clothes,
and known rank, that any little outlay made in his behalf would be probably repaid, and he
was therefore furnished with a messenger on credit. This man was first to call at Mr. M'Ruen's
with a note, and then to go to Charley's lodgings and get his brushes, razors, &c., these being
the first necessaries of life for which a man naturally looks when once overtaken by such a
misfortune as that with which Charley was now afflicted.

In the process of time the brushes and razors came, and so did Mr. M'Ruen.

'This is very kind of you,' said Charley, in rather a doleful voice, for he was already becoming
tired of Cursitor Street.

Mr. M'Ruen twisted his head round inside his cravat, and put out three fingers by way of shaking
hands with the prisoner.

'You seem pretty comfortable here,' said M'Ruen. Charley dissented to this, and said that he
was extremely uncomfortable.

'And what is it that I can do for you, Mr. Tudor?' said M'Ruen.

'Do for me! Why, bail me, to be sure; they won't let me out unless somebody bails me. You know
I shan't run away.'

'Bail you!' said M'Ruen.

'Yes, bail me,' said Charley. 'You don't mean to say that you have any objection?'

Mr. M'Ruen looked very sharply at his young client from head to foot. 'I don't know about bail,'
he said: 'it's very dangerous, very; why didn't you send for Mr. Norman or your cousin?'

'Because I didn't choose,' said Charley--'because I preferred sending to some one I could pay
for the trouble.'

'Ha--ha--ha,' laughed M'Ruen; 'but that's just it--can you pay? You owe me a great deal of
money, Mr. Tudor. You are so unpunctual, you know.'

'There are two ways of telling that story,' said Charley; 'but come, I don't want to quarrel
with you about that now--you go bail for me now, and you'll find your advantage in it. You
know that well enough.'

'Ha--ha--ha,' laughed the good-humoured usurer; 'ha--ha--ha-- well, upon my word I don't know.
You owe me a great deal of money, Mr. Tudor. Now, what o'clock is it by you, I wonder?'

Charley took out his watch--the Cox and Savary, before alluded to--and said that it was past seven.

'Aye; you've a very nice watch, I see. Come, Mr. Tudor, you owe me a great deal of money, and
you are the most unpunctual young man I know; but yet I don't like to see you distressed. I'll
tell you what, now--do you hand over your watch to me, just as a temporary loan--you can't
want it here, you know; and I'll come down and bail you out to-morrow.'

Charley declined dealing on these terms; and then Mr. M'Ruen at last went away, leaving Charley
to his fate, and lamenting quite pathetically that he was such an unpunctual young man, so
very unpunctual that it was impossible to do anything to assist him. Charley, however, manfully
resisted the second attack upon his devoted watch.

'That's very blue, very blue indeed,' said the master of the house, as Mr. M'Ruen took his
departure--'ha'n't you got no huncles nor hants, nor nothin' of that sort?'

Charley declared that he had lots of uncles and aunts, grandfathers and grandmothers, and a
perfect wealth of cousins, and that he would send for some of the leading members of his family
to-morrow. Satisfied with this, the man supplied him with bread and cheese, gin and water,
and plenty of tobacco; and, fortified with these comforts, Charley betook himself at last very
lugubriously, to a filthy, uninviting bed.,

He had, we have seen, sent for his brushes, and hence came escape; but in a manner that he
had little recked of, and of which, had he been asked, he would as little have approved. Mrs.
Richards, his landlady, was not slow in learning from the messenger how it came to pass that
Charley wanted the articles of his toilet so suddenly demanded. 'Why, you see, he's just been
quodded,' said the boy.

Mrs. Richards was quite enough up to the world, and had dealt with young men long enough, to
know what this meant; nor indeed was she much surprised. She had practical knowledge that Charley
had no strong propensity to pay his debts, and she herself was not unaccustomed to answer the
emissaries of Mr. Outerman and other greedy tradesmen who were similarly situated. To Mrs.
Richards herself Charley was not in debt, and she had therefore nothing to embitter her own
feelings against him. Indeed, she had all that fondness for him which a lodging-house keeper
generally has for a handsome, dissipated, easy-tempered young man; and when she heard that
he had been 'quodded,' immediately made up her mind that steps must be taken for his release.

But what was she to do? Norman, who she was aware would 'unquod' him immediately, if he were
in the way, was down at Hampton, and was not expected to be at his lodgings for two or three
days. After some cogitation, Mrs. Richards resolved that there was nothing for it but to go
down to Hampton herself, and break the news to his friends. Charley would not have been a bit
obliged to her had he known it, but Mrs. Richards acted for the best. There was a train down
to Hampton Court that night, and a return train to bring her home again--so off she started.

Mrs. Woodward had on that same afternoon taken down Katie, who was still an invalid;--Norman
had gone down with them, and was to remain there for some few days--going up and down every
morning and evening. Mrs. Woodward was sitting in the drawing-room; Linda and Katie were with
her, the latter lying in state on her sofa as invalid young ladies should do; Captain Cuttwater
was at Hampton Court, and Norman was on the water; when a fly from the railway made its way
up to the door of the Cottage.

'Mrs. Richards, ma'am,' said the demure parlour-maid, ushering in the lodging-house keeper,
who in her church-going best made a very decent appearance.

'Oh, Mrs. Richards, how are you?' said Mrs. Woodward, who knew the woman very well--'pray sit
down--are there any news from London?'

'Oh, ma'am, such news--such bad news--Mister Charley--.' Up jumped Katie from her sofa and
stood erect upon the floor. She stood there, with her mouth slightly open, with her eyes intently
fixed on Mrs. Richards, with her little hands each firmly clenched, drawing her breath with
hard, short, palpitating efforts. There she stood, but said nothing.

'Oh, Mrs. Richards--what is it?' said Mrs. Woodward; 'for Heaven's sake what is the matter?'

'Oh, ma'am; he's been took,' said Mrs. Richards.

'Took!' repeated Mrs. Woodward. 'Katie, dear Katie--sit down, my child--sit down.'

'Oh, mamma! oh, mamma!' said she, apparently unable to move, and certainly all but unable to stand.

'Tell us, Mrs. Richards, what is it--what has happened to Mr. Tudor?' and as she spoke Mrs.
Woodward got up and passed her arm around her younger daughter's waist--Linda also got up and
joined the group.

'Why, ma'am,' said Mrs. Richards, 'he's been took by the bailiffs, and now he's in prison.'

Katie did not faint. She never had fainted, and probably did not know the way; but she clenched
her hands still tighter, breathed harder than before, and repeated her appeal to her mother
in a voice of agony. 'Oh, mamma! oh, mamma!'

Katie had no very accurate conception of what an arrest for debt meant. She knew that next
to death imprisonment was the severest punishment inflicted on erring mortals, and she now
heard that Charley was in prison. She did not stop to think whether it was for his life, or
for some more limited period. It was enough for her to know, that this terrible misfortune
had come upon him, to him who, to her young fancy, was so bright, so good, so clever, so excellent,
upon him who had saved her life--upon him whom she so dearly loved.

'Oh, mamma! oh, mamma!' she said, and then in agony she shut her eyes and shuddered violently.

Mrs. Woodward was greatly afflicted. She was indeed sorry to hear such tidings of Charley Tudor;
but her grief was now deeper even than that. She could not be longer blind to the sort of feeling
which her child evinced for this young man; she could not think that these passionate bursts
of overpowering sorrow were the result of mere childish friendship; she could not but see that
her Katie's bosom now held a woman's heart, and that that heart was no longer her own.

And then Mrs. Woodward reflected of what nature, of what sort, was this man whom she had allowed
to associate with her darling, almost as a brother does with his sister; whom she had warmed
in her bosom till he had found an opportunity of inflicting this deadly wound. With terrible
bitterness she upbraided herself as she sat down and bade Mrs. Richards go on with her tale.
She knew that nothing which could now be said would add to Katie's anguish.

Mrs. Richards' story was soon told. It simply amounted to this-- that 'Mister Charley,' as
she always called him, had been arrested for debt at the suit of a tailor, and that she had
learnt the circumstances from the fact of the prisoner having sent for his brushes.

'And so I thought the best thing was to come and tell Mr. Norman,' said Mrs. Richards, concluding
her speech.

Nothing could be done till Norman came in. Linda went out with Mrs. Richards to get some refreshment
in the dining-room, and Mrs. Woodward sat with her arm round Katie's neck on the sofa, comforting
her with kisses and little caressing touches, but saying nothing. Katie, still unconscious
of her passion, gave way to spasmodic utterance of her own grief.

'Oh, mamma!' she said--' what can be done? What can we do? You will do something, mamma, won't
you? Poor Charley! Dear Charley! Harry will do something--won't he? Won't Harry go to London,
and do something?'

Mrs. Woodward did what she could to quiet her. Something should be done, she said. They must
wait till Harry came in, and then settle what was best. Nothing could be done till Harry came
in. 'You must be patient, Katie, or else you will make yourself really ill.'

Katie became afraid that she would be sent off to bed on the score of her illness before Harry
had come, and thus lose the advantage of hearing what was the step decided on. So she sat silent
in the corner of her sofa feigning to be asleep, but pondering in her mind what sort of penalties
were the penalties of imprisonment, how dreadful, how endurable, or how unendurable. Would
they put chains on him? would they starve him? would they cut off his beautiful brown hair?

Mrs. Woodward sat silent waiting for Harry's return. When first she had watched Katie's extreme
misery, and guessed the secret of her child's heart, she had felt something like hard, bitter
anger against Charley. But by degrees this feeling softened down. It was by no means natural
to her, nor akin to her usual tenderness. After all, the fault hitherto was probably more her
own than his.

Mrs. Richards was sent back to town. She was thanked for the trouble she had taken, and told
that Mr. Norman would do in the matter all that was necessary to be done. So she took her departure,
and Linda returned to the drawing-room.

Unfortunately Captain Cuttwater came in first. They none of them mentioned Charley's misfortune
to him. Charley was no favourite with Uncle Bat, and his remarks would not have been of the
most cheering tendency.

At last Norman came also. He came, as was his wont, through the drawing-room window, and, throwing
himself into a chair, began to tell the girls how much they had lost by not joining him on
the river.

'Harry,' said Mrs. Woodward, 'step into the dining-room with me for a moment.'

Harry got up to follow her. Katie and Linda also instantly jumped from their seats to do the
same. Mrs. Woodward looked round, and motioned to them to stay with their uncle. Linda obediently,
though reluctantly, remained; but Katie's impulse was too strong for her. She gave one imploring
look at her mother, a look which Mrs. Woodward well understood, and then taking silence for
consent, crept into the dining-room.

'Harry,' said Mrs. Woodward, as soon as the dining-room door was closed, 'Charley has been
arrested;' and then she told him how Mrs. Richards had been at the Cottage, and what was the
nature of the tidings she had brought.

Norman was not much surprised, nor did he feign to be so. He took the news so coolly that Katie
almost hated him. 'Did she say who had arrested him, or what was the amount?' he asked.

Mrs. Woodward replied that she knew no more than what she had already told. Katie stood in
the shade with her eyes fixed upon her cousin, but as yet she said nothing. How cruel, how
stony- hearted must he be to hear such dreadful tidings and remain thus undisturbed! Had Charley
heard that Norman was arrested, he would have been half way to London by this time. So, at
least, thought Katie.

'Something can be done for him, Harry, can there not? We must contrive to do something--eh,
Harry?' said Mrs. Woodward.

'I fear it is too late to do anything to-night,' said Harry, looking at his watch. 'The last
train is gone, and I could not possibly find him out before twelve.'

'And to-morrow is Sunday,' said Mrs. Woodward.

'Oh, Harry, pray do something!' said Katie, 'pray, pray, pray, do! Oh, Harry, think of Charley
being in prison! Oh, Harry, he would do anything for you!' and then she burst into tears, and
caught hold of Harry's arm and the front of his coat to add force to her entreaty.

'Katie,' said her mother, 'don't be so foolish. Harry will, of course, do whatever is best.'

'But, mamma, he says he will do nothing; why does he not go at once?'

'I will go at once, dear Katie,' said he; 'I will go now directly. I don't know whether we
can set him free to-night, or even to-morrow, as to-morrow is Sunday; but it certainly shall
be done on Monday, you may be sure of that at any rate. Whatever can be done shall be done;'
and, without further talk upon the subject, he took his hat and went his way.

'May God Almighty bless him!' said Mrs. Woodward. 'How infinitely greater are truth and honesty
than any talent, however brilliant!' She spoke only to herself and no one even guessed what
was the nature of the comparison which she thus made.

As soon as Norman was gone, Katie went to bed: and in the morning she was pronounced to be
too unwell to get up. And, indeed, she was far from well. During the night she only slept by
short starts, and in her sleep she was restless and uneasy; then, when she woke, she would
burst out into fits of tears, and lie sobbing hysterically till she slept again. In the morning,
Mrs. Woodward said something about Charley's misconduct, and this threw her into a wretched
state of misery, from which nothing would rouse her till her mother promised that the prodigal
should not be thrown over and abandoned.

Poor Mrs. Woodward was in a dreadful state of doubt as to what it now behoved her to do. She
felt that, however anxious she might be to assist Charley for his own sake, it was her bounden
duty to separate him from her child. Whatever merits he might have--and in her eyes he had
many--at any rate he had not those which a mother would desire to see in the future husband
of her daughter. He was profligate, extravagant, careless, and idle; his prospects in life
were in every respect bad; he had no self-respect, no self-reliance, no moral strength. Was
it not absolutely necessary that she should put a stop to any love that might have sprung up
between such a man as this and her own young bright-eyed darling?

Put a stop to it! Yes, indeed, most expedient; nay, absolutely necessary--if it were only possible.
Now, when it was too late, she began to perceive that she had not known of what material her
own child was formed. At sixteen, Gertrude and Linda had in reality been little more than children.
In manner, Katie had been more childish even than them, and yet--Mrs. Woodward, as she thought
of these things, felt her heart faint within her.

She was resolved that, cost what it might, Charley must be banished from the Cottage. But at
the first word of assumed displeasure that she uttered, Katie fell into such an agony of grief
that her soft heart gave way, and she found herself obliged to promise that the sinner should
be forgiven. Katie the while was entirely unconscious of the state of her own feelings. Had
she thought that she loved him as women love, had any thought of such love and of him together
even entered her mind, she could not have talked of him as she now talked. Had he been her
brother, she could not have been less guarded in her protestations of affection, or more open
in her appeals to her mother that he might be forgiven. Such was her present state; but it
was doomed that her eyes should soon be opened, and that she should know her own sorrow.

On the Sunday afternoon, Norman returned to Hampton with the tidings that Charley was once
more a free man. The key of gold which he had taken with him had been found potent enough to
open all barriers, even those with which the sanctity of Sunday had surrounded the prisoner.
Mr. Outerman, and the bailiff, and the messenger, had all been paid their full claims, and
Charley, with his combs and brushes, had returned to the more benign custody of Mrs. Richards.

'And why didn't he come down with you?' said Katie to Norman, who had gone up to her bedroom
to give her the good tidings.

Norman looked at Mrs. Woodward, but made no reply.

'He would probably prefer remaining in town at present,' said Mrs. Woodward. 'It will be more
comfortable for him to do so.'

And then Katie was left alone to meditate why Charley should be more comfortable after his
arrest in London than at Hampton; and after a while she thought that she had surmised the truth.
'Poor Charley! perhaps he is ashamed. He need not be ashamed to come at any rate to me.'

CHAPTER XXIX

EASY IS THE SLOPE OF HELL

The electors for the Tillietudlem district burghs, disgusted by the roguery of Mr. M'Buffer,
and anxiously on the alert to replace him by a strictly honest man, returned our friend Undy
by a glorious majority. He had no less than 312 votes, as opposed to 297, and though threatened
with the pains and penalties of a petition, he was not a little elated by his success. A petition
with regard to the Tillietudlem burghs was almost as much a matter of course as a contest;
at any rate the threat of a petition was so. Undy, however, had lived through this before,
and did not fear but that he might do so again. Threatened folks live long; parliamentary petitions
are very costly, and Undy's adversaries were, if possible, even in more need of money than himself.

He communicated his good fortune to his friend Alaric in the following letter:--

'Bellenden Arms, Tillietudlem, July, 185-.

'My DEAR DIRECTOR,

'Here I am once more a constituent part of the legislative wisdom of the United Kingdom, thanks
to the patriotic discretion of the pot-wallopers, burgage-tenants, and ten-pound freeholders
of these loyal towns. The situation is a proud one; I could only wish that it had been less
expensive. I am plucked as clean as ever was pigeon; and over and above the loss of every feather
I carried, old M'Cleury, my agent here, will have a bill against me that will hardly be settled
before the next election. I do not complain, however; a man cannot have luxuries without paying
for them; and this special luxury of serving one's country in Parliament is one for which a
man has so often to pay, without the subsequent fruition of the thing paid for, that a successful
candidate should never grumble, however much he may have been mulcted. They talk of a petition;
but, thank God, there are still such things as recognizances; and, moreover, to give M'Cleury
his due, I do not think he has left a hole open for them to work at. He is a thorough rascal,
but no man does better work.

'I find there is already a slight rise in the West Corks. Keep your eye open. If you find you
can realize L4 4s. or even L4, sell, and let the West of Cork and Ballydehob go straight to
the devil. We should then be able to do better with our money. But I doubt of such a sale with
so large a stock as we hold. I got a letter yesterday from that Cork attorney, and I find that
he is quite prepared to give way about the branch. He wants his price, of course; and he must
have it. When once we have carried that point, then it will be plain sailing; our only regret
then will be that we didn't go further into it. The calls, of course, must be met; I shall
be able to do something in October, but shall not have a shilling sooner--unless I sell, which
I will not do under 80s.

'I was delighted to hear of your promotion; not that you'll remain in the shop long, but it
gives you a better name and a better claim. Old Golightly was buried yesterday, as of course
you have heard. Mrs. Val quite agrees with me that your name had better be put in as that of
Clem's trustee. She's going to marry that d---- Frenchman. What an unmitigated ass that cousin
of yours must be! I can't say I admire her taste; but nevertheless she is welcome for me. It
would, however, be most scandalous if we were to allow him to get possession of her money.
He would, as a matter of course, make ducks and drakes of it in no time. Speculate probably
in some Russian railway, or Polish mine, and lose every shilling. You will of course see it
tied up tight in the hands of the trustees, and merely pay him, or if possible her, the interest
of it. Now that I am once more in, I hope we shall be able to do something to protect the fortunes
of married women.

'You will be quite safe in laying out Clem's money, or a portion of it, in the West Corks.
Indeed, I don't know how you could well do better with it. You will find Figgs a mere shadow.
I think we can pull through in this manner. If not we must get--to take our joint bill. He
would sooner do that than have the works stopped. But then we should have to pay a tremendous
price for it.

'So we were well out of the Mary Janes at last. The take last month was next to nothing, and
now she's full of water. Manylodes hung on till just the last, and yet got out on his feet
after all. That fellow will make a mint of money yet. What a pity that he should be such a
rogue! If he were honest, honest enough I mean to be trusted, he might do anything.

'I shall leave this on Wednesday night, take the oaths on Thursday, and will see you in the
evening. M'Carthy Desmond will at once move that I be put on the West Cork Committee, in place
of Nogo, who won't act. My shares are all at present registered in Val's name. It will be well,
however, to have them all transferred to you.

'Yours ever,

'U.S.

'M'Cleury has pledged himself to put me in again without further expense, if I have to stand
before the next general election, in consequence of taking place under Government. I earnestly
hope his sincerity may be tried.'

During the month of July, Alaric was busy enough. He had to do the work of his new office,
to attend to his somewhat critical duties as director of the West Cork Railway, to look after
the interests of Miss Golightly, whose marriage was to take place in August, and to watch the
Parliamentary career of his friend Undy, with whose pecuniary affairs he was now bound up in
a manner which he could not avoid feeling to be very perilous.

July passed by, and was now over, and members were looking to be relieved from their sultry
labours, and to be allowed to seek air and exercise on the mountains. The Ballydehob branch
line had received the sanction of Parliament through the means which the crafty Undy had so
well understood how to use; but from some cause hitherto not sufficiently fathomed, the shares
had continued to be depressed in value in spite of that desirable event. It was necessary,
however, that calls should be paid up to the amount of L5 a share, and as Undy and Alaric held
nearly a thousand shares between them, a large amount of money was required. This, however,
was made to be forthcoming from Miss Golightly's fortune.

On the first of August that interesting young lady was married to the man--shall we say of
her heart or of her feet? The marriage went off very nicely, but as we have already had one
wedding, and as others may perhaps be before us, we cannot spare much time or many pages to
describe how Miss Golightly became Madame Jaquetanape. The lady seemed well pleased with everything
that was done, and had even in secret but one care in the world. There was to be a dance after
she and her Victoire were gone, and she could not join in it!

We, however, are in the position, as regards Clementina, in which needy gentlemen not unfrequently
place themselves with reference to rich heiresses. We have more concern with her money than
herself. She was married, and M. Jaquetanape became the happy possessor of an income of L800
a year. Everybody conceived him to behave well on the occasion. He acknowledged that he had
very little means of his own--about 4,000 francs a year, from rents in Paris. He expressed
himself willing to agree to any settlement, thinking, perhaps with wisdom, that he might in
this way best make sure of his wife's income, and was quite content when informed that he would
receive his quarterly payments from so respectable a source as one of Her Majesty's Commissioners
for the regulation of the Civil Service. The Bank of France could not have offered better security.

Thus Alaric obtained full control of Miss Golightly's fortune: for Figgs, his co-trustee, was,
as has been said, a shadow. He obtained the full control of L20,000, and out of it he paid
the calls due upon the West Cork shares, held both by himself and Undy Scott. But he put a
salve upon his conscience, and among his private memoranda, appertaining to that lady's money
affairs he made an entry, intelligible to any who might read it, that he had so invested this
money on her behalf. The entry was in itself a lie--a foolish, palpable lie--and yet he found
in it something to quiet remorse and stupefy his conscience.

Undy Scott had become tyrannical in his logic as soon as he had persuaded Alaric to make use
of a portion of Madame Jaquetanape's marriage portion. 'You have taken part of the girl's money,'
was Undy's argument; 'you have already converted to your own purposes so much of her fortune;
it is absurd for you now to talk of conscience and honesty, of your high duties as a trustee,
of the inviolable distinction between meum and tuum. You have already shown that the distinction
is not inviolable; let us have no more such nonsense; there are still left L15,000 on which
we can trade; open the till, and let us go on swimmingly with the business.'

Alaric was not addressed absolutely in these words; he would not probably have allowed the
veil with which he still shrouded his dishonesty to be withdrawn with so rough a hand; but
that which was said was in effect the same. In September he left town for a few weeks and went
down to Scotland, still with Undy Scott. He had at first much liked this man's society, for
Scott was gay, lively, clever, and a good companion at all points. But latterly he had become
weary of him. He now put up with him as men in business have to put up with partners whom they
may not like; or, perhaps, to speak the truth openly, he bore with him as a rogue bears with
his confederate, though he absolutely hates his brother rogue on account of his very roguery.
Alaric Tudor was now a rogue; despite his high office, his grand ideas, his exalted ambition;
despite his talent, zeal, and well-directed official labours, he was a rogue; a thief, a villain
who had stolen the money of the orphan, who had undertaken a trust merely that he might break
it; a robber, doubly disgraced by being a robber with an education, a Bill Sykes without any
of those excuses which a philanthropist cannot but make for wretches brought up in infamy.

Alas, alas! how is it that in these days such men become rogues? How is it that we see in such
frightful instances the impotency of educated men to withstand the allurements of wealth? Men
are not now more keen after the pleasures which wealth can buy than were their forefathers.
One would rather say that they are less so. The rich labour now, and work with an assiduity
that often puts to shame the sweat in which the poor man earns his bread. The rich rogue, or
the rogue that would be rich, is always a laborious man. He allows himself but little recreation,
for dishonest labour admits of no cessation. His wheel is one which cannot rest without disclosing
the nature of the works which move it. It is not for pleasure that men

  Put rancours in the vessel of their peace;

nor yet primarily for ambition. Men do not wish to rise by treachery, or to become great through
dishonesty. The object, the ultimate object, which a man sets before himself, is generally
a good one. But he sets it up in so enviable a point of view, his imagination makes it so richly
desirable, by being gazed at it becomes so necessary to existence, that its attainment is imperative.
The object is good, but the means of attaining it-the path to the object-ah! there is the slip.
Expediency is the dangerous wind by which so many of us have wrecked our little boats.

And we do so more now than ever, because great ships, swimming in deepest waters, have unluckily
come safe to haven though wafted there by the same pernicious wind. Every great man, who gains
a great end by dishonest means, does more to deteriorate his country and lower the standard
of his countrymen than legions of vulgar thieves, or nameless unaspiring rogues. Who has injured
us so much in this way as he whose name still stands highest among modern politicians? Who
has given so great a blow to political honesty, has done so much to banish from men's minds
the idea of a life-ruling principle, as Sir Robert Peel?

It would shock many were we to attribute to him the roguery of the Sadleirs and Camerons, of
the Robsons and Redpaths of the present day; but could we analyse causes and effects, we might
perhaps do so with no injustice. He has taught us as a great lesson, that a man who has before
him a mighty object may dispense with those old-fashioned rules of truth to his neighbours
and honesty to his own principles, which should guide us in ordinary life. At what point ordinary
life ends, at what crisis objects may be considered great enough to justify the use of a dispensing
power, that he has not taught us; that no Sir Robert Peel can teach us; that must unfortunately
be left to the judgement of the individual. How prone we are, each of us, to look on our own
object as great, how ready to make excuses for receiving such a lesson for our guide; how willing
to think that we may be allowed to use this dispensing power ourselves--this experience teaches
us in very plain language.

Thrice in his political life did Sir Robert Peel change his political creed, and carry, or
assist to carry, with more or less of self-gratulation, the measures of his adversaries. Thrice
by doing so he kept to himself that political power which he had fairly forfeited by previous
opposition to the requirements of his country. Such an apposition of circumstances is at any
rate suspicious. But let us give him credit for the expression of a true belief; of a belief
at first that the corn-laws should be maintained, and then of a belief that they should not;
let us, with a forced confidence in his personal honesty, declare so much of him; nevertheless,
he should surely have felt, had he been politically as well as personally honest, that he was
not the man to repeal them.'

But it was necessary, his apologist will say, that the corn-laws should be repealed; he saw
the necessity, and yielded to it. It certainly was necessary, very necessary, very unavoidable;
absolutely necessary one may say; a fact, which the united efforts of all the Peels of the
day could in nowise longer delay, having already delayed it to the utmost extent of their power.
It was essential that the corn-laws should be repealed; but by no means essential that this
should be done by Sir Robert Peel.

It was a matter of indifference to us Englishmen who did the deed. But to Sir Robert Peel it
was a matter of great moment that he should do it. He did it, and posterity will point at him
as a politician without policy, as a statesman without a principle, as a worshipper at the
altar of expediency, to whom neither vows sworn to friends, nor declarations made to his country,
were in any way binding. Had Sir Robert Peel lived, and did the people now resolutely desire
that the Church of England should be abandoned, that Lords and Commons should bow the neck,
that the Crown should fall, who can believe that Sir Robert Peel would not be ready to carry
out their views? Readers, it may be that to you such deeds as those are horrible even to be
thought of or expressed; to me I own that they are so. So also to Sir Robert Peel was Catholic
Emancipation horrible, so was Reform of Parliament, so was the Corn Law Repeal. They were horrible
to him, horrible to be thought of, horrible to be expressed. But the people required these
measures, and therefore he carried them, arguing on their behalf with all the astuteness of
a practised statesman.

That Sir Robert Peel should be a worshipper of expediency might be matter of small moment to
any but his biographer, were it not that we are so prone to copy the example of those whose
names are ever in our mouths. It has now become the doctrine of a large class of politicians
that political honesty is unnecessary, slow, subversive of a man's interests, and incompatible
with quick onward movement. Such a doctrine in politics is to be deplored; but alas! who can
confine it to politics? It creeps with gradual, but still with sure and quick motion, into
all the doings of our daily life. How shall the man who has taught himself that he may be false
in the House of Commons, how shall he be true in the Treasury chambers? or if false there,
how true on the Exchange? and if false there, how shall he longer have any truth within him?

And thus Alaric Tudor had become a rogue, and was obliged, as it were in his own defence, to
consort with a rogue. He went down to Scotland with Undy, leaving his wife and child at home,
not because he could thus best amuse his few leisure days, but because this new work of his,
this laborious trade of roguery, allowed him no leisure days. When can villany have either
days or hours of leisure?

Among other things to be done in the north, Alaric was to make acquaintance with the constituents
of the little borough of Strathbogy, which it was his ambition to represent in the next Parliament.
Strathbogy was on the confines of the Gaberlunzie property; and indeed the lord's eldest son,
who was the present member, lived almost within the municipal boundary. Ca'stocks Cottage,
as his residence was called, was but a humble house for a peer's eldest son; but Mr. Scott
was not ashamed to live there, and there for a while he entertained his brother Undy and Alaric
Tudor. Mr. Scott intended, when the present session was over, to retire from the labours of
parliamentary life. It may be that he thought that he had done enough for his country; it may
be that the men of Strathbogy thought that he had not done enough for them; it may be that
there was some family understanding between him and his brother. This, however, was clear,
that he did not intend to stand again himself, and that he professed himself ready to put forward
Alaric Tudor as a worthy successor, and to give him the full benefit and weight of the Gaberlunzie
interest.

But not for nothing was Alaric to receive such important assistance.

'There are but 312 electors altogether,' said Undy one morning as they went out shooting, 'and
out of these we can command a hundred and twenty. It must be odd if you cannot get enough outsiders
to turn them into a majority. Indeed you may look on it as a certain seat. No man in England
or Scotland could give you one more certain.'

This was not the first occasion on which Undy had spoken of all that he was doing for his friend,
and Alaric therefore, somewhat disgusted with the subject, made no reply.

'I never had things made so easy for me when I wasn't in,' continued Undy; 'nor have I ever
found them so easy since. I don't suppose it will cost you above L500, or at most L600, altogether.'

'Well, that will be a comfort,' said Alaric.

'A comfort! why I should say it would. What with the election and petition together, Tillietudlem
never cost me less than L2,000. It cost me just as much, too, when I was thrown out.'

'That was a bore for you,' said Alaric.

'Upon my word you take it rather coolly,' said Undy; 'another man would thank a fellow for
putting such a nice thing in his way.'

'If the obligation be so deep,' said Alaric, becoming very red in the face, 'I would rather
not accept it. It is not too late for you to take the cheaper seat to yourself, if you prefer
it; and I will look elsewhere.'

'Oh, of course; perhaps at Tillietudlem; but for Heaven's sake, my dear fellow, don't let us
quarrel about it. You are perfectly welcome to whatever assistance we can give you at Strathbogy.
I only meant to say that I hope it will be efficacious. And on the score of expense I'll tell
you what we'll do--that is, if you think that fair; we'll put the cost of the two elections
together, and share and share alike.'

'Considering that the election will not take place for at least more than twelve months, there
will be time enough to settle that,' said Alaric.

'Well, that's true, too,' said Undy; and then they went on, and for some time separated on
the mountain, complaining, when they met again, of the game being scarce and the dogs wild,
as men always do. But as they walked home, Undy, who regretted the loss of good time, again
began about money matters.

'How many of those bridge shares will you take?' said he. This was a projected bridge from
Poplar to Rotherhithe, which had been got up by some city gentlemen, and as to which Undy Scott
was, or pretended to be, very sanguine.

'None,' said Alaric. 'Unless I can get rid of those confounded West Cork and Ballydehobs, I
can buy nothing more of anything.'

'Believe me, my dear fellow, the Ballydehobs are no such confounded things at all. If you are
ever a rich man it will be through the Ballydehobs. But what you say about the bridge shares
is nonsense. You have a large command of capital, and you cannot apply it better.'

Alaric winced, and wished in his heart that Clementina Jaquetanape, nee Golightly, with all
her money, was buried deep in the bogs of Ballydehob. Though he was a rogue, he could not yet
bear his roguery with comfort to himself. It sat, however, as easy on Undy as though he had
been to the manner born.

'I have no capital now at my disposal,' said he; 'and I doubt whether I should be doing right
to lay out a ward's money in such a manner.'

A slight smile came over Undy's gay unconcerned features; it was very slight, but nevertheless
it was very eloquent and very offensive also. Alaric understood it well; it made him hate the
owner of it, but it made him hate himself still more.

'It is as well to be hung for a sheep as for a lamb,' said Undy's smile; 'and, moreover,' continued
the smile, 'is it not ridiculous enough for you, Alaric Tudor, rogue as you are, to profess
to me, Undy Scott, rogue as I am, any solicitude as to your ward's welfare, seeing that you
have already taken to yourself, for your own dishonest purposes, a considerable slice of the
fortune that has been trusted to your keeping? You have done this, and yet you talk to me of
not having capital at your disposal! You have capital, and you will dispose of that capital
for your own purposes, as long as a shilling remains uninvested of your ward's money. We are
both rogues. God knows it, and you and I know it; but I am not such a hypocritical rogue as
to make mock boasts of my honesty to my brother rogue.'

This was certainly a long speech to have been made by a smile which crossed Mr. Scott's face
but for a moment, but every word of it was there expressed, and every word of it was there
read. Alaric did not at all like being addressed so uncivilly. It seemed to tend but little
to that 'Excelsior' for which his soul panted; but what could he do? how could he help himself?
Was it not all true? could he contradict the smile? Alas! it was true; it was useless for him
now to attempt even to combat such smiles. 'Excelsior,' indeed! his future course might now
probably be called by some very different designation. Easy, very easy, is the slope of hell.

Before they had returned to Ca'stocks Cottage, Undy had succeeded in persuading his friend
that the game must be played on--on and on, and out. If a man intends to make a fortune in
the share- market he will never do it by being bold one day and timid the next. No turf betting-book
can be made up safely except on consistent principles. Half-measures are always ruinous. In
matters of speculation one attempt is made safe by another. No man, it is true, can calculate
accurately what may be the upshot of a single venture; but a sharp fellow may calculate with
a fair average of exactness what will be the aggregate upshot of many ventures. All mercantile
fortunes have been made by the knowledge and understanding of this rule. If a man speculates
but once and again, now and then, as it were, he must of course be a loser. He will be playing
a game which he does not understand, and playing it against men who do understand it. Men who
so play always lose. But he who speculates daily puts himself exactly in the reversed position.
He plays a game which experience teaches him to play well, and he plays generally against men
who have no such advantage. Of course he wins.

All these valuable lessons did Undy Scott teach to Alaric Tudor, and the result was that Alaric
agreed to order--for self and partner--a considerable number of shares in the Limehouse Bridge
Company. Easy, very easy, is the slope of hell.

And then in the evening, on this evening and other evenings, on all evenings, they talked over
the prospects of the West Cork and Ballydehob branch, and of the Limehouse Bridge, which according
to Undy's theory is destined to work quite a revolution in the East-end circles of the metropolis.
Undy had noble ideas about this bridge. The shares at the present moment were greatly at a
discount--so much the better, for they could be bought at a cheaper rate; and they were sure
to rise to some very respectable figure as soon as Undy should have played out with reference
to them the parliamentary game which he had in view.

And so from morning to morning, and from night to night, they talked over their unholy trade
till the price of shares and the sounds of sums of money entered into Alaric's soul. And this,
perhaps, is one of the greatest penalties to which men who embark in such trade are doomed,
that they can never shake off the remembrance of their calculations; they can never drop the
shop; they have no leisure, no ease; they can never throw themselves with loose limbs and vacant
mind at large upon the world's green sward, and call children to come and play with them. At
the Weights and Measures Alaric's hours of business had been from ten to five. In Undy's office
they continued from one noon till the next, incessantly; even in his dreams he was working
in the share market.

On his return to town Alaric found a letter from Captain Cuttwater, pressing very urgently
for the repayment of his money. It had been lent on the express understanding that it was to
be repaid when Parliament broke up. It was now the end of October, and Uncle Bat was becoming
uneasy.

Alaric, when he received the letter, crushed it in his hand, and cursed the strictness of the
man who had done so much for him. On the next day another slice was taken from the fortune
of Madame Jaquetanape; and his money, with the interest, was remitted to Captain Cuttwater.

CHAPTER XXX

MRS. WOODWARD'S REQUEST

We will now go back for a while to Hampton. The author, for one, does so with pleasure. Though
those who dwell there be not angels, yet it is better to live with the Woodwards and Harry
Norman, with Uncle Bat, or even with the unfortunate Charley, than with such as Alaric and
Undy Scott. The man who is ever looking after money is fitting company only for the devils,
of whom, indeed, he is already one.

But Charley cannot any longer be called one of the Cottage circle. It was now the end of October,
and since the day of his arrest, he had not yet been there. He had not been asked; nor would
he go uninvited, as after what had passed at Hampton Court Bridge he surely might have done.

And consequently they were all unhappy. No one was more so than Charley. When the prospect
of the happy evening with Norah had been so violently interrupted by his arrest, he had, among
his other messages, sent word to the 'Cat and Whistle,' excusing his absence by a statement
of the true cause. From that day to this of which we are now speaking he had seen neither Mrs.
Davis nor her fair protegee.

Nor were they better contented at the Cottage. Mrs. Woodward was harassed by different feelings
and different fears, which together made her very unhappy. Her Katie was still ill; not ill
indeed so that she was forced to keep her bed and receive daily visits from pernicious doctors,
but, nevertheless, so ill as to make a mother very anxious.

She had never been quite strong, quite herself, from the night of Mrs. Val's dance. The doctor
who had attended her declared that her ducking in the river had given her cold: and that this,
not having been duly checked, still hung about her. Then she had been taken to a physician
in London, who poked her on the back and tapped her on the breast, listened to her lungs through
a wooden pipe--such was the account which Katie gave herself when she returned home--and prescribed
rum and milk and cod-liver oil, declaring, with an authoritative nod, that there was no organic
disease--as yet.

'And what shall we do with her, doctor?' asked Mrs. Woodward.

'Go on with the rum and milk and cod-liver oil, you can't do better.'

'And the cough, doctor?'

'Why, if that doesn't go before the cold weather begins, you may as well take her to Torquay
for the winter.'

Oh! consumption, thou scourge of England's beauty! how many mothers, gasping with ill-suppressed
fears, have listened to such words as these--have listened and then hoped; listened again and
hoped again with fainter hopes; have listened again, and then hoped no more!

But there was much on Mrs. Woodward's mind which she could not bring herself to tell to any
doctor, but which still left in her breast an impression that she was perhaps keeping back
the true cause of Katie's illness. Charley had not been at Hampton since his arrest, and it
was manifest to all that Katie was therefore wretched.

'But why do you not ask him, mamma?' she had urged when her mother suggested that he stayed
away because he did not like to show himself after what had occurred. 'What will he think of
us? he that saved my life, mamma! Oh, mamma! you promised to forgive him. Do ask him. You know
he will come if you ask him.'

Mrs. Woodward could not explain to her--could not explain to any one--why she did not invite
him. Norman guessed it all, and Mrs. Woodward saw that he had done so; but still she could
not talk to him of Katie's feelings, could not tell him that she feared her child was heart-laden
with so sad a love. So Mrs. Woodward had no confidant in her sorrow, no counsel which she could
seek to aid her own wavering judgement. It was prudent, she thought, that Katie and Charley
should be kept apart. Prudent! was it not even imperative on her to save her child from such
a fate? But then, when she saw the rosy cheek grow pale by degrees, as she watched the plump
little arms grow gradually thin and wan, as those high spirits fell, and that voice which had
ever been so frequent in the house and so clear,--when the sound of it became low and rare,
then her heart would misgive her, and she would all but resolve to take the only step which
she knew would bring a bright gleam on her child's face, and give a happy tone to her darling's
voice.

During the earlier portion of these days, Katie had with eager constancy reiterated her request
that Charley should be asked to Hampton; but of a sudden her prayers ceased. She spoke no more
of Charley, asked no longer after his coming, ceased even to inquire frequently of his welfare.
But yet, when his name was mentioned, she would open wide her bright eyes, would listen with
all her ears, and show only too plainly to one who watched her as a mother only can watch,
what were the thoughts which filled her heart.

'Linda,' she had said one night, as they sat in their room, preparing themselves for bed, 'Linda,
why does not mamma invite Charley to come down to Hampton?'

'Oh! I don't know,' said Linda; who, however, if she did not know, was not far wrong in the
guess she made. 'I suppose she thinks he'd be ashamed to show himself after having been in prison.'

'Ashamed! Why should he be ashamed after so long? Didn't you hear Harry say that the same thing
often happens to young men? Is he never to come here again? Dear Linda, I know you know; do
tell me.'

'Well, I'm sure I do not know, if that's not the reason.'

'Oh! Linda, dear Linda, yes, you do,' said Katie, throwing herself on her knees, resting her
arms on her sister's lap, and looking up wistfully into her sister's face. Her long hair was
streaming down her back; her white, naked feet peeped out from beneath her bedroom dress, and
large tears glistened in her eyes. Who could have resisted the prayers of such a suppliant?
Certainly not Linda, the soft-hearted Linda.

'Do tell me,' continued Katie, 'do tell me--I am sure you know; and, Linda, if it is wrong
to ask mamma about it, I'll never, never ask her again. I know mamma is unhappy about it. If
my asking is wrong, I'll not make her unhappy any more in that way.'

Linda, for a while, did not know what to answer. Her hesitating manner immediately revealed
to Katie that there was a secret, and that her sister could tell it if she would.

'Oh! Linda, do tell me, do tell me, dear Linda; you ought to tell me for mamma's sake.'

At last, with much hesitation, Linda told her the whole tale.

'Perhaps mamma thinks that you are too fond of Charley.'

An instant light flashed across Katie's heart--across her heart, and brain, and senses. Not
another word was necessary to explain to her the whole mystery, to tell the whole tale, to
reveal to her the secret of her own love, of her mother's fears, and of his assumed unwillingness.
She got up slowly from her knees, kissed her sister's cheek and neck, smiled at her so sweetly,
so sadly, and then sitting on her old seat, began playing with her long hair, and gazing at
vacancy.

'It is only what I guess, you know, Katie--you would make me tell you, but I am sure there
is nothing in it.'

'Dear Linda,' said she, 'you are so good; I am so much obliged to you.'

After that Katie spoke no further of Charley. But it was evident to them all, that though she
said nothing, she had not ceased to think of him. Nor did her cheek again become rosy, nor
her arms round, nor her voice happy. She got weaker than ever, and poor Mrs. Woodward was overcome
with sorrow.

Nor was this the only cause of grief at Surbiton Cottage. During the last few weeks a bitter
estrangement had taken place between the Woodwards and the Tudors, Alaric Tudor, that is, and
Gertrude. Two years had now passed since Norman had chosen to quarrel with Alaric, and during
all that period the two had never spoken amicably together, though they had met on business
very frequently; on all such occasions Alaric had been unperturbed and indifferent, whereas
Norman had been gloomy, and had carried a hostile brow and angry eye. At their period of life,
two years generally does much to quiet feelings of ill-will and pacify animosity; but Norman's
feelings had by no means been quieted, nor his animosity pacified. He had loved Alaric with
a close and manly love; now he hated him with a close and, I fear I may say, a manly hatred.
Alaric had, as he thought, answered his love by treachery; and there was that in Norman's heart
which would not allow him to forgive one who had been a traitor to him. He had that kind of
selfishness so common to us, but of which we are so unconscious, which will not allow us to
pardon a sin against our own amour propre. Alaric might have been forgiven, though he had taken
his friend's money, distanced him in his office, though he had committed against him all offences
which one friend can commit against another, all but this. Norman had been proud of his love,
and yet ashamed of it--proud of loving such a girl as Gertrude, and ashamed of being known
to be in love at all. He had confided his love to Alaric, and Alaric had robbed him of his
love, and wounded both his pride and his shame.

Norman lacked the charity which should have been capable of forgiving even this. He now looked
at all Alaric's doings through a different glass from that which he had used when Alaric had
been dear to him. He saw, or thought that he saw, that his successful rival was false, ambitious,
treacherous, and dishonest; he made no excuses for him, gave him no credit for his industry,
accorded no admiration to his talent. He never spoke ill of Alaric Tudor, to others; but he
fed his own heart with speaking and thinking ill of him to himself.

Of Gertrude he thought very differently. He had taught himself to disconnect her from the treachery
of her husband--or rather her memory; for, from the day on which he had learnt that she was
engaged to Alaric, he had never seen her. He still loved the remembrance of her. In his solitary
walks with Mrs. Woodward he would still speak of her as he might of one in some distant clime,
for whose welfare he was deeply interested. He had seen and caressed her baby at Hampton. She
was still dear to him. Had Alaric been called to his long account, it would have been his dearest
wish to have become at some future tune the husband of his widow.

To all these feelings on Norman's part Alaric was very indifferent; but their existence operated
as a drawback on his wife's comfort, and, to a certain degree, on his own. Mrs. Woodward would
not banish Norman from the Cottage, even for her daughter's sake, and it came by degrees to
be understood that the Tudors, man and wife, should not go there unless they were aware that
Norman was absent. Norman, on the other hand, did absent himself when it was understood that
Alaric and Gertrude were coming; and thus the Woodwards kept up their intercourse with both.

But this was a bore. Alaric thought it most probable that Norman would marry one of the younger
sisters, and he knew that family quarrels are uncomfortable and injudicious. When therefore
he became a Civil Service Commissioner, and was thus removed from business intercourse with
Norman, he conceived that it would be wise to arrange a reconciliation. He discussed the matter
with Gertrude, and she, fully agreeing with him, undertook the task of making the proposal
through her mother. This she did with all the kindness and delicacy of a woman. She desired
her mother to tell Harry how much she had valued his friendship, how greatly she regretted
the loss of it, how anxious her husband was to renew, if possible, their former terms of affection.
Mrs. Woodward, by no means sanguine, undertook the commission. She undertook it, and utterly
failed; and when Gertrude, in her disappointment, spoke bitterly of Norman's bitterness, both
mother and sister, both Mrs. Woodward and Linda, took Norman's part.

'I wish it could be otherwise,' said Mrs. Woodward, 'I wish it for all our sakes; but he is
a man not easily to be turned, and I cannot blame him. He has suffered very much.'

Gertrude became very red. Her mother's words contained a reproach against herself, tacit and
unintended indeed, but not the less keenly felt.

'I am not aware that Mr. Norman has any cause of just complaint,' she said, 'against any one,
unless it be himself. For the sake of charity and old associations we have wished that all
ideas of injury should be forgiven and forgotten. If he chooses still to indulge his rancour,
he must do so. I had taken him to be a better Christian.'

More words had sprung from these. Mrs. Woodward, who, in truth, loved Norman the better for
the continuance of his sorrow, would not give up his part; and so the mother and child parted,
and the two sisters parted, not quarrelling indeed, not absolutely with angry words, but in
a tone of mind towards each other widely differing from that of former years. Mrs. Woodward
had lost none of the love of the parent; but Gertrude had forgotten somewhat of the reverence
of the child.

All this had added much to the grief created by Katie's illness.

And then of a sudden Katie became silent, as well as sad and ill --silent and sad, but so soft,
so loving in her manner. Her gentle little caresses, the tender love ever lying in her eye,
the constant pressure of her thin small hand, would all but break her mother's heart. Katie
would sit beside her on the sofa in the drawing-room for hours; a book, taken up as an excuse,
would be in her lap, and she would sit there gazing listlessly into the vacant daylight till
the evening would come; and then, when the room was shaded and sombre, when the light of the
fire merely served to make the objects indistinct, she would lean gently and by degrees upon
her mother's bosom, would coax her mother's arm round her neck, and would thus creep as it
were into her mother's heart of hearts. And then slow tears would trickle down her cheeks,
very slow, one by one, till they would fall as telltales on her mother's hand.

'Katie, my darling Katie,' the mother would say.

'I'm only tired, mamma,' would be her answer. 'Don't move, mamma; pray don't move. I am so
comfortable.'

And then at night she would put herself to rest close circled in Linda's arms. She would twist
up her little feet, and lie so quiet there, that Linda would remain motionless that she might
not disturb her Katie's sleep; but soon warm tears would be running on her bosom, and she would
know that Katie was still thinking of her love.

Linda, among all her virtues, had not that of reticence, and her mother had soon learnt from
her what had been said that night in their bedroom about Charley. But this violation of confidence,
if it was a violation, was hardly necessary to make Mrs. Woodward aware of what was passing
in her daughter's bosom. When Katie ceased to ask that Charley might be sent for, when she
ceased to plead for his pardon and to praise his virtues, Mrs. Woodward knew well the cause
of her silence. It was not that others suspected her love, but that she had learned to suspect
it herself. It was not that she was ashamed of loving Charley, but that she felt at once that
such love would distress her mother's heart.

As she sat there that night fingering her silken hair, she had asked herself whether in truth
this man was master of her heart; she had probed her young bosom, which now, by a sudden growth,
became quick with a woman's impulse, and she had owned to herself that she did love him. He
was dearer to her, she found, than all in the world beside. Fondly as she loved her sister,
sweet to her as were her mother's caresses, their love was not as precious to her as his might
be. And then she remembered what he was, what was the manner of his life, what his character;
how different he was from Alaric or Harry Norman; she remembered this, and knew that her love
was an unhappy passion. Herself she would have sacrificed: prisoner as he had been, debtor
as he was, drunkard, penniless, and a spendthrift, she would not have hesitated to take him
for her guide through life, and have done what a woman might to guide him in return. But she
would not sacrifice her mother. She saw now why Charley was not asked, and silently acquiesced
in his banishment.

She was not yet quite seventeen. Not yet seventeen! the reader will say. She was still such
a child, and yet arguing to herself about spendthrift debtors and self-sacrifice! All this
bombast at sixteen and a half. No, my ungentle reader, not all this bombast at sixteen and
a half. The bombast is mine. It is my fault if I cannot put into fitting language the thoughts
which God put into her young heart. In her mind's soliloquy, Charley's vices were probably
all summed up in the one word, unsteady. Why is he so unsteady? Why does he like these wicked
things?' And then as regarded Mrs. Woodward, she did but make a resolve that not even for her
love would she add to the unhappiness of that loving, tenderest mother. There was no bombast
in Katie, either expressed or unexpressed.

After much consideration on the matter, Mrs. Woodward determined that she should ask Charley
down to the Cottage. In the first place, she felt bitterly her apparent ingratitude to him.
When last they had been together, the day after Katie's escape at the bridge, when his tale
had just been read, she had told him, with the warmth of somewhat more than friendly affection,
that henceforth they must be more than common friends. She had promised him her love, she had
almost promised him the affection and care of a mother; and now how was she keeping her promise?
He had fallen into misfortune, and she had immediately deserted him. Over and over again she
said to herself that her first duty was to her own child; but even with this reflection, she
could hardly reconcile herself to her neglect of him.

And then, moreover, she felt that it was impossible that all their friendship, all their mutual
regard, should die away suddenly without any explanation. An attempt to bring about this would
not cure Katie's love. If this were done, would not Katie always think of Charley's wrong?

And, lastly, it was quite clear that Katie had put a check on her own heart. A meeting now
might be the reverse of dangerous. It would be well that Katie should use herself to be with
him now again; well, at any rate, that she should see him once before their proposed journey
to Torquay; for, alas, the journey to Torquay was now insisted on by the London physician--insisted
on, although he opined with a nod, somewhat less authoritative than his former nod, that the
young lady was touched by no organic disease.

'And then,' said Mrs. Woodward to herself, 'his heart is good, and I will speak openly to him.'
And so Charley was again invited to the cottage. After some demurring between him and Norman,
he accepted the invitation.

Mrs. Val's dance had taken place in June, and it was now late in October. Four months had intervened,
and during that period Charley had seen none of the Woodwards. He had over and over again tried
to convince himself that this was his own fault, and that he had no right to accuse Mrs. Woodward
of ingratitude. But he was hardly successful. He did feel, in spite of himself, that he had
been dropped because of the disgrace attaching to his arrest; that Mrs. Woodward had put him
aside as being too bad to associate with her and her daughters; and that it was intended that
henceforth they should be strangers.

He still had Katie's purse, and he made a sort of resolve that as long as he kept that in his
possession, as long as he had that near his heart, he would not go near Norah Geraghty. This
resolution he had kept; but though he did not go to the 'Cat and Whistle,' he frequented other
places which were as discreditable, or more so. He paid many very fruitless visits to Mr. M'Ruen;
contrived to run up a score with the proprietor of the dancing saloon in Holborn; and was as
negligent as ever in the matter of the lock entries.

'It is no use now,' he would say to himself, when some aspirations for higher things came across
his heart; 'it is too late now to go back. Those who once cared for me have thrown me over.'
And then he would again think of Waterloo Bridge, and the Monument, and of what might be done
for threepence or fourpence in a pistol gallery.

And then at last came the invitation to Hampton. He was once more to talk to Mrs. Woodward,
and associate with Linda--to see Katie once more. When he had last left the house he had almost
been as much at home as any one of the family; and now he was to return to it as a perfect
stranger. As he travelled down with Norman by the railway, he could not help feeling that the
journey was passing over too quickly. He was like a prisoner going to his doom. As he crossed
the bridge, and remembered how Katie had looked when she lay struggling in the water, how he
had been feted and caressed after pulling her out, he made a bitter contrast between his present
position and that which he then enjoyed. Were it not for very shame, he would have found it
in his heart to return to London.

And then in a moment they were at the Cottage door. The road had never been so short. Norman,
who had not fathomed Charley's feelings, was happy and light-hearted--more so than was usual
with him, for he was unaffectedly glad to witness Charley's return to Hampton. He rang sharply
at the door, and when it was opened, walked with happy confidence into the drawing-room. Charley
was bound to follow him, and there he found himself again in the presence of Mrs. Woodward
and her daughters. Katie would fain have absented herself, but Mrs. Woodward knew that the
first meeting could take place in no more favourable manner.

Mrs. Woodward bade him welcome with a collected voice, and assured, if not easy manner. She
shook hands with him cordially, and said a few words as to her pleasure of seeing him again.
Then he next took Linda's hand, and she too made a little speech, more awkwardly than her mother,
saying something mal a propos about the very long time he had been away; and then she laughed
with a little titter, trying to recover herself. And at last he came to Katie. There was no
getting over it. She also stretched out her now thin hand, and Charley, as he touched it, perceived
how altered she was. Katie looked up into his face, and tried to speak, but she could not articulate
a word. She looked into his face, and then at Mrs. Woodward, as though imploring her mother's
aid to tell her how to act or what to say; and then finding her power of utterance impeded
by rising sobs, she dropped back again on her seat, and hid her face upon the arm of the sofa.

'Our Katie is not so well as when you last saw her--is she, Charley?' said Mrs. Woodward. 'She
is very weak just now; but thank God she has, we believe, no dangerous symptoms about her.
You have heard, perhaps, that we are going to Torquay for the winter?'

And so they went on talking. The ice was broken and the worst was over. They did not talk,
it is true, as in former days; there was no confidence between them now, and each of them felt
that there was none; but they nevertheless fell into a way of unembarrassed conversation, and
were all tolerably at their ease.

And then they went to dinner, and Charley was called on to discuss Admiralty matters with Uncle
Bat; and then he and Norman sat after dinner a little longer than usual; and then they had
a short walk, during which Katie remained at home; but short as it was, it was quite long enough,
for it was very dull; and then there was tea; and then more constrained conversation, in which
Katie took no part whatever; and then Mrs. Woodward and the girls took their candles, and Charley
went over to the inn on the other side of the road. Oh! how different was this from the former
evenings at Surbiton Cottage.

Charley had made no plan for any special interview with Katie; had, indeed, not specially thought
about it at all; but he could not but feel an intense desire to say one word to her in private,
and learn whether all her solicitude for him was over. 'Dear Charley, you will be steady; won't
you?' Those had been her last words to him. Nothing could have been sweeter; although they
brought before his mind the remembrance of his own unworthy career, they had been inexpressibly
sweet, as testifying the interest she felt in him. And was that all over now? Had it all been
talked away by Mrs. Woodward's cautious wisdom, because he had lain for one night in a sponging-house?

But the next day came, and as it passed, it appeared to him that no opportunity of speaking
one word to her was to be allowed to him.

She did not, however, shun him. She was not up at breakfast, but she sat next to him at lunch,
and answered him when he spoke to her.

In the evening they again went out to walk, and then Charley found that Linda and Norman went
one way, and that he was alone with Mrs. Woodward. It was manifest to him that this arrangement
had been made on purpose, and he felt that he was to undergo some private conversation, the
nature of which he dreaded. He dreaded it very much; when he heard it, it made him very wretched;
but it was not the less full of womanly affection and regard for him.

'I cannot let you go from us, Charley,' began Mrs. Woodward, 'without telling you how deep
a sorrow it has been to me to be so long without seeing you. I know you have thought me very
ungrateful.'

'Ungrateful, Mrs. Woodward! 'O no! I have done nothing to make gratitude necessary.'

'Yes, Charley, you have--you have done much, too much. You have saved my child's life.'

'O no, I did not,' said he; 'besides, I hate gratitude. I don't want any one to be grateful
to me. Gratitude is almost as offensive as pity. Of course I pulled Kate out of the water when
she fell in; and I would have done as much for your favourite cat.' He said this with something
of bitterness in his tone; it was not much, for though he felt bitterly he did not intend to
show it; but Mrs. Woodward's ear did not fail to catch it.

'Don't be angry with us, Charley; don't make us more unhappy than we already are.'

'Unhappy!' said he, as though he thought that all the unhappiness in the world was at the present
moment reserved for his own shoulders.

'Yes, we are not so happy now as we were when you were last with us. Poor Katie is very ill.'

'But you don't think there is any danger, Mrs. Woodward?'

There are many tones in which such a question may be asked--and is asked from day to day--all
differing widely from each other, and giving evidence of various shades of feeling in the speaker.
Charley involuntarily put his whole heart into it. Mrs. Woodward could not but love him for
feeling for her child, though she would have given so much that the two might have been indifferent
to each other.

'I do not know,' she said. 'We hope not. But I should not be sent with her to Torquay if she
were not very ill. She is very ill, and it is absolutely essential that nothing should be allowed
to excite her painfully. I tell you this, Charley, to excuse our apparent unkindness in not
having you here sooner.'

Charley walked by her in silence. Why should his coming excite her more than Norman's? What
could there be painful to her in seeing him? Did the fact of his having been arrested attach
to his visit any peculiar probability of excitement?

'Do not suppose that we have not thought of you,' continued Mrs. Woodward.' We have all done
so daily. Nay, I have done so myself all but hourly. Ah, Charley, you will never know how truly
I love you.'

Charley's heart was as soft as it was inflammable. He was utterly unable to resist such tenderness
as Mrs. Woodward showed to him. He had made a little resolution to be stiff and stern, to ask
for no favour and to receive none, not to palliate his own conduct, or to allow Mrs. Woodward
to condemn it. He had felt that as the Woodwards had given him up, they had no longer any right
to criticize him. To them at least, one and all, to Mrs. Woodward and her daughters, his conduct
had been sans reproche. They had no cause to upbraid him on their own account; and they had
now abandoned the right to do so on his own. With such assumed sternness he began his walk;
but now it had all melted before the warmth of one tender word from a woman's mouth.

'I know I am not worth thinking about,' said he.

'Do not say so; pray do not say so. Do not think that we say so to ourselves. "Aeroplanes,"
replied Jacques Rissole after a moment's thought.

"Bah! I cannot fly."

"Then I win," said Jacques simply.

The other looked at him in astonishment.

"What! You fly?"

"No; but I can learn."

"Then I will learn too," said Gaspard with dignity. "We meet--in six months?"

"Good." Jacques pointed to the ceiling. "Say three thousand feet up."

"Three thousand four hundred," said Gaspard for the sake of disagreeing.

"After all, that is for our seconds to arrange. My friend Épinard
of the Roullens Aerodrome will act for me.

He will also instruct me how to bring serpents to the ground."

"With the idea of cleansing the sky of cauliflowers," said Gaspard, "I shall proceed to the flying-ground
at Dormancourt; Blanchaille, the instructor there, will receive your friend."

He bowed and walked out.

Details were soon settled.

On a date six months ahead the two combatants would meet three thousand two hundred feet above the
little town in which they lived, and fight to the death. In the event of both crashing, the
one who crashed last would be deemed the victor. It was Gaspard's second who insisted on this clause;
Gaspard himself felt that it did not matter.

The first month of instruction went by. At the end of it Jacques Rissole had only one hope.
It was that when he crashed he should crash on some of Gaspard's
family.

Gaspard had no hope, but one consolation. It was that no crash could involve his stomach, which
he invariably left behind him as soon as the aeroplane rose.

At the end of the second month Gaspard wrote to Jacques.

"My friend," he wrote, "the hatred of you which I nurse in my bosom,
and which fills me with the desire to purge you from the sky, is in
danger of being transferred to my instructor.

Let us therefore meet and renew our enmity."

Jacques Rissole wrote back to Gaspard.

"My enemy," he wrote, "there is nobody in the whole of the Roullens
aerodrome whom I do not detest with a detestation beside which my
hatred for you seems as maudlin adoration.

This is notwithstanding the fact that I make the most marvellous progress in the art of flying.
It is merely something in their faces which annoys me. Let me therefore see yours again, in the
hope that it will make me think more kindly of theirs."

They met, poured wine over each other and parted. After another month the need of a further stimulant
was felt. They met again, and agreed to insult each other weekly.

On
the last day of his training Gaspard spoke seriously to his instructor.

"You
see that I make nothing of it," he said. "My thoughts are ever with
the stomach that I leave behind. Not once have I been in a position
to take control. How then can I fight? My friend, I arrange it all.
You shall take my place."

"Is that quite fair to Rissole?" asked
Blanchaille doubtfully.

"Do not think that I want you to hurt him.
That is not necessary. He will hurt himself. Keep out of his way until
he has finished with himself, and then fly back here. It is easy."

It
seemed the best way; indeed the only way. Gaspard Volauvent could
never get to the rendezvous alone, and it would be fatal to his honour
if Jacques arrived there and found nobody to meet him. Reluctantly
Blanchaille agreed.

At the appointed hour Gaspard put his head cautiously
out of his bedroom window and gazed up into the heavens. He saw two
aeroplanes straight above him. At the thought that he might have been
in one of them he shuddered violently. Indeed he felt so unwell that
the need for some slight restorative became pressing. He tripped off
to the estaminet.

It was empty save for one table. Gaspard walked
towards it, hoping for a little conversation. The occupant lowered
the newspaper from in front of his face and looked up.

It was too
much for Gaspard.

"Coward!" he shrieked.

Jacques, who had been just
going to say the same thing, hastily substituted "Serpent!"

"I know
you," cried Gaspard. "You send your instructor up in your place. Poltroon!"

"This
must be wiped out in blood," he said slowly. "Name your weapons."

"Submarines,"
said Jacques after a moment's thought.

A.A.M.

* * * * *

THE SWANS
OF YPRES. The traces of tears were still on his cheeks, but he
was no longer crying; there was, however, a look on his face of heart-rending sorrow which
Mrs. Woodward could hardly endure.

'I do understand you,' said he, 'and since you demand it, I will promise;' and then they walked
home side by side, without interchanging a single word.

When they reached the house, Mrs. Woodward went to her room, and Charley found himself alone
with Katie.

'I hope you find yourself better this evening,' said he.

'Oh, I am quite well,' she answered, with her sweetest, kindest voice; 'I am quite well, only
sometimes I am a little weak.'

He walked up to the window as though to pass on to the lawn; but the season was too far advanced
for that, and the window was locked. He retraced his steps, therefore, and passing out of the
drawing-room into the hall, stood at the open front door till he heard Mrs. Woodward come down.
Then he followed her into the room.

'Good-bye,' he said to her suddenly; 'I shall start by the early train to-morrow, and shall
not see you.' She pressed his hand, but he in nowise returned the pressure. 'Good-bye, Linda;
good- bye, Katie; good night, Captain Cuttwater.' And so he went his way, as Adam did when
he was driven out of Paradise.

Early on the following morning, the cook, while engaged in her most matutinal duties, was disturbed
by a ring at the front door. She, and she only of the household, was up, and as she had not
completed her toilet with much minuteness, she was rather embarrassed when, on opening the
door, she saw Mr. Charles Tudor.

'I beg your pardon, cook, for troubling you so early; but I have left something in the drawing-room.
I can find it myself;' and, so saying, he hurried into the room, so as to prevent the servant
from following him.

Katie had a well-worn, well-known little workbox, which, in years now long past; had been given
to her either by Alaric or Harry. Doubtless she had now work-boxes grander both in appearance
and size; but, nevertheless, whether from habit or from choice, her custom was, in her daily
needlework, to use this old friend. Often and often had Charley played with it many wicked
pranks. Once, while Katie had as yet no pretension to be grown up, he had put a snail into
it, and had incurred her severe displeasure. He had stuffed it full of acorns, and been rewarded
by being pelted with them round the lawn; and had filled it with nuts, for which he had not
found it so difficult to obtain pardon. He knew every hole and corner in it! he was intimate
with all her little feminine nicknacks--her silver thimble, her scissors, her bit of wax, and
the yard-measure, which twisted itself in and out of an ivory cottage--he knew them all, as
well as though they were his own; and he knew also where the workbox stood.

He closed the door behind him, and then, with his quickest motion, raised the lid and put within
the box, just under the bit of work on which she was employed, a light small paper parcel.
It contained the purse which she had worked for him, and had given to him with such sweet affection
at the Chiswick flower-show.

CHAPTER XXXI

HOW APOLLO SAVED THE NAVVY

About the middle of November, the Woodwards went to Torquay, and remained there till the following
May. Norman went with them to see them properly settled in their new lodgings, and visited
them at Christmas, and once again during their stay there. He then went down to fetch them
home, and when they all returned, informed Charley, with whom he was still living, that he
was engaged to Linda. It was arranged, he said, that they were to be married in August.

On the whole, the journey to Torquay was considered to have been successful. Katie's health
had been the only object in going there, and the main consideration while they remained. She
returned, if not well, at any rate not worse. She had got through the winter, and her lungs
were still pronounced to be free from those dreadful signs of decay, the name of which has
broken so many mothers' hearts, and sent dismay into the breasts of so many fathers. During
her sojourn at Torquay she had grown much, and, as is often the case with those who grow quickly,
she had become weak and thin. People at Torquay are always weak and thin, and Mrs. Woodward
had not, therefore, been greatly frightened at this. Her spirits, though by no means such as
they had been in former days, had improved, she had occupied herself more than she had done
during the last two months at Hampton, and had, at least so Mrs. Woodward fondly flattered
herself, ceased to be always thinking of Charley Tudor. It was quite clear that she had firmly
made up her mind to some certain line of conduct with reference to him; she never mentioned
his name, nor was it mentioned in her hearing by either her mother or sister during their stay
at Torquay. When Norman came down, she always found some opportunity of inquiring from him
as to Charley's health and welfare; but she did this in a manner which showed that she had
succeeded in placing her feelings wonderfully under control.

On that Monday morning, on which Charley had returned to town after his early visit to her
workbox, she had not failed to find the purse. Linda was with her when she did so, but she
had contrived so to conceal her emotion, that nothing was seen and nothing suspected. She felt
at once that it was intended that all intercourse should be broken off between them. She knew
instinctively that this was the effect of some precaution on her mother's part, and with a
sad bosom and a broken heart, she acquiesced in it. She said nothing, even to herself, of the
truth and constancy of her love; she made no mental resolution against any other passion; she
did not even think whether or not she might ever be tempted to love another; but she felt a
dumb aching numbness about her heart; and, looking round about her, she seemed to feel that
all was dark and dismal.

And so they sojourned through the winter at Torquay. The effort which Katie made was undoubtedly
salutary to her. She took again to her work and her lessons--studies we should probably now
call them--and before she left Torquay, she had again learned how to smile; but not to laugh
with that gay ringing silver laughter, ringing, but yet not loud, which to Charley's ear had
been as sweet as heavenly music. During this time Uncle Bat remained at Hampton, keeping bachelor's
house by himself.

And then while they were at Torquay, Linda and Norman became engaged to each other. Their loves
were honest, true, and happy; but not of a nature to give much scope to a novelist of a romantic
turn. Linda knew she was not Norman's first love, and requited Norman, of course, by telling
him something, not much, of Alaric's falseness to her. Norman made but one ungenerous stipulation.
It was this: that in marrying him Linda must give up all acquaintance with her brother-in-law.
He would never, he said, be the means of separating two sisters; she and Gertrude might have
such intercourse together as their circumstances might render possible; but it was quite out
of the question that either he, Harry Norman, or his wife, should ever again associate with
Alaric Tudor.

In such matters Linda had always been guided by others; so she sighed and promised, and the
engagement was duly ratified by all the parties concerned.

We must now return to Charley. When he got back to town, he felt that he had lost his amulet;
his charm had gone from him, and he had nothing now left whereby to save himself from ruin
and destruction. He was utterly flung over by the Woodwards; that now was to him an undoubted
fact. When Mrs. Woodward told him that he was never again to see Katie, that was, of course,
tantamount to turning him out of the Cottage. It might be all very well to talk to him of affection
and friendship; but it was manifest that no further signs of either were to be shown to him.
He had proved himself to be unworthy, and was no more to be considered as one of the circle
which made the drawing-room at Surbiton Cottage its centre. He could not quite explain all
this to Norman, as he could not tell him what had passed between him and Mrs. Woodward; but
he said enough to make his friend know that he intended to go to Hampton no more.

It would be wrong, perhaps, to describe Charley as being angry with Mrs. Woodward. He knew
that she was only doing her duty by her child; he knew that she was actuated by the purest
and best of motives; he was not able to say a word against her even to himself; but, nevertheless,
he desired to be revenged on her--not by injuring her, not by injuring Katie--but by injuring
himself. He would make Mrs. Woodward feel what she had done, by rushing, himself, on his own
ruin. He would return to the 'Cat and Whistle'--he would keep his promise and marry Norah Geraghty--he
would go utterly to destruction, and then Mrs. Woodward would know and feel what she had done
in banishing him from her daughter's presence!

Having arrived at this magnanimous resolution after a fortnight's doubt and misery, he proceeded
to put his purpose into execution. It was now some considerable time since he had been at the
'Cat and Whistle;' he had had no further visit from Mrs. Davis, but he had received one or
two notes both from her and Norah, to which, as long as he had Katie's purse, he was resolute
in not replying; messages also had reached him from the landlady through Dick Scatterall, in
the last of which he was reminded that there was a trifle due at the bar, and another trifle
for money lent.

One night, having lashed himself up to a fit state of wretched desperation, he found himself
at the well-known corner of the street leading out of the Strand. On his journey thither he
had been trying to realize to himself what it would be to be the husband of Norah Geraghty;
what would be the joy of returning to a small house in some dingy suburb and finding her to
receive him. Could he really love her when she would be bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh,
the wife of his bosom and the mother of his children? In such a case would he ever be able
to forget that he had known Katie Woodward? Would those words of hers ever ring in his ears,
then as now--'You will be steady, dear Charley; won't you?'

There are those who boast that a gentleman must always be a gentleman; that a man, let him
marry whom he will, raises or degrades his wife to the level of his own condition, and that
King Cophetua could share his throne with a beggar-woman without sullying its splendour or
diminishing its glory. How a king may fare in such a condition, the author, knowing little
of kings, will not pretend to say; nor yet will he offer an opinion whether a lowly match be
fatally injurious to a marquess, duke, or earl; but this he will be bold to affirm, that a
man from the ordinary ranks of the upper classes, who has had the nurture of a gentleman, prepares
for himself a hell on earth in taking a wife from any rank much below his own--a hell on earth,
and, alas! too often another hell elsewhere also. He must either leave her or loathe her. She
may be endowed with all those moral virtues which should adorn all women, and which, thank
God, are common to women in this country; but he will have to endure habits, manners, and ideas,
which the close contiguity of married life will force upon his disgusted palate, and which
must banish all love. Man by instinct desires in his wife something softer, sweeter, more refined
than himself; and though in failing to obtain this, the fault may be all his own, he will not
on that account the more easily reconcile himself to the want.

Charley knew that he was preparing such misery for himself. As he went along, determined to
commit a moral suicide by allying himself to the barmaid, he constrained himself to look with
his mind's eye 'upon this picture and on that.'

He had felt of what nature was the sort of love with which Katie Woodward had inspired his
heart; and he felt also what was that other sort of love to which the charms of Norah Geraghty
had given birth.

Norah was a fine girl, smart enough in her outward apparel, but apt occasionally to disclose
uncomfortable secrets, if from any accident more than her outward apparel might momentarily
become visible. When dressed up for a Sunday excursion she had her attractions, and even on
ordinary evenings, a young man such as Charley, after imbibing two or three glasses of spirits
and water, and smoking two or three cigars, might find her to be what some of her friends would
have called 'very good company.' As to her mind, had Charley been asked about it, he would
probably have said that he was ignorant whether she had any; but this he did know, that she
was sharp and quick, alert in counting change, and gifted with a peculiar power of detecting
bad coin by the touch. Such was Norah Geraghty, whom Charley was to marry.

And then that other portrait was limned with equal accuracy before his eyes. Katie, with all
her juvenile spirit, was delightfully feminine; every motion of hers was easy, and every form
into which she could twist her young limbs was graceful. She had all the nice ideas and ways
which a girl acquires when she grows from childhood to woman's stature, under the eye of a
mother who is a lady. Katie could be untidy on occasions; but her very untidiness was inviting.
All her belongings were nice; she had no hidden secrets, the chance revealing of which would
disgrace her. She might come in from her island palaces in a guise which would call down some
would-be-censorious exclamation from her mother; but all others but her mother would declare
that Katie in such moments was more lovely than ever. And Katie's beauty pleased more than
the eye--it came home to the mind and heart of those who saw her. It spoke at once to the intelligence,
and required, for its full appreciation, an exercise of the mental faculties, as well as animal
senses. If the owner of that outward form were bad or vile, one would be inclined to say that
Nature must have lied when she endowed her with so fair an index. Such was Katie Woodward,
whom Charley was not to marry.

As he turned down Norfolk Street, he thought of all this, as the gambler, sitting with his
razor before him with which he intends to cut his throat, may be supposed to think of the stakes
which he has failed to win, and the fortune he has failed to make. Norah Geraghty was Charley's
razor, and he plunged boldly into the 'Cat and Whistle,' determined to draw it at once across
his weasand, and sever himself for ever from all that is valuable in the world.

It was now about eleven o'clock, at which hour the 'Cat and Whistle' generally does its most
stirring trade. This Charley knew; but he also knew that the little back parlour, even if there
should be an inmate in it at the time of his going in, would soon be made private for his purposes.

When he went in, Mrs. Davis was standing behind the counter, dressed in a cap of wonderful
grandeur, and a red tabinet gown, which rustled among the pots and jars, sticking out from
her to a tremendous width, inflated by its own magnificence and a substratum of crinoline.
Charley had never before seen her arrayed in such royal robes. Her accustomed maid was waiting
as usual on the guests, and another girl also was assisting; but Norah did not appear to Charley's
first impatient glance.

He at once saw that something wonderful was going on. The front parlour was quite full, and
the ministering angel was going in and out quickly, with more generous supplies of the gifts
of Bacchus than were usual at the 'Cat and Whistle.' Gin and water was the ordinary tipple
in the front parlour; and any one of its denizens inclined to cut a dash above his neighbours
generally did so with a bottom of brandy. But now Mrs. Davis was mixing port-wine negus as
fast as her hands could make it.

And then there were standing round the counter four or five customers, faces well known to
Charley, all of whom seemed to be dressed with a splendour second only to that of the landlady.
One man had on an almost new brown frock coat with a black velvet collar, and white trousers.
Two had blue swallow-tailed coats with brass buttons; and a fourth, a dashing young lawyer's
clerk from Clement's Inn, was absolutely stirring a mixture, which he called a mint julep,
with a yellow kid glove dangling out of his hand.

They all stood back when Charley entered; they had been accustomed to make way for him in former
days, and though he had latterly ceased to rule at the 'Cat and Whistle' as he once did, they
were too generous to trample on fallen greatness. He gave his hand to Mrs. Davis across the
counter, and asked her in the most unconcerned voice which he could assume what was in the
wind. She tittered and laughed, told him he had come too late for the fun, and then retreated
into the little back parlour, whither he followed her. She was at any rate in a good humour,
and seemed quite inclined to forgive his rather uncivil treatment of her notes and messages.

In the back parlour Charley found more people drinking, and among them three ladies of Mrs.
Davis's acquaintance. They were all very fine in their apparel, and very comfortable as to
their immediate employment, for each had before her a glass of hot tipple. One of them, a florid-faced
dame about fifty, Charley had seen before, and knew to be the wife of a pork butcher and sausage
maker in the neighbourhood. Directly he entered the room, Mrs. Davis formally introduced him
to them all. 'A very particular friend of mine, Mrs. Allchops; and of Norah's too, I can assure
you,' said Mrs. Davis.

'Ah, Mr. Tudor, and how be you? A sight of you is good for sore eyes,' said she of the sausages,
rising with some difficulty from her chair, and grasping Charley's hand with all the pleasant
cordiality of old friendship.

'The gen'leman seems to be a little too late for the fair,' said a severe lodging-house keeper
from Cecil Street.

  'Them as wills not, when they may,
   When they wills they shall have nay,'

said a sarcastic rival barmaid from a neighbouring public, to whom all Norah's wrongs and all
Mr. Tudor's false promises were fully known.

Charley was not the fellow to allow himself to be put down, even by feminine raillery; so he
plucked up his spirit, sad as he was at heart, and replied to them all en masse.

'Well, ladies, what's in the wind now? You seem to be very cosy here, all of you; suppose you
allow me to join you.'

'With a 'eart and a 'alf,' said Mrs. Allchops, squeezing her corpulence up to the end of the
horsehair sofa, so as to make room for him between herself and the poetic barmaid. 'I'd sooner
have a gentleman next to me nor a lady hany day of the week; so come and sit down, my birdie.'

But Charley, as he was about to accept the invitation of his friend Mrs. Allchops, caught Mrs.
Davis's eye, and followed her out of the room into the passage. 'Step up to the landing, Mr.
Tudor,' said she; and Charley stepped up. 'Come in here, Mr. Tudor--you won't mind my bedroom
for once.' And Charley followed her in, not minding her bedroom.

'Of course you know what has happened, Mr. Tudor?' said she.

'Devil a bit,' said Charley.

'Laws, now--don't you indeed? Well, that is odd.'

'How the deuce should I know? Where's Norah?'

'Why--she's at Gravesend.'

'At Gravesend--you don't mean to say she's----'

'I just do then; she's just gone and got herself spliced to Peppermint this morning. They had
the banns said these last three Sundays; and this morning they was at St. Martin's at eight
o'clock, and has been here junketing ever since, and now they're away to Gravesend.'

'Gravesend!' said Charley, struck by the suddenness of his rescue, as the gambler would have
been had some stranger seized the razor at the moment when it was lifted to his throat.

'Yes, Gravesend,' said Mrs. Davis; 'and they'll come up home to his own house by the first
boat to-morrow.'

'So Norah's married!' said Charley, with a slight access of sentimental softness in his voice.

'She's been and done it now, Mr. Tudor, and no mistake; and it's better so, ain't it? Why,
Lord love you, she'd never have done for you, you know; and she's the very article for such
a man as Peppermint.'

There was something good-natured in this, and so Charley felt it. As long as Mrs. Davis could
do anything to assist her cousin's views, by endeavouring to seduce or persuade her favourite
lover into a marriage, she left no stone unturned, working on her cousin's behalf. But now,
now that all those hopes were over, now that Norah had consented to sacrifice love to prudence,
why should Mrs. Davis quarrel with an old friend any longer?--why should not things be made
pleasant to him as to the others?

'And now, Mr. Tudor, come down, and drink a glass to their healths, and wish 'em both well,
and don't mind what them women says to you. You're well out of a mess; and now it's all over,
I'm glad it is as it is.'

Charley went down and took his glass and drank 'prosperity to the bride and bridegroom.' The
sarcastic rival barmaid said little snappish things to him, offered him a bit of green ribbon,
and told him that if he 'minded hisself,' somebody might, perhaps, take him yet. But Charley
was proof against this.

He sat there about half an hour, and then went his way, shaking hands with all the ladies and
bowing to the gentlemen. On the following day, as soon as he left his office, he called at
the 'Cat and Whistle,' and paid his little bill there, and said his last farewell to Mrs. Davis.
He never visited the house again. Now that Norah was gone the attractions were not powerful.
Reader, you and I will at the same time say our farewells to Mrs. Davis, to Mr. Peppermint
also, and to his bride. If thou art an elegant reader, unaccustomed to the contamination of
pipes and glasses, I owe thee an apology in that thou hast been caused to linger a while among
things so unsavoury. But if thou art one who of thine own will hast taken thine ease in thine
inn, hast enjoyed the freedom of a sanded parlour, hast known 'that ginger is hot in the mouth,'
and made thyself light-hearted with a yard of clay, then thou wilt confess there are worse
establishments than the 'Cat and Whistle,' less generous landladies than Mrs. Davis.

When all this happened the Woodwards had not been long at Torquay. Mr. Peppermint was made
a happy man before Christmas; and therefore Charley was left to drift before the wind without
the ballast of any lady's love to keep him in sailing trim. Poor fellow! he had had wealth
on one side, beauty and love on another, and on the third all those useful qualities which
Miss Geraghty has been described as possessing. He had been thus surrounded by feminine attractions,
and had lost them all. Two of those, from whom he had to choose, had married others, and he
was banished from the presence of the third. Under such circumstances what could he do but
drift about the gulfs and straits of the London ocean without compass or rudder, and bruise
his timbers against all the sunken rocks that might come in his way?

And then Norman told him of his coming marriage, and Charley was more sad than ever. And thus
matters went on with him till the period at which our story will be resumed at the return of
the Woodwards to Hampton.

In the meantime another winter and another spring had passed over Alaric's head, and now the
full tide of the London season found him still rising, and receiving every day more of the
world's homage. Sir Gregory Hardlines had had every reason to praise his own judgement in selecting
Mr. Tudor for the vacant seat among the Magi.

From that moment all had gone smooth with Sir Gregory; there was no one to interfere with his
hobby, or run counter to his opinion. Alaric was all that was conciliatory and amiable in a
colleague. He was not submissive and cringing; and had he been so, Sir Gregory, to do him justice,
would have been disgusted; but neither was he self-opinionated nor obstinate like Mr. Jobbles.
He insisted on introducing no crotchets of his own, and allowed Sir Gregory all the credit
of the Commission.

This all went on delightfully for a while; but on one morning, early in May, Alaric somewhat
disturbed the equanimity of his chief by communicating to him his intention of becoming a candidate
for the representation of the borough of Strathbogy, at the next general election, which was
to take place very shortly after the close of the session. Sir Gregory was dumbfounded, and
expressed himself as incapable of believing that Tudor really meant to throw up L1,200 a year
on the mere speculation of its being possible that he should get into Parliament. Men in general,
as Sir Gregory endeavoured to explain with much eloquence, go into Parliament for the sake
of getting places of L1,200 a year. For what earthly reason should Alaric again be going to
the bottom of the ladder, seeing that he had already attained a rung of such very respectable
altitude? Alaric said to himself, 'Excelsior!' To Sir Gregory he suggested that it might be
possible that he should get into Parliament without giving up his seat at the Board. Earth
and heaven, it might be hoped, would not come together, even though so great a violence as
this should be done to the time-honoured practices of the Government. Sir Gregory suggested
that it was contrary to the constitution. Alaric replied that the constitution had been put
upon to as great an extent before this, and had survived. Sir Gregory regarded it as all but
impossible, and declared it to be quite unusual. Alaric rejoined that something of the same
kind had been done at the Poor Law Board. To this Sir Gregory replied, gently pluming his feathers
with conscious greatness, that at the Poor Law Board the chief of the Commission was the Parliamentary
officer. Alaric declared that he was perfectly willing to give way if Sir Gregory would go
into the House himself. To this Sir Gregory demurred; not feeling himself called on to change
the sphere of his utility. And so the matter was debated between them, till at last Sir Gregory
promised to consult his friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The ice was thus broken, and
Alaric was quite contented with the part which he had taken in the conversation.

With his own official prospects, in spite of the hazardous step which he now meditated, he
was quite contented. He had an idea that in the public service of the Government, as well as
in all other services, men who were known to be worth their wages would find employment. He
was worth his wages. Men who could serve their country well, who could adapt themselves to
work, who were practical, easy in harness, able to drive and patient to be driven, were not,
unfortunately, as plentiful as blackberries. He began to perceive that a really useful man
could not be found miscellaneously under every hat in Pall Mall. He knew his own value, and
did not fear but that he should find a price for it in some of the world's markets. He would
not, therefore, allow himself to be deterred from further progress by any fear that in doing
so he risked the security of his daily bread; no, not though the risk extended to his wife;
she had taken him for better or worse; if the better came she should share it; if the worse,
why let her share that also, with such consolation as his affection might be able to offer.

There was something noble in this courage, in this lack of prudence. It may be a question whether
men, in marrying, do not become too prudent. A single man may risk anything, says the world;
but a man with a wife should be sure of his means. Why so? A man and a woman are but two units.
A man and a woman with ten children are but twelve units. It is sad to see a man starving--
sad to see a woman starving--very sad to see children starving. But how often does it come
to pass that the man who will work is seen begging his bread? we may almost say never--unless,
indeed, he be a clergyman. Let the idle man be sure of his wife's bread before he marries her;
but the working man, one would say, may generally trust to God's goodness without fear.

With his official career Alaric was, as we have said, well contented; in his stock-jobbing
line of business he also had had moments of great exaltation, and some moments of considerable
depression. The West Corks had vacillated. Both he and Undy had sold and bought and sold again;
and on the whole their stake in that stupendous national line of accommodation was not so all-
absorbing as it had once been. But if money had been withdrawn from this, it had been invested
elsewhere, and the great sum borrowed from Madame Jaquetanape's fortune had been in no part
replaced--one full moiety of it had been taken--may one not say stolen?--to enable Alaric and
Undy to continue their speculations.

The undertaking to which they were now both wedded was the Limehouse and Rotherhithe Bridge.
Of this Undy was chairman, and Alaric was a director, and at the present moment they looked
for ample fortune, or what would nearly be ample ruin, to the decision of a committee of the
House of Commons which was about to sit with the view of making inquiry as to the necessity
of the bridge in question.

Mr. Nogo, the member for Mile End, was the parent of this committee. He asserted that the matter
was one of such vital importance not only to the whole metropolis, but to the country at large,
that the Government were bound in the first place to give a large subsidy towards building
the bridge, and afterwards to pay a heavy annual sum towards the amount which it would be necessary
to raise by tolls. Mr. Whip Vigil, on the other hand, declared on the part of Government that
the bridge was wholly unnecessary; that if it were built it ought to be pulled down again;
and that not a stiver could be given out of the public purse with such an object.

On this they joined issue. Mr. Nogo prayed for a committee, and Mr. Vigil, having duly consulted
his higher brethren in the Government, conceded this point. It may easily be conceived how
high were now the hopes both of Undy Scott and Alaric Tudor. It was not at all necessary for
them that the bridge should ever be built; that, probably, was out of the question; that, very
likely, neither of them regarded as a possibility. But if a committee of the House of Commons
could be got to say that it ought to be built, they might safely calculate on selling out at
a large profit.

But who were to sit on the committee? That was now the all- momentous question.

CHAPTER XXXII

THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE

There is a sport prevalent among the downs in Hampshire to which, though not of a high degree,
much interest is attached. Men and boys, with social glee and happy boyish shouts, congregate
together on a hill-side, at the mouth of a narrow hole, and proceed, with the aid of a well-trained
bull-dog, to draw a badger. If the badger be at all commendable in his class this is by no
means an easy thing to do. He is a sturdy animal, and well fortified with sharp and practised
teeth; his hide is of the toughest; his paws of the strongest, and his dead power of resistance
so great as to give him more than an equal chance with the bull-dog. The delighted sportsmen
stand round listening to the growls and snarls, the tearings, gnawings, and bloody struggles
of the combatants within.--'Well done, badger!--Well done, bull-dog!--Draw him, bulldog!--Bite
him, badger!' Each has his friends, and the interest of the moment is intense. The badger,
it is true, has done no harm. He has been doing as it was appointed for him to do, poor badger,
in that hole of his. But then, why were badgers created but to be drawn? Why, indeed, but to
be drawn, or not to be drawn, as the case may be? See! the bull-dog returns minus an ear, with
an eye hanging loose, his nether lip torn off, and one paw bitten through and through. Limping,
dejected, beaten, glaring fearfully from his one remaining eye, the dog comes out; and the
badger within rolls himself up with affected ease, hiding his bloody wounds from the public eye.

So it is that the sport is played in Hampshire; and so also at Westminster--with a difference,
however. In Hampshire the two brutes retain ever their appointed natures. The badger is always
a badger, and the bull-dog never other than a bull-dog. At Westminster there is a juster reciprocity
of position. The badger when drawn has to take his place outside the hole, and fight again
for the home of his love; while the victorious bull-dog assumes a state of badgerdom, dons
the skin of his enemy, and, in his turn, submits to be baited.

The pursuit is certainly full of interest, but it is somewhat deficient in dignity.

The parliamentary committee, which was to sit with reference to the Limehouse and Rotherhithe
Bridge, had been one of the effects of a baiting-match such as that above described. In this
contest the enemies of the proud occupier of the den on the mountain-side had not been contented
to attempt to expel him with a single bull-dog. A whole pack had been let loose at his devoted
throat. Bull-dogs had been at him, and terriers, mastiffs, blood-hounds, lurchers, and curs;
but so accustomed was he to the contest, so knowing in his fence, so ready with all the weapons
given to him by nature, that, in spite of the numbers and venom of his enemies, he had contrived
to hold his own. Some leading hounds had fallen to rise no more; others had retreated, yelping
to their kennels, to lie quiet for a while, till time might give them courage for a new attack.
The country round was filled with the noise of their plaints, and the yowling and howling of
canine defeat. The grey old badger meanwhile sat proud in his hole, with all his badger kin
around him, and laughed his well-known badger laugh at his disconsolate foes. Such a brock
had not for years been seen in the country-side; so cool, so resolute, so knowing in his badger
ways, so impregnable in his badger hole, and so good-humoured withal. He could bite full sore
with those old teeth of his, and yet he never condescended to show them. A badger indeed of
whom the country might well be proud!

But in the scramble of the fight some little curs had been permitted to run away with some
little bones; and, in this way, Mr. Nogo, the member for Mile End, had been allowed to carry
his motion for a committee to inquire as to the expediency of the Government's advancing a
quarter of a million towards the completion of that momentous national undertaking, the building
of a bridge from Limehouse to Rotherhithe.

Very much had been said about this bridge, till men living out of the light of parliamentary
life, nine hundred and ninety-nine men, that is, out of every thousand in the Queen's dominions,
had begun to think that it was the great want of the age. Men living in the light, the supporters
of the bridge as well as its enemies, knew very well that such an erection was quite unneeded,
and would in all probability never be made. But then the firm of Blocks, Piles, and Cofferdam,
who held a vast quantity of the bridge shares, and who were to be the contractors for building
it, had an all-powerful influence in the borough of Limehouse. Where would Mr. Nogo be if he
did not cultivate the friendship of such men as Blocks, Piles, and Cofferdam?

And so Mr. Nogo, and those who acted with Mr. Nogo--men, that is, who had little jobs of their
own to do, and in the doing of which Mr. Nogo occasionally assisted, Undy Scott, for instance,
and such-like--these men, I say, had talked much about the bridge; and gentlemen on the Treasury
bench, who could have afforded to show up the folly of the scheme, and to put Mr. Nogo down
at once, had he been alone, felt themselves under the necessity of temporizing. As to giving
a penny of the public money for such a purpose, that they knew was out of the question; that
Mr. Nogo never expected; that they all knew Mr. Nogo never expected. But as Mr. Nogo's numbers
were so respectable, it was necessary to oppose him in a respectable parliamentary steady manner.
He had fifteen with him! Had he been quite alone, Mr. Vigil would have sneered him off; had
he had but four to back him, the old badger would have laughed them out of face with a brace
of grins. But fifteen--! Mr. Whip Vigil thought that the committee would be the most safe.
So would the outer world be brought to confess that the interests of Limehouse and Poplar,
Rotherhithe and Deptford, had not been overlooked by a careful Government.

But of whom was the committee to be made up? That was now the question which to Mr. Nogo, in
his hour of temporary greatness, was truly momentous. He of course was to be the chairman,
and to him appertained the duty of naming the other members; of naming them indeed--so much
he could undoubtedly do by the strength of his own privilege. But of what use to name a string
of men to whom Mr. Vigil would not consent? Mr. Nogo, did he do so, would have to divide on
every name, and be beaten at every division. There would be no triumph in that. No; Mr. Nogo
fully understood that his triumph must be achieved--if he were destined to a triumph--by an
astute skill in his selection, not by an open choice of friends. He must obtain a balance on
his side, but one in which the scale would lean so slightly to his side that Mr. Vigil's eyes
might be deceived. Those who knew Mr. Vigil best were inclined to surmise that such an arrangement
was somewhat beyond Mr. Nogo's political capacity. There is a proverb which goes to show that
a certain little lively animal may be shaved if he be caught napping; but then the difficulty
of so catching him is extreme.

Mr. Nogo, at the head of the list, put Mr. Vigil himself. This, of course, was a necessity
to him--would that he could have dispensed with it! Then he named sundry supporters of the
Government, sundry members also of the opposition; and he filled up the list with certain others
who could not be regarded as sure supporters of one side or the other, but with whom, for certain
reasons, he thought he might in this particular case be safe. Undy Scott was of course not
among the number, as Mr. Nogo would only have damaged his cause by naming a man known to have
a pecuniary interest in the concern.

The member for Mile End was doubtless sharp, but Mr. Vigil was sharper. His object was, in
fact, merely to do his duty to the country by preventing a profuse and useless expenditure
of money. His anxiety was a perfectly honest one--to save the Exchequer namely. But the circumstances
of the case required that he should fight the battle according to the tactics of the House,
and he well understood how to do so.

When the list was read he objected to two or three names--only to two or three. They were not
those of staunch enemies of the Government; nor did he propose in their places the names of
staunch supporters. He suggested certain gentlemen who, from their acquaintance with bridges,
tolls, rivers, &c., would, as he said, be probably of use. He, also, was sure of his men, and
as he succeeded with two of them, he was also pretty sure of his committee.

And then the committee met, and a lot of witnesses were in attendance. The chairman opened
his case, and proceeded to prove, by the evidence of sundry most respectable men connected
with Limehouse, and with the portions of Surrey and Kent lying immediately opposite to it,
that the most intense desire for friendly and commercial intercourse was felt; but that, though
absolutely close to each other, the districts were so divided by adverse circumstances, circumstances
which were monstrous considering the advance of science in the nineteenth century, that the
dearest friends were constrained to perpetual banishment from each other; and that the men
of Kent were utterly unable to do any trade at Limehouse, and the Limehousians equally unable
to carry on traffic in Surrey.

It was wonderful that the narrow river should be so effective for injury. One gentleman from
Poplar proved that, having given his daughter in marriage to a man of Deptford two years since,
he had not yet been able to see her since that day. Her house, by the crow's flight, was but
seven furlongs from his own; but, as he kept no horse, he could not get to her residence without
a four hours' walk, for which he felt himself to be too old. He was, however, able to visit
his married daughter at Reading, and be back to tea. The witness declared that his life was
made miserable by his being thus debarred from his child, and he wiped his eyes with his pocket-handkerchief
piteously, sitting there in front of the committee. In answer to Mr. Vigil he admitted that
there might be a ferry, but stated that he did not know. Having had, from childhood, an aversion
to the water, he had not inquired. He was aware that some rash people had gone through the
Tunnel, but for himself he did not think the Tunnel a safe mode of transit.

Another gentleman belonging to Rotherhithe, who was obliged to be almost daily at Blackwall,
maintained two horses for the express purpose of going backwards and forwards, round by London
Bridge. They cost him L70 per annum each. Such a bridge as that now proposed, and which the
gentleman declared that he regarded as an embryo monument of national glory, would save him
L140 per annum. He then proceeded to make a little speech about the spirit of the age, and
the influence of routine, which he described as a gloomy gnome. But his oratory was cruelly
cut short by Mr. Vigil, who demanded of him whether he ever used the river steamers. The witness
shuddered fearfully as he assured the committee that he never did, and referred to the Cricket,
whose boilers burst in the year 1842; besides, he had, he said, his things to carry with him.

Another witness told how unsafe was the transit of heavy goods by barge from one side of the
river to another. He had had a cargo of marine stores which would go to sea before their time.
The strong ebb of the tide, joined to the river current, had positively carried the barge away,
and its course had not been stopped till it had drifted on shore at Purfleet. He acknowledged
that something had transpired of the bargemen being drunk, but he had no knowledge himself
that such had been the case. No other cargoes of his own had been carried away, but he had
heard that such was often the case. He thought that the bridge was imperatively demanded. Would
the tolls pay? He felt sure that they would. Why, then, should not the bridge be built as a
commercial speculation, without Government aid? He thought that in such cases a fostering Government
was bound to come forward and show the way. He had a few shares in the bridge himself. He had
paid up L1 a share. They were now worth 2s. 6d. each. They had been worth nothing before the
committee had been ordered to sit. He declined to give any opinion as to what the shares would
be worth if the money were granted.

Ladies at Limehouse proved that if there were a bridge they could save 30s. a year each, by
buying their tea and sugar at Rotherhithe; and so singular are the usages of trade, that the
ladies of Rotherhithe would benefit their husbands equally, and return the compliment, by consuming
the bread of Limehouse. The shores of Kent were pining for the beef of the opposite bank, and
only too anxious to give in return the surplus stock of their own poultry.

'Let but a bridge be opened,' as was asserted by one animated vendor of rope, 'and Poplar would
soon rival Pimlico. Perhaps that might not be desirable in the eyes of men who lived in the
purlieus of the Court, and who were desirous to build no new bridge, except that over the ornamental
water in St. James's Park.' Upon uttering which the rope-vendor looked at Mr. Vigil as though
he expected him to sink at once under the table.

Mr. Blocks, of the great firm of Blocks, Piles, and Cofferdam, then came forward. He declared
that a large sum of money was necessary before this great national undertaking could be begun
in a spirit worthy of the nineteenth century. It was intended to commence the approaches on
each side of the river a quarter of a mile from the first abutment of the bridge, in order
to acquire the necessary altitude without a steep ascent. He then described what a glorious
bridge this bridge would be; how it would eclipse all bridges that had ever been built; how
the fleets of all nations would ride under it; how many hundred thousand square feet of wrought
iron would be consumed in its construction; how many tons of Portland stone in the abutments,
parapets, and supporting walls; how much timber would be buried twenty fathoms deep in the
mud of the river; how many miles of paving-stone would be laid down. Mr. Blocks went on with
his astonishing figures till the committee were bewildered, and even Mr. Vigil, though well
used to calculations, could hardly raise his mind to the dimensions of the proposed undertaking.

The engineer followed, and showed how easily this great work could be accomplished. There was
no difficulty, literally none. The patronage of the Crown was all that was required. The engineer
was asked whether by the word patronage he meant money, and after a little laughing and a few
counter questions, he admitted that, in his estimation, patronage and money did mean the same
thing.

Such was the case made out by the promoters of the bridge, and the chairman and his party were
very sanguine of success. They conceived that Mr. Blocks' figures had completely cowed their
antagonists.

Mr. Vigil then took his case in hand, and brought forward his witnesses. It now appeared that
the intercourse between the people living on each side of the river was immense, and ever on
the increase. Limehouse, it would seem, had nothing to do but to go to Deptford, and that Deptford
consumed all its time in returning the visit. Little children were sent across continually
on the most trifling errands, going and coming for one halfpenny. An immense income was made
by the owners of the ferry. No two adjacent streets in London had more to do with each other
than had the lanes of Rotherhithe and the lanes of Limehouse. Westminster and Lambeth were
further apart, and less connected by friendly intercourse. The frequenters of the ferry were
found to outnumber the passengers over Waterloo Bridge by ten to one.

Indeed, so lamentable a proposition as this of building a bridge across the river had never
before been mooted by the public. Men conversant with such matters gave it as their opinion
that no amount of tolls that could reasonably be expected would pay one per cent on the money
which it was proposed to expend; that sum, however, they stated, would not more than half cover
the full cost of the bridge. Traffic would be prohibited by the heavy charges which would be
necessary, and the probability would be that the ferry would still continue to be the ordinary
mode of crossing the river.

A gentleman, accustomed to use strong figures of speech, declared that if such a bridge were
built, the wisest course would be to sow the surface with grass, and let it out for grazing.
This witness was taken specially in hand by Mr. Nogo, and targed very tightly. Mr. Vigil had
contrived to prove, out of the mouths of inimical witnesses, the very reverse of that which
they had been summoned thither to assert. The secret of the ferry had been first brought to
the light by the gentleman who could not visit his daughter at Deptford, and so on. These triumphs
had evidently been very pleasant to Mr. Vigil, and Mr. Nogo thought that he might judiciously
take a leaf out of the Treasury book. Actuated by this ambition, he, with the assistance of
his friend, the M'Carthy Desmond, put no less than 2,250 questions to the gentleman who suggested
the grazing, in order to induce him to say, that if there were a bridge, men would probably
walk over it. But they could not bring him to own to a single passenger, unless they would
abandon the tolls. The most that they could get from him was, that perhaps an old woman, with
more money than wit, might go over it on a Sunday afternoon, if--which he did not believe--any
old woman existed, in that part of the world, who had more money than wit.

This witness was kept in the chair for three days, during which Mr. Vigil was nearly driven
wild by the loss of his valuable time. But he did not complain. Nor would he have complained,
though he might have absented himself, had the witness been kept in the chair three weeks instead
of three days. The expense of the committee, including witnesses, shorthand-writers, and printing,
was about L60 a day, but it never occurred to any one of the number to get up and declare with
indignation, that such a waste of money and time on so palpably absurd a scheme was degrading,
and to demand an immediate close of their labours. It all went smoothly to the end, and Mr.
Nogo walked off from his task with the approving conscience of a patriotic legislator.

At the close the members met to prepare their report. It was then the first week in August,
and they were naturally in a hurry to finish their work. It was now their duty to decide on
the merits of what they had heard, to form a judgement as to the veracity of the witnesses,
and declare, on behalf of the country which they represented, whether or no this bridge should
be built at the expense of the nation.

With his decision each was ready enough; but not one of them dreamed of being influenced by
anything which had been said before them. All the world--that is, all that were in any way
concerned in the matter--knew that the witnesses for the bridge were anxious to have it built,
and that the witnesses against the bridge were anxious to prevent the building. It would be
the worst of ignorance, ignorance of the usage of the world we live in, to suppose that any
member of Parliament could be influenced by such manoeuvres. Besides, was not the mind of each
man fully known before the committee met?

Various propositions were made by the members among themselves, and various amendments moved.
The balance of the different parties had been nearly preserved. A decided victory was not to
be expected on either side. At last the resolution to which the committee came was this: 'That
this committee is not prepared, under existing circumstances, to recommend a grant of public
money for the purpose of erecting a bridge at Limehouse; but that the committee consider that
the matter is still open to consideration should further evidence be adduced.'

Mr. Vigil was perfectly satisfied. He did not wish to acerbate the member for Mile End, and
was quite willing to give him a lift towards keeping his seat for the borough, if able to do
so without cost to the public exchequer. At Limehouse the report of the committee was declared
by certain persons to be as good as a decision in their favour; it was only postponing the
matter for another session. But Mr. Vigil knew that he had carried his point, and the world
soon agreed with him. He at least did his work successfully, and, considering the circumstances
of his position, he did it with credit to himself.

A huge blue volume was then published, containing, among other things, all Mr. Nogo's 2,250
questions and their answers; and so the Limehouse and Rotherhithe bridge dropped into oblivion
and was forgotten.

CHAPTER XXXIII

TO STAND, OR NOT TO STAND

Sir Gregory Hardlines had been somewhat startled by Alaric's announcement of his parliamentary
intentions. It not unnaturally occurred to that great man that should Mr. Tudor succeed at
Strathbogy, and should he also succeed in being allowed to hold his office and seat together,
he, Tudor, would very soon become first fiddle at the Civil Service Examination Board. This
was a view of the matter which was by no means agreeable to Sir Gregory. Not for this had he
devoted his time, his energy, and the best powers of his mind to the office of which he was
at present the chief; not for this had he taken by the hand a young clerk, and brought him
forward, and pushed him up, and seated him in high places. To have kept Mr. Jobbles would have
been better than this; he, at any rate, would not have aspired to parliamentary honours.

And when Sir Gregory came to look into it, he hardly knew whether those bugbears with which
he had tried to frighten Tudor were good serviceable bugbears, such as would stand the strain
of such a man's logic and reason. Was there really any reason why one of the commissioners
should not sit in Parliament? Would his doing so be subversive of the constitution? Or would
the ministers of the day object to an additional certain vote? This last point of view was
one in which it did not at all delight Sir Gregory to look at the subject in question. He determined
that he would not speak on the matter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or to any of the
Government wigs who might be considered to be bigger wigs than himself.

And Alaric thought over the matter coolly also. He looked at it till the bugbears shrank into
utter insignificance; till they became no more than forms of shreds and patches put up to frighten
birds out of cherry-orchards.

Why should the constitution be wounded by the presence of one more commissioner in Parliament?
Why should not he do his public duty and hold his seat at the same time, as was done by so
many others? But he would have to go out if the ministry went out. That was another difficulty,
another bugbear, more substantial perhaps than the others; but he was prepared to meet even
that. He was a poor man; his profession was that of the Civil Service; his ambition was to
sit in Parliament. He would see whether he could not combine his poverty with his profession,
and with his ambition also. Sir Gregory resolved in his fear that he would not speak to the
Chancellor of the Exchequer on the matter; Alaric, on the other hand, in his audacity, resolved
that he would do so.

It was thus that Sir Gregory regarded the matter. 'See all that I have done for this man,'
said he to himself; 'see how I have warmed him in my bosom, how I have lifted him to fortune
and renown, how I have heaped benefits on his head! If gratitude in this world be possible,
that man should be grateful to me; if one man can ever have another's interest at heart, that
man should have a heartfelt anxiety as to my interest. And yet how is it? I have placed him
in the chair next to my own, and now he is desirous of sitting above me!'

'Twas thus Sir Gregory communed with himself. But Alaric's soliloquy was very different. A
listener who could have overheard both would hardly have thought that the same question was
being discussed by the two. 'I have got so high,' said Alaric, 'by my own labour, by my own
skill and tact; and why should I stop here? I have left my earliest colleagues far behind me;
have distanced those who were my competitors in the walk of life; why should I not still go
on and distance others also? why stop when I am only second or third? It is very natural that
Sir Gregory should wish to keep me out of Parliament; I cannot in the least blame him; let
us all fight as best each may for himself. He does not wish a higher career; I do. Sir Gregory
will now do all that he can to impede my views, because they are antagonistic to his own; very
well; I must only work the harder to overcome his objections.' There was no word in all this
of gratitude; there was no thought in Alaric's mind that it behoved him to be grateful to Sir
Gregory. It was for his own sake, not for his pupil's, that Sir Gregory had brought this pupil
forward. Grateful, indeed! In public life when is there time for gratitude? Who ever thinks
of other interest than his own?

Such was Alaric's theory of life. But not the less would he have expected gratitude from those
whom he might serve. Such also very probably was Sir Gregory's theory when he thought of those
who had helped him, instead of those whom he himself had helped.

And so they met, and discussed Alaric's little proposition.

'Since I saw you yesterday,' said Sir Gregory, 'I have been thinking much of what you were
saying to me of your wish to go into Parliament.'

'I am very much obliged to you,' said Alaric.

'I need hardly tell you, Tudor, how anxious I am to further your advancement. I greatly value
your ability and diligence, and have shown that I am anxious to make them serviceable to the
public.'

'I am fully aware that I owe you a great deal, Sir Gregory.'

'Oh, I don't mean that; that's nothing; I am not thinking of myself. I only want you to understand
that I am truly anxious to see you take that line in public matters which may make your services
most valuable to the public, and which may redound the most to your own advantage. I have thought
of what you said to me with the most mature deliberation, and I am persuaded that I shall best
do my duty to you, and to the service, by recommending you to abandon altogether your idea
of going into Parliament.'

Sir Gregory said this in his weightiest manner. He endeavoured to assume some of that authority
with which he had erst cowed the young Tudor at the Weights and Measures, and as he finished
his speech he assumed a profound look which ought to have been very convincing.

But the time was gone by with Alaric when such tricks of legerdemain were convincing to him.
A grave brow, compressed lips, and fixed eyes, had no longer much effect upon him. He had a
point to gain, and he was thinking of that, and not of Sir Gregory's grimaces.

'Then you will not see the Chancellor of the Exchequer on the subject?'

'No,' said Sir Gregory; 'it would be useless for me to do so. I could not advocate such a scheme,
feeling certain that it would be injurious both to yourself and to the service; and I would
not desire to see the Chancellor with the view of opposing your wishes.'

'I am much obliged to you for that, at any rate,' said Alaric.

'But I do hope that you will not carry your plan any farther. When I tell you, as I do with
the utmost sincerity, that I feel certain that an attempt to seat yourself in Parliament can
only lead to the ruin of your prospects as a Civil servant--prospects which are brighter now
than those of any other young man in the service--I cannot but think that you must hesitate
before you take any step which will, in my opinion, render your resignation necessary.'

'I shall be sorry to resign, Sir Gregory, as I have such true pleasure in serving with you.'

'And, I presume, a salary of L1,200 a year is not unacceptable?' said Sir Gregory, with the
very faintest of smiles.

'By no means,' said Alaric; 'I am a poor man, depending altogether on my own exertions for
an income. I cannot afford to throw away a chance.'

'Then take my word for it, you should give up all idea of Parliament,' said Sir Gregory, who
thought that he had carried his point.

'But I call a seat in Parliament a chance,' said Alaric; 'the best chance that a man, circumstanced
as I am, can possibly have. I have the offer of a seat, Sir Gregory, and I can't afford to
throw it away.'

'Then it is my duty to tell you, as the head of your office, that it will be your duty to resign
before you offer yourself as a candidate.'

'That you mean is your present opinion, Sir Gregory?'

'Yes, Mr. Tudor, that is my opinion--an opinion which I shall be forced to express to the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, if you persist in this infatuation.'

Alaric looked very grave, but not a whit angry. 'I am sorry for it, Sir Gregory, very sorry;
I had hoped to have had your countenance.'

'I would give it you, Mr. Tudor, if I could consistently with my duty as a public servant;
but as I cannot, I am sure you will not ask for it.' How Fidus Neverbend would have admired
the chief commissioner could he have seen and heard him at this moment! 'But,' he continued,
relaxing for a while the muscles of his face, 'I hope, I do hope, you will think better of
this. What are you to gain? Come, Tudor, think of it that way. What are you to gain? You, with
a wife and young family coming up about your heels, what are you to gain by going into Parliament?
That is what I ask you. What are you to gain?' It was delightful to see how pleasantly practical
Sir Gregory could become when he chose to dismount from his high horse.

'It is considered a high position in this country, that of a member of Parliament,' said Alaric.
'A man in gaining that is generally supposed to have gained something.'

'True, quite true. It is a desirable position for a rich man, or a rich man's eldest son, or
even for a poor man, if by getting into Parliament he can put himself in the way of improving
his income. But, my dear Tudor, you are in none of these positions. Abandon the idea, my dear
Tudor--pray abandon it. If not for your own sake, at any rate do so for that of your wife and
child.'

Sir Gregory might as well have whistled. Not a word that he said had the slightest effect on
Alaric. How was it possible that his words should have any effect, seeing that Alaric was convinced
that Sir Gregory was pleading for his own advantage, and not for that of his listener? Alaric
did listen. He received all that Sir Gregory said with the most profound attention; schooled
his face into a look of the most polite deference; and then, with his most cruel tone, informed
Sir Gregory that his mind was quite made up, and that he did intend to submit himself to the
electors of Strathbogy.

'And as to what you say about my seat at the board, Sir Gregory, you may probably be right.
Perhaps it will be as well that I should see the Chancellor of the Exchequer myself.'

'"Who will to Cupar maun to Cupar,"' said Sir Gregory; 'I can only say, Mr. Tudor, that I am
very sorry for you, and very sorry for your wife--very sorry, very sorry indeed.'

'And who will to Strathbogy maun to Strathbogy,' said Alaric, laughing; 'there is certainly
an air of truth about the proverb as applied to myself just at present. But the fact is, whether
for good or for bad, I maun to Strathbogy. That is my present destiny. The fact that I have
a wife and a child does make the step a most momentous one. But, Sir Gregory, I should never
forgive myself were I to throw away such an opportunity.'

'Then I have nothing more to say, Mr. Tudor.'

'Of course I shall try to save my place,' continued Alaric.

'I look upon that as quite impossible,' said Sir Gregory.

'It can do me no harm at any rate to see the Chancellor of the Exchequer. If he tells me that
a seat in Parliament and a seat at the board are incompatible, and that as one of the Civil
Service Commissioners I am not free to stand for the borough, I will in that case, Sir Gregory,
put my resignation in your hands before I publish my address.'

And so they parted, each determined to do all that in him lay to thwart the wishes of the other.
Alaric was not in the least influenced by anything that Sir Gregory had said to him; he had
made up his mind, and was determined to be turned from it by no arguments that his colleague
could use; but nevertheless he could not but be meditative, as, walking home across the Parks,
he thought of his wife and child. It is true that he had a second trade; he was a stock-jobber
as well as a Civil Service Commissioner; but he already perceived how very difficult it was
to realize an income to which he could trust from that second precarious pursuit. He had also
lived in a style considerably beyond that which his official income would have enabled him
to assume. He had on the whole, he thought, done very well; but yet it would be a dreadful
thing to have to trust to so precarious a livelihood. He had realized nothing; he had not yet
been able to pay back the money which he had so fraudulently taken, and to acquit himself of
a debt which now lay daily heavier and heavier on his soul. He felt that he must repay not
only that but Undy's share also, before he could again pass a happy day or a quiet night. This
plan of throwing up L1,200 a year would badly assist him in getting rid of this incubus.

But still that watchword of his goaded him on--'Excelsior!' he still said to himself; 'Excelsior!'
If he halted now, now when the ball was at his foot, he might never have another chance. Very
early in life before a beard was on his chin, before he could style himself a man according
to the laws of his country, he had determined within himself that a seat in Parliament was
the only fitting ambition for an Englishman. That was now within his reach. Would he be such
a dastard as to draw back his hand, and be deterred from taking it, by old women's tales of
prudence, and the self-interested lectures of Sir Gregory Hardlines?

'Excelsior!' There was not much that could be so styled in that debt of his to M. and Madame
Jaquetanape. If he could only pay that off he felt that he could brave the world without a
fear. Come what come might he would sell out and do so. The bridge committee was sitting, and
his shares were already worth more than he had paid for them. Mr. Blocks had just given his
evidence, and the commercial world was willing enough to invest in the Limehouse bridge. He
would sell out and put his conscience at rest.

But then to do so successfully, he must induce Undy to do so too; and that he knew would not
at present be an easy task. Who had ever been successful in getting back money from Undy Scott?
He had paid the last half-year's interest with most commendable punctuality, and was not that
a great deal from Undy Scott?

But what if this appropriation of another's money, what if this fraud should be detected and
exposed before he had succeeded in paying back the L10,000. What if he should wake some morning
and find himself in the grip of some Newgate myrmidon? A terrible new law had just been passed
for the protection of trust property; a law in which he had not felt the slightest interest
when he had first seen in the daily newspapers some tedious account of the passing of the various
clauses, but which was now terrible to his innermost thoughts.

His walk across the Parks was not made happy by much self- triumph. In spite of his commissionership
and coming parliamentary honours, his solitary moments were seldom very happy. It was at his
club, when living with Undy and Undy's peers, that he was best able to throw off his cares
and enjoy himself. But even then, high as he was mounted on his fast-trotting horse, black
Care would sit behind him, ever mounted on the same steed.

And bitterly did poor Gertrude feel the misery of these evenings which her husband passed at
his club; but she never reviled him or complained; she never spoke of her sorrow even to her
mother or sister. She did not even blame him in her own heart. She knew that he had other business
than that of his office, higher hopes than those attached to his board; and she taught herself
to believe that his career required him to be among public men.

He had endeavoured to induce her to associate constantly with Mrs. Val, so that her evenings
might not be passed alone; but Gertrude, after trying Mrs. Val for a time, had quietly repudiated
the closeness of this alliance. Mrs. Val had her ideas of 'Excelsior,' her ambition to rule,
and these ideas and this ambition did not at all suit Gertrude's temper. Not even for her husband's
sake could she bring herself to be patronized by Mrs. Val. They were still very dear friends,
of course; but they did not live in each other's arms as Alaric had intended they should do.

He returned home after his interview with Sir Gregory, and found his wife in the drawing-room
with her child. He usually went down from his office to his club, and she was therefore the
more ready to welcome him for having broken through his habit on the present occasion.

She left her infant sprawling on the floor, and came up to greet him with a kiss.

'Ger,'--said he, putting his arm round her and embracing her--'I have come home to consult
you on business;' and then he seated himself on the sofa, taking her with him, and still in
his arms. There was but little doubt that she would consent to anything which he could propose
to her after such a fashion, in such a guise as this; that he knew full well.

'Well, love,' said she, 'and what is the business about? You know that I always think that
to be best which you think to be best.'

'Yes, Ger; but this is a very important matter;' and then he looked grave, but managed at the
same time to look happy and contented. 'This is a matter of vital importance to you, and I
will do nothing in it without your consent.'

'What is best for you must be best for me,' said Gertrude, kissing his forehead.

Then he explained to her what had passed between himself and Sir Gregory, and what his own
ideas were as regarded the borough of Strathbogy. 'Sir Gregory,' said he, 'is determined that
I shall not remain at the board and sit in Parliament at the same time; but I do not see why
Sir Gregory is to have his own way in everything. If you are not afraid of the risk, I will
make up my mind to stand it at all events, and to resign if the Minister makes it imperative.
If, however, you fear the result, I will let the matter drop, and tell the Scotts to find another
candidate. I am anxious to go into Parliament, I confess; but I will never do so at the expense
of your peace of mind.'

The way in which he put upon her the whole weight of the decision was not generous. Nor was
the mode he adopted of inducing her to back his own wishes. If there were risk to her--and
in truth there was fearful risk--it was his duty to guard her from the chance, not hers to
say whether such danger should be encountered or no. The nature of her answer may be easily
surmised. She was generous, though he was not. She would never retard his advance, or be felt
as a millstone round his neck. She encouraged him with all her enthusiasm, and bade him throw
prudence to the winds. If he rose, must she not rise also? Whatever step in life was good for
him, must it not be good for her as well? And so that matter was settled between them--pleasantly
enough.

He endured a fortnight of considerable excitement, during which he and Sir Gregory did not
smile at each other, and then he saw the Chancellor of the Exchequer. That gentleman promised
to speak to the Prime Minister, feeling himself unable to answer the question put to him, definitely
out of his own head; and then another fortnight passed on. At the end of that time the Chancellor
of the Exchequer sent for Alaric, and they had a second interview.

'Well, Mr. Tudor,' said the great man, 'this is a matter of very considerable importance, and
one on which I am not even yet prepared to give you a positive answer.'

This was very good news for Alaric. Sir Gregory had spoken of the matter as one on which there
could be no possible doubt. He had asserted that the British lion would no longer sleep peaceably
in his lair, if such a violence were put on the constitution as that meditated by the young
commissioner. It was quite clear that the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the Prime Minister
also, looked at it in a very different light. They doubted, and Alaric was well aware that
their doubt was as good as certainty to him.

The truth was that the Prime Minister had said to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in a half-serious,
half-jocular way, that he didn't see why he should reject a vote when offered to him by a member
of the Civil Service. The man must of course do his work-- and should it be found that his
office work and his seat in Parliament interfered with each other, why, he must take the consequences.
And if--or--or--made a row about it in the House and complained, why in that case also Mr.
Tudor must take the consequences. And then, enough having been said on that matter, the conversation
dropped.

'I am not prepared to give a positive answer,' said the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who of
course did not choose to commit himself.

Alaric assured the great man that he was not so unreasonable as to expect a positive answer.
Positive answers, as he well knew, were not often forthcoming among official men; official
men, as he had already learnt, prefer to do their business by answers which are not positive.
He himself had become adverse to positive answers since he had become a commissioner, and was
quite prepared to dispense with them in the parliamentary career which he hoped that he was
now about to commence. This much, however, was quite clear, that he might offer himself as
a candidate to the electors of Strathbogy without resigning; and that Sir Gregory's hostile
remonstrance on the subject, should he choose to make one, would not be received as absolute
law by the greater powers.

Accordingly as Alaric was elated, Sir Gregory was depressed. He had risen high, but now this
young tyro whom he had fostered was about to climb above his head. O the ingratitude of men!

Alaric, however, showed no triumph. He was more submissive, more gracious than ever to his
chief. It was only to himself that he muttered 'Excelsior!

CHAPTER XXXIV

WESTMINSTER HALL

The parliamentary committee pursued their animated inquiries respecting the Limehouse bridge
all through the sultry month of July. How Mr. Vigil must have hated Mr. Nogo, and the M'Carthy
Desmond! how sick he must have been of that eternal witness who, with imperturbable effrontery,
answered the 2,250 questions put to him without admitting anything! To Mr. Vigil it was all
mere nonsense, sheer waste of time. Had he been condemned to sit for eight days in close contiguity
to the clappers of a small mill, he would have learnt as much as he did from the witnesses
before the committee. Nevertheless he went through it and did not lose his temper. He smiled
sweetly on Mr. Nogo every morning, and greeted the titled Irishman with his easy familiar nod,
as though the continued sitting of this very committee was of all things to him the most desirable.
Such is Mr. Vigil's peculiar tact, such his special talent; these are the gifts--gifts by no
means ordinary--which have made him Right Honourable, and recommended him to the confidence
of successive badgers.

But though the committee was uninteresting to Mr. Vigil, it was not so to the speculative inhabitants
of Limehouse, or to the credulous shopkeepers of Rotherhithe. On the evening of the day on
which Mr. Blocks was examined, the shares went up 20 per cent; and when his evidence was published
in extenso the next Saturday morning by the Capel Court Share-buyer, a periodical which served
for Bible and Prayer-book, as well as a Compendium of the Whole Duty of Man, to Undy Scott
and his friends, a further rise in the price of this now valuable property was the immediate
consequence.

Now, then, was the time for Alaric to sell and get out of his difficulties if ever he could
do so. Shares which he bought for 30s. were now worth nearly L2 10s. He was strongly of opinion
that they would fall again, and that the final result of the committee would leave them of
a less value than their original purchase-money, and probably altogether valueless. He could
not, however, act in the matter without consulting Undy, so closely linked were they in the
speculation; and even at the present price his own shares would not enable him to pay back
the full amount of what he had taken.

The joint property of the two was, however, at its present market price, worth L12,000--L10,000
would make him a free man. He was perfectly willing to let Undy have the full use of the difference
in amount; nay, he was ready enough to give it to him altogether, if by so doing he could place
the whole of his ward's money once more in safety. With the power of offering such a douceur
to his friend's rapacity, he flattered himself that he might have a chance of being successful.
He was thus prepared to discuss the matter with his partner.

It so happened that at the same moment Undy was desirous of discussing the same subject, their
joint interest, namely, in the Limehouse bridge; there was no difficulty therefore in their
coming together. They met at the door of the committee-room when Mr. Nogo had just put his
999th question to the adverse witness; and as the summons to prayers prevented the 1,000th
being proceeded with at that moment, Undy and Alaric sauntered back along the passages, and
then walking up and down the immense space of Westminster Hall, said each to the other what
he had to say on the matter mooted between them.

Undy was in great glee, and seemed to look on his fortune as already made. They had at first
confined their remarks to the special evidence of the witness who had last been in the chair;
and Undy, with the volubility which was common to him when he was in high spirits, had been
denouncing him as an ass who was injuring his own cause by his over obstinacy.

'Nothing that he can say,' said Undy, 'will tell upon the share- market. The stock is rising
from hour to hour; and Piles himself told me that he knew from sure intelligence that the Chancellor
of the Exchequer is prepared to give way, whatever Vigil may say to the contrary. Their firm,
Piles says, is buying every share they can lay their hands on.'

'Then in God's name let them buy ours,' said Alaric.

'Buy ours!' said Undy. 'You don't mean to tell me that you wish to sell now? You don't mean
to say that you want to back out, now that the game is all going our own way?'

'Indeed I do, and I intend to do so; just listen to me, Undy----'

'I tell you fairly, Tudor, I will not sell a share; what you may choose to do with your own
I cannot say. But if you will be guided by me you will keep every share you have got. Instead
of selling we should both add to our stock. I at any rate am resolved to do so.'

'Listen to me, Undy,' said Alaric.

'The truth is,' said Undy--who at the present moment preferred talking to listening--'the truth
is, you do not understand buying and selling shares. We should both be ruined very quickly
were I to allow myself to be led by you; you are too timid, too much afraid of risking your
money; your speculative pluck hardly rises higher than the Three per cents, and never soars
above a first- class mortgage on land.'

'I could be as sanguine as you are, and as bold,' said Alaric, 'were I venturing with my own
money.'

'In the name of goodness get that bugbear out of your head,' said Undy. 'Whatever good it might
have done you to think of that some time ago, it can do you no good now.' There was a bitter
truth in this which made Alaric's heart sink low within his breast. 'Wherever the money came
from, whose property it may have been or be, it has been used; and now your only safety is
in making the best use of it. A little daring, a little audacity--it is that which ruins men.
When you sit down to play brag, you must brag it out, or lose your money.'

'But, my dear fellow, there is no question here of losing money. If we sell now we shall realize
about L2,000.'

'And will that, or the half of that, satisfy you? Is that your idea of a good thing? Will that
be sufficient to pay for the dozen of bad things which a fellow is always putting his foot
into? It won't satisfy me. I can tell you that, at any rate.'

Alaric felt very desirous of keeping Undy in a good humour. He wished, if possible, to persuade
him rather than to drive him; to coax him into repaying this money, and not absolutely to demand
the repayment. 'Come,' said he, 'what do you call a good thing yourself?'

'I call cent per cent a good thing, and I'll not sell a share till they come up to that.'

'They'll never do that, Undy.'

'That's your opinion. I think differently. And I'm sure you will own I have had more experience
of the share-market than you have. When I see such men as Blocks and Piles buying fast, I know
very well which way the wind blows. A man may be fishing a long time, Tudor, in these waters,
before he gets such a haul as this; but he must be a great fool to let go his net when he does
get it.'

They both then remained silent for a time, for each was doubtful how best to put forward the
view which he himself wished to urge. Their projects were diametrically different, and yet
neither could carry his own without the assistance of the other.

'I tell you what I propose,' said Undy.

'Wait a moment, Undy,' said Alaric; 'listen to me for one moment. I can hear nothing till you
do so, and then I will hear anything.'

'Well, what is it?'

We have each of us put something near to L5,000 into this venture.'

'I have put more,' said Scott.

'Very well. But we have each of us withdrawn a sum equal to that I have named from my ward's
fortune for this purpose.'

'I deny that,' said Undy. 'I have taken nothing from your ward's fortune. I have had no power
to do so. You have done as you pleased with that fortune. But I am ready to admit that I have
borrowed L5,000--not from your ward, but from you.'

Alaric was nearly beside himself; but he still felt that he should have no chance of carrying
his point if he lost his temper.

'That is ungenerous of you, Scott, to say the least of it; but we'll let that pass. To enable
me to lend you the L5,000, and to enable me to join you in this speculation, L10,000 has been
withdrawn from Clementina's fortune.'

'I know nothing about that,' said Scott.

'Know nothing about it!' said Alaric, looking at him with withering scorn. But Undy was not
made of withering material, and did not care a straw for his friend's scorn.

'Nothing whatever,' said he.

'Well, so be it,' said Alaric; 'but the fact is, the money has been withdrawn.'

'I don't doubt that in the least,' said Undy. 'I am not now going to argue whether the fault
has been most mine or yours,' continued Alaric.

'Well, that is kind of you,' said Undy, 'considering that you are the girl's trustee, and that
I have no more to do with it than that fellow in the wig there.'

'I wish at any rate you would let me explain myself,' said Alaric, who felt that his patience
was fast going, and who could hardly resist the temptation of seizing his companion by the
throat, and punishing him on the spot for his iniquity.

'I don't prevent you, my dear fellow--only remember this: I will not permit you to assert,
without contradicting you, that I am responsible for Clem's fortune. Now, go on, and explain
away as hard as you like.'

Alaric, under these circumstances, found it not very easy to put what he had to say into any
words that his companion would admit. He fully intended at some future day to thrust Scott's
innocence down his throat, and tell him that he was not only a thief, but a mean, lying, beggarly
thief. But the present was not the time. Too much depended on his inducing Undy to act with him.

'Ten thousand pounds has at any rate been taken.'

'That I won't deny.'

'And half that sum has been lent to you.'

'I acknowledge a debt of L5,000.'

'It is imperative that L10,000 should at once be repaid.'

'I have no objection in life.'

'I can sell my shares in the Limehouse bridge,' continued Alaric, 'for L6,000, and I am prepared
to do so.'

'The more fool you,' said Undy,' if you do it; especially as L6,000 won't pay L10,000, and
as the same property, if overheld another month or two, in all probability will do so.'

'I am ready to sacrifice that and more than that,' said Alaric. 'If you will sell out L4,000,
and let me at once have that amount, so as to make up the full sum I owe, I will make you a
free present of the remainder of the debt. Come, Undy, you cannot but call that a good thing.
You will have pocketed two thousand pounds, according to the present market value of the shares,
and that without the slightest risk.'

Undy for a while seemed staggered by the offer. Whether it was Alaric's extreme simplicity
in making it, or his own good luck in receiving it, or whether by any possible chance some
all but dormant remnant of feeling within his heart was touched, we will not pretend to say.
But for a while he walked on silent, as though wavering in his resolution, and looking as if
he wished to be somewhat more civil, somewhat less of the bully, than he had been.

There was no one else to whom Alaric could dare to open his heart on this subject of his ward's
fortune; there was none other but this ally of his to whom he could confide, whom he could
consult. Unpromising, therefore, though Undy was as a confederate, Alaric, when he thought
he saw this change in his manner, poured forth at once the full tide of his feelings.

'Undy,' said he, 'pray bear with me a while. The truth is, I cannot endure this misery any
longer. I do not now want to blame anyone but myself. The thing has been done, and it is useless
now to talk of blame. The thing has been done, and all that now remains for me is to undo it;
to put this girl's money back again, and get this horrid weight from off my breast.'

'Upon my word, my dear fellow, I did not think that you took it in such a light as that,' said
Undy.

'I am miserable about it,' said Alaric. 'It keeps me awake all night, and destroys all my energy
during the day.'

'Oh, that's all bile,' said Undy. 'You should give up fish for a few days, and take a blue
pill at night.'

'Scott, this money must be paid back at once, or I shall lose my senses. Fortune has so far
favoured me as to enable me to put my hand at once on the larger portion of it. You must let
me have the remainder. In God's name say that you will do so.'

Undy Scott unfortunately had not the power to do as he was asked. Whether he would have done
so, had he had the power, may be doubtful. He was somewhat gravelled for an answer to Alaric's
earnest supplication, and therefore made none till the request was repeated.

'In God's name let me have this money,' repeated Alaric. 'You will then have made two thousand
pounds by the transaction.'

'My dear Tudor,' said he, 'your stomach is out of order, I can see it as well as possible from
the way you talk.'

Here was an answer for a man to get to the most earnest appeal which he could make! Here was
comfort for a wretch suffering from fear, remorse, and shame, as Alaric was suffering. He had
spoken of his feelings and his heart, but these were regions quite out of Undy Scott's cognizance.
'Take a blue pill,' said he, 'and you'll be as right as a trivet in a couple of days.'

What was Alaric to say? What could he say to a man who at such a crisis could talk to him of
blue pills? For a while he said nothing; but the form of his face changed, a darkness came
over his brow which Scott had never before seen there, the colour flew from his face, his eyes
sparkled, and a strange appearance of resolute defiance showed itself round his mouth. Scott
began to perceive that his medical advice would not be taken in good part.

'Scott,' said he, stopping short in his walk and taking hold of the collar of his companion's
coat, not loosely by the button, but with a firm grip which Undy felt that it would be difficult
to shake off--'Scott, you will find that I am not to be trifled with. You have made a villain
of me. I can see no way to escape from my ruin without your aid; but by the living God, if
I fall, you shall fall with me. Tell me now; will you let me have the sum I demand? "Ah," said
Mrs. Bloggins, speaking with deep emotion, "you may well call 'em
Americans, for I've never bin so troubled about anythink before.

Some people seem to git the notion into their 'eads that bed-makers
do no work.

Why we're arst to slave from mornin' till night, and our pay is paltry.

Things in Cambridge isn't like what they was. Time was when our young gentlemen used to 'ave
big dinners in their rooms, and a careful bed-maker could save a bone or two. Nowadays they,'re
only cheese-parers, that's what I call 'em. You won't believe me, I know, but my mother, who was
a bed-maker afore me, used to 'ave a month at the seaside every year,
all paid for out of money give to 'er by 'er young gentlemen.

To be sure there was a wrangler, or somethink of that kind, who didn't come up to the mark,
so she soon got rid of 'im; 'e used to find 'is butter was took by the cat, and accidents of
that kind.

"Mind yer," she continued, "I ain't got nothink to say against the Americans. They may be the most
liberal-'earted gentlemen in the world for all I know. But it's the
principle of the thing I'm objectin' to.

It's a case of kill me quick or cure me to-morrow, and if President WILSON was to talk till
next week 'e couldn't make it no different. You can't make a silk sock out of a side of bacon,
and that's true whichever way you look at it."

"But what steps," we urged, "does your Association intend to take, Mrs. Bloggins, over this
matter?"

"I don't know nothink about no 'sociations," said Mrs. Bloggins, "but
I do know that we're all in it, and Mrs. Pledger and Mrs. 'Uggins,
and the rest of 'em, we knows our power and we intends to use it."

"In what way do you mean?" I said.

She looked at me cunningly.

"Now you're spyin'. It's dirty work and I won't 'ave it 'ere.

You might be the Proctor hisself for all I cares--you're not going
to ferret nothink out of me."

Hereupon she rose with great dignity and plainly indicated that the
interview was at an end.

* * * * *

La Haute Cuisine.

"Cook; French;
age 38; wages £25-£30 week."--Morning Post.

* * * * *

TO THE DEATH.

[According
to the papers, two Frenchmen have agreed to fight a duel in aeroplanes.]

"Cauliflower!"
shrieked Gaspard Volauvent across the little table in the estaminet.
His face bristled with rage.

"Serpent!" replied Jacques Rissolo,
bristling with equal dexterity.

The two stout little men glared ferociously
at each other. And does he expect me to give them to him?'

'Well--I rather think he does. That is, not to give them, of course; you don't suppose he wants
you to make him a present of money. But he wants you to accommodate him with the price of them.
You can either do that, or let him have so many of your own; it will be as broad as it is long;
and he'll give you his note of hand for the amount.'

Now it was well known among the acquaintance of the Scott family, that the note of hand of
the Honourable Captain Val was not worth the paper on which it was written.

Alaric was so astonished at this monstrous request, coming as it did after such a conversation,
that he did not well know how to take it.

Was Undy mad, or was he in joke? What man in his senses would think of lending six or seven
hundred pounds to Val Scott! 'I suppose you are in jest,' said he, somewhat bitterly.

'I never was more in earnest in my life,' said Undy. 'I'll just explain how the matter is;
and as you are sharp enough, you'll see at once that you had better oblige him. Val, you know,
is always hard up; he can't touch a shilling of that woman's money, and just at present he
has none of his own. So he came to me this morning to raise the wind.'

'And you are kind enough to pass him on to me.'

'Listen a moment. I did not do anything of the kind. I never lend money to Val. It's a principle
with me not to do so, and he knows it.'

'Then just tell him that my principles in this respect are identical with your own.'

'That's all very well; and you may tell him so yourself, if you like it; but hear first of
all what his arguments are. Of course I told him I could do nothing for him. 'But,' said he,
'you can get Tudor to do it.' I told him, of course, that I could do nothing of the kind. 'Oh!'
said Val, 'I know the game you are both playing. I know all about Clem's money.' Val, you know,
never says much. He was playing pool at the time, at the club; but he came back after his stroke,
and whispered to me--'You and Tudor must let me have 250 of those shares, and then it'll be
all right.' Now Val, you know, is a most determined fellow.

Alaric, when he heard this, looked up into his companion's face to see whether he was talking
to the Evil One himself. Oh, what a net of ruin was closing round him!--how inextricable were
the toils into which he had fallen!

'After all,' continued Undy,' what he asks is not much, and I really think you should do it
for him. He is quite willing to give you his assistance at Strathbogy, and he is entitled to
some accommodation.'

'Some accommodation!' repeated Alaric, almost lost in the consideration of his own misery.

'Yes; I really think he is. And, Tudor, you may be sure of this, you know; you will be quite
safe with him. Val is the very soul of honour. Do this for him, and you'll hear no more about
it. You may be quite sure he'll ask for nothing further, and that he'll never say a word to
annoy you. He's devilish honourable is Val; no man can be more so; though, perhaps, you wouldn't
think it.'

'Devilish honourable!' said Alaric. 'Only he would like to have a bribe.'

'A bribe!' said Scott. 'Come, my dear fellow, don't you make an ass of yourself. Val is like
the rest of us; when money is going, he likes to have a share of it. If you come to that, every
man who is paid either for talking or for not talking is bribed.'

'I don't know that I ever heard of a much clearer case of a bribe than this which you now demand
for your brother.'

'Bribe or no bribe,' said Undy, looking at his watch, 'I strongly advise you to do for him
what he asks; it will be better for all of us. And let me give you another piece of advice:
never use hard words among friends. Do you remember the Mary Janes which Manylodes brought
for you in his pocket to the hotel at Tavistock?' Here Alaric turned as pale as a spectre.
'Don't talk of bribes, my dear fellow. We are all of us giving and taking bribes from our cradles
to our graves; but men of the world generally call them by some prettier names. Now, if you
are not desirous to throw your cards up altogether, get these shares for Val, and let him or
me have them to-morrow morning.' And so saying Undy disappeared into the House, through the
side door out of the hall, which is appropriated to the use of honourable members.

And then Alaric was left alone. He had never hitherto realized the true facts of the position
in which he had placed himself; but now he did so. He was in the hands of these men, these
miscreants, these devils; he was completely at their mercy, and he already felt that they were
as devoid of mercy as they were of justice. A cold sweat broke out all over him, and he continued
walking up and down the hall, ignorant as to where he was and what he was doing, almost thoughtless,
stunned, as it were, by his misery and the conviction that he was a ruined man. He had remained
there an hour after Undy had left him, before he roused himself sufficiently to leave the hall
and think of returning home. It was then seven o'clock, and he remembered that he had asked
his cousin to dine with him. He got into a cab, therefore, and desired to be driven home.

What was he to do? On one point he instantly made up his mind. He would not give one shilling
to Captain Val; he would not advance another shilling to Undy; and he would at once sell out
his own shares, and make such immediate restitution as might now be in his power. The mention
of Manylodes and the mining shares had come home to him with frightful reality, and nearly
stunned him. What right, indeed, had he to talk of bribes with scorn--he who so early in his
own life had allowed himself to be bought? How could he condemn the itching palm of such a
one as Val Scott--he who had been so ready to open his own when he had been tempted by no want,
by no poverty?

He would give nothing to Captain Val to bribe him to silence. He knew that if he did so, he
would be a slave for ever. The appetite of such a shark as that, when once he has tasted blood,
is unappeasable. There is nothing so ruinous as buying the silence of a rogue who has a secret.

What you buy you never possess; and the price that is once paid must be repaid again and again,
as often as the rogue may demand it. Any alternative must be better than this.

And yet what other alternative was there? He did not doubt that Val, when disappointed of his
prey, would reveal whatever he might know to his wife, or to his stepson. Then there would
be nothing for Alaric but confession and ruin. And how could he believe what Undy Scott had
told him? Who else could have given information against him but Undy himself? Who else could
have put up so heavily stupid a man as Captain Scott to make such a demand? Was it not clear
that his own colleague, his own partner, his own intimate associate, Undy Scott himself, was
positively working out his ruin? Where were now his high hopes, where now his seat in Parliament,
his authority at the board, his proud name, his soaring ambition, his constant watchword? 'Excelsior'
--ah me--no! no longer 'Excelsior'; but he thought of the cells of Newgate, of convict prisons,
and then of his young wife and of his baby.

He made an effort to assume his ordinary demeanour, and partially succeeded. He went at once
up to his drawing-room, and there he found Charley and Gertrude waiting dinner for him; luckily
he had no other guests.

'Are you ill, Alaric?' said Gertrude, directly she saw him.

'Ill! No,' said he; 'only fagged, dearest; fagged and worried, and badgered and bored; but,
thank God, not ill;' and he endeavoured to put on his usual face, and speak in his usual tone.
'I have kept you waiting most unmercifully for your dinner, Charley; but then I know you navvies
always lunch on mutton chops.'

'Oh, I am not particularly in a hurry,' said Charley; 'but I deny the lunch. This has been
a bad season for mutton chops in the neighbourhood of Somerset House; somehow they have not
grown this year.'

Alaric ran up to prepare for dinner, and his wife followed him.

'Oh! Alaric,' said she, 'you are so pale: what is the matter? Do tell me,' and she put her
arm through his, took hold of his hand, and looked up into his face.

'The matter! Nothing is the matter--a man can't always be grinning;' and he gently shook her
off, and walked through their bedroom to his own dressing-room. Having entered it he shut the
door, and then, sitting down, bowed his head upon a small table and buried it in his hands.
All the world seemed to go round and round with him; he was giddy, and he felt that he could
not stand.

Gertrude paused a moment in the bedroom to consider, and then followed him. 'What is it you
want?' said he, as soon as he heard the handle turn, 'do leave me alone for one moment. I am
fagged with the heat, and I want one minute's rest.'

'Oh, Alaric, I see you are ill,' said she. 'For God's sake do not send me from you,' and coming
into the room she knelt down beside his chair. 'I know you are suffering, Alaric; do let me
do something for you.'

He longed to tell her everything. He panted to share his sorrows with one other bosom; to have
one near him to whom he could speak openly of everything, to have one counsellor in his trouble.
In that moment he all but resolved to disclose everything to her, but at last he found that
he could not do it. Charley was there waiting for his dinner; and were he now to tell his secret
to his wife, neither of them, neither he nor she, would be able to act the host or hostess.
If done at all, it could not at any rate be done at the present moment.

'I am better now,' said he, giving a long and deep sigh; and then he threw his arms round his
wife and passionately embraced her. 'My own angel, my best, best love, how much too good or
much too noble you are for such a husband as I am!'

'I wish I could be good enough for you,' she replied, as she began to arrange his things for
dressing. 'You are so tired, dearest; wash your hands and come down--don't trouble yourself
to dress this evening; unless, indeed, you are going out again.'

'Gertrude,' said he, 'if there be a soul on earth that has not in it a spark of what is good
or generous, it is the soul of Undy Scott;' and so saying he began the operations of his toilet.

Now Gertrude had never liked Undy Scott; she had attributed to him whatever faults her husband
might have as a husband; and at the present moment she was not inclined to fight for any of
the Scott family.

'He is a very worldly man, I think,' said she.

'Worldly!--no--but hellish,' said Alaric; 'hellish, and damnable, and fiendish.'

'Oh, Alaric, what has he done?'

'Never mind; I cannot tell you; he has done nothing. It is not that he has done anything, or
can do anything to me--but his heart--but never mind--I wish--I wish I had never seen him.'

'Alaric, if it be about money tell me the worst, and I'll bear it without a murmur. As long
as you are well I care for nothing else--have you given up your place?'

'No, dearest, no; I can keep my place. It is nothing about that. I have lost no money; I have
rather made money. It is the ingratitude of that man which almost kills me. But come, dearest,
we will go down to Charley. And Gertrude, mind this, be quite civil to Mrs. Val at present.
We will break from the whole set before long; but in the meantime I would have you be very
civil to Mrs. Val.'

And so they went down to dinner, and Alaric, after taking a glass of wine, played his part
almost as though he had no weight upon his soul. After dinner he drank freely, and as he drank
his courage rose. 'Why should I tell her?' he said to himself as he went to bed. 'The chances
are that all will yet go well.'

CHAPTER XXXV

MRS. VAL'S NEW CARRIAGE

On the next morning Alaric went to his office without speaking further as to the trouble on
his mind, and endeavoured to comfort himself as best he might as he walked down to his office.
Then he had also to decide whether it would better suit his purpose to sell out at once and
pay up every shilling that he could, or whether he would hold on, and hope that Undy's predictions
would be fulfilled, and that the bridge shares would go on rising till they would sell for
all that was required of him.

Unfortunate man! what would he have given now to change his position for Norman's single clerkship,
or even for Charley's comparative poverty!

Gertrude stayed within all day; but not all day in solitude. About four in the afternoon the
Hon. Mrs. Val called, and with her came her daughter Clem, now Madame Jaquetanape, and the
two Misses Neverbend. M. Jaquetanape had since his marriage made himself very agreeable to
his honourable mother-in-law, so much so that he now occupied the place in her good graces
which Undy had formerly filled, and which after Undy's reign had fallen to Alaric's lot. Mrs.
Val liked to have about her some confidential gentleman; and as she never thought of placing
her confidence in her husband, she was prone to select first one man and then another as her
taste and interest dictated. Immediately after their marriage, Victoire and Clem had consented
to join housekeeping with their parent. Nothing could be more pleasant than this; their income
was unembarrassed, and Mrs. Val, for the first time in her life, was able to set up her carriage.
Among the effects arising from this cause, the female Neverbends, who had lately been worshippers
of Gertrude, veered round in their idolatry, and paid their vows before Mrs. Val's new yellow
panels. In this new carriage now came the four ladies to pay a morning visit to Mrs. Tudor.
It was wonderful to see into how small dimensions the Misses Neverbend had contrived to pack,
not themselves, but their crinoline.

As has before been hinted, Gertrude did not love Mrs. Val; nor did she love Clem the danseuse;
nor did she specially love the Misses Neverbend. They were all of a class essentially different
from that in which she had been brought up; and, moreover, Mrs. Val was not content to allow
Gertrude into her set without ruling over her, or at any rate patronizing her. Gertrude had
borne with them all for her husband's sake; and was contented to do so yet for a while longer,
but she thought in her heart that she would be able to draw some consolation from her husband's
misfortune if it should be the means of freeing her from Mrs. Val.

'Oh, my dear,' said Mrs. Val, throwing herself down into a sofa as though she were exhausted--'what
a dreadful journey it is to you up here! How those poor horses will stand it this weather I
don't know, but it nearly kills me; it does indeed.' The Tudors, as has been said, lived in
one of the quiet streets of Westbournia, not exactly looking into Hyde Park, but very near
to it; Mrs. Val, on the other hand, lived in Ebury Street, Pimlico; her house was much inferior
to that of the Tudors; it was small, ill built, and afflicted with all the evils which bad
drainage and bad ventilation can produce; but then it was reckoned to be within the precincts
of Belgravia, and was only five minutes' walk from Buckingham Palace. Mrs. Val, therefore,
had fair ground for twitting her dear friend with living so far away from the limits of fashion.
'You really must come down somewhat nearer to the world; indeed you must, my dear,' said the
Hon. Mrs. Val.

'We are thinking of moving; but then we are talking of going to St. John's Wood, or Islington,'
said Gertrude, wickedly.

'Islington!' said the Honourable Mrs. Val, nearly fainting.

'Is not Islington and St. Giles' the same place?' asked the innocent Clem, with some malice,
however, to counterbalance her innocence.

'O no!' said Lactimel. 'St Giles' is where the poor wretched starving Irish dwell. Their utter
misery in the middle of this rich metropolis is a crying disgrace to the Prime Minister.' Poor
Badger, how much he has to bear! 'Only think,' continued Lactimel, with a soft pathetic drawl,
'they have none to feed them, none to clothe them, none to do for them!'

'It is a great question,' said Ugolina, 'whether promiscuous charity is a blessing or a curse.
It is probably the greatest question of the age. I myself am inclined to think--'

'But, ma,' said Madame Jaquetanape, 'Mrs. Tudor doesn't really mean that she is going to live
at St. Giles', does she?'

'I said Islington,' said Gertrude. 'We may go to St. Giles' next, perhaps.' Had she known all,
how dreadful would such jokes have been to her!

Mrs. Val saw that she was being quizzed, and, not liking it, changed the conversation. 'Ugolina,'
said she, 'might I trouble you to look out of the front window? I hope those stupid men of
mine are not letting the horses stand still. They were so warm coming here, that they will
be sure to catch cold.' The stupid men, however, were round the corner at the public-house,
and Ugolina could only report that as she did not see them she supposed the horses were walking
about.

'And so,' said Mrs. Val, 'Mr. Tudor is thinking of resigning his place at the Civil Service
Board, and standing for that borough of Lord Gaberlunzie's, in Aberdeenshire?'

'I really cannot say,' said Gertrude; 'but I believe he has some idea of going into Parliament.
I rather believe he will continue to hold his place.'

'Oh, that I know to be impossible! I was told that by a gentleman who has been much longer
in the service than Mr. Tudor, and who understands all its bearings.' She here alluded to Fidus
Neverbend.

'I cannot say,' said Gertrude. 'I do not think Mr. Tudor has quite made up his mind yet.'

'Well, my dear, I'll tell you fairly what I think about it. You know the regard I have for
you and Mr. Tudor. He, too, is Clementina's trustee; that is to say, her fortune is partly
consigned to his care; so I cannot but have a very great interest about him, and be very anxious
that he should do well. Now, my dear, I'll tell you fairly what I think, and what all the world
is saying. He ought not to think of Parliament. He ought not, indeed, my dear. I speak for
your sake, and your child's. He is not a man of fortune, and he ought not to think of Parliament.
He has a very fine situation, and he really should be contented.'

This was intolerable to Gertrude. She felt that she must put Mrs. Val down, and yet she hardly
knew how to do it without being absolutely rude; whereas her husband had specially begged her
to be civil to this woman at present. 'Oh,' said she, with a slight smile, 'Mr. Tudor will
be able to take care of himself; you will find, I hope, that there is no cause for uneasiness.'

'Well, I hope not, I am sure I hope not,' said Mrs. Val, looking very grave. 'But I tell you
fairly that the confidence which we all have in your husband will be much shaken if he does
anything rash. He should think of this, you know. He has no private fortune to back him; we
must remember that.'

Gertrude became very red in the face; but she would not trust herself to answer Mrs. Val at
the spur of the moment.

'It makes such a difference, when one has got no private fortune,' said Madame Jaquetanape,
the heiress. 'Does it not, Lactimel?'

'Oh, indeed it does,' said Lactimel. 'I wish every one had a private fortune; it would be so
nice, wouldn't it?'

'There would be very little poetry in the world if you were to banish poverty,' said Ugolina.
'Poverty may be called the parent of poetry. Look at Milton, how poor he was; and Homer, he
begged his bread.'

'But Lord Byron was not a beggar,' said Clem, contemptuously.

'I do hope Mr. Tudor will think of what he is doing,' continued Mrs. Val. 'It is certainly
most good-natured and most disinterested of my dear father-in-law, Lord Gaberlunzie, to place
his borough at Mr. Tudor's disposal. It is just like him, dear good old nobleman. But, my dear,
it will be a thousand pities if Mr. Tudor should be led on by his lordship's kindness to bring
about his own ruin.'

Mrs. Val had once in her life seen his good-natured lordship. Soon after her marriage she had
insisted on Captain Val taking her down to the family mansion. She stayed there one night,
and then left it, and since that had shown no further desire to visit Cauldkail Castle. She
did not the less delight to talk about her dear good father-in-law, the lord. Why should she
give his son Val board and lodging, but that she might be enabled to do so? She was not the
woman to buy an article, and not make of it all the use of which it might be capable.

'Pray do not concern yourself,' said Gertrude. 'I can assure you Mr. Tudor will manage very
well for himself--but should any misfortune happen to him he will not, you may be certain,
attribute it to Lord Gaberlunzie.'

'I am told that Sir Gregory is most opposed to it,' continued Mrs. Val. 'I heard that from
Mr. Neverbend, who is altogether in Sir Gregory's confidence--did not you, my dears?' and she
turned round to the sisters of Fidus for confirmation.

'I heard my brother say that as Mr. Tudor's office is not parliamentary but permanent, and
as he has to attend from ten till four----'

'Alaric has not to attend from ten till four,' said Gertrude, who could not endure the idea
that her husband should be ranked with common clerks, like Fidus Neverbend.

'Oh, I didn't know,' said Lactimel, meekly. 'Perhaps Fidus only meant that as it is one of
those offices where the people have something to do, the commissioners couldn't be in their
offices and in Parliament at the same time.'

'I did understand,' said Ugolina, 'that Sir Gregory Hardlines had put his veto upon it; but
I must confess that it is a subject which I have not sufficiently studied to enable me----'

'It's L1,200 a year, isn't it?' asked the bride.

'Twelve hundred pounds a year,' said her mother--'a very serious consideration when there is
no private fortune to back it, on either side. Now if it were Victoire----'

'He couldn't sit in Parliament, ma, because he's an alien--only for that I shouldn't think
of his doing anything else.'

'Perhaps that may be altered before long,' said Lactimel, graciously.

'If Jews are to be admitted,' said Ugolina, 'who certainly belong to an alien nation; a nation
expressly set apart and separated from all people--a peculiar nation distinct from all others,
I for one cannot discern----'

What Ugolina could or could not discern about the Jews was communicated perhaps to Madame Jaquetanape
or to Lactimel, but not to Gertrude or to Mrs. Val; for the latter, taking Gertrude apart into
a corner as it were of the sofa, began confidentially to repeat to her her fears about her husband.

'I see, my dear,' said she, 'that you don't like my speaking about it.'

'Upon my word,' said Gertrude, 'I am very indifferent about it. But would it not be better
if you said what you have to say to my husband?'

'I intend to do so. I intend to do that also. But I know that a wife ought to have influence
over her husband, and I believe that you have influence over yours.'

'Not the least,' said Gertrude, who was determined to contradict Mrs. Val in everything.

'I am sorry to hear it,' said Mrs. Val, who among all her excellent acquirements, did not possess
that specially excellent one of understanding repartee. 'I am very sorry to hear it, and I
shall certainly speak to him the more seriously on that account. I think I have some influence
over him; at any rate I ought to have.'

'I dare say you have,' said Gertrude; 'Alaric always says that no experience is worth anything
that is not obtained by years.'

Mrs. Val at least understood this, and continued her lecture with some additional severity.
'Well, my dear, I am glad he has so much wisdom. But what I was going to say is this: you know
how much we have at stake with Mr. Tudor--what a very large sum of Clementina's money lies
in his hands. Now I really should not have consented to the arrangement had I thought it possible
that Mr. Tudor would have given up his income with the idea of going into Parliament. It wouldn't
have been right or prudent of me to do so. I have the greatest opinion of your husband's talents
and judgement, or I should not of course have entrusted him with the management of Clementina's
fortune; but I really shall think it right to make some change if this project of his goes on.'

'Why, what is it you suspect?' said Gertrude. 'Do you think that Mr. Tudor intends to use your
daughter's income if he loses a portion of his own? I never heard such a thing in my life.'

'Hush! my dear--gently--I would not for worlds let Clementina hear a word of this; it might
disturb her young happiness. She is so charmed with her husband; her married life is so fortunate;
Victoire is so--so--so everything that we all wish, that I would not for the world breathe
in her hearing a shadow of a suspicion.'

'Good gracious! Mrs. Scott, what do you mean? Suspicion!--what suspicion? Do you suspect my
husband of robbing you?' Oh, Gertrude; poor Gertrude! she was doomed to know it all before long.

'Oh dear, no,' said Mrs. Val; 'nothing of the kind, I assure you. Of course we suspect nothing
of the sort. But one does like to have one's money in safe hands. Of course Mr. Tudor wouldn't
have been chosen as trustee if he hadn't had a good income of his own; and look here, my dear,'--and
Mrs. Val whispered very confidentially, --'Mr. Tudor we all know is greatly concerned in this
bridge that the committee is sitting about; and he and my brother-in-law, Undecimus, are always
dealing in shares. Gentlemen do, I know; and therefore I don't say that there is anything against
it. But considering all, I hope Mr. Tudor won't take it ill if we propose to change our trustee.'

'I am very certain he will not,' said Gertrude. 'It is a laborious business, and he will be
glad enough to be rid of it. When he was asked to accept it, he thought it would be ill- natured
to refuse; I am certain, however, he will be very glad to give up the work to any other person
who may be appointed. I will be sure to tell him this evening what you have said.'

'You need not trouble yourself to do that,' said Mrs. Val. 'I shall see him myself before long.'

'It will be no trouble,' said Gertrude, very indignantly, for she was very angry, and had,
as she thought, great cause for anger. 'I shall certainly think it my duty to do so after what
has passed. Of course you will now take steps to relieve him as soon as possible.'

'You have taken me up a great deal too quick, my dear,' said Mrs. Val. 'I did not intend----'

'Oh--one can't be too quick on such a matter as this,' said Gertrude. 'When confidence is once
lost between two persons it is better that the connexion which has grown out of confidence
should be put an end to as soon as possible.'

'Lost confidence! I said nothing about lost confidence!'

'Alaric will so understand it, I am quite sure; at any rate I will tell him what you have said.
Suspicion indeed! who has dared to suspect him of anything not honest or upright?'

Gertrude's eyes flashed with anger as she vindicated her absent lord. Mrs. Val had been speaking
with bated breath, so that no one had heard her but she to whom she was speaking; but Gertrude
had been unable so to confine her answers, and as she made her last reply Madame Jaquetanape
and the Misses Neverbend were all ears.

'Ha, ha, ha!' laughed Mrs. Val. 'Upon my word, my dear, it is amusing to hear you take it up.
However, I assure you I meant nothing but what was kind and friendly. Come, Clementina, we
have been sitting here a most unconscionable time. Will you allow me, my dear, to ring for
my carriage?'

'Mamma,' said Clem, 'have you asked Mrs. Tudor to our little dance?'

'No, my dear; I have left that for you to do. It's your party, you know--but I sincerely hope
Mrs. Tudor will come.'

'Oh yes,' said Clementina, the tongue of whose eloquence was now loosened. 'You must come,
Mrs. Tudor; indeed you must. It will be so charming; just a few nice people, you know, and
nothing more.'

'Thank you,' said Gertrude; 'but I never dance now.' She had inwardly resolved that nothing
should ever induce her again to enter Mrs. Val's house.

'Oh, but you must come,' said Clementina. 'It will be so charming. We only mean to dance one
kind of dance--that new thing they have just brought over from Spain--the Contrabandista. It
is a polka step, only very quick, and you take every other turn by yourself; so you have to
take your partner up and let him go as quick as possible. You don't know how charming it is,
and it will be all the rage. We are to have the music out in the street, just as they have
in Spain.'

'It would be much too difficult for me,' said Gertrude.

'It is difficult,' said the enthusiastic Clem; 'but Victoire gives us lessons in it everyday
from twelve to two--doesn't he, Ugolina?'

'I'm afraid I shouldn't have time to go to school,' said Gertrude.

'Oh, it doesn't take much time--six or seven or eight lessons will do it pretty well. I have
almost learnt it already, and Ugolina is coming on very fast. Lactimel is not quite so perfect.
She has learnt the step, but she cannot bring herself to let Victoire go quick enough. Do come,
and bring Mr. Tudor with you.'

'As he has not to attend from ten till four, he could come and take lessons too,' said Lactimel,
who, now that she was no longer a hanger-on of Gertrude's, could afford to have her little revenge.

'That would be delightful,' said Clem. 'Mr. Charles Tudor does come in sometimes at twelve
o'clock, and I think he does it almost as well as Victoire.'

Gertrude, however, would go neither to the rehearsals nor to the finished performance; and
as Mrs. Val's men had by this time been induced to leave the beershop, the whole party went
away, leaving Gertrude to her meditations.

CHAPTER XXXVI

TICKLISH STOCK

Alaric returned from his office worn and almost as wretched as he had been on the day before.
He had spent a miserable day. In the morning Sir Gregory had asked him whether he had finally
made up his mind to address the electors of Strathbogy. 'No, not finally,' said Alaric, 'but
I think I shall do so.'

'Then I must tell you, Tudor,' said Sir Gregory, speaking more in sorrow than in anger, 'that
you will not have my countenance. I cannot but think also that you are behaving with ingratitude.'
Alaric prepared to make some petulant answer, but Sir Gregory, in the meantime, left the room.

Every one was falling away from him. He felt inclined to rush after Sir Gregory, and promise
to be guided in this matter solely by him, but his pride prevented him: though he was no longer
sanguine and confident as he had been a week ago, still his ambition was high. 'Those who play
brag must brag it out, or they will lose their money.' This had been said by Undy; but it was
not the less true on that account. Alaric felt that he was playing brag, and that his only
game was to brag it out.

He walked home slowly through the Parks. His office and house were so circumstanced that, though
they were some two miles distant, he could walk from one to the other almost without taking
his feet off the grass. This had been the cause of great enjoyment to him; but now he sauntered
on with his hands behind his back, staring straight before him, with fixed eyes, going by his
accustomed route, but never thinking for a moment where he was. The tune was gone when he could
watch the gambols of children, smile at the courtships of nursery-maids, watch the changes
in the dark foliage of the trees, and bend from his direct path hither and thither to catch
the effects of distant buildings, and make for his eye half-rural landscapes in the middle
of the metropolis. No landscapes had beauty for him now; the gambols even of his own baby were
unattractive to him; leaves might bud forth and nourish and fall without his notice. How went
the share-market? that was the only question that had an interest for him. The dallyings of
Capel Court were the only courtships that he now cared to watch.

And with what a terribly eager eye had he now to watch them! If his shares went up quickly,
at once, with an unprecedented success, he might possibly be saved. That was all. But if they
did not--! Such was the phase of life under which at the present moment it behoved him to exist.

And then, when he reached his home, how was he welcomed? With all the fond love which a loving
wife can show; so much at least was his; but before he had felt the sweetness of her caresses,
before he had acknowledged how great was the treasure that he possessed, forth from her eager
lips had come the whole tale of Mrs. Val's impertinence.

'I will never see her again, Alaric! never; she talked of her daughter's money, and said something
of suspicion!' Suspicion! Gertrude's eye again flashed fire with anger; and she all but stamped
with her little foot upon the ground. Suspicion! suspect him, her husband, the choice of her
heart, her Alaric, the human god whom she worshipped! suspect him of robbery! her lord, her
heart, her soul, the strong staff on which she leaned so securely, with such true feminine
confidence! Suspect him of common vile dishonesty!--'You will never ask me to see her again
--will you, Alaric?'

What was he to say to her? how was he to bear this? His heart yearned to tell her all; he longed
for the luxury of having one bosom to whom he could entrust his misery, his slight remaining
hope. But how could he himself, at one blow, by one word, destroy the high and polished shaft
on which she whom he loved had placed him? He could not do it. He would suffer by himself;
hope by himself, cease to hope by himself, and endure all, till either his sufferings or his
hopes should be over.

He had to pretend that he was indignant at Mrs. Val's interference; he had to counterfeit the
feelings of outraged honour, which was so natural to Gertrude. This he failed to do well. Had
he been truly honest--had that woman's suspicion really done him injustice--he would have received
his wife's tidings with grave displeasure, and have simply resolved to acquit himself as soon
as possible of the disagreeable trust which had been reposed in him. But such was not now his
conduct. He contented himself by calling Mrs. Val names, and pretended to laugh at her displeasure.

'But you will give up this trust, won't you?' said Gertrude.

'I will think about it,' said he. 'Before I do anything I must consult old Figgs. Things of
that kind can't be put out of their course by the spleen of an old woman like Mrs. Val.'

'Oh, Alaric, I do so wish you had had nothing to do with these Scotts!'

'So do I,' said he, bitterly; 'I hate them--but, Gertrude, don't talk about them now; my head
aches, and I am tired.'

He sat at home the whole evening; and though he was by no means gay, and hardly affectionate
in his demeanour to her, yet she could not but feel that some good effect had sprung from his
recent dislike to the Scotts, since it kept him at home with her. Lately he had generally spent
his evenings at his club. She longed to speak to him of his future career, of his proposed
seat in Parliament, of his office-work; but he gave her no encouragement to speak of such things,
and, as he pleaded that he was ill, she left him in quiet on the sofa.

On the next morning he again went to his office, and in the course of the morning a note was
brought to him from Undy. It ran as follows:--

'MY DEAR TUDOR,

'Is Val to have the shares? Let me have a line by the bearer.

'Yours ever,

'U. S.'

To this he replied by making an appointment to meet Undy before dinner at his own office.

At the time fixed Undy came, and was shown by the sole remaining messenger into Alaric's private
room. The two shook hands together in their accustomed way. Undy smiled good-humouredly, as
he always did; and Alaric maintained his usual composed and uncommunicative look.

'Well,' said Undy, sitting down, 'how about those shares?'

'I am glad you have come,' said Alaric, 'because I want to speak to you with some earnestness.'

'I am quite in earnest myself,' said Undy; 'and so, by G--, is Val. I never saw a fellow more
in earnest--nor yet apparently more hard up. I hope you have the shares ready, or else a cheque
for the amount.'

'Look here, Undy; if my doing this were the only means of saving both you and me from rotting
in gaol, by the Creator that made me I would not do it!'

'I don't know that it will have much effect upon me, one way or the other,' said Undy, coolly;
'but it seems to me to be the only way that can save yourself from some such fate. Shall I
tell you what the clauses are of this new bill about trust property?'

'I know the clauses well enough; I know my own position; and I know yours also.'

'D--- your impudence!' said Undy; 'how do you dare to league me with your villany? Have I been
the girl's trustee? have I drawn, or could I have drawn, a shilling of her money? I tell you,
Tudor, you are in the wrong box. You have one way of escape, and one only. I don't want to
ruin you; I'll save you if I can; I think you have treated the girl in a most shameful way,
nevertheless I'll save you if I can; but mark this, if this money be not at once produced I
cannot save you.'

Alaric felt that he was covered with cold perspiration. His courage did not fail him; he would
willingly have taken Undy by the throat, could his doing so have done himself or his cause
any good; but he felt that he was nearly overset by the cool deep villany of his companion.

'I have treated the girl badly--very badly,' he said, after a pause; 'whether or no you have
done so too I leave to your own conscience, if you have a conscience. I do not now mean to
accuse you; but you may know this for certain--my present anxiety is to restore to her that
which I have taken from her; and for no earthly consideration--not to save my own wife--will
I increase the deficiency.'

'Why, man, what nonsense you talk--as if I did not know all the time that you have your pocket
full of these shares.'

'Whatever I have, I hold for her. If I could succeed in getting out of your hands enough to
make up the full sum that I owe her--'

'You will succeed in getting nothing from me. When I borrowed L5,000 from you, it was not understood
that I was to be called upon for the money in three or four months' time.'

'Now look here, Scott; you have threatened me with ruin and a prison, and I will not say but
your threats may possibly prove true. It may be that I am ruined; but, if I fall, you shall
share my fall.'

'That's false,' said Undy. 'I am free to hold my head before the world, which you are not.
I have done nothing to bring me to shame.'

'Nothing to bring you to shame, and yet you would now have me give you a further portion of
this girl's money!'

'Nothing! I care nothing about the girl's money. I have not touched it, nor do I want to touch
it. I bring you a message from my brother; you have ample means of your own to comply with
his request.'

'Then tell your brother,' said Alaric, now losing all control over his temper--'tell your brother,
if indeed he have any part in this villany--tell your brother that if it were to save me from
the gallows, he should not have a shilling. I have done very badly in this matter; I have acted
shamefully, and I am ashamed, but----'

'Oh, I want to hear none of your rhapsodies,' said Undy. 'If you will not now do what I ask
you, I may as well go, and you may take the consequences;' and he lifted his hat as though
preparing to take his leave.

'But you shall hear me,' said Alaric, rising quickly from his seat, and standing between Undy
and the door. Undy very coolly walked to the bell and rang it. 'I have much to answer for,'
continued Alaric, 'but I would not have your sin on my soul, I would not be as black as you
are, though, by being so, I could save myself with certainty from all earthly punishment.'

As he finished, the messenger opened the door. 'Show Mr. Scott out,' said Alaric.

'By, by,' said Undy. 'You will probably hear from Mrs. Val and her daughter to-morrow,' and
so saying he walked jauntily along the passage, and went jauntily to his dinner at his club.
It was part of his philosophy that nothing should disturb the even tenor of his way, or interfere
with his animal comforts. He was at the present moment over head and ears in debt; he was playing
a game which, in all human probability, would end in his ruin; the ground was sinking beneath
his feet on every side; and yet he thoroughly enjoyed his dinner. Alaric could not make such
use of his philosophy. Undy Scott might be the worse man of the two, but he was the better
philosopher.

Not on the next day, or on the next, did Alaric hear from Mrs. Val, but on the following Monday
he got a note from her begging him to call in Ebury Street. She underscored every line of it
once or twice, and added, in a postscript, that he would, she was sure, at once acknowledge
the NECESSITY of her request, as she wished to communicate with him on the subject of her DAUGHTER'S
FORTUNE.

Alaric immediately sent an answer to her by a messenger. 'My dear Mrs. Scott,' said he, 'I
am very sorry that an engagement prevents my going to you this evening; but, as I judge by
your letter, and by what I have heard from Gertrude, that you are anxious about this trust
arrangement, I will call at ten to- morrow morning on my way to the office.'

Having written and dispatched this, he sat for an hour leaning with his elbows on the table
and his hands clasped, looking with apparent earnestness at the rows of books which stood inverted
before him, trying to make up his mind as to what step he should now take.

Not that he sat an hour undisturbed. Every five minutes some one would come knocking at the
door; the name of some aspirant to the Civil Service would be brought to him, or the card of
some influential gentleman desirous of having a little job perpetrated in favour of his own
peculiarly interesting, but perhaps not very highly-educated, young candidate. But on this
morning Alaric would see no one; to every such intruder he sent a reply that he was too deeply
engaged at the present moment to see any one. After one he would be at liberty, &c., &c.

And so he sat and looked at the books; but he could in nowise make up his mind. He could in
nowise bring himself even to try to make up his mind--that is, to make any true effort towards
doing so. His thoughts would run off from him, not into the happy outer world, but into a multitude
of noisy, unpleasant paths, all intimately connected with his present misery, but none of which
led him at all towards the conclusions at which he would fain arrive. He kept on reflecting
what Sir Gregory would think when he heard of it; what all those clerks would say at the Weights
and Measures, among whom he had held his head so high; what shouts there would be among the
navvies and other low pariahs of the service; how Harry Norman would exult--(but he did not
yet know Harry Norman);--how the Woodwards would weep; how Gertrude-- and then as he thought
of that he bowed his head, for he could no longer endure the open light of day. At one o'clock
he was no nearer to any decision than he had been when he reached his office.

At three he put himself into a cab, and was taken to the city. Oh, the city, the weary city,
where men go daily to look for money, but find none; where every heart is eaten up by an accursed
famishing after gold; where dark, gloomy banks come thick on each other, like the black, ugly
apertures to the realms below in a mining district, each of them a separate little pit- mouth
into hell. Alaric went into the city, and found that the shares were still rising. That imperturbable
witness was still in the chair at the committee, and men said that he was disgusting the members
by the impregnable endurance of his hostility. A man who could answer 2,250 questions without
admitting anything must be a liar! Such a one could convince no one! And so the shares went
on rising, rising, and rising, and Messrs. Blocks, Piles, and Cofferdam were buying up every
share; either doing that openly--or else selling on the sly.

Alaric found that he could at once realize L7,600. Were he to do this, there would be at any
rate seven-eighths of his ward's fortune secure.

Might he not, in such a case, calculate that even Mrs. Val's heart would be softened, and that
time would be allowed him to make up the small remainder? Oh, but in such case he must tell
Mrs. Val; and could he calculate on her forbearance? Might he not calculate with much more
certainty on her love of triumphing? Would he not be her slave if she had the keeping of his
secret? And why should he run so terrible a risk of destroying himself? Why should he confide
in Mrs. Val, and deprive himself of the power of ever holding up his head again, when, possibly,
he might still run out his course with full sails, and bring his vessel into port, giving no
knowledge to the world of the perilous state in which she had been thus ploughing the deep?
He need not, at any rate, tell everything to Mrs. Val at his coming visit on the morrow.

He consulted his broker with his easiest air of common concern as to his money; and the broker
gave him a dubious opinion. 'They may go a little higher, sir; indeed I think they will. But
they are ticklish stock, sir--uncommon ticklish. I should not like to hold many myself, sir.'
Alaric knew that the man was right; they were ticklish stock: but nevertheless he made up his
mind to hold on a little longer.

He then got into another cab and went back to his office; and as he went he began to bethink
himself to whom of all his friends he might apply for such a loan as would enable him to make
up this sum of money, if he sold his shares on the morrow. Captain Cuttwater was good for L1,000,
but he knew that he could not get more from him. It would be bad borrowing, he thought, from
Sir Gregory. Intimate as he had been with that great man, he knew nothing of his money concerns;
but he had always heard that Sir Gregory was a close man. Sir Warwick, his other colleague,
was in easy circumstances; but then he had never been intimate with Sir Warwick. Norman--ah,
if he had known Norman now, Norman would have pulled him through; but hope in that quarter
there was, of course, none. Norman was gone, and Norman's place had been filled by Undy Scott!
What could be done with Undy Scott he had already tried. Fidus Neverbend! he had a little money
saved; but Fidus was not the man to do anything without security. He, he, Alaric Tudor, he,
whose credit had stood, did stand, so high, did not know where to borrow, how to raise a thousand
pounds; and yet he felt that had he not wanted it so sorely, he could have gotten it easily.

He was in a bad state for work when he got back to the office on that day. He was flurried,
ill at ease, wretched, all but distracted; nevertheless he went rigidly to it, and remained
there till late in the evening. He was a man generally blessed with excellent health; but now
he suddenly found himself ill, and all but unable to accomplish the task which he had prescribed
to himself. His head was heavy and his eyes weak, and he could not bring himself to think of
the papers which lay before him.

Then at last he went home, and had another sad and solitary walk across the Parks, during which
he vainly tried to rally himself again, and collect his energies for the work which he had
to do. It was in such emergencies as this that he knew that it most behoved a man to fall back
upon what manliness there might be within him; now was the time for him to be true to himself;
he had often felt proud of his own energy of purpose; and now was the opportunity for him to
use such energy, if his pride in this respect had not been all in vain.

Such were the lessons with which he endeavoured to strengthen himself, but it was in vain;
he could not feel courageous--he could not feel hopeful--he could not do other than despair.
When he got home, he again prostrated himself, again declared himself ill, again buried his
face in his hands, and answered the affection of his wife by saying that a man could not always
be cheerful, could not always laugh. Gertrude, though she was very far indeed from guessing
the truth, felt that something extraordinary was the matter, and knew that her husband's uneasiness
was connected with the Scotts.

He came down to dinner, and though he ate but little, he drank glass after glass of sherry.
He thus gave himself courage to go out in the evening and face the world at his club. He found
Undy there as he expected, but he had no conversation with him, though they did not absolutely
cut each other. Alaric fancied that men stared at him, and sat apart by himself, afraid to
stand up among talking circles, or to put himself forward as it was his wont to do. He himself
avoided other men, and then felt that others were avoiding him. He took up one evening paper
after another, pretending to read them, but hardly noticing a word that came beneath his eye:
at last, however, a name struck him which riveted his attention, and he read the following
paragraph, which was among many others, containing information as to the coming elections.

'STRATHBOGY.--We hear that Lord Gaberlunzie's eldest son will retire from this borough, and
that his place will be filled by his brother, the Honourable Captain Valentine Scott. The family
have been so long connected with Strathbogy by ties of friendship and near neighbourhood, and
the mutual alliance has been so much to the taste of both parties, that no severance need be
anticipated.'

Alaric's first emotion was one of anger at the whole Scott tribe, and his first resolve was
to go down to Strathbogy and beat that inanimate fool, Captain Val, on his own ground; but
he was not long in reflecting that, under his present circumstances, it would be madness in
him to bring his name prominently forward in any quarrel with the Scott family. This disappointment
he might at any rate bear; it would be well for him if this were all. He put the paper down
with an affected air of easy composure, and walked home through the glaring gas-lights, still
trying to think--still trying, but in vain, to come to some definite resolve.

And then on the following morning he went off to call on Mrs. Val. He had as yet told Gertrude
nothing. When she asked him what made him start so early, he merely replied that he had business
to do on his road. As lie went, he had considerable doubt whether or no it would be better
for him to break his word to Mrs. Val, and not go near her at all. In such event he might be
sure that she would at once go to work and do her worst; but, nevertheless, he would gain a
day, or probably two, and one or two days might do all that he required; whereas he could not
see Mrs. Val without giving her some explanation, which if false would be discovered to be
false, and if true would be self-condemnatory. He again, however, failed to decide, and at
last knocked at Mrs. Val's door merely because he found himself there.

He was shown up into the drawing-room, and found, of course, Mrs. Val seated on a sofa; and
he also found, which was not at all of course, Captain Val, on a chair on one side of the table,
and M. Victoire Jaquetanape on the other. Mrs. Val shook hands with him much in her usual way,
but still with an air of importance in her face; the Frenchman was delighted to see M. Tudere,
and the Honourable Val got up from his chair, said 'How do?' and then sat down again.

'I requested you to call, Mr. Tudor,' said Mrs. Val, opening her tale in a most ceremonious
manner, 'because we all think it necessary to know somewhat more than has yet been told to
us of the manner in which my daughter's money has been invested.'

Captain Val wiped his moustache with the middle finger of his right hand, by way of saying
that he quite assented to his wife's proposition; and Victoire remarked that 'Madame was a
leetle anxious, just a leetle anxious; not that anything could be wrong with M. Tudere, but
because she was one excellent mamma.'

'I thought you knew, Mrs. Scott,' said Alaric, 'that your daughter's money is in the funds.'

'Then I may understand clearly that none of the amount so invested has been sold out or otherwise
appropriated by you.' said Mrs. Val.

'Will you allow me to inquire what has given rise to these questions just at the present moment?'
asked Alaric.

'Yes, certainly,' said Mrs. Val; 'rumours have reached my husband--rumours which, I am happy
to say, I do not believe--that my daughter's money has been used for purposes of speculation.'
Whereupon Captain Val again wiped his upper lip, but did not find it necessary to speak.

'May I venture to ask Captain Scott from what source such rumours have reached him!'

'Ah-ha-what source? d---- lies, very likely; d---- lies, I dare say; but people do talk--eh--you
know,' so much the eloquent embryo member for Strathbogy vouchsafed.

 'And therefore, Mr. Tudor, you mustn't be surprised that we
should ask you this question.'

'It is one simple, simple question,' said Victoire, 'and if M. Tudere will say that it is all
right, I, for myself, will be satisfied.' The amiable Victoire, to tell the truth, was still
quite satisfied to leave his wife's income in Alaric's hands, and would not have been at all
satisfied to remove it to the hands of his respected step-papa-in-law, or even his admired
mamma-in-law.

'When I undertook this trust,' said Alaric, 'which I did with considerable hesitation, I certainly
did not expect to be subjected to any such cross-examination as this. I consider such questions
as insults, and therefore I shall refuse to answer them. You, Mrs. Scott, have of course a
right to look after your daughter's interests, as has M. Jaquetanape to look after those of
his wife; but I will not acknowledge that Captain Scott has any such right whatsoever, nor
can I think that his conduct in this matter is disinterested;' and as he spoke he looked at
Captain Val, but he might just as well have looked at the door; Captain Val only wiped his
moustache with his finger once more. 'My answer to your inquiries, Mrs. Scott, is this--I shall
not condescend to go into any details as to Madame Jaquetanape 's fortune with anyone but my
co-trustee. I shall, however, on Saturday next, be ready to give up my trust to any other person
who may be legally appointed to receive it, and will then produce all the property that has
been entrusted to my keeping:' and so saying, Alaric got up and took his hat as though to depart.

'And do you mean to say, Mr. Tudor, that you will not answer my question?' said Mrs. Scott.

'I mean to say, most positively, that I will answer no questions,' said Alaric.

'Oh, confound, not do at all; d----,' said the captain. 'The girl's money all gone, and you
won't answer questions!'

'No!' shouted Alaric, walking across the room till he closely confronted the captain. 'No--no--I
will answer no questions that may be asked in your hearing. But that your wife's presence protects
you, I would kick you down your own stairs before me.'

Captain Val retreated a step--he could retreat no more--and wiped his moustache with both hands
at once. Mrs. Val screamed. Victoire took hold of the back of a chair, as though he thought
it well that he should be armed in the general battle that was to ensue; and Alaric, without
further speech, walked out of the room, and went away to his office.

'So you have given up Strathbogy?' said Sir Gregory to him, in the course of the day.

'I think I have,' said Alaric; 'considering all things, I believe it will be the best for me
to do so.'

'Not a doubt of it,' said Sir Gregory--'not a doubt of it, my dear fellow;' and then Sir Gregory
began to evince, by the cordiality of his official confidence, that he had fully taken Alaric
back into his good graces. It was nothing to him that Strathbogy had given up Alaric instead
of Alaric giving up Strathbogy. He was sufficiently pleased at knowing that the danger of his
being supplanted by his own junior was over.

And then Alaric again went into the weary city, again made inquiries about his shares, and
again returned to his office, and thence to his home.

But on his return to his office, he found lying on his table a note in Undy's handwriting,
but not signed, in which he was informed that things would yet be well, if the required shares
should be forthcoming on the following day.

He crumpled the note tight in his hand, and was about to fling it among the waste paper, but
in a moment he thought better of it, and smoothing the paper straight, he folded it, and laid
it carefully on his desk.

That day, on his visit into the city, he had found that the bridge shares had fallen to less
than the value of their original purchase-money; and that evening he told Gertrude everything.
The author does not dare to describe the telling.

CHAPTER XXXVII

TRIBULATION

We must now return for a short while to Surbiton Cottage. It was not so gay a place as it once
had been; merry laughter was not so often heard among the shrubbery walks, nor was a boat to
be seen so often glancing in and out between the lawn and the adjacent island. The Cottage
had become a demure, staid abode, of which Captain Cuttwater was in general the most vivacious
inmate; and yet there was soon to be marrying, and giving in marriage.

Linda's wedding-day had twice been fixed. That first-named had been postponed in consequence
of the serious illness of Norman's elder brother. The life of that brother had been very different
in its course from Harry's; it had been dissipated at college in riotous living, and had since
been stained with debauchery during the career of his early manhood in London. The consequence
had been that his health had been broken down, and he was now tottering to an early grave. 

To draw in the legs and secure the fastenings occupied the Pathfinder but a moment. Then there existed
no obstacle to their giving their undivided care to the wounded man.

Mabel, in this trying scene, conducted herself with the sort of unnatural energy that her sex,
when aroused, is apt to manifest. She got the light, administered water to the parched lips
of her father, and assisted Pathfinder in forming a bed of straw
for his body and a pillow of clothes for his head.

All this was done earnestly, and almost without speaking; nor did Mabel shed a tear, until she
heard the blessings of her father murmured on her head for this tenderness and care. All this
time Mabel had merely conjectured the condition of her parent. Pathfinder, however, had shown
greater attention to the physical danger of the Sergeant. He had ascertained that a rifle-ball
had passed through the body of the wounded man; and he was sufficiently familiar with injuries
of this nature to be certain that the chances of his surviving the hurt were very trifling,
if any.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Then drink my tears, while yet they fall-- Would that my bosom's blood were balm; And--well
thou knowest--I'd shed it all, To give thy brow one minute's calm. MOORE.

The eyes of Sergeant Dunham had not ceased to follow the form of his beautiful daughter from
the moment that the light appeared. He next examined the door of the block, to ascertain its security;
for he was left on the ground below, there being no available means of raising him to the upper
floor. Then he sought the face of Mabel; for as life wanes fast the affections resume their
force, and we begin to value that most which we feel we are about to lose for ever.

"God be praised, my child! you, at least, have escaped their murderous
rifles," he said; for he spoke with strength, and seemingly with no
additional pain.

"Give me the history of this sad business, Pathfinder."

"Ah's me, Sergeant! It has been sad, as you say. That there has been treachery, and the position
of the island has been betrayed, is now as sartain, in my judgment,
as that we still hold the block.

But--"
"Major Duncan was right," interrupted Dunham, laying a hand on the
other's arm.

"Not in the sense you mean, Sergeant--no, not in that
p'int of view; never! At least, not in my opinion. I know that natur'
is weak--human natur', I mean--and that we should none of us vaunt
of our gifts, whether red or white; but I do not think a truer-hearted
lad lives on the lines than Jasper Western."

"Bless you! bless you
for that, Pathfinder!" burst forth from Mabel's very soul, while a
flood of tears gave vent to emotions that were so varied while they
were so violent. "Oh, bless you, Pathfinder, bless you! She had never spoken to Katie of her love; no word had ever passed between
them on the subject which was now always nearest to the hearts of them both. Mrs. Woodward
had much in her character, as a mother, that was excellent, nay, all but perfect; but she could
not bring herself to question her own children as to the inward secrets of their bosoms. She
knew not at once how to answer Katie's question; and so she looked up at her with wistful eyes,
laden with tears.

'You may do so, mamma,' said Katie. Katie was already a braver woman than her mother. 'I think
Harry would like it, and poor Charley will feel hurt at being left out; you may do it, mamma,
if you like; it will not do any harm.'

Mrs. Woodward quite understood the nature of the promise conveyed in her daughter's assurance,
and replied that Charley should be asked. He was asked, and promised, of course, to come. But
when the wedding was postponed, when the other guests were put off, he also was informed that
his attendance at Hampton was not immediately required; and so he still remained a stranger
to the Cottage.

And then after a while another day was named, the guests, and Charley with them, were again
invited, and Norman was again assured that he should be made happy. But, alas! his hopes were
again delusive. News arrived at Surbiton Cottage which made it indispensable that the marriage
should be again postponed, news worse than any which had ever yet been received there, news
which stunned them all, and made it clear to them that this year was no time for marrying.
Alaric had been arrested. Alaric, their own Gertrude's own husband, their son-in-law and brother-in-law,
the proud, the high, the successful, the towering man of the world, Alaric had been arrested,
and was to be tried for embezzling the money of his ward.

These fatal tidings were brought to Hampton by Harry Norman himself; how they were received
we must now endeavour to tell.

But that it would be tedious we might describe the amazement with which that news was received
at the Weights and Measures. Though the great men at the Weights were jealous of Alaric, they
were not the less proud of him. They had watched him rise with a certain amount of displeasure,
and yet they had no inconsiderable gratification in boasting that two of the Magi, the two
working Magi of the Civil Service, had been produced by their own establishment. When therefore
tidings reached them that Tudor had been summoned in a friendly way to Bow Street, that he
had there passed a whole morning, and that the inquiry had ended in his temporary suspension
from his official duties, and in his having to provide two bailsmen, each for L1,000, as security
that he would on a certain day be forthcoming to stand his trial at the Old Bailey for defrauding
his ward--when, I say, these tidings were carried from room to room at the Weights and Measures,
the feelings of surprise were equalled by those of shame and disappointment.

No one knew who brought this news to the Weights and Measures. No one ever does know how such
tidings fly; one of the junior clerks had heard it from a messenger, to whom it had been told
downstairs; then another messenger, who had been across to the Treasury Chambers with an immediate
report as to a projected change in the size of the authorized butter-firkin, heard the same
thing, and so the news by degrees was confirmed.

But all this was not sufficient for Norman. As soon as the rumour reached him, he went off
to Bow Street, and there learnt the actual truth as it has been above stated. Alaric was then
there, and the magistrates had decided on requiring bail; he had, in fact, been committed.

It would be dreadful that the Woodwards should first hear all this from the lips of a stranger,
and this reflection induced Norman at once to go to Hampton; but it was dreadful, also, to
find himself burdened with the task of first telling such tidings. When he found himself knocking
at the Cottage door he was still doubtful how he might best go through the work he had before him.

He found that he had a partial reprieve; but then it was so partial that it would have been
much better for him to have had no such reprieve at all. Mrs. Woodward was at Sunbury with
Linda, and no one was at home but Katie. What was he to do? was he to tell Katie? or was he
to pretend that all was right, that no special business had brought him unexpectedly to Hampton?

'Oh, Harry, Linda will be so unhappy,' said Katie as soon as she saw him. 'They have gone to
dine at Sunbury, and they won't be home till ten or eleven. Uncle Bat dined early with me,
and he has gone to Hampton Court. Linda will be so unhappy. But, good gracious, Harry, is there
anything the matter?'

'Mrs. Woodward has not heard from Gertrude to-day, has she?'

'No--not a word--Gertrude is not ill, is she? Oh, do tell me,' said Katie, who now knew that
there was some misfortune to be told.

'No; Gertrude is not ill.'

'Is Alaric ill, then? Is there anything the matter with Alaric?'

'He is not ill,' said Norman,' but he is in some trouble. I came down as I thought your mother
should be told.'

So much he said, but would say no more. In this he probably took the most unwise course that
was open to him. He might have held his tongue altogether, and let Katie believe that love
alone had brought him down, as it had done so often before; or he might have told her all,
feeling sure that all must be told her before long. But he did neither; he left her in suspense,
and the consequence was that before her mother's return she was very ill.

It was past eleven before the fly was heard in which Linda and her mother returned home. Katie
had then gone upstairs, but not to bed. She had seated herself in the armchair in her mother's
dressing-room, and sitting there waited till she should be told by her mother what had occurred.
When the sound of the wheels caught her ears, she came to the door of the room and held it
in her hand that she might learn what passed. She heard Linda's sudden and affectionate greeting;
she heard Mrs. Woodward's expression of gratified surprise; and then she heard also Norman's
solemn tone, by which, as was too clear, all joy, all gratification, was at once suppressed.
Then she heard the dining- room door close, and she knew that he was telling his tale to Linda
and her mother.

O the misery of that next hour! For an hour they remained there talking, and Katie knew nothing
of what they were talking; she knew only that Norman had brought unhappiness to them all. A
dozen different ideas passed across her mind. First she thought that Alaric was dismissed,
then that he was dead; was it not possible that Harry had named Alaric's name to deceive her?
might not this misfortune, whatever it was, be with Charley? might not he be dead? Oh! better
so than the other. She knew, and said as much to herself over and over again; but she did not
the less feel that his death must involve her own also.

At last the dining-room door opened, and she heard her mother's step on the stairs. Her heart
beat so that she could hardly support herself. She did not get up, but sat quite quiet, waiting
for the tidings which she knew that she should now hear. Her mother's face, when she entered
the room, nearly drove her to despair; Mrs. Woodward had been crying, bitterly, violently,
convulsively crying; and when one has reached the age of forty, the traces of such tears are
not easily effaced even from a woman's cheek.

'Mamma, mamma, what is it? pray, pray tell me; oh! mamma, what is it?' said Katie, jumping
up and rushing into her mother's arms.

'Oh! Katie,' said Mrs. Woodward, 'why are you not in bed? Oh! my darling, I wish you were in
bed; I do so wish you were in bed--my child, my child!' and, seating herself in the nearest
chair, Mrs. Woodward again gave herself up to uncontrolled weeping.

Then Linda came up with the copious tears still streaming down her face. She made no effort
to control them; at her age tears are the easiest resource in time of grief. Norman had kept
her back a moment to whisper one word of love, and she then followed her mother into the room.

Katie was now kneeling at her mother's feet. 'Linda,' she said, with more quietness than either
of the others was able to assume, 'what has happened? what makes mamma so unhappy? Has anything
happened to Alaric?' But Linda was in no state to tell anything.

'Do tell me, mamma,' said Katie; 'do tell me all at once. Has anything--anything happened to--to
Charley?'

'Oh, it is worse than that, a thousand times worse than that!' said Mrs. Woodward, who, in
the agony of her own grief, became for the instant ungenerous.

Katie's blood rushed back to her heart, and for a moment her own hand relaxed the hold which
she had on that of her mother. She had never spoken of her love; for her mother's sake she
had been silent; for her mother's sake she had determined to suffer and be silent--now, and
ever! Well; she would bear this also. It was but for a moment she relaxed her hold; and then
again she tightened her fingers round her mother's hand, and held it in a firmer grasp. 'It
is Alaric, then?' she said.

'God forgive me,' said Mrs. Woodward, speaking through her sobs-- 'God forgive me! I am a brokenhearted
woman, and say I know not what. My Katie, my darling, my best of darlings--will you forgive me?'

'Oh, mamma,' said Katie, kissing her mother's hands, and her arms, and the very hem of her
garment, 'oh, mamma, do not speak so. But I wish I knew what this sorrow is, so that I might
share it with you; may I not be told, mamma? is it about Alaric?'

'Yes, Katie. Alaric is in trouble.'

'What trouble--is he ill?'

'No--he is not ill. It is about money.'

'Has he been arrested?' asked Katie, thinking of Charley's misfortune. 'Could not Harry get
him out? Harry is so good; he would do anything, even for Alaric, when he is in trouble.'

'He will do everything for him that he can,' said Linda, through her tears.

'He has not been arrested,' said Mrs. Woodward; 'he is still at home; but he is in trouble
about Miss Golightly's money--and--and he is to be tried.'

'Tried,' said Katie; 'tried like a criminal!'

Katie might well express herself as horrified. Yes, he had to be tried like a criminal; tried
as pickpockets, housebreakers, and shoplifters are tried, and for a somewhat similar offence;
with this difference, however, that pickpockets, housebreakers, and shoplifters, are seldom
educated men, and are in general led on to crime by want. He was to be tried for the offence
of making away with some of Miss Golightly's money for his own purposes. This was explained
to Katie, with more or less perspicuity; and then Gertrude's mother and sisters lifted up their
voices together and wept.

He might, it is true, be acquitted; they would none of them believe him to be guilty, though
they all agreed that he had probably been imprudent; but then the public shame of the trial!
the disgrace which must follow such an accusation! What a downfall was here! 'Oh, Gertrude!
oh, Gertrude!' sobbed Mrs. Woodward; and indeed, at that time, it did not fare well with Gertrude.

It was very late before Mrs. Woodward and her daughters went to bed that night; and then Katie,
though she did not specially complain, was very ill. She had lately received more than one
wound, which was still unhealed; and now this additional blow, though she apparently bore it
better than the others, altogether upset her. When the morning came, she complained of headache,
and it was many days after that before she left her bed.

But Mrs. Woodward was up early. Indeed, she could hardly be said to have been in bed at all;
for though she had lain down for an hour or two, she had not slept. Early in the morning she
knocked at Harry's door, and begged him to come out to her. He was not long in obeying her
summons, and soon joined her in the little breakfast parlour.

'Harry, said she, 'you must go and see Alaric.'

Harry's brow grew black. On the previous evening he had spoken of Alaric without bitterness,
nay, almost with affection; of Gertrude he had spoken with the truest brotherly love; he had
assured Mrs. Woodward that he would do all that was in his power for them; that he would spare
neither his exertions nor his purse. He had a truer idea than she had of what might probably
be the facts of the case, and was prepared, by all the means at his disposal, to help his sister-in-law,
if such aid would help her. But he had not thought of seeing Alaric.

'I do not think it would do any good,' said he.

'Yes, Harry, it will; it will do the greatest good; whom else can I get to see him? who else
can find out and let us know what really is required of us, what we ought to do? I would do
it myself, but I could not understand it; and he would never trust us sufficiently to tell
me all the truth.'

'We will make Charley go to him. He will tell everything to Charley, if he will to anyone.'

'We cannot trust Charley; he is so thoughtless, so imprudent. Besides, Harry, I cannot tell
everything to Charley as I can to you. If there be any deficiency in this woman's fortune,
of course it must be made good; and in that case I must raise the money. I could not arrange
all this with Charley.'

'There cannot, I think, be very much wanting,' said Norman, who had hardly yet realized the
idea that Alaric had actually used his ward's money for his own purposes. 'He has probably
made some bad investment, or trusted persons that he should not have trusted. My small property
is in the funds, and I can get the amount at a moment's notice. I do not think there will be
any necessity to raise more money than that. At any rate, whatever happens, you must not touch
your own income; think of Katie.'

'But, Harry--dear, good, generous Harry--you are so good, so generous! But, Harry, we need
not talk of that now. You will see him, though, won't you?'

'It will do no good,' said Harry; 'we have no mutual trust in each other.'

'Do not be unforgiving, Harry, now that he requires forgiveness.'

'If he does require forgiveness, Mrs. Woodward, if it shall turn out that he has been guilty,
God knows that I will forgive him. I trust this may not be the case; and it would be useless
for me to thrust myself upon him now, when a few days may replace us again in our present relations
to each other.'

'I don't understand you, Harry; why should there always be a quarrel between two brothers,
between the husbands of two sisters? I know you mean to be kind, I know you are most kind,
most generous; but why should you be so stern?'

'What I mean is this--if I find him in adversity, I shall be ready to offer him my hand; it
will then be for him to say whether he will take it. But if the storm blow over, in such case
I would rather that we should remain as we are.'

Norman talked of forgiveness, and accused himself of no want of charity in this respect. He
had no idea that his own heart was still hard as the nether millstone against Alaric Tudor.
But yet such was the truth. His money he could give; he could give also his time and mind,
he could lend his best abilities to rescue his former friend and his own former love from misfortune.
He could do this, and he thought therefore that he was forgiving; but there was no forgiveness
in such assistance. There was generosity in it, for he was ready to part with his money; there
was kindness of heart, for he was anxious to do good to his fellow- creature; but there were
with these both pride and revenge. Alaric had out-topped him in everything, and it was sweet
to Norman's pride that his hand should be the one to raise from his sudden fall the man who
had soared so high above him. Alaric had injured him, and what revenge is so perfect as to
repay gross injuries by great benefits? Is it not thus that we heap coals of fire on our enemies'
heads? Not that Norman indulged in thoughts such as these; not that he resolved thus to gratify
his pride, thus to indulge his revenge. He was unconscious of his own sin, but he was not the
less a sinner.

'No,' said he, 'I will not see him myself; it will do no good.'

Mrs. Woodward found that it was useless to try to bend him. That, indeed, she knew from a long
experience. It was then settled that she should go up to Gertrude that morning, travelling
up to town together with Norman, and that when she had learned from her daughter, or from Alaric--if
Alaric would talk to her about his concerns--what was really the truth of the matter, she should
come to Norman's office, and tell him what it would be necessary for him to do.

And then the marriage was again put off. This, in itself, was a great misery, as young ladies
who have just been married, or who may now be about to be married, will surely own. The words
'put off' are easily written, the necessity of such a 'put off' is easily arranged in the pages
of a novel; an enforced delay of a month or two in an affair which so many folk willingly delay
for so many years, sounds like a slight thing; but, nevertheless, a matrimonial 'put off' is,
under any circumstances, a great grief. To have to counter-write those halcyon notes which
have given glad promise of the coming event; to pack up and put out of sight, and, if possible,
out of mind, the now odious finery with which the house has for the last weeks been strewed;
to give the necessary information to the pastry-cook, from whose counter the sad tidings will
be disseminated through all the neighbourhood; to annul the orders which have probably been
given for rooms and horses for the happy pair; to live, during the coming interval, a mark
for Pity's unpitying finger; to feel, and know, and hourly calculate, how many slips there
may be between the disappointed lip and the still distant cup; all these things in themselves
make up a great grief, which is hardly lightened by the knowledge that they have been caused
by a still greater grief.

These things had Linda now to do, and the poor girl had none to help her in the doing of them.
A few hurried words were spoken on that morning between her and Norman, and for the second
time she set to work to put off her wedding. Katie, the meantime, lay sick in bed, and Mrs.
Woodward had gone to London to learn the worst and to do the best in this dire affliction that
had come upon them.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

ALARIC TUDOR TAKES A WALK

There is, undoubtedly, a propensity in human love to attach itself to excellence; but it has
also, as undoubtedly, a propensity directly antagonistic to this, and which teaches it to put
forth its strongest efforts in favour of inferiority. Watch any fair flock of children in which
there may be one blighted bud, and you will see that that blighted one is the mother's darling.
What filial affection is ever so strong as that evinced by a child for a parent in misfortune?
Even among the rough, sympathies of schoolboys, the cripple, the sickly one, or the orphan
without a home, will find the warmest friendship and a stretch of kindness. Love, that must
bow and do reverence to superiority, can protect and foster inferiority; and what is so sweet
as to be able to protect?

Gertrude's love for her husband had never been so strong as when she learnt that that love
must now stand in the place of all other sympathies, of all other tenderness. Alaric told her
of his crime, and in his bitterness he owned that he was no longer worthy of her love. She
answered by opening her arms to him with more warmth than ever, and bidding him rest his weary
head upon her breast. Had they not taken each other for better or for worse? had not their
bargain been that they would be happy together if such should be their lot, or sad together
if God should so will it?--and would she be the first to cry off from such a bargain?

It seldom happens that a woman's love is quenched by a man's crime. Women in this respect are
more enduring than men; they have softer sympathies, and less acute, less selfish, appreciation
of the misery of being joined to that which has been shamed. It was not many hours since Gertrude
had boasted to herself of the honour and honesty of her lord, and tossed her head with defiant
scorn when a breath of suspicion had been muttered against his name. It is not too much to say
that bed-making circles in Cambridge have been agitated to their utmost depths by the recent
advent of some hundreds of American youths who have come to pursue certain courses of study within
the University walls.

He had done wrong, he had sinned grievously; but no sooner did she acknowledge so much than
she acknowledged also that a man may sin and yet not be all sinful; that glory may be tarnished,
and yet not utterly destroyed; that pride may get a fall, and yet live to rise again. He had
sinned, and had repented; and now to her eyes he was again as pure as snow. Others would now
doubt him, that must needs be the case; but she would never doubt him; no, not a whit the more
in that he had once fallen. He should still be the cynosure of her eyes, the pride of her heart,
the centre of her hopes. Marina said of her lord, when he came to her shattered in limb, from
the hands of the torturer--

  'I would not change
  My exiled, mangled, persecuted husband,
  Alive or dead, for prince or paladin,
  In story or in fable, with a world
  To back his suit.'

Gertrude spoke to herself in the same language. She would not have changed her Alaric, branded
with infamy as he now was, or soon would be, for the proudest he that carried his head high
among the proud ones of the earth. Such is woman's love; such is the love of which a man's
heart is never capable!

Alaric's committal had taken place very much in the manner in which it was told at the Weights
and Measures. He had received a note from one of the Bow Street magistrates, begging his attendance
in the private room at the police-office. There he had passed nearly the whole of one day;
and he was also obliged to pass nearly the whole of another in the same office. On this second
day the proceedings were not private, and he was accompanied by his own solicitor.

