But the deep-set dark eyes, with a soul looking out of them, were as clear as ever. The uncannily
wise brain had lost not an atom of its power. The glorious mahogany-and-snow coat was still
abundant. The fearlessly gay spirit and loyal heart were undimmed by age.

Laddie resented angrily his new limitations. From time to time he would forget them; and would
set off at a run in the wake of Bruce and Wolf, when the sound of a stranger's approach made
them gallop up the driveway to investigate. But always; after the first few stiff bounds, he
would come to a panting halt and turn back wearily to his resting place in the veranda's coolest
corner; as indignant over his own weakness, as he would have been at fetters which impeded
his limbs.

He was more and more sensitive about this awkward feebleness of his. And he sought to mask
it; in ways that seemed infinitely pathetic to the two humans who loved him. For instance,
one of his favorite romps in bygone days had been to throw himself down in front of the Mistress
and pretend to bite her little feet; growling terrifically as he did it. Twice of late, as
he had been walking at her side, his footing had slipped or he had lost his balance, and had
tumbled headlong Instantly, both times, he had begun to growl and had bitten in mock fury at
the Mistress's foot. By this pitiful ruse he strove to make her believe that his fall had been
purposeful and a part of the olden game.

But worst of all he missed the long walks on which, from puppyhood, he had always accompanied
the Mistress and the Master. I remained at Washington from March 3 to August, engaged in the preparation
of a work upon the Revenue System. This volume contains the rulings and decisions by me most
of which have been sustained by the courts or justified by experience.*

My successor was Joseph J. Lewis, a country lawyer from Pennsylvania. He had written a biography
of Mr. Lincoln, and he had been the President's choice at the outset. When I resigned, the President
had his way. Whether Mr. Chase presented any other person I cannot
say.

"He still enjoys life," mused the Master, one day in late summer, as he and the Mistress sat
on the veranda, with Lad asleep at their feet. "And he can still get about a bit. His appetite
is good, and he drowses happily for a good deal of the day; and the car-rides are still as
much fun for him as ever they were. But when the time comes--and he's breaking fast, these
past few months--when the time comes that life is a misery to him--"

"I know," interposed the Mistress, her voice not quite steady. "I know. Do you suppose I haven't
been thinking about it, on the hot nights when I couldn't sleep? But, when the time comes--when
it comes--you'll--you'll do it, yourself, won't you?"

"Yes," promised the Master, miserably. "No one else shall. I'd rather cut off one of my own
hands, though. I'VE been doing a bit of thinking, too--at night. It's nobody's job but mine.
Laddie would rather have it that way, I know. And, by a bullet. He's a gallant old soldier.
And that is the way for him to go. Now, for the Lord's sake, let's talk about something else!
A man or woman is a fool to care that way about any mere dog. I--"

"But Lad isn't a 'mere' dog," contradicted the Mistress, stooping to pet the collie's classic
head as it lay across her foot. "He's--he's Laddie."

The sound of his name pierced the sleep mists and brought the dog to wakefulness. He raised
his head inquiringly toward the Mistress, and his plumed tail began to thump the floor. The
Mistress patted him again; and spoke a word or two. Lad prepared to drowse once more. Then,
to his dulled ears came the padding of little bare feet on the grass. And he glanced up again,
this time in eager interest.

Across the lawn from the orchard came trotting a child; carrying a basket of peaches toward
the kitchen. The youngster wore but a single garment, a shapeless calico dress that fell scarcely
to her knees. She was Sonya, the seven-year-old daughter of one of the Place's extra workmen,
a Slav named Ruloff who lived in the mile-distant village, across the lake.

Ruloff, following the custom of his peasant ancestors, put his whole family to work, from the
time its members were old enough to toddle. And he urged them against the vice of laziness
by means of an ever-ready fist, or a still readier toe or a harness strap--whichever of the
trio of energy producers chanced to be handiest. In coming over to the Place, for a month's
labor, during the harvest season, he brought along every day his youngest and most fragile
offspring, Sonya. Under her father's directions and under his more drastic modes of encouragement,
the little girl was of much help to him in his doily toil.

Twice, the Master had caught him punishing her for undue slowness in carrying out some duty
too heavy for her frail strength. But if you insist on exploding money all over the place, I
don't see why you shouldn't get a run for it. Besides, I need a bit of it myself. What you want
is a press agent. You're starting all wrong. People in New York can't understand or believe anything
except through the language of the press agent. You take one on your staff, and in three days
you'll be so famous that, if a child in a kindergarten is asked who
is the Queen of Holland, it will answer: 'Colonel Crockett, of Waco.'"



Sonya was an engaging little thing; and the Mistress had made a pet of her. So had the Master.
But the youngster's warmest friend was old Sunnybank Lad.

From the first day of Sonya's advent in his life, Lad had constituted himself her adorer and
constant companion.

Always his big heart had gone out to children; as to everything weak and defenseless. Not always
had his treatment at the hands of children encouraged this feeling of loving chivalry and devotion.
But Sonya was an exception. Whenever she could steal a minute of time, away from her father's
glum eyes and nagging voice and ready fist, she would seek out Lad.

She was as gentle with the grand old dog as other children had been rough. She loved to cuddle
down close beside him, her arms around his shaggy neck; and croon queer little high-voiced
songs to him; her thin cheek against his head. She used to save out fragments from her own
sparse lunch to give to him. She was inordinately proud to walk at his side during Lad's rare
rambles around the Place. Child and dog made a pretty picture of utter chumship.

To nobody save the Mistress and the Master had Laddie ever given his heart so completely as
to this baby.

Hurried though she was, today, Sonya set down her basket of peaches and, with a shy glance
of appeal at the two humans, reached across the veranda edge to stroke Lad's head and to accept
in delight his proffered paw. Then, guiltily, she caught up her basket and sped on to the kitchen.

Lad, slowly and with difficulty, got to his feet and followed her. A minute later the Mistress
watched them making their way to the orchard, side by side; the child slackening her eager
steps in order to keep pace with the aged dog. 

He obtained his medical education in part at least, at Troy, N. Y., from which place he fled
to avoid arrest upon the charge of robbing graves. His parents were rigid believers in the old faith,
and in that faith they had trained the son. They--"

"What can we do?" asked the Master, hopelessly. "I've spoken to the village authorities about
it. But it seems the law can't interfere; unless brutal cruelty can be proved or unless the
parents are unfit to bring up the child."

