The mariner's compass, invented, according to the generally received opinion, about 1302, by
one Flavio Gioja of Amalfi, enabled vessels to sail at a distance from the coasts, and to guide
themselves when out of sight of land. Martin Béhaim, with two physicians in the service of
Prince Henry of Portugal, had also added to nautical science by discovering the way of directing
the voyager's course according to the position of the sun in the heavens, and by applying the
astrolabe to the purposes of navigation. These improvements being adopted, the commercial question
of the western route increased daily in importance in Spain, Portugal, and Italy, countries
in which three-quarters of the science is made up of imagination. There was discussion, there
were writings. The excited world of commerce disputed with the world of science. Facts, systems,
doctrines, were grouped together. The time was come when there was needed one single intelligence
to collect together and assimilate the various floating ideas. This intelligence was found.
At length all the scattered notions were gathered together in the mind of one man, who possessed
in a remarkable degree genius, perseverance, and boldness.

This man was no other than Christopher Columbus, born, probably near Genoa, about the year
1436. We say "probably," for the towns of Cogoreo and Nervi dispute with Savona and Genoa,
the honour of having given him birth. The date of his birth varies, with different biographers,
from 1430 to 1445, but the year 1436 would appear to be the correct one, according to the most
reliable documents. The family of Columbus was of humble origin; his father, Domenic Columbus,
a manufacturer of woollen stuffs, seems, however, to have been in sufficiently easy circumstances
to enable him to give his children a more than ordinarily good education. The young Christopher,
the eldest of the family, was sent to the University of Pavia, there to study Grammar, Latin,
Geography, Astronomy, and Navigation.

At fourteen years of age Christopher left school and went to sea; from this time until 1487,
very little is known of his career. It is interesting to give the remark of Humboldt on this
subject, as reported by M. Charton; he said, "that he regretted the more this uncertainty about
the early life of Columbus when he remembered all that the chroniclers have so minutely preserved
for us upon the life of the dog Becerillo, or the elephant Aboulababat, which Haroun-al-Raschid
sent to Charlemagne!" The most probable account to be gathered from contemporary documents
and from the writings of Columbus himself, is that the young sailor visited the Levant, the
west, the north, England several times, Portugal, the coast of Guinea, and the islands of Africa,
perhaps even Greenland, for, by the age of forty "he had sailed to every part that had ever
been sailed to before." He was looked upon as a thoroughly competent mariner, and his reputation
led to his being chosen for the command of the Genoese galleys, in the war which that Republic
was waging against Venice. He afterwards made an expedition, in the service of René, king of
Anjou, to the coasts of Barbary, and in 1477, he went to explore the countries beyond Iceland.

This voyage being successfully terminated, Christopher Columbus returned to his home at Lisbon.
He there married the daughter of an Italian gentleman, Bartolomeo Munez Perestrello, a sailor
like himself and deeply interested in the geographical ideas of the day. The wife of Columbus,
Dona Filippa, was without fortune, and Columbus, having none himself, felt he must work for
the support of himself and his family. The future discoverer, therefore, set to work to make
picture-books, terrestrial globes, maps, and nautical charts, and continued in this employment
until 1481, but without at the same time abandoning his scientific and literary pursuits. It
seems probable even, that during this period he studied deeply, and attained to knowledge far
beyond that possessed by most of the sailors of his time. Can it have been that at this time
"the Great Idea" first arose in his mind? It may well have been so. He was following assiduously
the discussions relative to the western routes, and the facility of communication by the west,
between Europe and Asia. His correspondence proves that he shared the opinion of Aristotle
as to the relatively short distance separating the extreme shores of the old Continent. He
wrote frequently to the most distinguished savants of his time. Martin Béhaim, of whom we have
already spoken, was amongst his correspondents, and also the celebrated Florentine astronomer,
Toscanelli, whose opinions in some degree influenced those of Columbus.

At this time Columbus, according to the portrait of him given by his biographer Washington
Irving, was a tall man, of robust and noble presence. His face was long, he had an aquiline
nose, high cheek bones, eyes clear and full of fire; he had a bright complexion, and his face
was much covered with freckles. He was a truly Christian man, and it was with the liveliest
faith that he fulfilled all the duties of the Catholic religion.

At the time when Christopher Columbus was in correspondence with the astronomer Toscanelli,
he learnt that the latter, at the request of Alphonso V., King of Portugal, had sent to the
king a learned Memoir upon the possibility of reaching the Indies by the western route. Columbus
was consulted, and supported the ideas of Toscanelli with all his influence; but without result,
for the King of Portugal, who was engaged at the time in war with Spain, died, without having
been able to give any attention to maritime discoveries. His successor, John II., adopted the
plans of Columbus and Toscanelli with enthusiasm. At the same time, with most reprehensible
cunning, he tried to deprive these two savants of the benefit of their proposition; without
telling them, he sent out a caravel to attempt this great enterprise, and to reach China by
crossing the Atlantic. But he had not reckoned upon the inexperience of his pilots, nor upon
the violence of the storms which they might encounter; the result was, that some days after
their departure, a hurricane brought back to Lisbon the sailors of the Portuguese king. Columbus
was justly wounded by this unworthy action, and felt that he could not reckon upon a king who
had so deceived him. His wife being dead, he left Spain with his son Diego, towards the end
of the year 1484. It is thought that he went to Genoa and to Venice, where his projects of
transoceanic navigation were but badly received.

However it may have been, in 1485 we find him again in Spain. This great man was poor, without
resources. He travelled on foot, carrying Diego his little son of ten years old, in his arms.
From this period of his life, history follows him step by step; she no more loses sight of
him, and she has preserved to posterity the smallest incidents of this grand existence. We
find Columbus arrived in Andalusia, only half a league from the port of Palos. Destitute, and
dying of hunger, he knocked at the door of a Franciscan convent, dedicated to Santa Maria de
Rabida, and asked for a little bread and water for his poor child and for himself. The superior
of the convent, Juan Perez de Marchena, gave hospitality to the unfortunate traveller. He questioned
him, and was surprised by the nobleness of his language, but still more astonished was he,
by the boldness of the ideas of Columbus, who made the good Father the confidant of his aspirations.
For several months the wandering sailor remained in this hospitable convent; some of the monks
were learned men, and interested themselves about him and his projects; they studied his plans;
they mentioned him to some of the well-known navigators of the time; and we must give them
the credit of having been the first to believe in the genius of Christopher Columbus. Juan
Perez showed still greater kindness; he offered to take upon himself the charge of the education
of Diego, and he gave to Columbus a letter of recommendation addressed to the confessor of
the Queen of Castille.

This confessor, prior of the monastery of Prado, was deep in the confidence of Ferdinand and
Isabella; but he did not approve of the projects of the Genoese navigator, and he rendered
him no service whatever with his royal penitent. Columbus must still resign himself to wait.
He went to live at Cordova, where the court was soon to come, and for livelihood he resumed
his trade of picture-seller. Is it possible to quote from the lives of illustrious men an instance
of a more trying existence than this of the great navigator? Could ill-fortune have assailed
any man with more cruel blows? But this indomitable, indefatigable man of genius, rising up
again after each trial, did not despair. He felt within him the sacred fire of genius, he worked
on unceasingly, he visited influential persons, spreading his ideas and defending them, and
combating all objections with the most heroic energy. At length he obtained the protection
of the great cardinal-archbishop of Toledo, Pedro Gonzalez de Mendoza, and thanks to him, was
admitted into the presence of the King and Queen of Spain.

Christopher Columbus must have imagined himself now at the end of all his troubles. Ferdinand
and Isabella received his project favourably, and caused it to be submitted for examination
to a council of learned men, consisting of bishops and monks who were gathered together ad
hoc in a Dominican convent at Salamanca. But the unfortunate pleader was not yet at the end
of his vicissitudes. In this meeting at Salamanca all his judges were against him. The truth
was, that his ideas interfered with the intolerant religious notions of the fifteenth century.
The Fathers of the Church had denied the sphericity of the earth, and since the earth was not
round they declared that a voyage of circumnavigation was absolutely contrary to the Bible,
and could not therefore, on any logical theory, be undertaken. "Besides," said these theologians,
"if any one should ever succeed in descending into the other hemisphere, how could he ever
mount up again into this one?" This manner of arguing was a very formidable one at this period;
for Christopher Columbus saw himself, in consequence, almost accused of heresy, the most unpardonable
crime which could be committed in these intolerant countries. He escaped any evil consequences
from the hostile disposition of the Council, but the execution of his project was again adjourned.

Long years passed away. The unfortunate man of genius, despairing of success in Spain, sent
his brother to England to make an offer of his services to the king, Henry VII. But it is probable
that the king gave no answer. Then Christopher Columbus turned again with unabated perseverance
to Ferdinand, but Ferdinand was at this time engaged in a war of extermination against the
Moors, and it was not until 1492, when he had chased the Moors from Spain, that he was able
again to listen to the solicitations of the Genoese sailor.

This time the affair was thoroughly considered, and the king consented to the enterprise. But
Columbus, as is the manner of proud natures, wished to impose his own conditions. They bargained
over that which should enrich Spain! Columbus, in disgust, was without doubt ready to quit,
and for ever, this ungrateful country, but Isabella, touched by the thought of the unbelievers
of Asia, whom she hoped to convert to the Catholic faith, ordered Columbus to be recalled,
and then acceded to all his demands.

Columbus was in the fifty-sixth year of his age when he signed a treaty with the King of Spain
at Santa-Feta on the 17th of April, 1492, being eighteen years after he had first conceived
his project, and seven years from the time of his quitting the monastery of Palos. By this
solemn convention, the dignity of high admiral was to belong to Columbus in all the lands which
he might discover, and this dignity was to descend in perpetuity to his heirs and successors.

All was arranged, and at length Columbus was to put his cherished projects in execution. But
let us repeat, he had no thought of meeting with the New World, of the existence of which he
had not the faintest suspicion. His aim was "to explore the East by the West, and to pass by
the way of the West to the Land whence come the spices." One may even aver that Columbus died
in the belief that he had arrived at the shores of Asia, and never knew himself that he had
made the discovery of America. But this in no way lessens his glory; the meeting with the new
Continent was but an accident. The real cause of the immortal renown of Columbus was that audacity
of genius which induced him to brave the dangers of an unknown ocean, to separate himself afar
from those familiar shores, which, until now, navigators had never ventured to quit, to adventure
himself upon the waves of the Atlantic Ocean in the frail ships of the period, which the first
tempest might engulf, to launch himself, in a word, upon the deep darkness of an unknown sea.

The preparations began, Columbus entering into an arrangement with some rich navigators of
Palos, the three brothers Pinzon, who made the necessary advances for defraying the expenses
of fitting out the ships. Three caravels, named the Gallega, the Nina, and the Pinta, were
equipped in the port of Palos. The Gallega was destined to carry the admiral, who changed her
name to the Santa-Maria. The Pinta was commanded by Martin Alonzo Pinzon, and the Nina by his
two brothers, Francis Martin, and Vincent Yanez Pinzon. It was difficult to man the ships,
sailors generally being frightened at the enterprise, but at last the captains succeeded in
getting together one hundred and twenty men, and on Friday, August 3rd, 1492, the admiral crossing
at eight o'clock in the morning the bar of Saltez, off the town of Huelva, in Andalusia, adventured
himself with his three half-decked caravels upon the Atlantic waves.

II. CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS.

During the first day's voyage, the admiral--the title by which he is usually known in the various
accounts of his exploits--bearing directly southwards, sailed forty-five miles before sunset;
turning then to the south-east, he steered for the Canaries, in order to repair the Pinta,
which had unshipped her rudder, an accident caused perhaps by the ill-will of the steersman,
who dreaded the voyage. Ten days later Columbus cast anchor before the Great Canary Island,
where the rudder of the caravel was repaired. Nineteen days afterwards he arrived before Gomera,
where the inhabitants assured him of the existence of an unknown land in the west of the Archipelago.
He did not leave Gomera until the 6th of September. He had received warning that three Portuguese
ships awaited him in the open sea, with the intention of barring his passage; however, without
taking any heed of this news, he put to sea, cleverly avoided meeting his enemies, and steering
directly westward, he lost all sight of land. During the voyage the admiral took care to conceal
from his companions the true distance traversed each day; he made it appear less than it really
was in the daily abstracts of his observations, that he might not add to the fear already felt
by the sailors, by letting them know the real distance which separated them from Europe. Each
day he watched the compasses with attention, and it is to him we owe the discovery of the magnetic
variation, of which he took account in his calculations. The pilots, however, were much disturbed
on seeing the compasses all "north-westers," as they expressed it.

On the 14th of September the sailors saw a swallow and some tropic-birds. The sight of these
birds was an evidence of land being near, for they do not usually fly more than about seventy
miles out to sea. The temperature was very mild, the weather magnificent; the wind blew from
the east and wafted the caravels in the desired direction. But it was exactly this continuance
of east wind which frightened the greater part of the sailors, who saw in this persistence,
so favourable for the outward voyage, the promise of a formidable obstacle to their return
home. On the 16th of September some tufts of seaweed, still fresh, were seen floating on the
waves. But no land was to be seen, and this seaweed might possibly indicate the presence of
submarine rocks, and not of the shores of a continent. On the 17th, thirty-five days after
the departure of the expedition, floating weeds were frequently seen, and upon one mass of
weed was found a live cray-fish, a sure sign this of the proximity of land.

During the following days a large number of birds, such as gannets, sea-swallows, and tropic-birds,
flew around the caravels. Columbus turned their presence to account as a means of reassuring
his companions, who were beginning to be terribly frightened at not meeting with land after
six weeks of sailing. His own confidence never abated, but putting firm trust in God, he often
addressed energetic words of comfort to those around him, and made them each evening chant
the Salve Regina, or some other hymn to the Virgin. At the words of this heroic man, so noble,
so sure of himself, so superior to all human weaknesses, the courage of the sailors revived,
and they again went onwards.

We can well imagine how anxiously both officers and men scanned the western horizon towards
which they were steering. Each one had a pecuniary motive for wishing to be the first to descry
the New Continent, King Ferdinand having promised a reward of 10,000 maravédis, or 400 pounds
sterling, to the first discoverer. The latter days of the month of September were enlivened
by the presence of numerous large birds, petrels, man-of-war birds, and damiers, flying in
couples, a sign that they were not far away from home. So Columbus retained his unshaken conviction
that land could not be far off.

On the 1st of October, the admiral announced to his companions that they had made 1272 miles
to the west since leaving Ferro; in reality, the distance traversed exceeded 2100 miles, and
of this Columbus was quite aware, but persisted in his policy of disguising the truth in this
particular. On the 7th of October, the crews were excited by hearing discharges of musketry
from the Nina, the commanders of which, the two brothers Pinzon, thought they had descried
the land; they soon found, however, that they had been mistaken. Still, on their representing
that they had seen some parroquets flying in a south-westerly direction, the admiral consented
to change his route so far as to steer some points to the south, a change which had happy consequences
in the future, for had they continued to run directly westward, the caravels would have been
aground upon the great Bahama Bank, and would probably have been altogether destroyed.

Still the ardently desired land did not appear. Each evening the sun as it went down dipped
behind an interminable horizon of water. The crews who had several times been the victims of
an optical illusion, now began to murmur against Columbus, "the Genoese, the foreigner," who
had enticed them so far away from their country. Some symptoms of mutiny had already shown
themselves on board the vessels, when, on the 10th of October, the sailors openly declared
that they would go no further. In treating of this part of the voyage, the historians would
seem to have drawn somewhat upon their imagination; they narrate scenes of serious import which
took place upon the admiral's caravel, the sailors going so far as even to threaten his life.
They say also, that the recriminations ended by a kind of arrangement, granting a respite of
three days to Columbus, at the end of which time, should land not have been then discovered,
the fleet was to set out on its return to Europe. All these statements we may look upon as
pure fiction; there is nothing in the accounts given by Columbus himself which lends them the
smallest credibility. But it has been needful to touch upon them, for nothing must be omitted
relating to the great Genoese Navigator, and some amount of legend mixed up with history does
not ill beseem the grand figure of Christopher Columbus. Still, it is an undoubted fact that
there was much murmuring on board the caravels, but it would seem that the crews, cheered by
the words of the admiral, and by his brave attitude in the midst of uncertainty, did not refuse
to do their duty in working the ships.

On the 11th of October, the admiral noticed alongside of his vessel, a reed still green, floating
upon the top of a large wave: at the same time the crew of the Pinta hoisted on board another
reed, a small board, and a little stick, which appeared to have been cut with an instrument
of iron; it was evident that human hands had been employed upon these things. Almost at the
same moment, the men of the Nina perceived a branch of some thorny tree covered with blossoms.
At all this every one rejoiced exceedingly; there could be no doubt now of the proximity of
the coast. Night fell over the sea. The Pinta, the best sailor of the three vessels, was leading.
Already, Columbus himself, and one Rodrigo Sanchez, comptroller of the expedition, had thought
they had seen a light moving amidst the shadows of the horizon, when a sailor named Rodrigo,
on board the Pinta, cried out, "Land, land."

What must have been the feelings in the breast of Columbus at that moment? Never had any man,
since the first creation of the human race experienced a similar emotion to that now felt by
the great navigator. Perhaps even it is allowable to think that the eye which first saw this
New Continent, was indeed that of the admiral himself. But what matters it? The glory of Columbus
consisted not in the having arrived, his glory was in the having set out. It was at two o'clock
in the morning that the land was first seen, when the caravels were not two hours' sail away
from it. At once all the crews deeply moved, joined in singing together the Salve Regina. With
the first rays of the sun they saw a little island, six miles to windward of them. It was one
of the Bahama group; Columbus named it San Salvador, and immediately falling on his knees,
he began to repeat the hymn of Saint Ambrose and Saint Augustine: "Te Deum laudamus, Te Deum
confitemur."

