The "hires" were now defined, and this act penalized masters who paid labourers at a higher
rate than was allowed under it. The scale of wages varied in different reigns. Here we may
confine ourselves to the provisions of the statute of 11 Henry VII., which not only determined
the maximum payments, but sanctioned reductions on legitimate grounds. Thus regard was had
to the current wages in the locality, which the employer was under no obligation to exceed.
Less was to be paid at holiday than at other times; and if a man were lazy in the morning or
lingered over his meals, he might be mulcted at his master's discretion.

Premising that the purchasing power of a penny in the fifteenth century was about twelve times
as much as it is now, we are able to form some idea of the economic position of the different
classes which were the subjects of this legislation. The bailiff, it appears, might have a
salary of 26s. 8d.; the common servant in husbandry cost 16s. 8d. and 4s. for clothes; and
the artisan received per day 5d. in the summer and 6d. in the winter. This brings us to the
hours of labour, which depended on the season, and were also regulated by statute. These were
from 5 a.m. till between 7 and 8 p.m. from the middle of March to the middle of September,
half an hour being allowed for breakfast, and an hour and a half for dinner and a siesta--an
indulgence countenanced from May to August. During the winter, the rule was that work was to
be carried on whilst there was daylight.

Mention has been made of holidays. These, though inevitable, were evidently regarded as seasons
of danger, since the favourite recreations of labourers, if left to their own devices, were
poaching and politics. Against these twin evils the King's counsellors took precautions in
an act (13 Rich. II., st. I., c. 13), of which the preamble ran:

     "Forasmuch as divers artificers, labourers, servants, and grooms,
     keep greyhounds and other dogs, and on the holy days, when
     Christian people be at church hearing Divine service, they go
     a-hunting in parks, warrens, and coningries of lords and others to
     the very great destruction of the same, and sometimes under such
     colour they make their assemblies, conferences, and conspiracies
     for to rise and disobey their allegiance, &c."

Hence none but laymen with 40s. and clerks with £10 were suffered to keep dogs or use ferrets,
nets, harepipes, cords, or other engines to destroy deer. Instead of engaging in such perilous
diversions, servants and labourers were ordered to "have bows and arrows and to use the same
on Sundays and holy days, and leave all playing at tennis or football and other games called
quoits, dice, casting of the stone, kailes (skittles) and other importune games." Swords and
daggers were prohibited "but in time of war for the defence of the realm of England"--a wise
measure when the country was infested with vagrants and there were so many liveried retainers
prompt to resent a real or imaginary affront.

DOMESTIC

CHAPTER XIX

RETINUES

At the conclusion of the previous section allusion was made to retinues as constituting a danger
to the industrious members of the body politic. In this, our final section, we turn, or rather
return, from the life of the fields to that of the hall. Some notice of the interior order
of great houses has appeared in earlier chapters--e.g., that on "Children of the Chapel"--but
such special reference, involving no more than the religious side of domestic arrangements,
leaves a sense of incompleteness, and this void we must now proceed to fill.

Starting with the peril and annoyance involved in the maintenance of retinues, the proposition
may be easily demonstrated. Alike in town and country the presence of armed and idle ruffians
was a source of well-grounded apprehension. Thus, when the Bishop of Durham attended parliament,
he had to obtain a licence before his retainers could be quartered at Stratford-at-Bow; and
the manifold inconveniences produced by these satellites in country districts during the reign
of Edward I. form the subject of a versified complaint, to be found in Wright's 'Political
Songs'. One of the causes of the grievous scarcity of labour is believed to have been that
nobles and others, under the pretence of husbandry, kept in their pay able-bodied dependants
who, rather than eke out a miserable existence on the land, preferred to follow some warlike lord.

BILLETING

As usual, the trouble began at the fountain-head. Everybody knows the term "billeting" as applied
to soldiers on the march, who are compulsorily quartered on licensed victuallers and others
at fixed rates. This is really a very ancient custom, which is closely, and indeed lineally,
connected with the topic under discussion.

In the early days of royal progresses it was the duty of the Marshal of the King's Household
to secure lodgings for the members of the retinue which accompanied him; and this he did by
means of a billet, by virtue of which he appropriated for the occasion the best of the houses
in the vicinity, marking them with chalk and ruthlessly ejecting the occupiers. The Marshal,
it may be observed, did not do the chalking himself--a task which seems to have been delegated
to the Sergeant Chamberlain of the Household.

Even London did not escape this intolerable vexation, though its immunity from billeting was
expressly laid down in a succession of charters. The royal officials, paying scant heed to
the sanctity of these clauses, repeatedly invaded the precincts of the City; and in the reign
of Edward II. they went so far as to seize the house of one of the sheriffs, John de Caustone,
and quarter therein the King's Secretary, sergeants, horses, and harness. The sheriff acted
boldly. He erased the chalk marks, and proceeded to expel the intrusive sergeants--perhaps
even the Secretary himself, unless, as Mr. Riley thinks probable, that person "walked quietly
away." For this resolute vindication of the liberties of the City, Caustone had to answer before
the Seneschal and Marshal of the King's Household, sitting in the Tower, but, as there was
no excuse for the insolent aggression, he suffered no harm. The citizens, indeed, were so assured
of their rights in this particular, that at some date--probably in the reign of Edward I.--an
ordinance had been passed:

"That if any member of the royal household, or any retainer of the nobility, shall attempt
to take possession of a house within the City either by main force or by delivery [of the Marshal
of the King's Household]; and, if in such attempt he shall be slain by the master of the house,
then, and in such case, the master of the house, shall find six of his kinsmen [i.e. as compurgators],
who shall make oath, himself making oath as the seventh, that it was for this reason that he
so slew the intruder; and thereupon he shall go acquitted."

PRE-EMPTION

The humbler people who escaped billeting might still have cause to regret royal journeys owing
to the inconsiderate exercise of the right of pre-emption. Subjects were compelled to sell;
and the worst of it was that the King's purveyors were in the habit of paying not in cash down,
but by means of an exchequer tally, or a beating! A tally was a hazel rod which had certain
notches indicating the amount due. It obtained its name from the circumstance that these rods
were in pairs, the creditor having one and the debtor the other, so that they could be used
for the purpose of comparison. In practice it was found no easy matter to recover under this
system, which lent itself to the worst exactions, and is the subject of numerous complaints
in our early popular poetry. Thus in "King Edward and the Shepherd":

  "I had catell, now have I none;
  They take my beasts, and done them slon,
    And payen but a stick of tree ...
  They take geese, capons, and hen
  And all that ever they may with ren
    And reaves us our catell....
  They took my hens and my geese
  And my sheep with all the fleece
    And led them forth away."

Somewhat similarly, when a ship arrived in port with a cargo of wine, the prerogative of prise
was enforced, whereby the King was entitled to "a tun before and one abaft the mast," or the
equivalent in money.

The royal household and those of "the great lords of the land" enjoyed the right of pre-emption
not only in the country but in the London markets. Dealers in fish, for example, were not allowed
to quit the City in order to meet a consignment "for the purpose of sending it to any great
lord or a house of religion, or of regrating it," until the King's purveyors had first purchased
what was required for their master's table.

When fish had been brought to the City, no fishmonger might buy "before the good people have
bought what they need." It was the same with poultry. Until prime had been sounded at St. Paul's,
poulterers were forbidden to buy for resale, the object being that "the buyers for the King
and great lords of the land, and the good people of the City may make good their purchases,
so far as they shall need."

LIVERY

So much for purveyance. As regards the disposition of the provisions thus obtained, it was
expressed by the term "livery," formerly of much wider application than at present. The word
comprehended all that was delivered or dispensed by the lord to his underlings or domestics--money,
victuals, wine, garments, fuel, and lights; but no doubt it was employed more particularly
of external and distinctive garb. The Wardrobe Book of 28 Edward I. and the Household Ordinances
show that officers and retainers of the Court were presented with a roba estivalis and hiemalis.
The livrée des chaperons, so often mentioned, refers to hoods or tippets of a colour sharply
contrasting with that of the garment over which they were worn. Subsequently this mark took
the form of a round cap, attached to which was a long liripipe, which might be wound round
the head, but more usually hung over the arm. In the dress of the City Liverymen traces of
it may still be found.

This suggests the remark that livery was used not by the members of great households merely,
but by brotherhoods and gentz de mester; hence it is that Chaucer in his Prologue of the "Canterbury
Tales" enumerates

  A Haberdassher and a Carpenter
  A Webbe, Dyere, and a Tapicer;

and says of them:

   ... they were clothed alle in a liveree
  Of a solempne and great fraternitee.

The statute 7 Henry IV. conceded this privilege to the "trades of the cities of the realm,"
thus confirming previous acts of the reign of Edward III. and Richard II., which sanctioned
the wearing of livery by menials and members of gilds, but prohibited the distribution of badges
to adherents who assumed them in testimony of their readiness to aid their patron in any private
quarrel. The practice was therefore a grave menace to the King's peace.

