

Meanwhile the candidature of Prince Leopold was renounced by him. But this was not enough.
The King of Prussia was asked to promise that it should in no event ever be renewed,--which
he declined to do, reserving to himself the liberty of consulting circumstances. This requirement
was the more offensive, inasmuch as it was addressed exclusively to Prussia, while nothing
was said to Spain, the principal in the business. Then ensued an incident proper for comedy,
if it had not become the declared cause of tragedy. The French Ambassador, Count Benedetti,
who, on intelligence of the candidature, had followed the King to Ems, his favorite watering-
place, and there in successive interviews pressed him to order its withdrawal, now, on its
voluntary renunciation, proceeding to urge the new demand, and after an extended conversation,
and notwithstanding its decided refusal, seeking, nevertheless, another audience the same day
on this subject, his Majesty, with perfect politeness, sent him word by an adjutant in attendance,
that he had no other answer to make than the one already given: and this refusal to receive
the Ambassador was promptly communicated by telegraph, for the information especially of the
different German governments. [Footnote: Bismarck to Bernstorff, July 19, 1870, with Inclosures:
Parliamentary Papers, 1870, Vol. LXX.,--Franco-Prussian War, No. 3, pp. 5-8. Gerolt to Fish,
August 11, 1870, with Inclosures: Executive Documents, 41st Cong. 3d Sess., H. of R., Vol.
I. No. 1, Part 1,--Foreign Relations, pp. 219-221. The reader will notice that the copy of
the Telegram in this latter volume is the paper on p. 221, with the erroneous heading, "Count
Bismarck to Baron Gerolt."]

PRETEXT OF THE TELEGRAM.

These simple facts, insufficient for the slightest quarrel, intolerable in the pettiness of
the issue disclosed, and monstrous as reason for war between two civilized nations, became
the welcome pretext. Swiftly, and with ill-disguised alacrity, the French Cabinet took the
next step in the duel. On the 15th of July the Prime-Minister read from the tribune a manifesto
setting forth the griefs of France,--being, first, the refusal of the Prussian King to promise
for the future, and, secondly, his refusal to receive the French Ambassador, with the communication
of this refusal, as was alleged, "officially to the Cabinets of Europe," which was a mistaken
allegation: [Footnote: Bismarck to Bernstorff, July 18, and to Gerolt, July 19, 1870: Parliamentary
Papers and Executive Documents, Inclosures, ubi supra.] and the paper concludes by announcing
that since the preceding day the Government had called in the reserves, and that they would
immediately take the measures necessary to secure the interests, the safety, and the honor
of France. [Footnote: Journal Officiel du Soir, 17 Juillet 1870.] This was war.

Some there were who saw the fearful calamity, the ghastly crime, then and there initiated.
The scene that ensued belongs to this painful record. The paper announcing war was followed
by prolonged applause. The Prime-Minister added soon after in debate, that he accepted the
responsibility with "a light heart." ["Oui!" gauche.] Nous l'acceptons,  le coeur leger."]
Not all were in this mood.