249

MECHANICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE "PIONEER" 'Steadman's dogcart is to take Mr. Hammond to the station at half-past
two,' said Lady Maulevrier, 'so you had better go and give him his
luncheon.'

Mary needed no second bidding.

She flew downstairs, and met her lover in the hall.

 These engines were built in
    limited number by nearly every well-known maker, and among the
    few remaining is the 6-wheel "Pioneer," on display in the Museum
    of History and Technology, Smithsonian Institution. This
    locomotive is a true representation of a light passenger
    locomotive of 1851 and a historic relic of the mid-nineteenth
    century.

    THE AUTHOR: John H. White is associate curator of
    transportation in the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of
    History and Technology.

The "PIONEER" is an unusual locomotive and on first inspection would seem to be imperfect for
service on an American railroad of the 1850's. This locomotive has only one pair of driving
wheels and no truck, an arrangement which marks it as very different from the highly successful
standard 8-wheel engine of this period. All six wheels of the Pioneer are rigidly attached
to the frame. It is only half the size of an 8-wheel engine of 1851 and about the same size
of the 4--2--0 so common in this country some 20 years earlier. Its general arrangement is
that of the rigid English locomotive which had, years earlier, proven unsuitable for use on
U.S. railroads.

These objections are more apparent than real, for the Pioneer, and other engines of the same
design, proved eminently successful when used in the service for which they were built, that
of light passenger traffic. The Pioneer's rigid wheelbase is no problem, for when it is compared
to that of an 8-wheel engine it is found to be about four feet less; and its small size is
no problem when we realize it was not intended for heavy service. Figure 2, a diagram, is a
comparison of the Pioneer and a standard 8-wheel locomotive.

Since the service life of the Pioneer was spent on the Cumberland Valley Railroad, a brief
account of that line is necessary to an understanding of the service history of this locomotive.

    Exhibits of the "Pioneer"

    The Pioneer has been a historic relic since 1901. In the fall
    of that year minor repairs were made to the locomotive so that
    it might be used in the sesquicentennial celebration at
    Carlisle, Pennsylvania. On October 22, 1901, the engine was
    ready for service, but as it neared Carlisle a copper flue
    burst. The fire was extinguished and the Pioneer was pushed
    into town by another engine. In the twentieth century, the
    Pioneer was displayed at the Louisiana Purchase Exposition,
    St. Louis, Missouri, in 1904, and at the Wheeling, West
    Virginia, semicentennial in 1913. In 1927 it joined many other
    historic locomotives at the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad's "Fair
    of the Iron Horse" which commemorated the first one hundred
    years of that company. From about 1913 to 1925 the Pioneer
    also appeared a number of times at the Apple-blossom Festival
    at Winchester, Virginia. In 1933-1934 it was displayed at the
    World's Fair in Chicago, and in 1948 at the Railroad Fair in the
    same city. Between 1934 and March 1947 it was exhibited at the
    Franklin Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The Cumberland Valley Railroad

The Cumberland Valley Railroad (C.V.R.R.) was chartered on April 2, 1831, to connect the Susquehanna
and Potomac Rivers by a railroad through the Cumberland Valley in south-central Pennsylvania.
The Cumberland Valley, with its rich farmland and iron-ore deposits, was a natural north-south
route long used as a portage between these two rivers. Construction began in 1836, and because
of the level valley some 52 miles of line was completed between Harrisburg and Chambersburg
by November 16, 1837. In 1860, by way of the Franklin Railroad, the line extended to Hagerstown,
Maryland. It was not until 1871 that the Cumberland Valley Railroad reached its projected southern
terminus, the Potomac River, by extending to Powells Bend, Maryland. Winchester, Virginia,
was entered in 1890 giving the Cumberland Valley Railroad about 165 miles of line. The railroad
which had become associated with the Pennsylvania Railroad in 1859, was merged with that company
in 1919.

By 1849 the Cumberland Valley Railroad was in poor condition; the strap-rail track was worn
out and new locomotives were needed. Captain Daniel Tyler was hired to supervise rebuilding
the line with T-rail, and easy grades and curves. Tyler recommended that a young friend of
his, Alba F. Smith, be put in charge of modernizing and acquiring new equipment. Smith recommended
to the railroad's Board of Managers on June 25, 1851, that "much lighter engines than those
now in use may be substituted for the passenger transportation and thereby effect a great saving
both in point of fuel and road repairs...."[1] Smith may well have gone on to explain that
the road was operating 3- and 4-car passenger trains with a locomotive weighing about 20 tons;
the total weight was about 75 tons, equalling the uneconomical deadweight of 1200 pounds per
passenger. Since speed was not an important consideration (30 mph being a good average), the
use of lighter engines would improve the deadweight-to-passenger ratio and would not result
in a slower schedule. 

'I should have doubted his having so humanising a taste as tobacco. He looks too evil a creature
ever to have yielded to the softening influence of a pipe.'

'An evil creature! What, old Sam? Why he is the most genial old thing, and as cheery--loves to
hear the newspaper read to him--the murders and railway accidents. He doesn't care for politics.
Everybody likes old Sam Barlow.'

'I fancy the Grasmere idea of reverend
and amiable age must be strictly local.

    I can only say that I never saw a more unholy countenance.'
    
    'You must have been dreaming when you saw him,' said Mary. 'Where
    did you meet him?'
    
    'On the Fell, about a quarter of a mile from the shrubbery gate.'

'Did
    you? I shouldn't have thought he could have got so far. I've a good
    mind to take you to see him, this very afternoon, before we
    go home.'
    
    'Do,' exclaimed Hammond, 'I should like it immensely.

    I thought him a hateful-looking old person; but there was something
so thoroughly uncanny about him that he exercised an absolute fascination
upon me: he magnetised me, I think, as the green-eyed cat magnetises
the bird.

    I have been positively
    longing to see him again.
    He is a kind of human monster,
    and I hope some one will
    have a big bottle made ready for him and preserve him in spirits
when he dies.'

'What a horrid idea!

    No, sir, dear old Barlow shall lie beside the Rotha, under the trees
Wordsworth planted.

    He is such a man as Wordsworth
    would have loved.'

Mr.
    Hammond shrugged
    his shoulders, and
    said no more.

    Mary's little vehement ways, her enthusiasm, her love of that
    valley, which might be called her native place, albeit her eyes
    had opened upon heaven's light far away, her humility, were
    all very delightful in their way. She was not a perfect beauty,
    like Lesbia; but she was a fresh, pure-minded English girl, frank
    as the day, and if he had had a brother he would have recommended
    that brother to choose just such a girl for his wife.
     One of the Engines has been placed on the
    Road and I believe performed in such a manner as to convince all
    who are able to judge of this ability to perform--although the
    maximum duty of the Engines was not performed on account of some
    original defects which are now being remedied as I before
    stated.

    Within ten days the Engine will be able to run regularly with a
    train on the Road where in shall be enabled to judge correctly
    of their merits.

    An accident occurred during the trial of the Small Engine at
    Norwich which caused a damage of about $300 in which condition
    the Engine came here and is now being repaired--the cost of
    which will be presented to your Board hereafter. As to the
    fault or blame of parties connected with the accident as also
    the question of responsibility for Repairs are questions for
    your disposal. I therefore leave the matter until further called
    upon.

    The Expenses necessarily incurred by the trial of the Engines
    and also the Expenses of transporting the same are not included
    in the Statement herewith presented, the whole amount of which
    will not probably exceed $400.00.

These two locomotives became the Cumberland Valley Railroad's Pioneer (number 13) and Jenny
Lind (number 14). While Smith notes that one of the engines was damaged during the inspection
trials, Joseph Winters, an employee of the Cumberland Valley who claimed he was accompanying
the engine enroute to Chambersburg at the time of their delivery, later recalled that both
engines were damaged in transit.[4] According to Winters a train ran into the rear of the Jenny
Lind, damaging both it and the Pioneer, the accident occurring near Middletown, Pennsylvania.
The Jenny Lind was repaired at Harrisburg but the Pioneer, less seriously damaged, was taken
for repairs to the main shops of the Cumberland Valley road at Chambersburg.

While there seems little question that these locomotives were not built as a direct order for
the Cumberland Valley Railroad, an article[5] appearing in the Railroad Advocate in 1855 credits
their design to Smith. The article speaks of a 2--2--4 built for the Macon and Western Railroad
and says in part:

    This engine is designed and built very generally upon the ideas,
    embodied in some small tank engines designed by A. F. Smith,
    Esq., for the Cumberland Valley road. Mr. Smith is a strong
    advocate of light engines, and his novel style and proportions
    of engines, as built for him a few years since, by Seth
    Wilmarth, at Boston, are known to some of our readers. Without
    knowing all the circumstances under which these engines are
    worked on the Cumberland Valley road, we should not venture to
    repeat all that we have heard of their performances, it is
    enough to say that they are said to do more, in proportion to
    their weight, than any other engines now in use.

The author believes that the Railroad Advocate's claim of Smith's design of the Pioneer has
been confused with his design of the Utility (figs. 6, 7). Smith designed this compensating-lever
engine to haul trains over the C.V.R.R. bridge at Harrisburg. It was built by Wilmarth in 1854.

According to statements of Smith and the Board of Managers quoted on page 244, the Pioneer
and the Jenny Lind were not new when purchased from their maker, Seth Wilmarth. Although of
recent manufacture, previous to June 1851, they were apparently doing service on a road in
Norwich, Connecticut. It should be mentioned that both Smith and Tyler were formerly associated
with the Norwich and Worcester Railroad and they probably learned of these two engines through
this former association. It is possible that the engines were purchased from Wilmarth by the
Cumberland Valley road, which had bought several other locomotives from Wilmarth in previous
years. It was the practice of at least one other New England engine builder, the Taunton Locomotive
Works, to manufacture engines on the speculation that a buyer would be found; if no immediate
buyers appeared the engine was leased to a local road until a sale was made.[6]

Regarding the Jenny Lind and Pioneer, Smith reported[7] to the Board of Managers at their meeting
of March 17, 1852:

    The small tank engines which were purchased last year ... and
    which I spoke in a former report as undergoing at that time some
    necessary improvements have since that time been fairly tested
    as to their capacity to run our passenger trains and proved to
    be equal to the duty.

    The improvements proposed to be made have been completed only on
    one engine [Jenny Lind] which is now running regularly with
    passenger trains--the cost of repairs and improvements on this
    engine (this being the one accidentally broken on the trial)
    amounted to $476.51. The other engine is now in the shop, not
    yet ready for service but will be at an early day.

The Pioneer and Jenny Lind achieved such success in action that the president of the road,
Frederick Watts, commented on their performance in the annual report of the Cumberland Valley
Railroad for 1851. Watts stated that since their passenger trains were rarely more than a baggage
car and two coaches, the light locomotives "... have been found to be admirably adapted to
our business." The Cumberland Valley Railroad, therefore, added two more locomotives of similar
design in the next few years. These engines were the Boston and the Enterprise, also built
by Wilmarth in 1854-1855.

Watts reported the Pioneer and Jenny Lind cost $7,642. A standard 8-wheel engine cost about
$6,500 to $8,000 each during this period. In recent years, the Pennsylvania Railroad has stated
the Pioneer cost $6,200 in gold, but is unable to give the source for this information. The
author can discount this statement for it does not seem reasonable that a light, cheap engine
of the pattern of the Pioneer could cost as much as a machine nearly twice its size.

Service History of the Pioneer

After being put in service, the Pioneer continued to perform well and was credited as able
to move a 4-car passenger train along smartly at 40 mph.[8] This tranquility was shattered
in October 1862 by a raiding party led by Confederate General J. E. B. Stuart which burned
the Chambersburg shops of the Cumberland Valley Railroad. The Pioneer, Jenny Lind, and Utility
were partially destroyed. The Cumberland Valley Railroad in its report for 1862 stated:

    The Wood-shop, Machine-shop, Black-smith-shop, Engine-house,
    Wood-sheds, and Passenger Depot were totally consumed, and with
    the Engine-house three second-class Engines were much injured by
    the fire, but not so destroyed but that they may be restored to
    usefulness.

However, no record can be found of the extent or exact nature of the damage. The shops and
a number of cars were burned so it is reasonable to assume that the cab and other wooden parts
of the locomotive were damaged. One unverified report in the files of the Pennsylvania Railroad
states that part of the roof and brick wall fell on the Pioneer during the fire causing considerable
damage. In June 1864 the Chambersburg shops were again burned by the Confederates, but on this
occasion the railroad managed to remove all its locomotives before the raid. During the Civil
War, the Cumberland Valley Railroad was obliged to operate longer passenger trains to satisfy
the enlarged traffic. The Pioneer and its sister single-axle engines were found too light for
these trains and were used only on work and special trains. Reference to table 1 will show
that the mileage of the Pioneer fell off sharply for the years 1860-1865.

TABLE 1.--YEARLY MILEAGE OF THE PIONEER

(From Annual Reports of the Cumberland Valley Railroad)

    Year:             Miles

    1852                  3,182[a]
    1853                 20,722[b]
    1854                 18,087
    1855                 14,151
    1856                 20,998
    1857                 22,779
    1858                 29,094
    1859                 29,571
    1860                  4,824
    1861                  4,346
    1862                   ([c])
    1863                  5,339
    1864                    224
    1865                  2,215
    1866                 20,546
    1867                  5,709
    1868                 13,626
    1869                  1,372
    1870                    ...
    1871                  2,102
    1872                  4,002
    1873                  3,721
    1874                  3,466
    1875                    636
    1876                    870
    1877                    406
    1878                  4,433
    1879                    ...
    1880                  8,306
    1881                   ([d])
                       ---------
    Total               244,727[e]

FOOTNOTES TO TABLE 1:

[a] Mileage 1852 for January to September (no record of mileage recorded in Annual Reports
previous to 1852).

[b] 15,000 to 20,000 miles per year was considered very high mileage for a locomotive of the
1850's.

[c] No mileage reported for any engines due to fire.

[d] Not listed on roster.

[e] The Pennsylvania Railroad claims a total mileage of 255,675. This may be accounted for
by records of mileages for 1862, 1870, and 1879.

In 1871 the Pioneer was remodeled by A. S. Hull, master mechanic of the railroad. The exact
nature of the alterations cannot be determined, as no drawings or photographs of the engine
previous to this time are known to exist. In fact, the drawing (fig. 8) prepared by Hull in
1876 to show the engine as remodeled in 1871 is the oldest known illustration of the Pioneer.
Paul Westhaeffer, a lifelong student of Cumberland Valley R. R. history, states that according
to an interview with one of Hull's descendants the only alteration made to the Pioneer during
the 1871 "remodeling" was the addition of a handbrake. The road's annual report of 1853 describes
the Pioneer as a six-wheel tank engine. The report of 1854 mentions that the Pioneer used link
motion. These statements are enough to give substance to the idea that the basic arrangement
has survived unaltered and that it has not been extensively rebuilt, as was the Jenny Lind in 1878.

By the 1870's, the Pioneer was too light for the heavier cars then in use and by 1880 it had
reached the end of its usefulness for regular service. The walls were old gold silk, the curtains
a tawny velvet of deeper tone, the cabinets and buffet of dark Italian walnut, inlaid with lapis-lazuli
and amber. The fireplace was a masterpiece of cabinet work, with high narrow shelves, and curious
recesses holding priceless jars of Oriental enamel. The deep hearth was filled with arum lilies
and azalias, like a font at Easter.

Lady Kirkbank, who pretended to adore genius, was affectionately effusive to Miss Fitzherbert, the
popular actress, but she rather ignored the sister. The desire to operate longer trains and the need for engines
of greater traction to overcome the steep grades of American roads called for coupled driving
wheels and machines of greater weight than the 4--2--0. After the introduction of the 4--4--0,
the single-axle engine received little attention in this country except for light service or
such special tasks as inspection or dummy engines.

There was, however, a renewed interest in "singles" in the early 1850's because of W. B. Adams'
experiments with light passenger locomotives in England. In 1850 Adams built a light single-axle
tank locomotive for the Eastern Counties Railway which proved very economical for light passenger
traffic. It was such a success that considerable interest in light locomotives was generated
in this country as well as in England. Nearly 100 single-axle locomotives were built in the
United States between about 1845-1870. These engines were built by nearly every well-known
maker, from Hinkley in Boston to the Vulcan Foundry in San Francisco. Danforth Cooke & Co.
of Paterson built a standard pattern 4--2--4 used by many roads. One of these, the C. P. Huntington,
survives to the present time.

The following paragraphs describe the mechanical details of the Pioneer as it appears on exhibition
in the Smithsonian Institution's new Museum of History and Technology.

BOILER

The boiler is the most important and costly part of a steam locomotive, representing one-fourth
to one-third of the total cost. A poorly built or designed boiler will produce a poor locomotive
no matter how well made the remainder of mechanism. The boiler of the Pioneer is of the wagon-top,
crownbar, fire-tube style and is made of a 5/16-inch thick, wrought-iron plate. The barrel
is very small, in keeping with the size of the engine, being only 27 inches in diameter. While
some readers may believe this to be an extremely early example of a wagon-top boiler, we should
remember that most New England builders produced few locomotives with the Bury (dome) boiler
and that the chief advocates of this later style were the Philadelphia builders. By the early
1850's the Bury boiler passed out of favor entirely and the wagon top became the standard type
of boiler with all builders in this country. 

By the influence of the Jesuit Fathers I was placed in a house of commerce at Marseilles. Funds
to provide for my education and establishment in life, under very modest conditions, were sent
periodically by an agent at Madras. Its thickness cannot be conveniently
measured, but it is greater than that of the boiler shell, probably about 1/2 to 5/8 inch.
While copper tubes and tube sheets were not much used in this country after about 1870, copper
was employed as recently as 1950 by Robert Stephenson & Hawthorns, Ltd., on some small industrial
locomotives.

The boiler shell is lagged with wooden tongue-and-groove strips about 2-1/2 inches wide (felt
also was used for insulation during this period). The wooden lagging is covered with Russia
sheet iron which is held in place and the joints covered by polished brass bands. Russia sheet
iron is a planish iron having a lustrous, metallic gray finish.

The steam dome (fig. 18) is located directly over the firebox, inside the cab. It is lagged
and jacketed in an identical manner to the boiler. The shell of the dome is of 5/16-inch wrought
iron, the top cap is a cast-iron plate which also serves as a manhole cover offering access
to the boiler's interior for inspection and repair.

A round plate, 20 inches in diameter, riveted on the forward end of the boiler, just behind
the bell stand, was found when the old jacket was removed in May 1963. The size and shape of
the hole, which the plate covers, indicate that a steam dome or manhole was located at this
point. It is possible that this was the original location of the steam dome since many builders
in the early 1850's preferred to mount the dome forward of the firebox. This was done in the
belief that there was less danger of priming because the water was less agitated forward of
the firebox.

The firebox is as narrow as the boiler shell and fits easily between the frame. John Hammond folded
his sweetheart in his arms for one brief embrace; there was no time for loitering. In another
moment he was springing into the cart. A shake of the reins, and he was driving slowly down
the steep avenue.
With the deep, narrow firebox, wood was filled up to the level of the fire door. In this way,
the fire did not burn so furiously and did not keep ahead of the fireman; at the same time,
since it burned so freely, a good fire was always on hand. The Pioneer burned oak and hickory.[14]
For the firebox 5/16-inch thick sheet was used, for heavier sheet would have blistered and
flaked off because of the intense heat of the fire and the fibrous quality of wrought-iron
sheet of the period. Sheet iron was fabricated from many small strips of iron rolled together
while hot. These strips were ideally welded into a homogeneous sheet, but in practice it was
found the thicker the sheet the less sure the weld.

The fire grates are cast iron and set just a few inches above the bottom of the water space
so that the water below the grates remains less turbulent and mud or other impurities in the
water settle here. Four bronze mud plugs and a blowoff cock are fitted to the base of the firebox
so that the sediment thus collected can be removed (figs. 17, 18).

The front of the boiler is attached to the frame by the smokebox, which is a cylinder, bolted
on a light, cast-iron saddle (not part of the cylinder castings nor attached to them, but bolted
directly to the top rail of the frame; it may be a hastily made repair put on at the shops
of the C.V.R.R.). The rear of the boiler is attached to the frame by two large cast-iron brackets,
one on each side of the firebox (fig. 18). These are bolted to the top rail of the frame but
the holes in the brackets are undoubtedly slotted, so that they may slide since the boiler
will expand about 1/4 inch when heated. In addition to the crown bars, which strengthen the
crown sheet, the boiler is further strengthened by stay bolts and braces located in the wagon
top over the firebox, where the boiler had been weakened by the large hole necessary for the
steam dome. This boiler is a remarkably light, strong, and compact structure.

BOILER FITTINGS

Few boiler fittings are found on the Pioneer and it appears that little was done to update
the engine with more modern devices during its many years of service. With the exception of
the steam gauge, it has no more boiler fitting than when it left the builder's shop in 1851.

The throttle valve is a simple slide valve and must have been primitive for the time, for the
balance-poppet throttle valve was in use in this country previous to 1851. It is located directly
below the steam dome even though it was common practice to place the throttle valve at the
front of the boiler in the smokebox. Considering the cramped condition inside the smokebox,
there would seem to be little space for the addition of the throttle valve; hence its present
location. This was the house which Lesbia had been brought to see, and through which she walked
with the calmly critical air of a person who had seen so many palaces that one more or less could
make no difference.

In vain did Mr. Smithson peruse her countenance in the hope of seeing that she was impressed by
the splendour of his surroundings, and by the power of the man who commanded such splendour. Lesbia
was as cold as the Italian sculptor's Reading Girl in an alcove of Mr. Smithson's picture gallery;
and the stockbroker felt very much as Aladdin might have done if
the fair Badroulbadour had shown herself indifferent to the hall of
the jewelled windows, in that magical palace which sprang into being
in a single night. The water level in the boiler
is indicated by the three brass cocks located on the backhead. No gauge glass is used; they
were not employed in this country until the 1870's, although they were commonly used in England
at the time the Pioneer was built.

While two safety valves were commonly required, only one was used on the Pioneer. The safety
valve is located on top of the steam dome. Pressure is exerted on the lever by a spring balance,
fixed at the forward end by a knife-blade bearing. The pressure can be adjusted by the thumbscrew
on the balance. The graduated scale on the balance gave a general but uncertain indication
of the boiler pressure. The valve itself is a poppet held against the face of the valve seat
by a second knife blade attached to the lever. The ornamental column forming the stand of the
safety valve is cast iron and does much to decorate the interior of the cab. The pipe carrying
the escaping steam projects through the cab roof. It is made of copper with a decorative brass
band. This entire mechanism was replaced by a modern safety valve for use at the Chicago Railroad
Fair (1949). Fortunately, the old valve was preserved and has since been replaced on the engine.

The steam gauge is a later addition, but could have been put on as early as the 1860's, since
the most recent patent date that it bears is 1859. It is an Ashcroft gauge having a handsome
4--4--0 locomotive engraved on its silver face.

The steam jet (item 3, fig. 18) is one of the simplest yet most notable boiler fitting of the
Pioneer, being nothing more than a valve tapped into the base of the steam dome with a line
running under the boiler jacket to the smokestack. When the valve is opened a jet of steam
goes up the stack, creating a draft useful for starting the fire or enlivening it as necessary.
This device was the invention of Alba F. Smith in 1852, according to the eminent 19th-century
technical writer and engineer Zerah Colburn.[15]

The two feedwater pumps (fig. 20) are located beneath the cab deck (1, fig. 17). They are cast-iron
construction and are driven by an eccentric on the driving-wheel axle (fig. 27). The airchamber
or dome (1, fig. 27) imparts a more steady flow of the water to the boiler by equalizing the
surges of water from the reciprocating pump plunger. A steam line (3, fig. 18), which heats
the pump and prevents freezing in cold weather, is regulated by a valve in the cab (figs. 18,
27). Note that the line on the right side of the cab has been disconnected and plugged.

The eccentric drive for the pumps is unusual, and the author knows of no other American locomotive
so equipped. Eastwick and Harrison, it is true, favored an eccentric drive for feed pumps,
but they mounted the eccentric on the crankpin of the rear driving wheel and thus produced
in effect a half-stroke pump. This was not an unusual arrangement, though a small crank was
usually employed in place of the eccentric. The full-stroke crosshead pump with which the Jenny
Lind (fig. 22) is equipped, was of course the most common style of feed pump used in this country
in the 19th century.

Of all the mechanisms on a 19th-century locomotive, the feed pump was the most troublesome.
If an engineer could think of nothing else to complain about, he could usually call attention
to a defective pump and not be found a liar. Because of this, injectors were adopted after
their introduction in 1860. It is surprising that the Pioneer, which was in regular service
as late as 1880 and has been under steam many times since for numerous exhibitions, was never
fitted with one of these devices. Because its stroke is short and the plunger is in less rapid
motion, the present eccentric arrangement is more complex but less prone to disorder than the
simpler but faster crosshead pump.

The check valves are placed slightly below the centerline of the boiler (fig. 18). These valves
are an unfinished bronze casting and appear to be of a recent pattern, probably dating from
the 1901 renovation. At the time the engine was built, it was usual to house these valves in
an ornamental spun-brass casing. The smokestack is of the bonnet type commonly used on wood-burning
locomotives in this country between about 1845 and 1870. The exhaust steam from the cylinders
is directed up the straight stack (shown in phantom in fig. 27) by the blast pipe. This creates
a partial vacuum in the smokebox that draws the fire, gases, ash, and smoke through the boiler
tubes from the firebox. The force of the exhausting steam blows them out the stack. At the
top of the straight stack is a deflecting cone which slows the velocity of the exhaust and
changes its direction causing it to go down into the funnel-shaped outer casing of the stack.
Here, the heavy embers and cinders are collected and prevented from directly discharging into
the countryside as dangerous firebrands. Wire netting is stretched overtop of the deflecting
cone to catch the lighter, more volatile embers which may defy the action of the cone. The
term "bonnet stack" results from the fact that this netting is similar in shape to a lady's
bonnet. The cinders thus accumulated in the stack's hopper could be emptied by opening a plug
at the base of the stack.

While the deflecting cone was regarded highly as a spark arrester and used practically to the
exclusion of any other arrangement, it had the basic defect of keeping the smoke low and close
to the train. This was a great nuisance to passengers, as the low trailing smoke blew into
the cars. 'How beautifully Mr. Hammond read Heine that morning!' said Mary, breaking off suddenly
from a perfectly automatic reading.

'You did not hear him, did you? You were not there,' said the Fräulein.

'I was not there, but I heard him. I--I was sitting on the bank among the pine trees.'

'Why did you not come and sit with us? It would have been more ladylike than to hide yourself
behind the trees.'

Mary blushed crimson.

'I had been in the kennels
with Maulevrier; I was not fit to be seen,' she said.

'Hardly a ladylike
admission,' replied the Fräulein, who felt that with Lady Mary her
chief duty was to reprove.

CHAPTER XV.

'OF ALL MEN ELSE I HAVE AVOIDED
THEE.'

It was afternoon. A careful study of photographs
of Hinkley and other New England-built engines of the period will reveal this style of construction.
The frame of the Pioneer differs from the usual riveted frame in that the top rail is 1-3/4
inches thick by 4-1/8 inches deep and runs the length of the locomotive. The pedestals are
made of two 3/8-inch plates flush-riveted to each side of the top rail. The cast-iron shoes
which serve as guides for the journal boxes also act as spacers between the pedestal plates.

The bottom rail of the frame is a 1-1/8-inch diameter rod which is forged square at the pedestals
and forms the pedestal cap. The frame is further stiffened by two diagonal rods running from
the top of each truck-wheel pedestal to the base of the driving-wheel pedestal, forming a truss.
Six rods, riveted to the boiler shell and bolted to the frame's top rail, strengthen the frame
laterally. Four of these rods can be seen easily as they run from the frame to the middle of
the boiler; the other two are riveted to the underside of the boiler. The attachment of these
rods to the boiler was an undesirable practice, for the boiler shell was thus subjected to
the additional strain of the locomotive's vibrations as it passed over the road. In later years,
as locomotives grew in size, this practice was avoided and frames were made sufficiently strong
to hold the engine's machinery in line without using the boiler shell.

The front and rear frame beams are of flat iron plate bolted to the frame. The rear beam had
been pushed in during an accident, and instead of its being replaced, another plate was riveted
on and bent out in the opposite direction to form a pocket for the rear coupling pin. Note
that there is no drawbar and that the coupler is merely bolted to the beams. Since the engine
only pulled light trains, the arrangement was sufficiently strong.

RUNNING GEAR

