=24. Methods of Characterization.=--In our everyday life we are continually drawing inferences
in regard to the characters of those about us, and we do the same thing in a story. Some writers
tell us as clearly as they can the natures of the men and women they are revealing to us, while
others leave that almost wholly for us to conjecture. We shall employ, then, two sets of symbols
for character, one for direct statement of character, and one for character effects. The realization
of character through direct statement may include presentation of motives, ideas, passions,
will, special phases of development. It may come through report of the talk of others, or through
statement of opinion generally entertained. c1 we will use for direct statement of character,--"John
was a hard old miser,"--and we will add to this symbol the symbol a to indicate that this is
only so far potent with us as to make us know the writer's understanding of the character merely,
b to indicate that we recognize the writer's feeling for the character but do not share it,
and c to indicate that the writer's feeling for his character affects us sympathetically to
a like feeling. Another group of symbols, c2, c3, and c4, we will use for character "effects,"
for such knowledge of character as we gain by inference. c2 is a symbol for a general inference
regarding a group of people or a community; c3 and c4 are symbols for inferences regarding
the individual, c3 indicating the recognition of type or class qualities, c4, the recognition
of more individual traits of character. The distinction here is merely one of matter of fact,
a distinction not always to be made with sureness, since it is one of degree rather than altogether
one of kind. When the way in which a man is good or cheerful or avaricious is differentiated
for us from the way in which another man is good or cheerful or avaricious, he is so far individualized.
Class characterization, c3, may be found along with individualization. The extreme accentuation
of one or a few characteristics to the disregard of others gives the effect of individualization,
but we shall understand this as in fact type characterization, since our natures are so complex
that in almost no case can the conduct of any one be understood through knowledge of a few
dominant traits of character. Individualization gives us intimacy of acquaintance; type or
class characterization makes us see merely the striking, peculiar, or controlling expressions
of personality. Guy Mannering in Scott's "Guy Mannering" is but a type of the conventional
soldier. Tito Milema in George Eliot's "Romola" presents so many sides of a complex nature
that we easily distinguish him from all other characters in fiction whatever.

=25. The Subjective and Objective.=--Writers, in their methods of presentation, may be broadly
divided into two classes, those who write subjectively and those who write objectively. A subjective
writer is one whose own personality, point of view, feeling, is insistent in what he writes.
An objective writer, on the other hand, is one who leaves the things of which he makes record
to produce their own impression, the writer himself remaining an almost impassive spectator,
telling the story with little or no comment. Chaucer, in the prologue to the "Canterbury Tales,"
betrays his personal feeling for his characters continually, and so is subjective. Shakespeare
in his plays is objective, presenting all sorts of men and women without show of his own attitude
toward them.

=26. Interest of the Plot and its Purpose.=--We have seen that interest in incident is a first
interest in the story. This interest, we must understand further, is not to be maintained by
having things happen in a matter regulated only by chance or the exigencies of the author's
invention at the moment. The unification of a story that results from the subordination of
minor incidents to a final outcome is an essential necessity of the plot. The plot, indeed,
is the arrangement of incidents with reference to the dénouement. The development of the plot
should be such as to indicate an end toward which the succession of incidents is tending, and
yet such as to keep the reader in suspense with regard to the nature of that end. There must
be novelty in the happenings, and yet the novelty must not be so great as to keep the reader
confused or strain belief. The permanent hold upon us of a piece of fiction is enhanced if
it embodies some central truth, illustrating the working out of some law of life, or involved
in the personal attitude of the writer toward some problem of existence. Only dilettanteism
and superficiality forget that an artist, giving the form of beauty to his conceptions, is
trying to make them as significant to others as they are to him, and that æsthetic and ethical,
or spiritual, significance are inextricably interwoven. It will, of course, be the care of
the artist to see that any didactic purpose is not obtrusive.

  F2b     1. 2. "Ye 'ill taste, Tammas," with settled melancholy.

  m3k     4. "Na, na; I've nae incleenation the day; it's an awful
  F2a     dispensation, this, Jeems. 5. She wuld be barely saxty."

  m3k     6. "Ay, ay, but we maun keep up the body sae lang as we're
             here, Tammas."

  c2/c4  7. "Weel, puttin' it that way, a'm not sayin' but yir
  m2      richt," yielding unwillingly to the force of circumstance.

  c4/m3  8. "We're here the day and there the morn, Tammas. 9. She
  m3      was a fine wumman--Mistress Stirton--a weel-livin' wumman:
             this will be a blend, a'm thinkin'."

  c4/m3  10. "She slippit aff sudden in the end; a'm judgin' it's
  m3      frae the Muirtown grocer; but a body canna discreeminate
             on a day like this."

             11. It was George Howe's funeral that broke the custom and
  F2b     closed the "service." 12. When I came into the garden
             where the neighbors were gathered, the "wricht" was
  Exp.+m2 removing his tray and not a glass had been touched. 13.
             Then I guessed that Drumtochty had a sense of the fitness
             of things and was stirred to its depths.

             14. "Ye saw the wricht carry in his tray," said Drumsheigh
             as he went home from the kirkyard.

  m3d     15. "Weel, yon's the last sicht o't ye' ill get or a'm no
  m3k     Drumsheigh. 16. 17. A'm ower auld in the horn to change noo.
  m3/F2b 18.

=27. Interpretative Application of the Symbols.=--A little discussion of the foregoing from
a "A Scholar's Funeral" in the "Bonnie Brier Bush" may serve to make some of these things clearer.
The fact that the "wricht" is silent here in the first sentence makes us know that this is
the usual custom and that these people have an underlying sense of decorum. Sentence two has
the same effect in their abstraction, and this is emphasized again in the "two graven images."
The third sentence is a mood "effect" of kind, since we recognize the conventionally sobered
feeling without the "settled melancholy." This is true again in sentence four, and in five
we have a "fact as effect," drawing the inference that they are a long-lived race in Drumtochty.
From the yielding to an invitation so framed as to put aside the semblance of yielding to inclination,
we get a knowledge of character which seems to us individual, but which is used by the author
to indicate a local community characteristic. The author's mood of amused observation is evident
here, too, in his unbelieving acquiescence in Tammas's point of view. In sentences eight and
nine we come to know Jeems in a more individual way, through the mingling in him of moods of
conventional solemnity and everyday discussion. This is repeated in sentence ten. In sentence
twelve we draw an emotional inference concerning the degree of their feeling from the fact
that "not a glass had been touched." This is told in the explanatory way in thirteen with the
addition of a suggestion of the author's sympathetic understanding and appreciation. Knowing
Drumsheigh's reserve, from things that have gone before this in the story, we feel that only
strong emotion could have called out sentence fifteen; and the apologetic tone of sixteen and
seventeen indicates rather mood than such heightened feeling. Sentence eighteen returns to
the mood of fifteen and sixteen, and through the fact of Domsie's standing "ahent the brier
bush" reveals both Domsie's mood and Drumsheigh's own in our knowledge of its emotional appeal
to him.

=28. Different Forms of the Story.=--It is to be understood that certain types of the short
story are not included in this study as not being available for detailed work. Stories in which
the interest is almost wholly dependent upon the succession of incidents can profitably be
studied only with relation to the plot. Generally in such cases the things that make the story
effective will be readily apparent, and they can be brought out by a few questions. To give
variety and interest to the work the teacher will occasionally find it desirable to call attention
to stories in current periodicals, requiring the class to bring in analyses of them showing
structure of the plot, methods of managing the reader's sympathies, fundamental motive of the
story, the treatment of character and methods of presenting it, and such other things as seem
most of moment in the story in question. When library facilities permit, it will be found worth
while to make some comparison of the short story as it is now written in America with the short
stories of fifty years ago and of the present day in England and France. No classification
of stories is attempted here, since such classification is of no particular moment to the writer
of stories.

A FEW CAUTIONS

=29.= The suggestions that follow are phrased to cover the matter of visualization, but they
touch upon general principles which are of wider application. It has seemed more convenient
at this point to give them this specific treatment.

=30. Author's Purpose should be Concealed.=--An attempt to bring about a visualization or any
other artistic effect in the mind of the reader is foredoomed to failure when in any way the
writer's purpose too evidently betrays itself as such. Too much in the way of direct statement
or predication is one indication of such purpose, and is therefore more or less ineffectual.
For effective visualization some sort of preparation of the mood or sympathies of the reader
is generally required. This, however, should be concealed, being accomplished through suggestion,
as is the visualization itself.

=31. Unity in Visualization.=--A visualization should be so managed as to bring the whole picture,
or nearly all of it, into the mind at once. It is partly because it does not do this that the
method by details is not generally effective. A string of incomplete images passing through
the mind, each one taking the place of the preceding and effacing it, is not artistically satisfying.
It is possible to retain such separate images and at the end bring them together in a complete
picture, but this will require effort on the part of the reader; and it is fundamentally important
in all writing to reduce the conscious attention and effort of the reader to the lowest point.
Only extreme literary art can so nullify this effort in effect as to make description by detail
pleasurable, if of any length. Description by detail is, perhaps, more admissible in writing
having a meditative tone than in any other, except, of course, technical description.

=32. Fine Writing.=--Fine writing is especially to be avoided in visualization, since the tone
of artificiality is immediately destructive of the reader's confidence in the sincerity of
the writer. It betrays the author's purpose of producing an effect. The appearance of truth
free from any semblance of over-statement is a first requisite.

=33.= In any visualization harmony of detail is of prime importance. Even in describing something
actually seen it will sometimes be necessary to leave out items really present, but not of
a kind to contribute to the general effect. The saying that "Truth is stranger than fiction"
should read that fiction may not be as strange as truth. Harmony of mood is important, as well
as harmony of detail, in the thing described. If the picture is a quiet one, exclamatory excitement
on the part of the writer, however affecting the scene may be supposed to be, will prevent
its becoming real to the reader. These things are, then, to be borne in mind with regard to
the elements of a visualization: the details presented must be so far true to common knowledge
and experience as to gain ready belief, they must have unity in fact and in effect, and they
must also be sufficiently individual to appeal to the mind with something of the sense of novelty.

REFERENCE TABLE OF SYMBOLS

    Exp.   = Explanatory matter.

    F1  = Statement of fact from which no inference is drawn.

    F2  = Statement of fact from which an inference is drawn.

    F2a = Statement of fact with inference mainly logical.

    F2b = Statement of fact with inference mainly emotional.

    In.  = Statement of incident, secondary symbols as with F.

    As1 = Anticipatory suggestion, a foretelling of something to
               happen, leaving the reader in doubt as to how it is to
               be brought about.

    As2 = Anticipatory suggestion, a foreshowing of something
               definite to happen, exciting the reader's curiosity to
               know what it is and how it is to be brought about.

    As3 = Anticipatory suggestion, a foreshadowing of something
               to be expected in the way of character development and
               consequent happening.

    V1  = Description in which the mere idea of the thing
               described is presented.

    V2  = A kindling hint by which the mind is enabled to piece
               together a visualization of the object.

    V3  = Visualization of so vivid a kind as to possess the mind
               completely. This becomes

    Vb3   when it pleasurably affects the sensibilities.

    A1  = Audition in the way of simple idea of the thing to be
               heard.

    A2  = Audition as a reviving of the sense of sound.

    S1  = Sensation, the mere presentation of the idea of an
               appeal to one of the other senses.

    S2  = Sensation, a subjective reviving of the sensation
               itself.

    x      used to indicate that a subjective excitation of some one
               of the senses has motor effects, as in the shiver at the
               thought of a file upon the teeth.

    m1  = Mood "effect," from which we learn the feeling of the
               writer without experiencing it ourselves.

    m2  = Mood "effect" from which we sympathetically experience
               the feeling of the writer.

    m3  = Mood "effect," a revelation of the feeling of a
               character in the story.

    c1  = Direct statement of character.

    c1a = Direct statement of character that does not reveal the
               author's attitude toward the character.

    c1b = Direct statement in which we are made aware of the
               author's attitude toward the character, but are not
               affected by it.

    c1c = Direct statement of character sympathetically
               influencing us to the author's attitude toward the
               character.

    c2  = Character "effect," characterization of a group or
               community of people.

    c3  = Character "effect," class or type characterization of
               the individual.

    c4  = Character "effect" in the way of individualization.

    d    = Degree, added to symbol for mood effect to indicate
               intensity of the feeling.

    k    = Kind, used to indicate that the inference concerns itself
               with character and not intensity.

    /    = A symbol employed (see section 26) to indicate that one
               inference is drawn as an ultimate conclusion from
               another more immediate inference.

SUBJECTS FOR DAILY THEMES

Subjects for visualization and the reviving of other sensations.

1. A sunset sky. 2. A group in the park. 3. A spring freshet. 4. The man at the threshing machine.
5. The city across the river: night. 6. Moonlight among the hills. 7. A city street. 8. The
college campus. 9. Eleanor's rose garden. 10. The witch of Endor (1 Sam. xxviii: 6-25). 11.
Mt. Pelée in eruption. 12. The woods at night. 13. David playing before Saul. 14. A ferny water
course among the trees. 15. A bluebird in the orchard. 16. The violinist. 17. In time of apple
blossoms. 18. The scent of new-mown hay. 19. Barbara at the piano. 20. The first watermelon.
21. Sailing with the wind. 22. Dawn in the mountains. 23. The wind among the pines. 24. The
blacksmith and the forge.

Subjects for presentation of mood.

1. Uncle Dick hears the news. 2. Balboa catches sight of the Pacific. 3. Silas explains himself.
4. Napoleon looking back at Moscow. 5. Congressman Norris is refused the floor of the convention.
6. Johnnie is told that he may go to the circus. 7. Ethan Allen at Ticonderoga. 8. Bamba, king
of an island in the south seas, sees the first ship of the white man. 9. Alfred meets a Hallowe'en
obstacle.

Subjects for visualization and presentation of facts as "effects."

1. A deserted house. 2. In the second-hand store. 3. The railroad wreck. 4. The beggar at the
door. 5. Representative Dongan reads a letter from "The Corners." 6. A woman at the station.
7. Mrs. Humphrey's kitchen. 8. The trail of war.

Subjects for character studies.

1. The village oracle. 2. The landlord of the Lion Inn. 3. The old stage-driver. 4. The conductor.
5. An old-fashioned music-master. 6. A pirate captain. 7. A country beau. 8. Deacon Bradley.
9. The school bully. 10. The female suffragist. 11. One of the four hundred. 12. A disciple
of Mrs. Eddy. 13. "The man with the hoe." 14. The scissors grinder. 15. Captain Doty of the
police. 16. A candidate for office.

THE COMPLETE STORY

The invention of situations and plots can hardly be a matter of class-room instruction. If
stories come to one, it is well. Study of the detailed means of making them living for the
reader will then be worth while. The student should be encouraged to invent plots of his own,
but as a simplification of this difficulty, to the end that some exercise in the writing of
a complete story may be had, plots of some successful published stories are here given with
suggestions regarding methods of treatment.

I

    Scene, a saloon where both men and women are drinking. One of
    them, a girl, thinks she sees at the window the face of Christ
    with his tender eyes. She leaves and will not permit the others
    to go with her.

    At a little distance she comes upon the stranger waiting for
    her. He tells her that when she wakes it will be to a new life
    and she will be his, bidding her go to a house he points out and
    remain for the night. She obeys, and the man passes into the
    shadow.

    Introductory sentence in the original, giving the atmosphere of
    the story: "This was the story the mystic told." Concluding
    sentence in the original, connecting it with our sense of
    unfathomable mysteries: "And this the listener gravely asked,
    'One was chosen, the others left. Were the others less in need
    of grace?'"

    Divisions of the story. 1. Visualizing description of the saloon
    and of the street outside through which the stranger passes.

    2. Appearance of the face at the pane and its effect on the
    young girl (m3 "effect"). This is the difficult part of the
    story, and the reader can be made to believe in it only through
    sympathy with the girl's feeling.

    3. The talk of her companions and her answers (m3).

    4. Her search for the stranger in the night (m3).

    5. His talk to her when she finds him.

This story in the original contains a little less than two thousand words. It will be seen
at once that unless handled in such fashion as to appeal vividly to the imagination, a story
with this for its theme will seem weak and unreal. It must be made as suggestive as possible
or it will fail. It preaches, but it must avoid the air of preaching. Consider carefully how
you would present the stranger--whether first at the window or before--so as to affect the
reader with a sense of something more than human in him.

II

    Scene of the story is the prairie desert of the West in time of
    drouth. A party of men, including two who are not yet through
    their work in an eastern college, are riding in search of water,
    having had none for two days. Water is found, but shortly
    afterwards one of the two young men is missing. The talk of the
    others reveals the absent one's unselfishness and friendly
    devotion to his chum. Soon he is seen riding up excitedly and
    beckoning. The others follow him to a rough eminence, where he
    stops and listens, imploring them to tell him whether they can
    hear a voice calling. When they hear it too, he is assured that
    he has not lost his reason from the thirst, and together they
    begin a search which results in their discerning a cavern in the
    side of an embankment where a man lies on a couch moaning for
    water. As they try to enter, he warns them away with the cry of
    "smallpox."

    The story is told to a group of friends gathered together of an
    evening, and the narrator draws from among his books a copy of
    Shakespeare found in the cavern by one of the men, bearing on
    its fly leaf, in addition to the owner's name, the word
    Brasenose, the name of one of the colleges at Oxford. The
    pathos of the story is in this last touch, an Oxford student
    dying so loathsome a death in a strange and desert land, and
    dying so heroically.

    Divisions of the story. 1. Visualization of the desert and the
    men. The scent of water. Drinking from the muddied stream.

    2. One of the young men starts off alone in a delirium of pain
    (m3). He returns suffering from the fear that he has lost his
    reason (m3).

    3. The discovery of the cave (V3 and F2b). The delirious
    talk of the sick man. His sudden joy in the unexpected presence
    of human beings (V3 and m3). His final "G'way! G'way!
    Smallpox!"

    4. The narrator of the story shows the copy of Shakespeare and
    the inscription on the fly leaf.

The story in the original contains about three thousand words. It is important that the suffering
of the men be developed at some length in a convincing fashion. It serves as a preparation
for the more terrible suffering of the one man who moans for water as he tears the foul smallpox
sores. This should be presented in as visualizing a way as possible and with as full showing
of mood as may be. The conclusion in division 4 must be altogether different in tone from the
preceding. Narrator and listeners are in a world of ease and comfort, and their interest in
the story is an interest in something pathetically remote.

SITUATIONS TO BE DEVELOPED INTO PLOTS

