THE STORY OF

ISAAC BROCK

HERO, DEFENDER AND SAVIOUR OF

UPPER CANADA

1812

BY

WALTER R. NURSEY

     "By his unrivalled skill, by great
     And veteran service to the state,
     By worth adored,
     He stood, in high dignity,
     The proudest knight of chivalry,
     Knight of the Sword."
             --Coplas de Manrique.

TORONTO:

WILLIAM BRIGGS

1908

Copyright, Canada, 1908, by WALTER R. NURSEY.

A WORD TO THE READER

That Isaac Brock is entitled to rank as the foremost defender of the flag Western Canada has
ever seen, is a statement which no one familiar with history can deny. Brock fought and won
out when the odds were all against him.

At a time when almost every British soldier was busy fighting Napoleon in Europe, upon General
Brock fell the responsibility of upholding Britain's honour in America. He was "the man behind
the gun"--the undismayed man--when the integrity of British America was threatened by a determined
enemy.

His success can be measured by the fact that it is only since the war of 1812-14 that the British
flag has been properly respected in the western hemisphere. It is also a fact that after the
capture of Detroit the Union Jack became more firmly rooted in the affections of the Canadian
people than ever.

It must not be forgotten that the capture of this stronghold was almost as far-reaching in
its ultimate effect as the victory of Wolfe on the Plains of Abraham, and was fraught with
little, if any, less import to Canada.

What with the timidity of Prevost, and the tactical blunders of both himself and Sheaffe, the
immediate influence upon the enemy of the victories at Detroit and Queenston was almost nullified. Cæsar
had placed the king under guard, but Arsinoë--his younger sister--had slipped out of the palace
to join herself to the advancing host of Achillas, and speedily that general would be at hand.
Cæsar as usual was everywhere, with new schemes for the defences, new enthusiasm for his officers,
new inspiration for his men. No one slept nor cared to sleep inside the palace walls. They toiled
for dear life, for with morning, at most, Achillas would be upon them; and by morning, if Pothinus's
plans had not failed, they would have been drugged and helpless to a man, none able to draw
sword from scabbard. It was a new experience to one and all, for these Romans to stand on the defensive.
For once Cæsar had made a false step--he ought to have taken on his voyage more men. He stood
with his handful, with the sea on one side of him and a great city
and a nation in arms against him on the other.

The struggle was not to be for empire, but for life. But the Romans were too busy that night to
realize anything save the need of untiring exertion. If they had counted the odds against them,
four thousand against a nation, they might well have despaired, though their chieftain were
Cæsar.

Two years earlier Drusus, as he hurried to and fro transmitting orders for his general, might
have been fain to draw aside and muse on the strangeness of the night
scene.

                                 

                                                     W. R. N.

Toronto, October, 1908.

    NOTE.--Of the hundred and more books and documents consulted in a
    search for facts I would register my special obligations to Tupper's
    "Life of Brock"; Auchinleck's "History of the War of 1812-14";
    Cruikshank's "Documentary History," and Richardson's "War of 1812"
    (edited by Casselman).

CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                                  PAGE

     I. OUR HERO'S HOME--GUERNSEY                          11

    II. SCHOOL AND PASTIMES                                16

   III. FROM ENSIGN TO COLONEL                             21

    IV. EGMONT-OP-ZEE AND COPENHAGEN                       27

     V. BROCK IN CANADA                                    36

    VI. BRIDLE-ROAD, BATTEAU AND CANOE                     40

   VII. MUTINY AND DESERTION                               47

  VIII. FRANCE, THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA               52

    IX. FUR-TRADERS AND HABITANTS                          55

     X. THE MASSACRE AT MACKINAW                           59

    XI. LITTLE YORK, NIAGARA, AMHERSTBURG                  64

   XII. MAJOR-GENERAL BROCK, GOVERNOR OF UPPER CANADA      72

  XIII. THE WAR CLOUD                                      75

   XIV. THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA DECLARES WAR          80

    XV. BROCK ACCEPTS HULL'S CHALLENGE                     87

   XVI. "EN AVANT, DETROIT!"                               92

  XVII. OUR HERO MEETS TECUMSEH                            96

 XVIII. AN INDIAN POW-WOW                                 100

   XIX. THE ATTACK ON DETROIT                             105

    XX. BROCK'S VICTORY                                   109

   XXI. CHAGRIN IN THE UNITED STATES                      112

  XXII. PREVOST'S ARMISTICE                               117

 XXIII. "HERO, DEFENDER, SAVIOUR"                         121

  XXIV. BROCK'S LAST COUNCIL                              128

   XXV. THE MIDNIGHT GALLOP                               135

  XXVI. THE ATTACK ON THE REDAN                           140

 XXVII. VAN RENSSELAER'S CAMP                             144

XXVIII. A FOREIGN FLAG FLIES ON THE REDAN                 147

  XXIX. THE BATTLE OF QUEENSTON HEIGHTS                   152

   XXX. THE DEATH OF ISAAC BROCK                          156

        SUPPLEMENT--

          AFTER BROCK'S DEATH                             161

          SUBSEQUENT EVENTS OF THE CAMPAIGN OF 1812       165

          THE CAMPAIGN OF 1813                            167

          THE CAMPAIGN OF 1814                            171

          WHAT OF CANADA?                                 173

        APPENDIX                                          175

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

                                                               PAGE

PORTRAIT OF MAJOR-GENERAL SIR ISAAC BROCK            Frontispiece

"VIEW OF ST. PETER'S PORT, GUERNSEY, 18 x 6"                     11

NAVY HALL, REMNANT OF THE OLD "RED BARRACKS," NIAGARA, 1797      27

PORTRAIT OF COLONEL JAMES FITZGIBBON                             32

VIEW OF QUEENSTON ROAD, ABOUT 1824                               40

RUINS OF OLD POWDER MAGAZINE, FORT GEORGE                        52

BROCK'S COCKED HAT                                               64

BUTLER'S BARRACKS (OFFICERS' QUARTERS), NIAGARA COMMON           75

OUR HERO MEETS TECUMSEH. "THIS IS A MAN!"                        96

LIEUT.-COLONEL JOHN MACDONELL                                   109

VIEW OF QUEENSTON HEIGHTS AND BROCK'S MONUMENT                  117

"PORTRAIT OF MAJOR-GENERAL BROCK, 18 X 6"                       121

POWDER MAGAZINE, FORT GEORGE, NIAGARA                           128

BROCK'S MIDNIGHT GALLOP                                         135

BATTLE OF QUEENSTON HEIGHTS. From an old Print                  140

DEATH OF ISAAC BROCK                                            156

BROCK'S COAT, WORN AT QUEENSTON HEIGHTS                         159

BATTLE OF QUEENSTON. From an old Sketch                         161

PLAN OF BATTLE OF QUEENSTON                                     163

TAKING OF NIAGARA, MAY 27TH, 1813. From an old Print            170

CENOTAPH, QUEENSTON HEIGHTS                                     172

BROCK'S MONUMENT                                                174

     NOTE.--For full description of above illustrations, see
     Appendix, page 175.

THE STORY OF ISAAC BROCK

CHAPTER I.

OUR HERO'S HOME--GUERNSEY.

Off the coast of Brittany, where the Bay of Biscay fights the white horses of the North Sea,
the Island of Guernsey rides at anchor. Its black and yellow, red and purple coast-line, summer
and winter, is awash with surf, burying the protecting reefs in a smother of foam. Between
these drowned ridges of despair, which warn the toilers of the sea of an intention to engulf
them, tongues of ocean pierce the grim chasms of the cliffs.

Between this and the sister island of Alderney the teeth of the Casquets cradle the skeleton
of many a stout ship, while above the level of the sea the amethyst peaks of Sark rise like
phantom bergs. In the sunlight the rainbow-coloured slopes of Le Gouffre jut upwards a jumble
of glory. Exposed to the full fury of an Atlantic gale, these islands are well-nigh obliterated
in drench. From where the red gables cluster on the heights of Fort George, which overhang
the harbour, to the thickets of Jerbourg, valley and plain, at the time we write of, were a
gorgeous carpet of anemones, daffodils, primroses and poppies.

These are tumultuous latitudes. Sudden hurricanes, with the concentrated force of the German
Ocean behind them, soon scourge the sea into a whirlpool and extinguish every landmark in a
pall of gray. For centuries tumult and action have been other names for the Channel Islands.
It is no wonder that the inhabitants partake of the nature of their surroundings. Contact with
the elements produces a love for combat. As this little book is largely a record of strife,
and of one of Guernsey's greatest fighting sons, it may be well to recall the efforts that
preceded the birth of our hero and influenced his career, and through which Guernsey retained
its liberties.

For centuries Guernsey had been whipped into strife. From the raid upon her independence by
David Bruce, the exiled King of Scotland, early in 1300, on through the centuries up to the
seventeenth, piping times of peace were few and far between. The resources of the island led
to frequent invasions from France, but while fighting and resistance did not impair the loyalty
of the islanders, it nourished a love of freedom, and of hostility to any enemy who had the
effrontery to assail it. As a rule the sojourn of these invaders was brief. When sore pressed
in a pitched battle on the plateau above St. Peter's Port, the inhabitants would retreat behind
the buttresses of Castle Cornet, when, as in the invasion by Charles V. of France, the fortress
proving impregnable, the besiegers would collect their belongings and sail away.

In the fourteenth century Henry VI. of England, in consideration of a red rose as annual rental,
conveyed the entire group to the Duke of Warwick. But strange privileges were from time to
time extended to these audacious people. Queen Elizabeth proclaimed the islands a world's sanctuary,
and threw open the ports as free harbours of refuge in time of war. She authorized protection
to "a distance on the ocean as far as the eye of man could reach." This act of grace was cancelled
by George the Third, who regarded it as a premium on piracy. In Cromwell's time Admiral Blake
had been instructed to raise the siege of Castle Cornet. He brought its commander to his senses,
but only after nine years of assault, and not before 30,000 cannon-balls had been hurled into
the town.

Late in the fourteenth century, when the English were driven out of France, not a few of those
deported, who had the fighting propensity well developed, made haste for the Channel Islands,
where rare chances offered to handle an arquebus for the King. Among those who sought refuge
in Guernsey there landed, not far from the Lion's Rock at Cobo, an English knight, Sir Hugh
Brock, lately the keeper of the Castle of Derval in Brittany, a man "stout of figure and valiant
of heart." This harbour of refuge was St. Peter's Port.

     "Within a long recess there lies a bay,
     An island shades it from the rolling sea,
     And forms a port."

The islet that broke the Atlantic rollers was Castle Cornet. Sir Hugh Brock, or Badger in the
ancient Saxon time--an apt name for a tenacious fighter--shook hands with fate. He espied the
rocky cape of St. Jerbourg, and ofttimes from its summit he would shape bold plans for the
future, the maturing of which meant much to those of his race destined to follow.

The commercial growth of the Channel Islands has been divided into five periods, those of fishing,
knitting (the age of the garments known as "jerseys" and "guernseys"), privateering, smuggling,
and agriculture and commerce. To the third period belong these records. The prosperity of the
islands was greatest from the middle of the seventeenth century up to the overthrow of Napoleon
at Waterloo and the close of Canada's successful fight against invasion in 1815. During this
period the building of ships for the North Atlantic and Newfoundland trade opened new highways
for commerce, but the greatest factor in this development was the "reputable business" of privateering,
which must not be confounded either with buccaneering or yard-arm piracy. It was only permitted
under regular letters of marque, was ranked as an honorable occupation, and those bold spirits,
the wild "beggars of the sea"--who preferred the cutlass and a roving commission in high latitudes
to ploughing up the cowslips in the Guernsey valleys, or knitting striped shirts at home--were
recognized as good fighting men and acceptable enemies.

Trade in the islands, consequent upon the smuggling that followed and the building of many
ships, produced much wealth, creating a class of newly rich and with it some "social disruption."

Notable in the "exclusive set," not only on account of his athletic figure and handsome face,
but for his winning manners and ability to dance, though but a boy, was Isaac Brock. Isaac--a
distant descendant of bold Sir Hugh--was the eighth son of John Brock, formerly a midshipman
in the Royal Navy, a man of much talent and, like his son, of great activity. Brock, the father,
did not enjoy the fruit of his industry long, for in 1777, in his 49th year, he died in Brittany,
leaving a family of fourteen children. Of ten sons, Isaac, destined to become "the hero and
defender of Upper Canada," was then a flaxen-haired boy of eight.

Anno Domini 1769 will remain a memorable one in the history of the empire. Napoleon, the conqueror
of Europe, and Wellington, the conqueror of Napoleon, were both sons of 1769. This same year
Elizabeth de Lisle, wife of John Brock, of St. Peter's Port, bore him his eighth son, the Isaac
referred to, also ordained to become "a man of destiny." Isaac's future domain was that greater,
though then but little known, dominion beyond the seas, Canada--a territory of imperial extent,
whose resources at that time came within the range of few men's understanding. Isaac Brock,
as has been shown, came of good fighting stock, was of clean repute and connected with most
of the families of high degree on the Island. The de Beauvoirs, Saumarez, de Lisles, Le Marchants,
Careys, Tuppers and many others distinguished in arms or diplomacy, were his kith and kin.
His mind saturated with the stories of the deeds of his ancestors, and possessed of a spirit
of adventure developed by constant contact with soldiers and sailors, it was but natural that
he became cast in a fighting mould and that "to be a soldier" was the height of his ambition.

Perhaps Isaac Brock's chief charm, which he retained in a marked degree in after life--apart
from his wonderful thews and sinews, his stature and athletic skill--was his extreme modesty
and gentleness. The fine old maxim of the child being "father to the man" in his case held good.

CHAPTER II.

SCHOOL AND PASTIMES.

Guernsey abounded in the natural attractions that are dear to the youth of robust body and
adventurous nature. Isaac, though he excelled in field sports and was the admiration of his
school-fellows, was sufficiently strong within himself to find profit in his own society. In
the thickets that overlooked Houmet Bay he found solace apart from his companions. There he
would recall the stories told him of the prowess of his ancestor, William de Beauvoir, that
man of great courage, a Jurat of the royal court. Even here he did not always escape intruders.
Outside the harbour of St. Peter's Port, separated by an arm of the sea, rose the Ortach Rock,
between the Casquets and "Aurigny's Isle," a haunted spot, once the abode of a sorcerer named
Jochmus. To secure quiet he would frequently visit this isolated place, in spite of the resident
devil, the devil-fish, or the devil-strip of treacherous water which ran between.

He was not ten when, to the amazement of his friends in imitation of Leander but without the
same inducements, he swam the half mile to the reefs of Castle Cornet and back again, through
a boiling sea and rip-tides that ran like mill-races. This performance he repeated again and
again. For milder amusement he would tramp to the water-lane that stole through the Moulin
Huet, a bower of red roses and perfume, or walk by moonlight to the mystic cromlechs, where
the early pagans and the warlocks and witches of later days flitted round the ruined altars.

Though Isaac was self-contained and resolute he had a restless spirit. Fearless, without a
touch of the braggart, his courage was of the valiant order, the quality that accompanies a
lofty soul in a strong body. For his constant courtesy and habit of making sacrifices for his
friends, he was in danger of being canonized by his school-fellows.

About this time, shortly after his father's death, it was suggested he should leave the Queen
Elizabeth School on the Island and study at Southampton. Here he tried his best, boy though
he was, to live up to the standard of what he had been told were his obligations as a gentleman,
acquiring, too, a little book-learning and much every-day knowledge.

Isaac's holidays, always spent in his beloved Guernsey, increased the thirst for adventure.
The spirit of conquest, the controlling influence of his after life, grew upon him. Something
accomplished, something done, was the daily rule. To scale an impossible cliff with the wings
of circling sea-fowl beating in his face, to land a big conger eel without receiving a shock,
to rescue a partridge from a falcon, to shoot a rabbit at fifty paces, to break a wild pony,
or even to scan a complicated line in his syntax--these were achievements, small perhaps, but
typical of his desire. His young soul was stirred; the blood coursed in his veins as the sap
courses in the trees of the forest in spring; his mind, susceptible to the influences of nature,
was strengthened and purified by these pursuits.

In the shelter of silent trossach, on wind-swept height, or on wildest, ever-restless sea,
he would, as the mood seized him, take his solitary outings. These jaunts, he told his mother,
gave him time to reflect and resolve. It was not strange that he selected a profession that
presented the opportunities he craved.

       *       *       *       *       *

England with folded arms was at peace. The Treaty of Versailles had terminated the disastrous
war with America. The independence of the "Thirteen States" had been recognized. The world
was drawing a long breath, filling its fighting lungs, awaiting the death struggle with Napoleon
for the supremacy of Europe. Yet the spirit of war lingered in the air. It even drifted on
the breeze across the Channel to Guernsey, and filtered through the trees that crowned the
Lion's Rock at Cobo. It invaded the valleys of the Petit Bot and stirred the bulrushes in the
marshes of Havelet. The pulse of our hero throbbed with the subtle infection. Not with the
brute lust for other men's blood, but with the instinct of the true patriot to shed, if need
be, his own blood to maintain the right. He would follow the example of his ancestors and fight
and die, if duty called him, in defence of king and country.

The sweet arrogance of youth uplifted him. Earth, air and water conspired to encourage him.
To satisfy this unspoken craving for action he would, from his outlook on the Jerbourg crags--where
bold Sir Hugh had sat for just such purpose years before--watch the Weymouth luggers making
bad weather of it beyond the Casquets; or challenge in his own boat the rip-tides between Sark
and Brechou, and the combers that romped between St. Sampson and the Isle of Herm.

There was no limit to this boy's hardihood and daring. The more furious the gale the more congenial
the task. Returning from these frequent baptisms of salt water, his Saxon fairness and Norman
freshness aglow with spray, he would loiter on the beach to talk to the kelp gatherers raking
amid the breakers, and to watch the mackerel boats, reefed down, flying to the harbour for
shelter. The crayfish in the pools would tempt him, he would try his hand at sand-eeling, or
watch the surf men feed a devil-fish to the crabs. Then up the gray benches of the furrowed
cliffs, starred with silver lichens and stone-crop, to where ploughmen were leaving glistening
furrows in the big parsnip fields. Then on through the tangle of sweet-briar, honeysuckle and
wild roses, where birds nested in the perfumed foliage, until, the summit reached, surrounded
by purple heather and golden gorse, he would look on the sea below, with Sark, like a "basking
whale, burning in the sunset." Then he would hurry to tell his mother of the day's exploits,
retiring to dream of strange lands and turbulent scenes, in which the roll of drums and roar
of cannon seemed never absent.

With his youthful mind possessed with the exploits of the King's soldiers in Europe and America,
and influenced by his brother John's example--then captain in the 8th Regiment of the line--Isaac
pleaded successfully to enter the army. To better prepare for this all-important step, and
to become proficient in French, a necessary accomplishment, it was arranged, though he was
only fifteen, to place him with a Protestant clergyman in Rotterdam for one year, to complete
his education.

His vacations now were few; his visits to the Island flying ones. But the old life still fascinated
him. His physique developed as the weeks flew by, and he became more and more a striking personality.
This was doubly true, for while he remained the champion swimmer, he was also the best boxer
of his class, besides excelling in every other manly sport. In tugs-of-war and "uprooting the
gorse" he had no equals, but a sense of his educational deficiencies kept him at his books.

He had only passed his sixteenth birthday when, one wild March morning in 1785, he was handed
an important-looking document. It was a parchment with the King's seal attached, his commission
of ensign in the 8th Regiment. Isaac at once joined the regimental depot in England. It was
evident that his lack of learning would prove a barrier to promotion. He found that much of
the leisure hitherto devoted to athletic sports must be given to study. Behind "sported oak,"
while dust accumulated on boxing-glove and foil--neither the banter of his brother officers
nor his love for athletics inducing him to break the resolution--he bent to his work with a
fixity of purpose that augured well for his future.

In every man's life there are milestones. Isaac Brock's life may fairly be divided into five
periods. When he crossed the threshold of his Guernsey home and donned the uniform of the King
he passed his first milestone.

CHAPTER III.

FROM ENSIGN TO COLONEL.

In every young man's career comes a time of probation. During this critical period that youth
is wise who enters into a truce with his feelings. This is the period when influences for good
or bad assert themselves--the parting of the ways. The sign-posts are painted in capitals.

When Brock buttoned his scarlet tunic and strapped his sword on his hip, as fine a specimen
of a clean-bodied, clean-minded youth as ever trod the turnpike of life, he knew that he was
at the cross-roads. The trail before him was well blazed, but straight or crooked, rough or
smooth, valley or height, it mattered little so long as he kept nourished the bright light
of purpose that burned steadily within him. 

Two or three freedmen of Lentulus were rushing toward the terrace. They were murdering Quintus!
He was resisting, resisting with all the powers of a wild animal driven to its last lair. Outside,
on the terrace, where but an instant before she and her lover were cooing in delicious ecstasy,
there were oaths, blows, and the sharp pants and howls of mortal struggle. And she could do
nothing--nothing! And it was through his love for her that Drusus was to go down to his untimely
grave! The seconds of struggle and anguish moved on leaden feet. Every breath was agony, every
sound maddening. And she could do nothing--nothing. Still they were fighting. Phaon--she knew
his voice--was crying out as if in grievous pain. And now the voice of Lucius Ahenobarbus
sounded again: "One thousand denarii if you fling him into the sea!"
and she could do nothing--nothing!

She tore down the purple tapestries around her bed, and dashed from its tripod a costly bowl
of opal Alexandrian glass--all in the mere rage of impotence. And still they were fighting. What
was that ornament hanging on the wall, half hid behind the torn tapestry? A scabbard--a sword,
some relic of ancient wars! And all the combatants were unarmed! The antique weapon was held
by stout thongs to the wall; she plucked it from its fastenings with the strength of a Titaness.
The rusty blade resisted an instant; she dragged it forth.

Then out on to the terrace. Really only a moment had elapsed since she left it. One of the slaves
was lying dead, or stunned, prone on the turf. Phaon was writhing and howling beside him, nursing
a broken jaw. The other assailants had sunk back in temporary repulse and were preparing for
a second rush. Drusus was still standing. He half leaned upon the stone pedestal of an heroic-sized
Athena, who seemed to be spreading her protecting ægis above him. His garments were rent to
the veriest shreds. His features were hidden behind streaming blood, his arms and neck were
bruised and bleeding; but clearly his adversaries could not yet congratulate themselves that
the lion's strength was too sapped to be no longer dreaded.

"Come, you," was his hot challenge to Lucius Ahenobarbus, who stood,
half delighted, half afraid, shivering and laughing spasmodically,
as he surveyed the struggle from a safe distance.

"Come, you, and have your share in the villany!"

And again, for it was all the affair of the veriest moment, the slaves rushed once more on their
indocile victim. "Freedom to the man who pulls him down!" was the incentive of Ahenobarbus.

But
again Drusus, who, to tell the truth, had to contend with only the
flabby, soft-handed, unskilful underlings of Lucius, struck out so
furiously that another of his attackers fell backward with a groan
and a gasp.

All this Cornelia saw while, sword in hand, she flew toward the knot of writhing men. She pushed
aside the slaves by sheer force. She asked no civilities, received none.

"Pull her away!" shouted Lucius, and started himself to accomplish his purpose. A rude hand smote
her in the face; she staggered, fell; but as she fell a hand snatched the sword out of her
grasp. She released her hold gladly, for did she not know that hand?

When she rose to her feet there were shrieks of fear and pain on every side.
 There was no question in Brock's
mind as to his duty--the duello at that time was the recognized court of appeal. If its purpose
as originally designed had at times been infamously abused, it was still the one and only arbiter
through which insults had to be purged and from which, for the "officer and gentleman," there
was no escape.

Now Isaac, who was several inches taller and much bulkier than the scoundrel who had insulted
him, declined to become a shining mark at the regulation twelve paces. He demanded from his
fire-eating antagonist that the duel proceed on equal terms. Whipping out his kerchief, cool
as a cucumber, his blue eyes steady and resolute, he insisted that they both fire across it.
The fairness of the proposal staggered the bully. The chances were not sufficiently one-sided.
If this plan was acted upon he might himself be killed. He refused to comply. The code of honour
and garrison approval sustained Brock in his contention, and the refusal of the professional
killer to fight under even chances was registered in the mess-room as the act of a coward,
and he left the regiment by compulsion.

In Jamaica the continued strain of inactivity under which our hero fretted told upon him, and
he was struck down with fever, his cousin, Henry Brock, lieutenant in the 13th Foot, dying
in Kingston of the same pestilence. At this time Isaac had as servant a soldier named Dobson,
one of those faithful souls who, true as steel, once installed in their master's affection,
remain loyal to the end. To the untiring attentions of this man Brock owed his life. Deep and
mutual respect followed, and the two became inseparable. Where Brock went, there was Dobson,
sharing his fortune and all the hard knocks of his military campaigns, a fellowship ending
only with Dobson's death, shortly before his "beloved master" gave up his life on Queenston
Heights.

Tropical malaria is hard to shake off. Release from duty was imperative, and as England was
now calling for recruits, the War Office summoned Brock, an alluring sample of a soldier, to
whom was assigned the task of licking the fighting country bumpkin--the raw material--into
shape. This he did, first in England, then in Guernsey and Jersey. A vision of our hero, glorious
in his uniform, was in itself sufficient to ensnare the senses of any country yokel. It was
a militant age.

When quartered in Guernsey, and from the same heights of Jerbourg where but a few years before
he was wont to sweep the ocean for belated fishing smacks, Brock saw his kinsman, Sir James
Saumarez, and the white canvas of a small squadron, heave in sight from Plymouth Roads. The
British sailor had been ordered to ascertain the strength of the French fleet. Saumarez' ships
were far slower than those of the enemy, so, feigning the greatest desire to fight, he lured
his opponent by a clever ruse. First he closed with him, and then, when his own capture seemed
inevitable, hauled his wind, slipped through a maze of reefs by an intricate passage--long
familiar to our hero--and found safety off La Vazon, where the Frenchmen dare not follow.

In June, 1795, Brock purchased his majority, but retained his command of the recruits. From
toes to finger-tips Isaac was a soldier, bent on mastering every detail of the profession of
his choice. A year after the return of the 49th to England, on the completion of his 28th year,
he became by purchase senior lieutenant-colonel of his regiment. High honour and rapid promotion,
considering that for five out of seven years' service he had remained an ensign. He had learned
to recognize opportunity, the earthly captain of a man's fate.

     "For every day I stand outside your door,
     And bid you wake and rise to fight and win."

But Brock's position was no sinecure. The regiment was in a badly demoralized condition. The
laxity of the late commanding officer had created a deplorable state of things. To restore
the lost morale of the corps was his first duty. The thoroughness of his reforms can be best
understood by quoting the words of the Duke of York, who declared that "out of one of the worst
regiments in the service Colonel Brock had made the 49th one of the best."

From the Commander-in-Chief of a nation's army to a colonel--not yet thirty--of a marching
regiment, this was an exceptional tribute.

Isaac's persistent endeavours were rapidly bringing their own reward.

CHAPTER IV.

EGMONT-OP-ZEE AND COPENHAGEN.

Meanwhile the war cloud in Europe was growing apace. Holland had been forced into an alliance
with France. War, no longer a spectre, but a grim monster, stalked the Continent. Everywhere
the hostile arts of Bonaparte were rousing the nations. The breezes that had stirred the marshes
of Havelet and awakened in Brock a sense of impending danger, now a furious gale, swept the
empires. The roll of drums and roar of cannon that Isaac had listened to in his boyhood dreams
were now challenging in deadly earnest. The great reveille that was awakening the world was
followed by the British buglers calling to arms the soldiers of the King.

Notwithstanding the aversion of the English prime minister, Pitt, to commence hostilities,
war was unavoidable. One of the twelve battalions of infantry selected for the front was the
49th. When the orders were read for the regiment to join the expedition to Holland, wild excitement
prevailed in barracks. Active service had come at last. The parting of Brock with his family
was softened by maternal pride in his appearance.

The tunic of the 49th was scarlet, with short swallow-tails. The rolling lapels were faced
with green, the coat being laced with white, with a high collar. The shako, which was originally
surmounted by white feathers with black tips, a distinction for services in the American war
of 1776, at Bunker's Hill and Brandywine, was, at Brock's special request, replaced by a black
plume. The officers wore their hair turned up behind and fastened with a black "flash." The
spectacle of Master Isaac thus arrayed, in all the glory of epaulets and sabretache and the
gold braid of a full colonel, reconciled the inhabitants of St. Peter's Port to his departure.

By the end of August the first division of the British army, of which the 49th was a unit,
was aboard the transports in the Zuyder Zee, off the coast of Holland, and early one morning,
under the command of Sir Ralph Abercrombie, with blare of trumpets and standards flying, they
effected a landing under the guns of the ships of the line, of which, with frigates and sloops,
there were well-nigh sixty. Brock had often listened to the roar of shot and shell in target
practice and sham fight, but of a cannonade of artillery, where every shrieking cannon-ball
was probably a winged messenger of death, this was his first experience. He now learned that
in the music of the empty shell of experiment and the wicked screech of the missiles of war
there was an unpleasant difference. He did not wince, but sternly drew himself together, thought
of home, begged God's mercy, and awaited the command to advance with an impatience that was
physical pain.

By four in the afternoon the Hilder Peninsula and its batteries had been taken, but with a
loss to the British of a thousand men. Brock could scarcely believe that the enemy had retreated.
This, however, was merely a taste of war. The second division having arrived, the whole force
of nearly 20,000 men, under the Duke of York, started to make history. In the last days of
a stormy September 16,000 Russian allies reached the scene. The fourth brigade, which included
the 49th, was under the command of General Moore--Sir John Moore, of Corunna fame. For several
weeks the waiting troops were encamped in the sand-hills without canvas and exposed to biting
storms. The capture of the city of Horn without resistance hardly prepared our hero and his
men for the stout opposition at the battle of Egmont-op-Zee that followed.

Brock's brother, Savery, a paymaster to the brigade, though by virtue of his calling exempt
from field service, insisted on joining the fighting line, acting as aide to Sir Ralph Abercrombie.

Every record, every line written or in print concerning Brock, from first to last, all prove
that the keynote of his success, the ruling impulse of his life, was promptness and action.
So, at Egmont, no sooner did the bugle sound the advance than he was off with his men like
a sprinter at the crack of the pistol. Others might follow; he would lead. They were part of
the advance guard of a column of 10,000 men. The enemy was in front in superior numbers, but
their weakness lay in underrating the courage of the British. They had been taught to consider
English soldiers the most undisciplined rabble in the world!

This was a factor unknown and unheeded by Brock. All that he knew was that an obstacle barred
the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Steady, the 49th!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The loud, clear notes of the leader rang above rasping of scabbards and suggestive clank of
steel. The men straightened. A suppressed exclamation ran along the line and died to a whisper.
Whispers faded into silence. A fraction of a second, perhaps, and then, high above the stillness,
when British and French alike were silently appealing to the God of battles, over steaming
dyke and yellow sand-dunes rose once more in trumpet tones the well-known voice, "Charge, men,
and use your bayonets with resolution!" No rules were followed as to the order of going--the
ground, to use Brock's words, was too rough, "like a sea in a heavy storm"--but the dogs of
war were let loose. The quarry was at bay. Another instant and the air was split with yells,
the clash of naked steel and screams of agony. Then cheer upon cheer, as the British swept
irresistibly on, and the enemy, declining to face the glittering bayonets and unable to resist
the impact of the English, wavered, broke and retreated.

The shedding of men's blood by man is never an edifying spectacle. The motive that prompts
the attack or repels it, the blind obedience that entails the sacrifice, the retribution that
follows, are more or less understandable. What of the compensation? There may be times when
a pure principle is at stake and must be upheld despite all hazards, but there are times when
there is no principle at stake whatever. These considerations, however, have no place in the
soldier's manual. They are questions for the court, not the camp, and cannot be argued on the
battlefield. The soldier is not invited to reason why, though many an unanswerable question
by a dying hero has been whispered in the trenches.

There was much carnage at Egmont-op-Zee, and many a 49th grenadier "lost the number of his
mess." Isaac directly after the fight wrote to his brothers that "Nothing could exceed the
gallantry of his men in the charge." To his own wound he referred in his usual breezy and impersonal
way.

We must appeal to his brother Savery for the actual facts.

That the action had been a hot one can be best judged by the official returns. Out of 391 rank
and file of the 49th in the field, there were 110 casualties--30 killed, 50 wounded and 30
missing. Savery Brock shared the honours with his brother. Oblivious to a hurricane of bullets,
he rode from sand-hill to sand-hill, encouraging the men until his truancy was noticed and
he was halted by Isaac. "By the Lord Harry, Master Savery," shouted the colonel, loud as he
could pitch his powerful voice, as the big paymaster strode by, his horse having been shot
under him, "did I not order you, unless you remained with the General, to stay with your iron
chest? Go back, sir, immediately." To which Savery answered, playfully, "Mind your regiment,
Master Isaac. You surely would not have me quit the field now." Of this intrepid brother Isaac
wrote, "Nothing could surpass Savery's activity and gallantry." Another of the wounded at Egmont
was Lord Aylmer, afterwards Governor-General of British North America. The loss of the enemy
was estimated at 4,000. Two weeks later the British troops--while suffering intensely from
severe weather--met with a reverse in the field, to which, through a misunderstanding of orders,
their Russian allies contributed. The Duke of York was ordered to evacuate the country. The
campaign had resulted in much experience and high honour for Brock. Quick to perceive and learn,
his powers of observation on the field had enriched his mind with lessons in the tactics of
war never to be forgotten.

In the ranks of the 49th was a young Irishman of superior talents. Brock was not slow to discover
his abilities, and "with a discrimination that honoured both," he later appointed this combative
private sergeant-major. Still later he procured him an ensigncy in the 49th, finally appointing
him adjutant, promotion that the ability and gallantry of James FitzGibbon, a Canadian veteran
of 1812, and the "hero of Beaver Dams" (Adjutant-General of Canada, 1837, and Military Knight
of Windsor, 1851), amply justified.

If Brock was quick to appreciate merit, he was no less so in detecting defects. The Russian
soldiers came in for scathing criticism. The type at Egmont impressed him most unfavourably.
The clumsy Russian foot-soldier was his special aversion. The accuracy of his criticism has
been confirmed by military writers, but this book is not for the purpose of weighing the quality
of Russian valour in Holland. Six thousand of these Russian allies, the lateness of the season
preventing their return home, were later quartered for six months in Guernsey.

While our hero was a severe military critic, he was never an unjust one, neither did he spare
his own men. Though not a martinet, which was foreign to every fibre of his nature, he was
a stickler for rigid discipline. When the expedition was recalled, he was first quartered in
Norwich, and then at the old familiar barracks of St. Helier, in Jersey. On his return to the
latter place, in 1800, after leave of absence, he found that the junior lieutenant-colonel
of the 49th--Colonel Sheaffe--had incurred the reasonable dislike of the men. The regiment
was drawn up on the sands for morning parade, standing at ease. In company with this unpopular
officer Brock appeared upon the scene. He was greeted with three hearty cheers. The personal
honour, however, was lost sight of in the act of disobedience. Rebuking the men severely for
"their most unmilitary conduct," they were marched to quarters and confined to barracks for
a week. He would not, he explained, allow public exaltation of himself at the expense of another.

The next year found our hero in the Baltic Sea, aboard the Ganges, detailed for active duty
as second in command of the land forces that under Lord Nelson were ordered to the attack on
Copenhagen. It was intended that Brock, with the 49th, should lead in storming the Trekroner
(Three Crown) battery, in conjunction with five hundred seamen; but the heroic defence by the
Danes rendered the attempt impracticable, and Brock remained on the Ganges, an unwilling spectator
of bloodshed in which he took no part. Towards the close of the engagement--the heaviest pounding
match in history--he was on the Elephant, Nelson's flagship, and saw the hero of Trafalgar
write his celebrated letter to the Crown Prince of Denmark.

As at Egmont, the irrepressible conduct of Savery Brock on the Ganges gave our hero much concern.
Savery, as a former midshipman, was of course a gunner. While training a quarter-deck gun on
the Trekroner battery his hat was blown from his head and he was knocked down by the rush of
wind from a grapeshot. Seeing this, Brock exclaimed, "Ah, poor Savery! He is indeed dead."
But, to use his own words, it was only "the hot air from the projectile that had 'floored'
him." Previous to this he had driven Isaac almost demented by stating his intention of joining
the storming party and sharing his brother's danger. "Is it not enough that one brother should
be killed or drowned?" said Isaac. But Savery persisted until, at Isaac's request, the commander
of the Ganges kept the paymaster quiet by stratagem. "Master Savery," said he, "you simply
must remain with us. I appoint you captain of the gun. It will amuse you."

The loss of the Danes at Copenhagen was placed at 6,000, including prisoners. The British killed
and wounded numbered 943, more than fell at the Battle of the Nile. Part of this loss is charged
to a criminal misconception of military etiquette. To a line officer who asked where his men
should be stationed, the captain of the battleship replied, that as soldiers were no good with
big guns, and as the forts were out of musket range, he should "send them between decks." This,
said the infantryman, "would be eternal disgrace." In deference to this brutal conception of
military ethics, the men were drawn up on the gangway and, standing at attention, were allowed
to be mowed down by Danish grapeshot. The 49th, on its return to England from Copenhagen, thoroughly
initiated in the cruel cult of war, was ordered to Colchester.

Isaac Brock, with the bay-leaves of distinction on his brow, and his heart touched but not
dismayed at the ferocity of war, had passed the second milestone of his life.

CHAPTER V.

BROCK IN CANADA.

Isaac Brock received with regret his orders to proceed with the 49th to Canada. Europe was
still in the clutches of war. Great opportunities awaited the soldier of fortune in the struggle
waging in the Peninsula. The prospect for military advancement in Canada was not encouraging.
America was at peace. Canada was but slowly developing. While her exports of lumber and fish
attracted the attention of the British merchant, her great resources were unknown except to
the fur trader and the few United States speculators whose cupidity kept pace with their knowledge.
Though the known sympathy of the United States for France was regarded as a possible excuse
for hostility towards England, as yet this sympathy had found no official utterance, hence
the outlook from a soldier's standpoint was far from desirable. Brock's life in the West Indies
had created a distaste for garrison duty. While a past master in the details of barrack life,
his career under arms had created an aversion for the grind of drill and parade.

Life in the high latitudes of Canada would present a clean-cut contrast to tropical Barbadoes,
but it was out of harmony with his ambition, and, judging by his spirits, he might have been
embarking for penal servitude at Botany Bay rather than for the land which was to bring him
lasting fame. Even the attentions of the devoted Dobson, who had just filled his pipe, did
not serve to arouse him. Brock's depression was short-lived. His optimism and faith banished
gloomy thoughts. The ship had hardly dropped the last headland of the Irish coast when the
winds bred in Labrador awoke the Viking strain in him and filled his soul with hope. The swinging
seas of this northern ocean revived thoughts of the long-ago exploits of Sebastian Cabot, the
discoverer of Newfoundland, and of his own sea-dog ancestors, those rough-riders of the sea
who had defied the banks of Sable Island and returned to St. Peter's Port with their rich cargoes
of contraband, looking innocent as kittens, while the ship was bursting with fur, fin and feather.
So, pipe in mouth, with the frigate close-hauled, watching her bows splintering the sea into
a million jewels, he left care behind, and thenceforward his busy brain was forming plans that
would soften his exile in that land of chilling promise he was approaching.

He had been told to expect magnificent scenery, but was quite unprepared for the picture that
the Gulf of St. Lawrence unfolded. The Straits of Belle Isle, the Magdalen Islands, the brazen
bosom of the Bay of Chaleur that had allured Jacques Cartier 265 years before, the might of
the noble river and the glorious vista of the citadel and frowning heights of Quebec, where
Wolfe and Montcalm fell--the ancient Stadacona framed in the sunset--amazed him. A presage
of coming conflict crowded his brain.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Manfully tell me the truth."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carr, an educated soldier of the 49th, was hesitating. Desertions had been frequent at Quebec,
and discipline must be restored. Stepping up, with hand clenched, the officer continued, "Don't
lie! Tell the truth like a man. You know I have ever treated you kindly." The confession of
intended desertion followed. "Go, then," said Colonel Brock,--"go and tell your deluded comrades
everything that has passed here, and also that I will still treat every man of you with kindness,
and then you may desert me if you please."

During the three years of his command at Montreal, York, Fort George and Quebec, though mutiny
was epidemic in both Europe and America, Brock had lost but one man by desertion. He had won
the loyalty of the rank and file. FitzGibbon said of him that "he created by his judicious
praise the never-failing interest of the men in the ranks." His accurate knowledge of human
nature served him in the graver experiences of life which followed. His stay in Quebec was
short. A study of the ancient citadel and its incomplete fortifications occupied his time.
In the summer of 1803 he was stationed at York, a hamlet carved out of the backwoods, sustaining
a handful of people, but famous as the gathering-place of many wise men. He found that desertions
in Upper Canada had become too frequent. The temptations offered by a long line of frontier
easy of access, and the desperate discipline in the army, had led to much brutality in the
way of punishments.

Such were the conditions in Upper Canada when Brock reached York. Shortly after his arrival
six men, influenced by an artificer, stole a military batteau and started across the lake to
Niagara. By midnight Brock, with his trusty sergeant-major and the ever-watchful Dobson, in
another batteau with twelve men, passed out of the western gap in hot pursuit of the defaulters.
Though the night was calm the trip was perilous. Before them stretched a waste of water, but
our hero was in his element. He was living over again his daring visits to the Casquets through
the furious seas that raced between St. Sampson and the Isle of Herm.

The crew was divided into "watches," six taking an hour's "breather" while the other six rowed,
hour and hour about, alternately rowing and resting. When the wind served they hoisted their
big square sail, our hero at the tiller. On this occasion there was little wind, and "Master
Isaac," for example's sake, and "to keep my biceps and fore-arm in good condition"--as he told
the sergeant-major--took his regular spells at the oar. On arriving at Fort George, Colonel
Hunter, Governor and Commandant, rebuked him for rashly venturing across the lake in an open
boat, "a risk," he said, "never before undertaken."[1] The expedition, however, was successful,
for the deserters were surprised on the American shore and made prisoners.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] Lake Ontario was crossed from Toronto to the wharf at the mouth of the Niagara River in
an ordinary double-scull, lap-strake pleasure-skiff, by the writer and another Argonaut--Herbert
Bartlett--one unruly morning in the summer of 1872. Though a risky row, and not previously
attempted, it was not regarded as a remarkable feat by the performers.

CHAPTER VI.

BRIDLE-ROAD, BATTEAU AND CANOE.

The means for transit through Canada at this time was most primitive, and not the least of
the questions which occupied Brock's thoughts was the important one of transportation. The
lack of facilities for moving large bodies of men and supplies, in event of war, was as apparent
as was the lack of vessels of force on lake and river.

Between Quebec and Montreal, a distance of sixty leagues, the overland journey was divided
into twenty-four stages, requiring four relays of horse-caleches in summer and horse-carioles
in winter. The time occupied was three days, and the rate for travellers twenty-five cents
a league. This rough road--which entailed numerous ferries in summer at the Ottawa and at Lake
St. Francis, except for a break of fifty miles--led by Cornwall and Prescott to Kingston, along
which route United Empire Loyalists twenty years before had established themselves.

A few years prior to Brock's arrival, Governor Simcoe, with the men of the Queen's Rangers,
had cut a roadway through the dense forest between Prescott and Burlington, at the head of
Lake Ontario. From Ancaster, the then western limit of the U.E. Loyalists' settlement, this
road traversed the picturesque region that surrounded the Mohawk village on the Grand River,
where Joseph Brant, the famous warrior, was encamped with his Six Nation Indians. From this
point it penetrated the rolling lands of the western peninsula, to the La Trenche (the Thames
River), from whence Lake St. Clair and the Detroit outlet to the great lakes was reached by
water. Another military road, also built by Simcoe, followed the old Indian trail through thirty-three
miles of forest from York to Lake Simcoe. This shorter route to Lake Superior enabled the North-West
Fur Company--established by Frobisher and McTavish, of Montreal, in 1776--to avoid canoeing
up the Ottawa and its tortuous tributaries. The batteaux were brought up the St. Lawrence,
breaking bulk at certain "carrying places," then under sail up Lake Ontario to York. From here
the cargoes were hauled by horses over Yonge's military road to Lake Simcoe, thence by river
and stormy Lake Huron to Fort Michilimackinac, Great Turtle Island--the Mackinaw of to-day--at
the head of Lake Michigan. By this route fifty dollars was saved on every ton of freight from
Ottawa to the middle north. At Mackinaw the goods were reshipped by bark canoe to the still
remoter regions in the further West, where Spanish pedlars on the southern tributaries of the
lower Mississippi traded with the Akamsea Indians in British goods distributed from Mackinaw.

The records of these trips through a wilderness of forest and stream, with their exhilarating
hardships, had a singular fascination for Isaac Brock. It was not long before he had won, with
his conquering ways and robust manhood, the allegiance of the big-hearted fur-traders in Montreal.
Their wild legends of the great fur country rang in his ears, and his receptive mind was soon
stored with the exploits of Radisson and Groseillers, Joliette, Marquette, and other famous
pathfinders, with whose exploits a century and a half before, aided by his fluency in French,
he became wonderfully familiar.

He found the evolution of the Canadian highway a subject of absorbing interest. From his Caughnawaga
guides he learned how the tracks made by lynx and beaver, rabbit and wolverine, wolf and red
deer--invariably the safest and firmest ways--were in turn naturally followed by Indian voyageur
and fur-trader, until the blazed trail became the bridle-road for the pack-horse of the pioneer.
This, as the white settler drifted in, became the winter-road; then, as civilization stifled
the call of the wild, there uprose from swamp and muskeg the crude corduroy, expanding by degrees
into the half-graded highway, until the turnpike and toll-bar, with its despotic keeper, exacted
its tribute from progress. This was the prelude to a still more amazing transformation, for
the day soon came, though not in our hero's time, when the drumming of the partridge was silenced
by the choo-choo of the locomotive as it shrieked through forest and beaver-meadow on its way
to vaster tracks, further and further west, disclosing and leaving in its trail an empire of
undreamed-of fertility. Then the redman, disturbed in his solitudes, was confronted with civilization,
and had to accept the terms of conquest or seek another sanctuary in the greater wilderness beyond.

The navigation of the lakes and rivers at this time was limited to three types of vessel, the
"snow," a three-master with a try-sail abaft the mainmast, the schooner, the batteau and the
birch canoe, and, in closely land-locked waters, the horse ferry. The Durham boat, a batteau
on a larger scale with false keel, had yet to be introduced. The bark canoe, which for certain
purposes has never been improved upon--not even excepting the cedar-built canoe--varied in
size from nine to thirty feet, or, in the language of the voyageur, from one and a half to
five fathoms. These canoes had capacity for a crew of from one to thirty men, or a cargo of
seventy "pieces" of ninety pounds each, equal to three tons, exclusive of provisions for nine
paddlers. In these arks of safety, manned by Indians or metis (half-breeds), the fur-trader
would leave Lachine, on the St. Lawrence, ascend the Ottawa, descend the French, cross Lake
Huron--the Lake Orleans of Nicollet and Hennepin--and find no rest from drench or riffle until
he reached Mackinaw, or more distant Fort Dearborn (now Chicago), on the Skunk River, at the
head of Lake Michigan, 1,450 miles by water from Quebec.

The batteaux--great, open, flat-bottomed boats, forty feet long and eight feet beam, pointed
at stem and stern--were not unlike the York boats used in Lord Wolseley's Red River expedition
in 1870, and would carry five tons of cargo. Rigged with a movable mast stepped almost amid-ships,
and a big lug-sail, these greyhounds of the lakes were, for passengers in our hero's time,
often the only means of water transport between Quebec and Little York. As important factors
in the transport of soldiers and munitions in the war of 1812, they deserve description.

While sailing well when before the wind, they yet, with their defective rig and keelless bottoms,
carrying no weather helm, made little headway with the wind close abeam. On one occasion Isaac
Brock left Lachine with a brigade of five batteaux, so that all hands could unite in making
the portages. At the Cascades, the Milles Roches and the Cedars, three-quarters of the cargo
had to be portaged by the packmen. At times these lightened boats were poled or tracked through
the broken water, towed by the men, from such foothold as the rocky banks afforded, by means
of a long lariat tied to the boat's bow, with loops over each trackman's shoulder, one man
steering with a long sweep. When this treadmill work was impossible, owing to too steep banks,
and where no batteau locks existed, the crew hauled the boats across the portage on a skidway
of small rolling logs, and, so journeying, Prescott was reached. Here, the wind being favourable,
lug-sails were hoisted and Brock's strange fleet started for Kingston, reaching it after twelve
days' toil from Lachine, then coasting further along Lake Ontario to Little York (Toronto).
When wind failed, the long oars were used, the men rising from the thwarts to pull, standing.
Thus, alternately sitting and rising, pulling in unison, the light-hearted voyageurs would
break into one of their wild French chants, quaint with catching refrain, in which our hero
soon learned to join.

At Prescott Brock sometimes took the Government schooner, paying two guineas for a trip, which
might last a week, or caught one of the small "two-stickers" that carried freight between Kingston
and Queenston. If much pressed for time, the batteau would be exchanged for a caleche--the
stage-coach was as yet only a dream--and he would resign himself to a rude jolting over the
colonization road through the forest that flanked the rugged northern shore of Lake Ontario.

These trips were a never-failing source of surprise and profit. The skill of the canoemen,
the strength and endurance of the packmen, excited his admiration. What wonderful raw material!
Given drill and discipline, what might not be achieved on the frontier with such craftsmen!
The muscles, all whipcord, of these rugged Canadians, part coureur de bois, part scout, amazed
him. One thing was not so evident as he could have wished. Their love seemed to be more for
race and language, home and wilderness, than for King and country. Perhaps, as he said, if
the safety of their homes were threatened, they would develop patriotism of the highest type.

But, after all, as to kings, "Who," they naively asked him, "was their king? Surely they must
be under two flags and two kings. Napoleon or George? Que voulez vous?"

As their hearts seemed to be as stout as their limbs, they would, he reflected, be unconquerable,
these careless children of waste places. While Brock thus communed, he watched. There was little
to choose between them--Narcisse, Baptiste, Louis, Jacques, Pierre--all strong as buffalo,
all agile as catamounts.

They would lift the "pieces" from the dripping canoe and land them on the slippery rock. A
minute later and Narcisse perhaps would appear, a bit bent, to keep balanced a bag of flour,
a chest of tea, a caddy of tobacco and sundry packages of sugar or shot that made up the load
resting on his shoulders where body and nape of neck joined. This load was supported and held
together by a broad moose-hide band--a tump-line--strapped across his forehead, his upraised
hands grasping the narrowing moose-hide stretched on either side of his lowered head, between
ear and shoulder. Brock would watch these packmen as, thus handicapped with a load weighing
from two to five hundred pounds, they set out across the rough portage, singing, and at a dog
trot, following each other in quick succession. There was rivalry, of course, duly encouraged
by Brock with a promise of tobacco to the first man in, but it was all good-natured competition,
the last man chanting his laughing canzonet as loudly as the first.

Our hero, with his grand physique and cleverness, was not long in mastering the tricks of the
carriers. He soon learned to build up a load and adjust a tump-line, after which practice made
the carrying of a pack almost twice his own weight a not extraordinary performance.

These trips afforded Brock an opportunity to study Indian character. He learned much from the
packman and voyageur that was destined to be of great value to him in his career on the western
frontier, among the outposts of civilization.

Little escaped his notice. His faculties were sharpened by contact with these children of the
wilds, whose only class-room was the forest, their only teacher, nature. As the crushed blade
or broken twig were of deepest import to the Indian scout, so no incident of his life was now
too trivial for Brock to dismiss as of no importance.

CHAPTER VII.

MUTINY AND DESERTION.

Brock could hardly reconcile the degree of punishment inflicted upon the soldiers, the poorly
paid defenders of the Empire, with their casual offences. While he rebelled against the brutalities
of some officers, he was powerless to prevent them. The sentencing powers conferred by court-martial
were at that time beyond belief. A captain and two subalterns could order 999 lashes with a
"cat" steeped in brine. It is on record that on one occasion a soldier was sentenced to 1,500
lashes for "marauding." And there were other modes of torture. This was close upon the heels
of a period when even the slightest breaches of the civil law were punished out of all proportion
to the offence. While insisting on the strictest discipline, Brock always tempered justice
with mercy. Few men better realized the value of a pleasant word or had in such degree the
rare tact that permitted familiarity without killing respect.

A terrible incident occurred in the summer of 1803 which tested all Brock's fortitude and conception
of duty. A conspiracy to mutiny was discovered at Fort George on the Niagara River. The methods
of the commanding officer had exasperated the men until they planned mutiny on a large scale.
This included the murder of Colonel Sheaffe and the incarceration of the other officers. A
threatening remark by a soldier of the 49th was overheard. He was arrested and put in irons.
A confession by another soldier implicated a well-known sergeant, and a message was sent to
York begging Brock's immediate presence.

Our hero landed from the schooner alone. It was dinner hour. The barrack-square, as Brock crossed
it to the guard-house, was deserted. In charge of the guard he found two of the suspected ringleaders.
The guard presented arms. "Sergeant," said the colonel of towering frame and commanding aspect,
"come here. Lay down your pike." The order was promptly complied with. "Take off your sword
and sash and lay them down also." This was done. "Corporal O'Brien," said the colonel, addressing
the sergeant's brother-conspirator, "bring a pair of handcuffs, put them on this sergeant,
lock him up in a cell, and bring me the key." This, too, was done. "Now, corporal, you come
here; lay down your arms, take off your accoutrements, and lay them down also." He was obeyed.
Turning to the right man of the guard, "Come here, you grenadier. Bring a pair of handcuffs
and put them on this corporal, lock him up in another cell, and bring me the key." When this
was done, turning to the astounded drummer, our hero said, "Drummer, beat to arms."

The garrison was aroused. First to rush out was Lieutenant Williams, sword in hand. "Williams!"
said the Colonel, "go instantly and secure Rock"--a former sergeant, recently reduced. "If
he hesitates to obey, even for one second, cut him down." Up the stairs flew Williams, calling
to Rock to come down. "Yes, sir," answered Rock, "when I take my arms." "You must come without
them," said Williams. "Oh, I must have my arms, sir," and as Rock stretched out his hand to
seize his musket in the arm-rack, Williams shouted, "If you lay one finger on your musket I
will cut you down," at the same time drawing his sabre. "Now, go down before me." Rock obeyed,
was placed in irons, and within half an hour Clark, O'Brien, and nine other mutineers were
embarked for York on the schooner.

What a picture rises before us. The mid-day sun, the glittering barrack-square, the scarlet
and white tunics and polished side-arms of the frightened soldiers, with Brock, the embodiment
of power and stern justice, towering above the shrinking culprits. Expiation of the offence
had yet to follow. The appetite of the law had to be appeased. The trial took place at Quebec.
Four mutineers and three deserters were condemned to death, and in the presence of the entire
garrison were executed. The details of this are best unwritten. Through a shocking blunder,
the firing party discharged their carbines when fifty yards distant, instead of advancing to
within eight yards of the victims. The harrowing scene rent Brock's heart. That the men who
had fought so bravely under him at Egmont and laughed at the carnage at Copenhagen should end
their lives in this manner was inexpressibly sad. After reading the account of the execution
of their comrades to the men on parade at Fort George, Brock added, "Since I have had the honour
to wear the British uniform I have never felt grief like this." The prisoners publicly declared
that had they continued under our hero's command they would have escaped their doom, "being
the victims of unruly passions inflamed by vexatious authority."

When Brock assumed command every possible privilege was extended to the troops at Fort George.
For every request, however trivial, he knew there was some reason. His mind was big enough
to trade in trifles.

In view of these desertions, the prospect of hostilities between Canada and the United States
became a momentous one. By close study of events in France and America and intercourse with
prominent United States citizens, Brock detected the signs that precede trouble.

But the grave question of desertion and the war-cloud on the horizon could not occupy our hero's
attention to the exclusion of other demands upon his time. Canada's growing importance was
attracting many travellers from over-seas. Notable among these was Thomas Moore, the brilliant
Irish poet, who was our hero's guest at Fort George for two weeks in the summer of 1803. Every
attraction that the peninsula presented was taxed for his entertainment. Of these diversions
the one which probably left the most lasting impression on the versatile son of Erin was a
gathering of the Tuscarora warriors, under Chief Brant, at the Indian encampment on the Grand
River.

"Here," wrote Moore, in one of his celebrated epistles, "the Mohawks
received us in all their ancient costumes. The young men ran races for
our amusement, and gave an exhibition game of ball, while the old men
and the women sat in groups under the surrounding forest trees. The
scene altogether was as beautiful as it was new to me. To Colonel Brock,
in command of the fort, I am particularly indebted for his many
kindnesses during the fortnight I remained with him."
     Row, brothers, row! the stream runs fast,
     The rapids are near, and the daylight's past!"

In the fall of 1805 our hero was gazetted full colonel, and returned to England on leave. While
he had lost none of the buoyancy of his youth, he was daily realizing the fullness of his responsibilities.

For the better defence of Canada, he submitted to the Duke of York, the Commander-in-Chief,
a suggestion for the forming of a veteran battalion. He quoted the case of the U.E. Loyalists,
who after the Revolutionary war, had been granted small tracts in Upper Canada; contrasting
their perfect conduct with the practices of some of the settlers ten years later, whose loyalty,
from his own observation, would not stand the test. Our hero, who was warmly thanked by the
Duke for his zeal, was now regarded as a person to be reckoned with. His abilities and charm
of manner had won him a reputation at the Horse Guards.

He returned to Guernsey to receive the congratulations of those brothers "who loved him so
dearly," but had not time to tell the graphic story of his sojourn in Canada or revisit the
haunts of his boyhood, for news arrived from the United States of so warlike a character that
he returned before his leave expired. He overtook at Cork the Lady Saumarez, a well-manned
Guernsey privateer, armed with letters of marque, and bound for Quebec. Leaving London on the
26th of June, 1806, he set sail for Canada, never to return to those to whom he had so endeared
himself by his splendid qualities.

CHAPTER VIII.

FRANCE, THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA.

Shortly after his return to Quebec, Isaac Brock succeeded to the command of the troops in both
Upper and Lower Canada, with the pay and allowance of a brigadier.

Though no overt act had been committed against Canada by the United States, relations were
strained, and he found much to occupy his time. His humanity stirred, he set about erecting
hospitals, reorganized the commissariat department, and engaged in an unpleasant dispute with
President Dunn, the civil administrator of Lower Canada, regarding the fortifications of the
Citadel. To-day deep in plans for mobilizing the militia and the formation of a Scotch volunteer
corps of Glengarry settlers; to-morrow devising the best way of utilizing an Indian force in
the event of war. In June, 1807, the affair between the British gunboat Leopard and the American
frigate Chesapeake occurred. The former boarded the latter in search of deserters, and on being
challenged, gave the Chesapeake a broadside. While the Leopard was clearly in the wrong, the
United States Government rejected every offer of reparation made by Britain. Then came retaliation.
French vessels--though France was at war with Britain--were actually allowed by the United
States, a neutral power, full freedom of its harbours. The ships of Britain, a power at peace
with the United States of America, were refused the same privilege.

For a proper understanding of the position we must unroll a page of history. Napoleon, though
he crushed the Prussians at Jena, could not efface the memory of his own humiliation at Trafalgar.
His ears tingled. He was waiting to deliver a blow that would equalize the destruction of his
fleet by Nelson. Though Britain remained mistress of the seas, surely, thought the "little
corporal," a way could be found to humble her. If her sources of food supply, for instance,
could be cut off, "the wings of her war-ships would be clipped."

To this end Napoleon issued an arrogant proclamation, which was of far-reaching effect. It
authorized the destruction of all British goods and all colonial produce shipped to any European
port by a British vessel. It allowed the seizure by France of all ships, of whatever nation,
which had even called at a British port. To this the United States raised no objection, though
it was in violation of the world's law in respect to nations which were at peace with each
other. The United States' President evidently believed that British resentment at Napoleon's
decree would sooner or later provide the United States with an excuse for a disagreement with
Britain. He was not mistaken. Britain at once announced that she in her turn would prohibit
the ships of other nations visiting French ports until they had first called at a British port.
But two wrongs do not make a right. England also, being short of seamen by desertion, insisted
that she had the right to search for British seamen on American vessels.

This was a questionable proceeding, and not always carried out in the most amiable manner,
as the Chesapeake incident proves, and occasionally led to seizing American seamen, native-born
citizens of the United States, in mistake for British-born deserters.

Meanwhile Brock found "the military and the people of Quebec divided by opposing elements of
dissatisfaction." His call for one thousand men for two months to complete the defences of
the Citadel was met by the Provincial Government with what was practically a refusal. He persisted
in his purpose, and despite drawbacks which would have deterred a less dominant nature, he
erected a battery, mounting eight thirty-six pound guns, raised upon a cavalier bastion, in
the centre of the Citadel, so as to command the opposite heights of Point Levis.

Alive to the probability of invasion, and to the defenceless state of the Canadian frontier
and the extreme apathy of the Quebec Government, Colonel Brock warned the War Office. He stated
that, as the means at his disposal were quite inadequate to oppose an enemy in the field, with
a provincial frontier of 500 miles, he would perforce confine himself to the defence of the
city of Quebec. The Lower Canadians, willing to undergo training, had formed themselves into
corps of cavalry, artillery and infantry, at no expense to the Government, but the Government
gave them no encouragement.

This was the state of affairs in Quebec when Lieutenant-General Sir James Craig arrived to
take office as Governor-General of the British Provinces in North America as well as Commander
of the Forces. Brock soon became the confidant of the new administrator, who was not slow to
observe the exceptional capacity of our hero. The day came all too quickly for the Governor
when occasion arose for the presence of a strong man to take command in Montreal, and with
great reluctance he had to call upon Isaac Brock to assume the office.

CHAPTER IX.

FUR-TRADERS AND HABITANTS.

Montreal--the Mount Royal of Jacques Cartier--was then in the heyday of its pioneer glory.
It was the seat of government of the North-West Company, which exercised feudal sway over an
empire of wilderness, lake and prairie, and whose title to monopoly was challenged only by
the powerful Hudson's Bay Company. Since 1670 this older syndicate of adventurers had held
the destinies of the great lone land in the farther North-West, its fruitful plains and pathless
forests, in the hollow of its hand. Later, when the two companies amalgamated, their joint
operations extended from Alaska to Rupert's Land, from Oregon to the Sandwich Islands, from
Vancouver to Labrador, an empire embracing an area of 4,500,000 square miles.

At Montreal Brock lived with these merchant princes on terms of close intimacy. He was sensible
enough, as a man of the world, to enjoy the creature comforts of life. The blazing log-fire,
with its glow and crackle, in contrast to the blizzard that raged outside; the dim-lighted
splendour of spacious dining-hall, with hewn rafters and savage trophies of the explorers;
the polished oak floor and carved ceiling, hung with rare fur and gaudy feathers, appealed to him.

The rubber of whist over, came the fragrant perfecto--these traders ransacked the world for
their tobacco--and Brock, under the influence of the soothing weed, would charm these wild
vagrants into unlocking some of the strange secrets of the wilderness. From these usually silent
but sometimes garrulous merchants he acquired during the long winter nights a fund of facts
that greatly influenced his future actions.

Being superseded at Montreal by General Drummond, he did not relish a return to Quebec. Separation
from the 49th meant actual pain, but, as he said, "Soldiers must accustom themselves to frequent
movements, and as they have no choice, it often happens they are placed in situations little
agreeing with their wishes." His regrets were lessened by his promotion to the rank of brigadier-general.
But he prayed for active service, still trying to secure a staff appointment in Portugal, and
awaited the result of his brother Savery's efforts, hoping he might yet be ordered to join
"the best disciplined army that ever left England."

"Your Excellency," he said to the Governor-General, "I must see active service, or had much
better quit the army, for I can look for no advantage if I remain buried in inaction in this
remote corner of the earth, without the least mention ever likely being made of me."

Unsuspected by our hero, fate in his case was only "marking time."

Day after day Brock saw British ships weigh anchor at Quebec with Canadian timber for the building
of English vessels of war. The importance of these Canadian provinces to Great Britain awoke
in him dreams of a federation of all the colonies. Cargoes of timber, that would require more
than 400 vessels to transport, were then lying on the beaches of the St. Lawrence. "Bonaparte,"
he wrote, "coveted these vast colonial areas, and desired to repossess them."

Brock's mind was busy trying to solve these problems. "A small French force of 5,000 men,"
he told the Governor, "could most assuredly conquer the Province of Quebec. In the event of
French invasion, would the volatile Lower Canadian people, in spite of all their privileges,
remain loyal?" A certain class of habitant argued that Napoleon, who was sure to conquer Europe,
would of course seize the Canadas, encouraged by the United States. "Would Englishmen," asked
Brock, "if positions were reversed, be any more impatient to escape from possible British rule
than were French Canadians from the possible rule of France?"

"Blood, my good FitzGibbon," he declared to his protégé, "is thicker than water. You cannot
expect to get men to change their nature, or the traditions of their race, through an act of
parliament at twenty-four hours' notice. Old thoughts and habits die hard."

Though Brock's perceptive faculties were well developed, his forecasts, built upon the evidences
of opposition among certain Lower Canadians, happily proved only in part correct. Later, when
his plan of campaign was menaced by still greater disaffection in Upper Canada, he found he
had not reckoned on the influence of his own example, which, added to his power of purpose,
"disconcerted the disloyal." In proof of this fact Detroit and Queenston Heights were splendid
examples.

It was this spirit of unrest among the people of Quebec that moved Sir James Craig to keep
Brock within easy reach until the growing discord in Upper Canada called for the presence of
a man of tact and resolution, one to whom all things seemed possible--and Brock knew no such
word as "impossible." On one occasion the "faithful sergeant-major" had ventured to declare
that a certain order was "impossible." "'Impossible!'" repeated Brock, "nothing should be 'impossible'
to a soldier. The word 'impossible' must not be found in a soldier's vocabulary."

CHAPTER X.

THE MASSACRE AT MACKINAW.

It was while stationed in Montreal that our hero met Alexander Henry, ex-fur-trader and adventurer
and coureur de bois--then a merchant and King's auctioneer--a notable personage and leader
in many a wild exploit in the far West, an old though virile man after Isaac's own heart.

From Henry he learned much of the Indian wars in the West, and the strategic value of various
points on the frontier, possession of which in the event of war he foresaw would be worth a
king's ransom. Not least were details respecting Michilimackinac, the Mackinaw already referred
to. Nearly half a century before, Henry, a native of New Jersey, of English parents--his ambition
fired by tales of the fabulous fortunes to be made in the fur trade--obtained from the commandant
at Montreal a permit to proceed west as a trader. He outfitted at Albany, and the following
summer set out for Mackinaw.

Meanwhile the Indian allies, under control of the great Pontiac, were fighting immigration
and civilization. Between Fort Pitt--Pittsburgh-- and the Fox River, in Wisconsin, the home
of the Sacs and Foxes, they had captured nine out of thirteen military posts, and were secretly
planning the downfall of Fort Mackinaw. This was regarded as an impregnable post and vulnerable
only through strategy--in Indian parlance another name for duplicity. Fort Mackinaw, as Brock
well knew, was the most important trading entrepôt west of Montreal. It served a territory
extending from the Missouri in the west to the far Kissaskatchewan in the north.

On Henry's arrival his friendship was sought by an Indian chief, Wawatam. Between these two
men a remarkable attachment developed. They became brothers by mutual adoption. At this time
the fort was garrisoned by ninety British regulars. One day, outside the walls on the surrounding
plateau, several hundred savages were encamped, ostensibly for purposes of trade, some of them
killing time by playing the Indian game of ball--the baggatiway of the red-man, la jeu de la
crosse of the voyageur. Henry, acting upon a veiled warning by Wawatam, suggested to the officer
in command extra precaution.

"I told him," said he, while Brock drank in every word, "that Indian treachery was proverbial."
Now this recital was of the deepest interest to our hero, for Mackinaw, then in the possession
of the United States, held the key to the Michigan frontier and control of the upper lakes.
While the huge log fire that roared in the chimney cast light and shadow on polished wall and
the oak beams of the big dining-hall, Brock puffed away at his huge partiga, weighing every
word that fell from the bearded lips of the trader.

"Major Errington," continued Henry, "while thanking me, laughed at my forebodings. Then Wawatam
urged me, as his adopted brother, to depart for Sault Ste. Marie. But I delayed and once more
sought Errington, who still ridiculed my fears. While I was yet expostulating with him we heard
the louder shouts of the Indians. They had rushed through the fort gateway into the enclosure
within the palisades in pursuit of a lost ball. This was but a ruse to gain admittance, for
in a moment the laughter and shouts changed to wild yells and warwhoops. The guard was overpowered
in a flash, and in the attack that followed almost the entire garrison was tomahawked and scalped."

"Ah!" said Brock, "so British lethargy and self-complaisance succumbed to Indian duplicity."

Then his thoughts turned to Niagara. He saw the open portals of Fort George, and Tuscarora
youths playing the Indian game of ball in the meadows of the Mohawk village.

"Those who escaped massacre at Mackinaw," said Henry, refilling his stone pipe and resuming
his story, "were preserved for a worse fate. Pontiac's allies--and you, Colonel, know something
of these matters from the tales told you by the officers of the North-West Company--entered
on a carnival of blood. From a garret, where a Pawnee Indian woman had secreted me, I saw the
captured soldiers tomahawked and scalped, and some butchered like so many cattle, just as required
for the cannibal feast that followed."

"Tortured?" interrogated Brock.

"Tortured!" repeated Henry. "Why, the diabolical devices that those men resorted to to inflict
acute physical agony were inconceivable-- unutterable, Colonel." He paused.... "After all,
no worse, perhaps, than the tortures that have been inflicted by civilized fanatics in Europe."

There was silence for a moment. Both men were buried deep in thought, the one living in the
past, the other striving to forecast the future.

"Through the intercession of Wennway, another friendly Indian," continued Henry, "my life was
spared. Preparations were made for my secret departure. As I shoved my canoe into the water,
en voyage for Wagoshene, the prayers of Wawatam rang in my ears as, standing on the yellow
beach with outstretched arms, he invoked the Gitche Manitou, the Great Spirit, to conduct me
in safety to the wigwams of my people."

"Surely, Master Henry," commented Isaac Brock, "with all the latent qualities for good that
seem to underlie the outward ferocity of some redmen, firmness and kindness are alone needed
to convert them into faithful friends."

"An Indian, or Indians collectively," said Henry, pausing before he answered,--"I speak from
personal experience only--are faithful so long as you keep absolute good faith with them. In
this particular they are no different from white people; but never deceive them, even in trifles,
and never subject them to ridicule. Then, if you treat them with consideration, you can reasonably
depend upon their individual loyalty. They expect a lot of attention. Yes! an Indian is naturally
grateful, probably far more so than the ordinary white man, and seldom forgets a kindness.
Should you come into closer contact with the redman, Colonel, as I have a presentiment you
will before long, never forget that an Indian, by right of his mode of life, is deeply suspicious
and painfully sensitive. He has a keen sense of humour, however, and is quick to discern and
laugh at the weak points of others, which, until you understand his language, you will be slow
to suspect. On the other hand, he won't stand being laughed at himself or placed in a foolish
position. For that matter, who can? Occasionally you will meet a savage with strangely high
principles. Among the redskins there is a proportion of good and bad, as there is in all races,
but less crime, under normal conditions, than there is among the whites. So, summing up his
vices and virtues, the North American Indian, allowing for heredity and surroundings, differs
little from ourselves."

"They are brave," interrupted Brock.

"Oh, yes," said Henry, "splendidly reckless of life. The courage of the fatalist I should say.
You see, they are so constantly on the war-path that fighting is a compulsory pastime."

"Still," said Brock, "with what daring they fight for their homes."

"True, Colonel," retorted Henry, "but when it comes to fighting for home, a hummingbird will
defend its nest. Their peculiar traits are largely the result of a nomadic life and tribal
strife, hence, their duplicity. Superstition influences them greatly, as it does all savage
races. In one respect they are at least superior to some of our own people--I refer to their
treatment of their children. Their lovingkindness is pathetic. Contact with civilization, as
you may discover, develops at first all their bad qualities, for they are apt imitators, so
when the pagan Indian meets a trader without a conscience--and there are some, you know--why,
he is not slow to adopt the bad Christian's methods."

CHAPTER XI.

LITTLE YORK, NIAGARA, AMHERSTBURG.

In common with most great men, Brock found distraction in trifles. For weeks prior to leaving
Quebec all kinds of gayety prevailed. A visit from Governor Gore of Upper Canada, and the arrival
of the fleet from Guernsey and two frigates from Portsmouth, gave a fillip to society. Races,
water-parties and country picnics were the order of the day. Our hero's contribution consisted
of a banquet and grand ball. He had his own troubles, however, that even the versatile Dobson
could not overcome, and he roundly scolded his brother Irving for not sending him a new cocked
hat.[2]

"That cocked hat," he said, "has not been received; a most distressing circumstance, as from
the enormity of my head I find the utmost difficulty in getting a substitute."

His departure for York weighed upon him. In Quebec he had the most "delightful garden imaginable,
with abundance of melons and other good things"--these, together with his new bastions and
forts, he had to desert. Being somewhat of a philosopher, he said that since fate decreed the
best portion of his life was to be wasted in inaction, and as President Jefferson, though he
wanted war, was afraid to declare it, he supposed he should have to be pleased with the prospect
of moving upwards.

Brock had been but a few weeks at Fort George--a "most lonesome place," as compared with Quebec,
Montreal, Kingston, or even Little York, from which latter place he was cut off by forty miles
of lake, or more than a hundred miles of dense forest and bridgeless streams--when he decided
upon a flying trip to Detroit, where, during the French régime, the adventurous Cadillac had
landed in 1701. He would inspect the western limit of the frontier now under his care and obtain
at first hand a knowledge of the peninsula. "For," as he remarked to Glegg, his aide, "if I
can read the signs aright, the two nations are rushing headlong into a military conflict."

Two routes were open to him, one overland, the other land and water. He chose the latter. A
vast quantity of freight now reached Queenston from Kingston. Vessels of over fifty tons sailed
up the river, bearing merchandise for the North-West Company. Salt pork from Ireland and flour
from London, Britain being the real base of supply--the remote North-West looking to Niagara
for food and clothing--the return cargoes being furs and grain. To portage these goods around
Niagara Falls kept fifty or more farmers' waggons busy every day during the summer. A team
of horses or oxen could haul twenty "pieces," of one hundred weight each, for a load. The entire
length of the portage from Lake Ontario to Lake Erie was practically a street, full of all
the bustle and activity that a scattered country population of 12,000 conferred upon it. Two
churches, twenty stores, a printing house, six taverns and a scholastic academy supplied the
varied wants of Niagara's 500 citizens who overfilled its one hundred dwellings.

From Lake Ontario, Newark, as it had been called, presented an inviting appearance. The brick-and-stone
court-house and jail and brightly painted Indian council-house and cottages rose in strong
contrast against the green forest. On the river bank was Navy Hall, a log retreat for seamen,
and on Mississaga (Black Snake) Point a stone lighthouse flashed its red signal of hope to
belated mariners. Nearer the lake shore, in isolated dignity across a mile of common, stood
Fort George, a dilapidated structure with wooden palisades and bastions. Half-acre lots in
the village were given gratis by the Government to anyone who would build, and eight acres
outside for inclosures, besides a large "commonty" for the use of the people. A quite pretentious
wharf lined the river, and from this, on any summer afternoon, a string of soldiers and idle
citizens might be seen--among whom was Dobson--casting hook and troll for bass, trout, pickerel
and herring, with which the river swarmed. On one occasion Brock helped to haul up a seine
net in which were counted 1,008 whitefish of an average weight of two pounds, 6,000 being netted
in one day.

Side-wheel ferries, driven by horse-power, plied between the river's mouth and the Queenston
landing. The paddle-wheels of these were open double-spoke affairs, without any circular rim.
A stage-coach also ran between Queenston and Fort Erie, the first in Upper Canada. For one
dollar the passenger could travel twenty-five miles.

At Fort Erie, at the head of the Niagara River, Brock embarked in mid-August in a government
schooner. He wished to familiarize himself with the upper water-ways. He made the long trip
from Quebec to York, and thence to Niagara, Amherstburg, Detroit, Sandwich and return overland
to Fort George, within two months--record time. Dobson accompanied his master. Brock was silent
as to his impressions, but admitted he was convinced that the water route for a military expedition
was the only practical one, and that Mackinaw, held by the United States, was the portal and
key to the western frontier in case of invasion. He crossed overland through the "bad woods"
and open plains to the Point of Pines, where batteaux and canoes awaited him. From thence he
proceeded along the north shore of Lake Erie until abreast of the Miami, a confluent of the
Ohio River, on the south shore, then turned northward up the Detroit River, twenty-five miles
farther, reaching Amherstburg--called Malden by the Americans--250 miles from Fort Erie. Here,
after consulting with Colonel St. George, he inspected the battery at Sandwich, and with little
ceremony visited Detroit--the old military post of Pontchartrain--on the opposite side of the
river, later notorious as an emporium for "rum, tomahawks and gunpowder." From Amherstburg,
a small village with an uncompleted fort and shipyard, he sent messengers to the remote post
of St. Joseph, an island, fifty-five miles from Mackinaw, below Sault Ste. Marie, and started
homewards overland.

In returning, he skirted the great tributary marshes, alive with water-fowl of every description,
whose gabble and flapping wings could be heard at a long distance. He camped in the vast hardwood
forests that covered the western point of the peninsula that extends west from Lake Ontario
to the river connecting Lake Huron with Lake Erie. He shot big bustards and wild turkeys in
the bush, where wolves and deer were as thick as rabbits in a warren, and tramped the uplands,
teeming with quail and prairie chicken. Continuing by Delaware and the Government road at Oxford
on the Thames, and by the "Long Woods" over the Burford Plains to Brant's Ford, he reached
the Grand River, and then by Ancaster and the head of the lake to Burlington, when he followed
the Lake Ontario southern shore road to Niagara.

Many of the settlers whom he met were from the Eastern States. These were the original Loyalists
or their descendants, patriots to the core. Other more recent arrivals--perhaps two-thirds
of the whole--came from Pennsylvania, New York and New Jersey, attracted by the fertility of
the soil and freedom from taxation, or to escape militia service. These latter he quickly realized
were not the class to rely upon in event of war, but he gave no public sign of distrust. It
was from the pick of the first-mentioned stalwarts that Brock formed his loyal Canadian militia,
his gallant supporters in the war of 1812, who made a reputation at Detroit and Queenston that
will never die.

He was more than ever sensible of the resources of the country. This glimpse of the west enamoured
him. To his "beloved brothers"--our hero always thus addressed them--he described it as a "delightful
country, far exceeding anything I have seen on this continent." The extent of the Great Lakes
amazed him, as did their fish. From these deep cisterns he had seen the Indian fishermen take
whitefish, the ahtikameg (deer-of-the-water), twenty pounds in weight; maskinonge-- matchi-kenonje,
the great pike--more than twice that size, and sturgeon that weighed two hundred pounds and
over, and in such quantities that he hesitated to tell his experiences on his return.

Henry's stories of five hundred whitefish taken with a scoop net at the rapids of Sault Ste.
Marie in two hours were no longer questioned. The size of the red-fleshed land-locked trout
(the quail-of-the-water), of pickerel and bass, astounded him. His travels had broadened his
views. The chatter of his Iroquois and Algonquin friends was now easier of interpretation.
The riddles of the wilderness were more easily read. He now realized how possible it was, in
this continent of unsurveyed immensity, to journey for weeks, after leaving the white man's
domain hundreds of miles behind, and then reach only the rim of another kingdom of even far
greater fertility. He also realized that beyond these laughing lands lay a rugged world of
desolation, bounded in turn by the rasping ice-floes of the Arctic.

If Brock's mind had expanded, so had his body. He was, as he expressed it, as "hard as nails."
The close of 1811 found "Master Isaac" a grand specimen of manhood. Inclined to be a little
portly, he was still athletic. His face, though a trifle stern, had grown more attractive,
because of the benevolent look now stamped upon it. He was still fair and florid, with a broad
forehead, and eyes though somewhat small, yet full and of a grayish blue, a charming smile
and splendid white teeth. Always the same kindly gentleman and always a soldier. His life at
Fort George had been one of great loneliness. He read much and rapidly, and would memorize
passages from the books that had left the deepest impression. History, civil and military,
especially ancient authors, was his choice, and maps his weakness. Over these, with his devoted
aides, he would pore late into the night, until he knew the country almost as well as his friend
the Surveyor-General. For variety he feasted upon the robust beauties of Pope's "Homer," ever
regretting he never had a master "to guide and encourage him in his tastes."

With Lieutenant-Governor Gore, formerly a soldier in Guernsey, our hero was on intimate terms.
When the grind of duty let him, he would travel "the worst road in the country--fit only for
an Indian mail-carrier--in order to mix in the society of York." He periodically returned these
hospitalities by a grand ball at Niagara--always the event of the season. Brock, while fond
of women's society, preferred brain to beauty. Had his old Guernsey friends been present on
these occasions they would not have recognized in the soldier, resplendent in a general's uniform,
now dancing a mazurka, the handsome stripling who only a few years since had waltzed his way
into the hearts of all the women of St. Peter's Port.

The unrest of the Indians at Amherstburg troubled him. He had seen over eight hundred in camp
there, receiving rations for a month while waiting presents of blankets, powder and shot from
King George. They asked British support if they took the warpath against the Americans--the
Long-knives--Gitchi-mokohmahn, their sworn enemies. Tecumseh, a Shawanese chief, had demanded
from the United States the restoration of violated rights. This demand had not been complied
with. The position was critical. Great tact was required to retain the friendship of the Indians,
while not complying with their request.

In Lower Canada there was still discord among the French Canadians. The Governor, Sir James
Craig, in a dying condition, relinquished office. In answer to Brock's application for leave,
still hoping for a staff appointment in Portugal, the Governor-General implored him to remain.

"I must," he told him, "leave the country in the best state of security I can; your presence
is needed here. I am sending you as a mark of my sincere regard my favourite horse, Alfred."
This was a high-bred animal, and our hero's charger in the war that followed.

It was not, however, until war was regarded as unavoidable, and not until after he was promoted
to be a major-general and appointed President and Administrator of Upper Canada, as successor
to Governor Gore, that Isaac Brock became reconciled to life in Canada, and with set purpose
assumed the duties of his high calling.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our hero had passed his third milestone.

FOOTNOTE:

[2] Miss Carnochan, as the Curator of the Niagara Historical Society the custodian of many
relics of the war of 1812, has in her keeping this identical cocked hat. It arrived "shortly
after Brock's death, and was given by his nephew to Mr. George Ball, near whose residence the
49th was stationed. The hat measures twenty-four inches inside, and was used at the funeral
obsequies of 1824 and 1853, when many old soldiers requested, and were permitted, to try it
on." The usage that the cocked hat then received has not improved its appearance.

CHAPTER XII.

MAJOR-GENERAL BROCK, GOVERNOR OF UPPER CANADA.

The appointment of Brock--with his exceptional military attainments--to the chief command in
Upper Canada, at the point of greatest danger, was a rare piece of good fortune for the colony.
Of the American military leaders, Generals Howe, Dearborn and Wadsworth were all examples of
a common standard; even Sir George Prevost, the new Governor-General of Canada and Commander-in-Chief,
was tuned in a minor key.

Isaac Brock was the man of the hour. His star was in the ascendant. Queen Victoria's father,
the Duke of Kent, was anxious to meet the soldier whose despatches had stirred the War Office.
The Duke of York was ready to give him a brigade under Wellington, while the Governor of Jamaica,
the Duke of Manchester, then touring Canada, begged Brock, whom he looked upon as a "universal
provider," to equip him with canoes and guides for a western pilgrimage. If Brock's promotion
brought him distinction it also brought him work--Executive Councils, court-martials, reorganization
of militia, reconstruction of the ruined forts on the Niagara frontier, the building of gunboats,
the making of roads. Never idle. To-day he was inspecting a camp of the 49th at Three Rivers,
near Montreal; next week at Fort Erie. Ever busy, ever buoyant. Whether perusing documents,
scouring the muddy roads at Queenston, surveying the boundaries of the dreaded Black Swamp,
or visiting the points between Fort George and Vrooman's battery on his slashing gray charger,
he had a smile and cheery word for everyone. As for Dobson, his profound awe at his master's
progress was only equalled by his devotion, that increased with the illness that threatened
his life; while the faithful sergeant-major, now Captain FitzGibbon, in command of a company
of the 49th, was reflecting great credit on his patron. But no matter what the tax on his time,
Isaac never neglected the "beloved brothers."

In New York there had been financial failures. Brock predicted a dreadful crash, and had so
written to his brother Irving, who with William had a bank in London. He hoped they "had withheld
their confidence in public stocks." Providence ruled otherwise. While Isaac in the solitude
of his quarters was writing this warning, the banking house in London, whose vessels in the
Baltic Sea had been seized by Bonaparte's privateers, closed its doors. The news reached him
on his birthday. He learned that a private advance made to him by William for the purchase
of his commissions had been entered in the bank's books by mistake. He was a debtor to the
extent of £3,000.

Brock rose to the occasion. He proved himself not only a soldier but, best of all, a just man
with the highest sense of personal honour. His distress was all for his brothers. He would
sell his commission, turn over his income as governor and surrender everything, if by doing
so he could save the fortunes of his family. Anything that not only the law but the right might
demand. This failure impaired the former good fellowship between William and Irving Brock.
Isaac wrote Irving, beseeching him to repair the breach. "Hang the world," said he; "it is
not worth a thought. Be generous, and find silent comfort in being so. Oh, my dear brother,
forget the past and let us all unite in soothing the grief of one of the best hearts that heaven
ever formed, whose wish was to place us all in affluence. Could tears restore him he would
be happy."

But Isaac was not permitted to know that reconciliation followed his prayers. While William
and Irving were shaking hands, but before they had even heard of the capture of Detroit, Isaac,
unknown to them, was at that moment lying cold in death within the cavalier bastion at Fort George.

Little York was now Brock's headquarters. He built dockyards to shelter His Majesty's navy,
which consisted of two small vessels! He planned new Parliament Buildings and an arsenal, prepared
township maps showing roads and trails, fords and bridges, all of which latter were in a shocking
condition. At York the timber and brushwood was so dense that travel between the garrison and
town was actually by water. His mind made up that war with the United States was inevitable,
he was confronted with crucial questions demanding instant solution. Chief of these was the
defence of the frontier, 1,300 miles in length, which entailed repairs of the boundary forts,
the raising of a reliable militia, the increase of the regular troops, the building of more
gunboats, and the solving of the Indian problem.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE WAR CLOUD.

A President of the United States had breezily declared that the conquest of Canada would be
"a mere matter of marching." The final expulsion of England from the American continent he
regarded as a matter of course. Cabinet ministers at Washington and rabid politicians looked
upon the forcible annexation of Canada as a foregone conclusion.

One Massachusetts general officer, a professional fire-eater, said he "would capture Canada
by contract, raise a company of soldiers and take it in six weeks." Henry Clay, another statesman,
"verily believed that the militia of Kentucky alone were competent to place Upper Canada at
the feet of the Americans." Calhoun, also a "war-hawk," had said that "in four weeks from the
time of the declaration of war the whole of Upper and part of Lower Canada would be in possession
of the United States." All of this was only the spread-eagle bombast of amateur filibusters,
as events proved, but good cause for Brock, who had been appointed janitor of Canada and been
given the keys of the country, to ponder deeply.

Canada's entire population was nearly 320,000--about the same as that of Toronto to-day--that
of the United States was 8,000,000! To defend her broken frontier Canada had only 1,450 British
soldiers and a militia--at that moment--chiefly on paper. If the Indians in the West were to
be impressed with British supremacy--for they were making a stand against 2,000 American soldiers
on the banks of the Wabash, in Ohio, where eighteen years before they had been beaten by General
Wayne at Miami--then Amherstburg must be greatly strengthened and the Americans deterred from
attack. How was Brock to obtain troops, and how were they to be equipped? The stores at Fort
York were empty, provisions costly, and no specie to be had. All the frontier posts needed
heavier batteries. On Lake Erie the fleet consisted of the Queen Charlotte and the small schooner
Hunter. As to the militia, he had been advised that it would not be prudent to arm more than
4,000 of the 11,000 in all Canada prepared to bear arms.

To Brock's citation of thirty pressing wants Sir George Prevost wrote him, "You must not be
led into any measure bearing the character of offence, even should war be declared." Prevost
had a fluid backbone, while Brock's was of finely tempered steel.

While affairs were in this precarious state His Excellency the Lieutenant-Governor, Major-General
Brock, opened the Legislature at York. With what pride the news was received by the good people
at St. Peter's Port can be imagined. To think that this great man, gorgeous in a purple Windsor
uniform and slender court sword, with gleaming silk hose and hair aglitter with silver powder,
was none other than "Master Isaac," whom the humblest Guernsey fisherman claimed as comrade,
seemed past belief! To think that this important gentleman, with frilled waistcoat and cuffs
of delicate lace--actually the King's Deputy--before whom, as "Your Excellency," Indian and
paleface, gentle and simple, bowed low, was the small boy who used to play "uprooting the gorse"
with the Guernsey fisher-lads--was beyond comprehension. Probably the one least affected by
these honours was our hero himself. While it gratified his honest pride, it did not in the
least cloud his vision. His speech from the throne proves this.

"It is a glorious contest in which the Empire is engaged," he said, "to secure the independence
of Europe, but what can we think of the American Government, which is trying to impede her
effort.... The ships of England," he continued, "had been refused shelter in United States
harbours, while refuge had been extended to the ships of our inveterate enemies." He reminded
the colonists that "insulting threats had been offered to the flag and hostile preparations
made." He praised the militia, and, while wishing for peace, declared that "Canada must prepare
for war, relying on England's support in her hour of peril." He asked the Legislature to assent
to three things of vital importance--the suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, the passage of
a law to regulate the privileges of aliens, and an Act providing for rewards to be paid to
the captors of deserters.

It was a house divided against itself, and it turned a deaf ear to Brock's appeal. "To the
great influence of American settlers over the members of the Lower House," he attributed this
defeat. A court-martial revealed the fact that one of the best known militia regiments was
composed almost entirely of native Americans! The United Empire Loyalists thronged to his banner.

Undaunted by the cheap prudence of Prevost, a hostile Legislature, and the difficulties that
beset him, Brock took off his coat, rolled up his sleeves, and all but single-handed--"off
his own bat," as Dobson explained it to an admiring crowd in the barrack-room--wrought like
the hero that he was for the salvation of his country. He became a machine, a machine working
at high pressure eighteen hours out of twenty-four. He had developed into a very demon for work.

With an empty treasury and no hope of reinforcements--every soldier England could spare was
fighting in Spain--he raised flank companies of militia to be attached to the regular regiments.
The Glengarry sharpshooters, four hundred strong, were enlisted in three weeks. A new schooner
was placed on the stocks. He formed a car-brigade of the young volunteer farmers of York and
removed incompetent officers.

Fort George, constructed of earthen ramparts, with honeycombed cedar palisades which a lighted
candle could set fire to, with no tower or block-house, and mounting only nine-pound guns,
he knew was incapable of resistance. It invited destruction from any battery that might be
erected at Youngstown on the American side, while confronting it was Fort Niagara, built of
stone, mounting over twenty heavy guns, containing a furnace for heating shot, and formidable
with bastions, palisades, pickets and dry ditch. The tension at Niagara was trying. Two officers
of the 41st were expelled for killing dull care by dissipation. A Canadian merchant schooner
was boarded in mid-lake by an American brig, taken to Sackett's Harbour and stripped. The Americans
were pouring rations and munitions of war into Detroit. If Brock's hands were shackled, he
knew the art of sitting tight. He made another flying trip to Amherstburg, taking one hundred
men of the 41st, in the face of Prevost's standing orders to "exercise the strictest economy."
Handicapped on every side, doing his best and preparing for the worst, he wrote Prevost that
his "situation was critical," but he "hoped to avert dire calamity."

The river bank between Fort George and Queenston for seven miles was patrolled night and day.
A watch was placed on Mississaga lighthouse from daylight to dusk, and beacon masts, supporting
iron baskets filled with birchbark and pitch, were erected on the heights to announce, in event
of hostilities, the call to arms.

At this time one of Brock's most intimate friends--his chosen adviser--was Mr. Justice William
Dummer Powell, later Chief Justice of Upper Canada, and former Speaker of the House. At the
judge's house and at Tordarroch, the log mansion of General Æneas Shaw--another intimate, and
Adjutant-General of Militia--Brock was wont to repair for a few hours' rest from official cares.
It was at Tordarroch (Oak Hall), on the outskirts of York, that the great Duke of Kent had
been a guest. When at Fort George our hero usually lived with Colonel Murray, of the 100th,
and "charming Mrs. Murray," as he was fond of calling her, in their "pretty cottage," and if
not there he was a constant visitor at the house of Captain John Powell, a son of the judge
and son-in-law of General Shaw, between whose daughter, Sophia Shaw, and Isaac Brock there
had developed a deep attachment. Here he whiled away spare moments with whist and cribbage,
"diversions," he said, "that sharpened a man's wits." He would shoot wild pigeons and spruce
partridges in the adjacent bush, or take long gallops, frequently alone, over the plains beyond
the Heights of Queenston, ever on the lookout for new bridle-paths and point-to-point trails.

CHAPTER XIV.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA DECLARES WAR.

It came at last! On June 18th, 1812, after weeks of preparation, placing an embargo on shipping,
putting 100,000 militia on a war footing on the pretence of hostilities among the Indians,
calling out the volunteers and raising a special public fund, Congress under President Madison
declared war against Great Britain.

This did not end Brock's suspense. Not until five weeks later did he receive official notice
from Prevost. Despite opposition from many states, which declared their detestation of an alliance
with Bonaparte, after a stormy debate behind closed doors at Washington, Congress voted for
war against England, with Canada as the point of attack. The United States placed itself on
record as approving of "forcible invasion of a neighbouring peaceful country and its rights,
and of taking property on which it had no shadow of claim."

The offensive "right of search" of American ships by British warships for deserters was, of
course, given as the excuse for war. The United States Government contended that a nation's
flag protected the cargoes of the vessels of that nation. To search for contraband or for deserters
on such ships, President Madison declared, was a violation of international law. In direct
violation of the United States' own interpretation of this decree, her war-frigate President
blew the British gunboat Little Belt, half her own size, almost out of the water because of
the refusal of her commander to allow such search.

It is interesting to remember that while the United States contended that Britain had no right
to search the ships of other nations, she actually allowed her own officials, in the case of
an American sailor who had become a citizen of France and an officer in the French navy, to
search the foreign vessel upon which he served and arrest him as a deserter. A more flagrant
violation of the principles she professed is difficult to imagine. She insisted that this officer
was still a citizen of the United States, for he could not become a citizen of another country
without the consent of the government of his native country. So, when it suited her purpose,
and in direct defiance of her own proclamation, she did not hesitate to accept England's contention
and adopt the "obnoxious doctrine"--thus practising the identical principle against which she
had declared war. Truly glaring inconsistency.

While these were the chief of the alleged reasons for war, the whole world knew that the real
cause was the jealousy and hatred felt for England by a certain class of United States citizens
who "were bound to pick a quarrel with John Bull, excuse or no excuse." That there were many
and irritating faults on the part of England cannot be denied. In the light of subsequent events
it is not difficult to realize that both governments were in the wrong. The wisdom born of
bitter experience and the sincere friendship of the two nations to-day, sensibly founded on
mutual respect, happily renders a repetition of such regrettable scenes outside the pale of
possibility.

Strange to say, England had revoked the objectionable Order-in-Council authorizing right of
search of American ships for deserters by British men-of-war the very day before war was declared
by the United States. There was no ocean cable in those days. Had there been, this story might
never have been written. The removal, however, of this one reason for war was not--when letters
duly arrived from England announcing the fact--accepted by the United States as a reason for
an immediate declaration of peace. This proves that the reasons advanced by the United States
for going to war were from first to last not genuine, but mere excuses. Canada was as Naboth's
vineyard, and Ahab, in the person of the United States, coveted it. England hesitated to draw
the sword on a people "speaking a common tongue, with institutions based upon her own," but
she could not always be expected to "turn the other cheek to the smiter."

The United States called out an army of 15,000 men for purposes of attack on the Niagara frontier,
and commanded General Wadsworth--of course, on paper--"to feed and cherish them." How well
he executed this command remains to be seen.

What of Canada? Her yeomen forsook ploughshare and broadaxe, seized sword and musket, and rallied
to the standard of Brock. In Upper Canada there was an active force of 950 regulars and marines
and 550 militia. This little army had to defend the seven forts of Kingston, York, George,
Erie, Chippewa, Amherstburg, and St. Joseph, not one of which was a fortress of strength, to
patrol the lakes and protect a most vulnerable frontier. It was the opinion of leading military
authorities that Canada could never be held against such an enemy.

Brock was at York when the news reached him. He at once sent part of the 41st to Niagara by
lake, crossing himself with his brigade-major, Evans, and Macdonell and Glegg, his aides, and,
as usual, in a batteau, with eleven men. At Fort George he bade adieu to some American officers,
guests of the mess, and sent them across the river. He was eager to storm Fort Niagara, whose
capture might have changed the entire situation, but alas! what of his instructions?

He called out more militia, though he had only a few tents and many of the men were drilling
without shoes. One hundred Tuscaroras under Chief Brant answered his summons. He divided his
augmented Niagara force into four divisions--at Fort Erie 400 men, at Fort Chippewa 300, at
Queenston 300, at Fort George 500. Of these, 900 were militia.

The rattle of the matchlock was as familiar as cockcrow. Every man became in fact, if not in
deed, a volunteer. If the musket was not strapped to the tail of the plough, it leaned against
the snake-fence--loaded. The goose-step, the manual and platoon took the place of the quadrille.
Every clearing became a drill-hall, every log cabin an armoury. Many of the militia were crack
shots, with all the scouting instincts of the forest ranger. In the barrack-square, in scarlet,
white and green, the regulars drilled and went through wondrous evolutions with clock-work
precision--fighting machinery with the tenacity of the bull-dog, though lacking the craft of
the woods that had taught the volunteer the value of shelter and the wisdom of dwelling on his aim.

Apart, stolid and silent, but interested spectators, lounged the dusky redmen, forever sucking
at their pwoighun-ahsin (stone pipes) and making tobacco from the inner bark of red-willow
wands, watching and wondering. The foot soldiers carried fire-locks, flints and cartridge boxes.
These smooth-bore flint-locks had an effective range of less than 100 yards, and could be discharged
only once a minute. Very different to the modern magazine rifle, which can discharge twenty-five
shots in a minute and kill at 4,200 yards, while within 2,000 yards it is accurate and deadly.
The mounted men were armed with sabres and ponderous pistols.

Our hero addressed the militia. The enemy, he told them, intended to lay waste the country.
"Let them be taught," he said, "that Canadians would never bow their necks to a foreign yoke."
As the custodian of their rights, he was trying to preserve all they held dear. He looked to
them to repel the invaders.

Brock was placed in a most peculiar position, for while the passive Prevost was still instructing
him--nearly three weeks after the declaration of war--"to take no offensive measures, as none
would be taken by the United States Government," General Hull, with a force of 2,500 tried
soldiers, was on his way from Ohio through the Michigan forests to occupy Detroit and invade
Canada. Hull reached Detroit, and four days later, with his entire command, crossed the river
and occupied Sandwich. But the trip was attended with serious mishap to his army, for Lieutenant
Roulette, of the British sloop Hunter--a brother of the famous fur-trader--in a small batteau,
with only six men, captured the United States packet Cayuga, with a detachment of five officers
and thirty-three soldiers, as she was coming up the river. The Cayuga's treasure consisted
not only of valuable stores and baggage, but Hull's official correspondence with the United
States Secretary of War. The contents of this decided Brock, though he had no idea Hull's army
was so strong, to attempt the reduction of Fort Detroit without a moment's delay.

The very hour he knew that war was declared he had notified the officer at St. Joseph. Our
hero, whose root idea of a soldier's craft was "secrecy in conception and vigour in execution,"
had no taste for Prevost's mad doctrine that the aggressed had to await the convenience of
the aggressor. Brock had been taught to regard tolerance in war as an "evil of the first magnitude,"
and so had already instructed the commander at St. Joseph that if war was proclaimed he was
to attack Mackinaw at once, but if attacked, "defend your post to the last." Prevost at the
same time had ordered this officer "in case of necessity to effect his own retreat," never
dreaming he would dare attack Mackinaw. What a contrast the despatches of these two men present!
The one full of confidence, fight and resistance, the other shrinking from action and suggesting
retreat. Brock's despatch was of later date and more palatable to the fighter at St. Joseph.
He started at once for Mackinaw, fifty-five miles distant, with 45 of the 10th Royal veterans,
180 Canadians, many of whom were traders and voyageurs, and convoyed by the brig Caledonia,
owned by the North-West Fur Company.

He landed before daybreak. By noon of that day the Union Jack was floating above the basalt
cliffs of the Gibraltar of the north, and also over two of the enemy's vessels laden with furs.
It is not on record that Captain Roberts was recommended by General Sir George Prevost for
promotion! The Indians at Amherstburg were now ready to support the British. Foremost among
these was the great Shawanese warrior, Tecumseh.

General Hull, having meantime billeted himself in Colonel Baby's big brick house at Sandwich,
issued a proclamation to the "inhabitants of Canada." As a sample of egotism, bluff and bombast
it stands unrivalled. He told the inhabitants of Canada that he was in possession of their
country, that an ocean and wilderness isolated them from England, whose tyranny he knew they
felt. His grand army was ready to release them from oppression. They must choose between liberty
and security, as offered by the United States, and war and annihilation, the penalty of refusal.
He also threatened instant destruction to any Canadian found fighting by the side of an Indian,
though General Dearborn, in command of the United States forces at Niagara, had been authorized
by the United States Secretary of War "to organize the warriors of the Seneca Indians" for
active service against Canada.

The United States Secretary of War wrote to Hull, saying his action respecting Canadian Indians
"met with the approval of the Government." Evidently ashamed, upon reflection, of Hull's threat,
that same Government later instructed its commissioners at the Treaty of Ghent, when peace
was restored, "to disown and disavow" their former Indian policy.

Hull's extraordinary production, which proved a boomerang, was really the work of Colonel Lewis
Cass, his Chief of Staff; but while Hull and Cass were "unloading their rhetoric at Sandwich,"
our hero was "loading his guns at Mackinaw."

CHAPTER XV.

BROCK ACCEPTS HULL'S CHALLENGE.

With the country's call for a saviour had arisen the man so sorely needed. Vigilant, sagacious
and brave, but with most inadequate forces, Brock, faced by a crisis, hurried to repel the
invasion by Hull. If Canada was to be saved, Detroit, as well as Mackinaw, must be reduced.
The confidence also of the savages must be retained. The smallness of his army demanded the
neutrality of the redmen, if not their active aid.

The plan of his campaign was laid before his Executive Council and the members of his staff.
As they parted at the door of the General's quarters at midnight, preceding the day on which
their gallant leader issued his counter reply to Hull, his final words were: "To hold Amherstburg,
gentlemen, is of vital importance. It is the western base from which we must resist attack
and advance upon Detroit. It must be held in force."

Brock's written answer to Hull's flamboyant address--edited by his wise adviser, Judge Powell--was
eloquent and dignified. Hull's invitation to Canadians to seek protection from Britain under
the flag of the United States was, he said, "an insult." He cited the advantages of British
connection, and warned the colonists that secession meant the restitution of Canada to the
Empire of France. This was the price to be paid by America for the aid given by France to the
revolting States during the War of Independence. He reminded them of the constancy of their
fathers. "Are you prepared to become slaves to this despot Napoleon, who rules Europe with
a rod of iron? If not, arise, repel the invader and give your children no cause to reproach
you with sacrificing the richest inheritance of earth, participation in the name, character
and freedom of Britons."

He told them not to be dismayed by the enemy's threat to "refuse them quarter should an Indian
appear in their ranks." "Why," he continued, "should the brave bands of Indians which now inhabit
this colony be prevented from defending their new homes?" These poor people, he reminded them,
had actually been punished for their former fidelity to the United States, by the Government
of that country taking from them their old homes in Ohio. The King of England had granted them
a refuge and given them superior lands in Canada. Why were they to be denied the right to defend
their hearths "from invasion by ferocious foes," who, while utilizing Indians themselves, had
condemned the practice in others? The threat to refuse quarter to these defenders of invaded
rights would, he said, bring about inevitable reprisal, for "the national character of Britain
was not less distinguished for humanity than retributive justice."

The obstacles surrounding Brock would have driven an ordinary man to distraction. It is not
possible to recite a fraction of them. The Grand River Indians, having received a specious
letter from Hull, refused to join the relief expedition for Moraviantown, on the Thames, on
which some of Hull's freebooters were marching. Some of the militia declined to leave their
homes, suspicious, they said, of Indian treachery. Some, with blood relations in the States,
refused point blank to take up arms. Others were busy harvesting, while not a few came out
openly as traitors and joined the ranks of Hull. Brock had no reinforcements of regular troops,
and small chance of getting any, and, what was far worse, he received little moral support
even from the Legislature, and none from other sources from which he had a right to expect
it. He called an extra session of the House to enact laws to meet the crisis, to invest him
with greater authority and to vote money for defence. He closed his Speech from the Throne
with a declaration delivered in sonorous, ringing tones that echoed throughout the chamber:

"We are engaged in an awful and eventful contest. By unanimity and vigour we may teach the
enemy this lesson, that a country defended by free men, devoted to the cause of their King
and constitution, can never be conquered."

Though Brock's speech "inspired the faithful and foiled the designs of some of the faithless,"
his demands were conceded in part only, and he left for Fort George with heart filled with
misgivings. In answer to his request, Prevost declined to define the extent of the authority
with which he had himself vested him. Extreme measures, he told him, must be taken at his own
risk. Our hero was one of those limited few who had sounded the depths of the truth that it
was easier to do one's duty than to know it. His shrewdness and self-reliance came to the rescue.
Seeing that the Niagara River would be selected as the point for invasion, he made it his defensive
frontier, while the Detroit River was the offensive front of his campaign. These views he outlined
to his staff on the night following the prorogation of the House.

Judge Powell, after a long session of Council, the last to depart, was rising to leave. "Then,
sir," said Colonel Macdonell, General Brock's new provincial aide, the young and brilliant
Attorney-General of Upper Canada--engaged to Mary Powell, the daughter of the judge--"you really
believe we can bombard Detroit successfully? The fort has, I understand, parapets twenty feet
high, with four bastions, surrounded by palisades, a ditch and a glacis, and is capable of
withstanding a long siege; besides which it has 2,500 fighting men to defend it."

"My good Macdonell," responded our hero, interest and deep regard imprinted on his face, "we
fortunately know from Hull's own letters that he has as little confidence in his army as they
have confidence in him. I fancy he is merely whistling to keep up his courage. A bold front
on our part, with a judicious display of our small force, will give him cause to reflect. Then,
provided we enthuse the Indians--and if Mackinaw is fallen, this should not be difficult--Detroit
is ours!"

"How about Amherstburg and Sandwich, General?" interjected Justice Powell. "Their safety is
essential to your plan."

"As to Amherstburg," said Brock, "it is the pivot point, sir, and must be retained as our base.
At Sandwich we already have earthworks completed. If destroyed by Hull they must be rebuilt,
for the batteries there must cover our crossing and cannonade the fort while we advance upon
it. I have already sent, as you know, a few additional men to Procter--every man I can steal
from here. He should be able to hold his own at Amherstburg for a bit longer. The conditions,
I admit, are far from satisfactory under the present command, but Chambers is on his way with
forty of the 41st, one hundred militia with Merritt, and some of Brant's braves, to put backbone
into the garrison."

"General," said Justice Powell, the rays from a waning moon flooding the hall-way as the outer
door was opened by Brock for the exit of his councillors, "having implicit confidence in your
judgment and military ability, I believe you will overthrow Hull. Assuming that you capture
old Fort Lernoult and seize Detroit, what then?"

"What then, sir?" said Brock--emphasizing his parting words with a gesture of his hand--"why,
Detroit taken, I shall return here, batter Fort Niagara--providing Prevost consents--and then
by a sudden movement I could sweep the frontier from Buffalo to Fort Niagara and complete the
salvation of Canada by the occupation of Sackett's Harbor. Good-night, gentlemen. En avant,
Detroit!"

CHAPTER XVI.

"EN AVANT, DETROIT!"

Under an August moon Lake Erie shone as a shield of silver. Brock, with a fleet of small craft,
batteaux and boats of every kind given him by the settlers, had pulled out from Long Point
with 40 regulars and 260 militia for the relief of Amherstburg, two hundred miles distant.

The news of the fall of Mackinaw and the official declaration of war had only reached him as
Parliament rose. He had proclaimed martial law before leaving York. He had also heard details
of the attack by Hull's raiders on the Moravian settlement, sixty miles up the Thames. He knew
of the repulse of 300 United States troops in three attempts to cross the Canard River bridge
for an attack on Amherstburg, and of their being driven into the open plains, with loss, by
Procter's men.

It was in one of these attacks that the first scalp in the war of 1812 was taken--not by one
of Brock's terrible Indians, whose expected excesses had been referred to by Hull, but by a
captain of Hull's spies. This officer--one hates to describe him as a white man--wrote his
wife, he "had the pleasure of tearing a scalp from the head of a British redskin," and related
at length the brutal details of his methods. They were those of a wild beast. "The first stroke
of the tomahawk," Hull had stated in his proclamation, "the first attempt with the scalping-knife,
will be the signal of a scene of desolation." Yet the first scalp taken in the Detroit campaign
was by one of his own officers!

Brock knew that the valorous Hull, dismayed at the advance of the British, had recrossed the
river with all but 250 of his men and was hard at work on the defences of Fort Shelby, behind
which he had retired. Brock also knew of the affair at Brownstown, where the Indian chief Tecumseh,
with twenty-five warriors, had separated himself from Major Muir's detachment, sent to intercept
a transport on its way from Ohio to Detroit with supplies for Hull. He had been told of the
stratagem by which the great Shawanese warrior had ambushed the 200 American soldiers, near
the Raisin River, who had marched from Detroit to escort this convoy and the mails. Seven American
officers were killed at the Raisin, twelve of all ranks wounded, and seventy reported missing
after the fight. In addition to the provision train, Tecumseh captured what was of much greater
importance, another batch of Hull's despondent despatches. It was here that swift justice overtook
the scalping Captain McCullough, of Hull's spies, who himself met with the fate of his former
victim--the fate he deserved.

Brock also received despatches describing the daring attack by Lieutenant Roulette, of the
provincial marine, who in a small boat with a handful of men had boarded and seized in the
Detroit River a brigade of eleven batteaux! These, loaded with food, were on their way from
Black Rock, and now carried fifty-six wounded American soldiers and two English prisoners.
This bold feat of "cutting out" took place under the eyes of an armed escort of 250 American
soldiers marching along the river bank.

Messengers from Procter had also informed Brock of the fight at Maguagua, fourteen miles below
Detroit. It was here that Muir, with 200 regulars and militia and less than 200 Indians, instead
of waiting to be attacked, recklessly assailed a force of 600 Americans who were halted on
the edge of the oak forest, supported by two six-pounder guns. Fighting without hope against
such odds, the British were outflanked, Muir himself wounded, and an officer killed--the second
British soldier to fall in the war of 1812. The American loss was eighteen killed and sixty-three
wounded. Though the difference in arms and men was greatly in favour of the Americans, the
British were enabled to retreat to the river, where they regained their boats. The American
force, suffering from greater casualties, did not attempt to follow them.

Apart from the inferior strength of the British, the chief cause of their reverse at Maguagua
was the blunder of some men of the 41st, who fired upon a body of Tecumseh's Indians. In rushing
from the woods the redmen were mistaken for the enemy, and falling into a similar error themselves,
they returned with interest the fire of the British soldiers. The disorder that followed created
a panic. While Tecumseh with his own Indians fought bravely, the seventy Lake Indians under
Caldwell suffered from "chill" and fled at the first shot. The most encouraging of these facts,
when told to the expedition, aroused in Brock's followers a wild desire to meet Hull's army
in battle.

Our hero's trip from Long Point was full of peril and hardship. The lake shore in places was
extremely rugged. Precipitous cliffs of red clay and sun-baked sand rose two hundred feet from
the boulder-strewn coast. Scarcely a creek offered shelter. The weather was unusually stormy.
A heavy surf boomed on the shore. Flocks of water-fowl were driven before the wind. The men
were drenched by torrents of rain. Though thirty miles in twenty-four hours was considered
the maximum distance for rowing a batteau, nothing could retard this strange armada or dampen
the confidence of the men in their resolute leader, who in an open boat led the way. In this
boat, which was "headquarters," were Brock and his two aides. A lighted flambeau at the bow
acted as a beacon during the night. After five days of great vigilance and galley-slave work,
the toilers reached Amherstburg. Without the help of these hardy and resourceful men of the
Canadian militia this trip could not have been accomplished.

The conduct of these bold frontiersmen aroused Brock's admiration. His own example had again
acted as an inspiration. Shortly after leaving Port Talbot, his batteau, pounding in the sea,
ran upon a reef that extended far from shore, and despite oars and pike-poles, remained fast.
In the height of the confusion "Master Isaac" sprang overboard, and a moment later voyageur
and raw recruit, waist deep in water, following the example of the hero of Castle Cornet, lifted
the batteau over the dangerous ledge.

When at midnight the boats passed up the Strait--through which the ambitious La Salle and Father
Hennepin had passed in 1679--and grated on the gravel beach at Amherstburg, Brock was greeted
with a volley of musketry by the Indians. This was contrary to his rigid rubric of war. Such
waste of powder must not be tolerated. He turned to the Indian superintendent, "Do pray, Colonel
Elliott," said he, "explain my reasons for objecting to the firing and tell the Chiefs I will
talk with them to-morrow."

CHAPTER XVII.

OUR HERO MEETS TECUMSEH.

A few minutes only had elapsed when Elliott returned. The sentry's challenge caused Brock to
look up from the table, littered with plans and despatches. Another figure darkened the doorway.

"This, sir," said Elliott, "is Tecumseh, the Shawanese chief of whom you have heard, and who
desires to be presented to you."

The General, who had removed the stains of travel and was in uniform, rose to his full height,
bowed, extended his hand and explained in manly fashion the reason for asking that the firing
be stopped. The contrast presented by the two men was striking. The old world and the new,
face to face--a scene for the brush of an impressionist. Brock, tall, fair, big-limbed, a blue-eyed
giant, imposing in scarlet coat and blue-white riding trousers, tasselled Hessian boots, and
cocked-hat in hand. On his benevolent face was an irresistible smile.

The Indian, though of middle height, was of most perfect proportions, an athlete in bronze,
lithe and supple as a panther. His oval face, set in a frame of glistening black hair, shone
like a half-polished copper relief. Overlooking the nose, straight as one of his own arrows,
and from which some tinkling silver coins were suspended, a pair of hawk-like eyes, hazel-black
and unflinching--in which the secrets of the world seemed slumbering--gleamed upon Brock. His
dress, a hunting jacket of tanned deer-skin and close-fitting leggings. Fringed mocassins of
the same material, richly embroidered in silk and porcupine quills dyed in divers colours,
encased his feet. The light from the open log fire flickered fitfully, half revealing the antlered
heads of moose and caribou and other trophies of the chase that, hanging from the rafters,
looked down upon the group, adding weirdness to the picture.

Brock briefly explained that he had come to fight the King's enemies, enemies who so far had
never seen his back, and who were Tecumseh's enemies also. "Would Tecumseh maintain an honourable
warfare?"

Perhaps no eulogy of Brock was ever penned that so well summed up his qualities as did the
terse, four-worded certificate of character uttered by the Indian before replying to the British
general's appeal. Tecumseh looked "Master Isaac's" commanding physique up and over, over and
down--Brock's caution as to waste of powder doubtless weighing with him--until eye met eye,
and then, impulsively extending his thin brown hand, turned to his followers, exclaiming in
tones of highest admiration:

"This is a man!"

Assenting "Ughs" and "Ho-hos" followed in rapid succession, and in response to Brock's invitation
the headmen, painted and plumed and in striped blankets, squatted on their stained reed mats
and wild-beast skins on the basswood log floor. Questioned as to the nature of the country
westward, Tecumseh took a roll of elm-bark and with the point of his scalping-knife traced
on its white inner surface the features of the region--hills, forests, trails, rivers, muskegs
and clearings. Rough, perhaps, but as accurate, he said, as if drawn by a pale-face teebahkeè-wayninni
(surveyor).

That night, after Tecumseh's return, Brock again held council with his staff, proposing an
attack on Detroit. Only one of his chief officers, the staunch colonial quartermaster, Lieutenant-Colonel
Nichol, agreed with him. Colonel Henry Procter, from whom he had expected whole-hearted support,
strongly objected. History teaches us that the conception of a daring plan is the offspring
of great minds only. Procter was not of this class, as his subsequent record shows. Some of
our hero's critics have described his resolve to attack Detroit as "audacious and desperate."
Isaac Brock was, of course, nothing if not contemptuously daring. The greater the difficulty
that faced him the more was he determined to challenge the obstacle, that to a less confident
man would have been rejected as insurmountable. He had, however, resolved and planned not only
upon taking Detroit, but, if need be, the pursuit and capture of Hull's entire army, compelling
him to either stand and fight or surrender. With habitual prescience he had weighed well the
issues and chosen the lesser alternative. His own defeat and possibly his death, on the one
hand, against the probable salvation of half a continent on the other. What true soldier could
hesitate?

While patiently hearing objections, he brushed the most of them aside as mere flies on the
wheel. Surely the way had been opened to him. The seized despatches had revealed the discord
among Hull's troops and shown him that while the United States militia, the flower of Ohio
and Kentucky, was of good material, the United States soldiers were not. He knew that the situation
in Upper Canada called for extreme measures, and that the time to strike was now or never,
for his scouts had truly reported that 350 United States mounted troops were pressing close
upon his rear. They were, in fact, only a mile or two distant. If his own inferior force was
outflanked, or his communication with the Canadian interior cut, it spelled utter disaster.
He was in a wilderness without hope of reinforcements. As Colonel Cass, the United States commander,
later reported to the President, Brock was "between two fires and with no hope of succour."
Brock knew he must act at once or even retreat might be impossible. With inborn acumen he saw
at a glance the peril of his own position, and with cool courage hastened to avert it. He realized
that upon the "destruction or discomfiture" of Hull's forces "the safety of the province depended."

Brock listened closely to Procter's argument--by this time he knew, of course, that Hull's
own line of communication with his reserves had been cut--then rising, when all who cared to
speak had finished, he said: "Gentlemen, I have definitely decided on crossing the river and
attacking Fort Detroit. Instead of further advice I must beg of you to give me your hearty
support. The general orders for to-morrow will be issued at once."

This decision was typical of the man of action. "Prudent only where recklessness was a fault,
and hazardous only when hesitation meant defeat."

CHAPTER XVIII.

AN INDIAN POW-WOW.

It was a picturesque council of white men and Indians that was held at dawn in an open glade
of the forest. The fragrant odours of the bush mingled with the pungent smoke of the red willow-bark,
puffed from a hundred pipes. Conspicuous at this pow-wow was Tecumseh, who across his close-fitting
buckskin hunting jacket, which descended to his knees and was trimmed with split leather fringe,
wore a belt of wampum, made of the purple enamel of mussel shells--cut into lengths like sections
of a small pipe-stem, perforated and strung on sinew. On his head he wore a toque of eagle plumes.

"My object," said Brock, addressing the Indians, "is to assist you to drive the 'Long-knives'
[Americans] from the frontier, and repel invasion of the King's country." Tecumseh, speaking
for his tribesmen, remarked, not without sarcasm, that "their great father, King George, having
awakened out of a long sleep, they were now ready to shed their last drop of blood in that
father's service."

"The pale faces," he continued, after an impressive pause--and the fire of his eloquence and
his gestures swayed his hearers like the reeds on the river bank--"the Americans who want to
fight the British are our enemies.... They came to us hungry and they cut off the hands of
our brothers who gave them corn.... We gave them rivers of fish and they poisoned our fountains....
We gave them forest-clad mountains and valleys full of game, and in return what did they give
our warriors and our women? Rum and trinkets and--a grave!... The shades of our fathers slaughtered
on the banks of the Tippecanoe can find no rest.... Their eyes can see no herds on the hills
of light in the hunting grounds of the dead!... Until our enemies are no more we must be as
one man, under one chief, whose name is--Death!... I have spoken."

Tecumseh, it should be known, bore a personal grudge against the Americans, especially against
the 4th Regiment, then in garrison at Detroit, the "heroes of Tippecanoe." This was a terrible
misnomer, for under General Harrison, with 1,000 soldiers, less than a year before, they had
taken part in the slaughter of Tecumseh's half-armed band of 600 men and women on the banks
of the Tippecanoe River, during that chief's absence with many of his warriors, and had laid
waste his village. With a perhaps pardonable spirit of vindictiveness, such as is shared by
both redskin and white man, the human-being in him thirsted for revenge.

Brock, perceiving Tecumseh's sagacity and influence over the savages, invited the Shawanese
and Wawanosh, Ojebekun and the other sachems, to a private council. Here he unfolded his plans.
Before doing this he made it a condition that no barbarities were to be committed. "The scalping-knife,"
said he, "must be discarded, and forbearance, compassion and clemency shown to the vanquished."
He told them he wanted to restrict their military operations to the known rules of war, as
far as was possible under the singular conditions in which they fought, and exacted a promise
from the lofty-minded Tecumseh that his warriors "should not taste pernicious liquor until
they had humbled the Big-knives." "If this resolution," remarked Brock, "is persevered in,
you must surely conquer."

Brock's rapid ascendency over the Indians was astonishing; they already revered him as a common
father.

That same afternoon our hero, moving up with his entire command to Sandwich, occupied the mansion
of Colonel Baby, the great fur-trader, just evacuated by Hull. In the spacious hall hooks were
nailed to the rafters, from which were suspended great steel-yards, by which the beaver packs
were weighed. Scattered on the hewn floor in much profusion were soldiers' accoutrements, service
and pack-saddles, iron-bound chests mixed up with bear-traps and paddles, rolls of birch-bark,
leather hunting shirts, and the greasy blankets of voyageur and redskin. The room on the right
became Brock's headquarters, and in this room he penned his first demand upon General Hull.

"My force," so he wrote, "warrants my demanding the immediate surrender of Fort Detroit." Anxious
to prevent bloodshed, and knowing Hull's dread of the Indians, he also played upon his fears.
"The Indians," he added, "might get beyond my control." This summons was carried by Colonel
Macdonell and Major Glegg, under a flag of truce, across the river.

The batteries at Sandwich consisted of one eighteen-pounder, two twelve-pounders, and two 51/2-inch
howitzers. Back of these artificial breastworks extended both a wilderness and the garden of
Canada. Beyond the meadows, aflame with autumn wild-flowers, beyond the cultivated clearings,
rose a forest of walnut, oak, basswood, birch and poplar trees, seared with age, of immense
height and girth, festooned with wild honeysuckle and other creepers. In the open were broad
orchards bending under their harvest of red and yellow fruit--apples and plums, peaches, nectarines
and cherries--and extensive vineyards. Huge sugar maples challenged giant pear trees, whose
gnarled trunks had resisted the storms of a century. To the north the floor of the forest was
interlaced with trails, which, with the intention of deceiving Hull's spies as to the strength
of Brock's forces, had been crossed and recrossed, and countermarched and doubled over, by
the soldiers and Tecumseh's half-naked braves.

The air was filled with the fragrance of orchard and forest. Facing our hero, flowed the river,
broad, swift and deep; tufted wolf-willow, waving rushes and gray hazel fringing the banks.
Across and beyond this almost mile-wide ribbon of water, the imposing walls of Fort Detroit
confronted him. Approaching him at a rapid gait he at last espied his two despatch bearers,
their scarlet tunics vivid against the green background. They reported that, after waiting
upon Hull for two hours without being granted an interview, they were handed the following reply:

"General Hull is prepared to meet any force brought against him, and accept any consequences."

Brock instructed his gunners to acknowledge the receipt of this challenge with the thunder
of their batteries, and from then, far into the night, shells and round-shot shrieked their
way across the river, the answering missiles from Hull's seven twenty-four-pounders breaking
in a sheet of flame from the very dust created by the British cannon-balls that exploded on
the enemy's breastworks. Through the irony of fate, the first shot fired under Brock's personal
orders in the cause of Canadian freedom killed a United States officer, an intimate friend
of the British artilleryman who had trained the gun. Such are the arguments of war.

The cannonade proving ineffective, as judged by visible results, Brock issued orders to cross
the river at dawn, when he would make the attempt to take the fort by storm--and soldier and
militiaman bivouacked on their arms.

       *       *       *       *       *

Camp fires were extinguished, but the tireless fireflies danced in the blackness of the wood.
The river gurgled faintly in the wind-stirred reeds. From out the gloom of the thicket came
the weird coco-coco of the horned owl. From the starlit sky above fell the shrill cry of the
mosquito hawk, "peepeegeeceese, peepeegeeceese!" From an isolated bark tepee came the subdued
incantation of the Indian medicine-man, while above the singing of the tree-tops and over all,
clear and with clock-like regularity, floated the challenge of the sentry and answering picket:

"Who goes there?"

"A friend."

"All's well."

CHAPTER XIX.

THE ATTACK ON DETROIT.

Morning came all too slowly for Brock's impatient soldiers. At last the reveille warned the
expectant camp. The sun rose, a red-hot shell out of the faint August haze, huge and threatening.
With its advent the British batteries resumed their fire, aided by the guns on the Queen Charlotte
and Hunter, which lay in the river, above the village known to-day as Windsor, to cover the
embarkation of the troops in batteaux and canoes.

Brock's entire force consisted of only 330 regulars and 400 militia, some of whom, acting on
a happy thought, were disguised in discarded uniforms of the 41st. This army was supported
by five pieces of artillery. All crossed the river in safety, landing at Spring Wells, four
miles below. The Indians, 600 strong, under Tecumseh, in addition to the men of his own nation,
consisted of many Sioux, Wyandottes and Dacotahs. The majority of these crossed under cover
of the night. History records no instance of a determined force being stopped by a river. The
Detroit River presented an animated picture. Edging their way through a maze of boats and batteaux,
and in marked contrast to the scarlet-coated soldiers and blue-shirted sailors, bark canoes
on which were drawn in flaring colours a variety of barbaric designs, flitted here and there,
their crews of half-naked savages fearsome in fresh war-paint and gaudy feathers. Coo-ees,
shrieks and shrill war-whoops--"Ah-oh! Ah-oo!" like the dismal yells of a pack of coyotes--rent
the air, the discordant din ever and anon drowned by the thunder of the guns from the Sandwich
batteries.

Upon landing Brock mustered his men. The reports showed 750 of all ranks, including the voyageurs
left in charge of the river squadron. The 600 Indians deployed in the shelter of the woods,
skirmishing to effect a flank movement. The column, having formed, was moved forward in sections,
and at double distance, to lend a fictitious air of strength; the light artillery, of three,
six, and two three-pounders, being immediately in rear of the advance guards, the whole preceded
by fluttering standards and rolling drums. Three generations ago! Yet you can see it all to-day
as plainly as Brock saw it, if you but close your eyes and conjure up the past.

The enemy, over 2,000 strong, drawn up in line upon an overlooking rise, had planted in the
roadway, commanding the approach to the town, two twenty-four pounders, each loaded with six
dozen grapeshot, around which the gunners stood with burning fuses, challenging our hero's advance.

Up and down, in front of the line, rode Isaac Brock on his gray charger, his brilliant uniform--khaki
was unknown in those days--flashing in the morning sun, a shining mark. A command here, a kindly
rebuke there, a word of encouragement to all ranks; the eyes of Britain and Canada were upon
them; they might have to take the fort by storm,--even so, honour and glory awaited them....
Forward then, for King and country!

The rat-a-tat-tat of the kettle-drums, the clear-cut whistle of the fifes, the resonant roll
of the big drums, the steady tramp, tramp of armed men--and the human machine was in motion.

       *       *       *       *       *

The long grim guns on Fort Detroit and Hull's field-pieces pointed their black muzzles at the
column. Up and down, in front of his men, rode Isaac Brock.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now this was more than some flesh and blood could stand. Spurring his horse, acting Quartermaster-General
Nichol reined up alongside his beloved commander. "General," he said, saluting his leader,
while the soldiers' faces expressed dumb approval, "forgive me, but I cannot forbear entreating
you not to expose yourself. If we lose you, we lose all. I pray you, allow the troops to advance,
led by their own officers."

"Master Nichol," said Brock, turning in his saddle and returning the salute of the gallant
Quartermaster, "I fully appreciate your kindly advice, but I feel that, in addition to their
sense of loyalty and duty, there are many here following me from a feeling of personal regard,
and I will never ask them to go where I do not lead."

Before him spread the plain, broken here and there with coulees and clumps of bush. A partly
fenced roadway, with some scattered houses on the river bank, but no barbed-wire entanglements,
impeded his movements. The introduction of such pleasant devices was left for a higher civilization!

       *       *       *       *       *

The column was in motion. The steady onward tramp, tramp of this thin red line, raw recruit
and grizzly veteran shoulder to shoulder, struck fear into the heart of the unfortunate Hull.
The prospect, though his troops outnumbered the British three to one, was clearly war to the
knife. Brock's meaning was apparent. Should he or should he not accept the Englishman's challenge?
He could extract no comfort out of that solid scarlet front, bristling with naked steel, now
fast approaching in battle array with even, ominous tread.

       *       *       *       *       *

The siege-proof walls of the fort lay behind him. His irresolute heart grew faint, and in the
flash of a flintlock in its pan, honour was sacrificed and fame cast to the winds. A brave
army of martyrs, over 2,000 strong, was rightabout faced, and drinking the cup of humiliation,
that only men of courage can drain to the bitter dregs, this army, eager to lock bayonets with
the British, was actually ordered to retreat into the shelter of Fort Detroit!

CHAPTER XX.

BROCK'S VICTORY.

Reaching a ravine, Brock ordered up his artillery and prepared to assault. "Come, come, Ahenobarbus,"
thrust in Marcus Læca, who had been educated in Catilina's school for polite villains and
cut-throats. "Pratinas is only proposing what, if you were a man of spirit, would have been done
long ago. You can't complain of Fortune, when she's put a handsome estate in your hands for
the asking."

"My admirable fellow," said Pratinas, benevolently, "I highly applaud your scruples. But, permit
me to say it, I must ask you to defer to me as being a philosopher. Let us look at the matter
in a rational way. We have gotten over any bogies which our ancestors had about Hades, or the
punishments of the wicked. In fact, what we know--as good Epicureans--is that, as Democritus
of Abdera[59] early taught, this world of ours is composed of a vast number of infinitely small
and indivisible atoms, which have by some strange hap come to take
the forms we see in the world of life and matter.

Now the soul of man is also of atoms, only they are finer and more subtile. At death these atoms
are dissolved, and so far as that man is concerned, all is over with
him.

       The atoms may recombine, or join with others, but never form anew
that same man.

Hence we may fairly conclude that this life is everything and death ends all. Do you follow,
and see to what I am leading?"

[59] Born about 470 B.C.

"I think so," said the wretched Lucius, feeling himself like a bird caught in a snare, yet not
exactly grasping the direct bearing of all this learned exposition.

"My application is this," went on Pratinas, glibly.

"Life is all--all either for pleasure or pain. Therefore every man has a right to extract all
the sweetness he can out of it. But suppose a man deliberately makes himself gloomy, extracts
no joy from life; lets himself be overborne by care and sorrow,--is not such a man better dead
than living?

Is not a dreamless sleep preferable to misery or even cold asceticism? And how much more does this
all apply when we see a man who makes himself unhappy, preventing by his very act of existence
the happiness of another more equably tempered mortal! Now I believe this is the present case.
Drusus, I understand, is leading a spare, joyless, workaday sort of existence, which is, or
by every human law should be, to him a burden. So long as he lives, he prevents you from enjoying
the means of acquiring pleasure. Now I have Socrates of imperishable memory on my side, when
I assert that death under any circumstances is either no loss or
a very great gain.

Considering then the facts of the case in its philosophic and rational
bearings, I may say this: Not merely would it be no wrong to remove
Drusus from a world in which he is evidently out of place, but I even
conceive such an act to rise to the rank of a truly meritorious deed."

Lucius Ahenobarbus was conquered. He could not resist the inexorable logic of this train of
reasoning, all the premises of which he fully accepted. Perhaps, we should add, he was not
very unwilling to have his wine-befuddled intellect satisfied, and his conscience stilled. He turned
down a huge beaker of liquor, and coughed forth:--

"Right as usual, Pratinas! By all the gods, but I believe you can save me!"

"Yes; as soon as Drusus is dead," insinuated the Greek who was already
computing his bill for brokerage in this little affair, "you can raise
plenty of loans, on the strength of your coming marriage with Cornelia."

"But

                                               how will you manage it?"
                                                   put in the alert Gabinius. "There mustn't be any clumsy bungling."

                                                             

"Rest assured," said Pratinas, with a grave dignity, perhaps the result
of his drinking, "that in my affairs I leave no room for bungling."

"And your plan is--" asked Lucius.

"Till to-morrow, friend," said the Greek; "meet me at the Temple of Saturn, just before dusk.
Then I'll be ready."

II

Lucius Ahenobarbus's servants escorted their tipsy master home to his lodgings in a fashionable
apartment house on the Esquiline.

When he awoke, it was late the next day, and head and wits were both sadly the worse for the
recent entertainment. Finally a bath and a luncheon cleared his brain, and he realized his position.
He was on the brink of concocting a deliberate murder. Drusus had never wronged him; the crime would
be unprovoked; avarice would be its only justification.

Ahenobarbus had done many things which a far laxer code of ethics than that of to-day would frown
upon; but, as said, he had never committed murder--at least had only had crucified those luckless
slaves, who did not count. He roused with a start, as from a dream. What if Pratinas were wrong?
What if there were really gods, and furies, and punishments for the wicked after death? And then
came the other side of the shield: a great fortune his; all his debts paid off; unlimited chances
for self-enjoyment; last, but not least, Cornelia his. She had slighted him, and turned her
back upon all his advances; and now what perfect revenge! Lucius was more in love with Cornelia
than he admitted even to himself. He would even give up Clyte, if he could possess her. And
so the mental battle went on all day; and the prick of conscience, the fears of superstition,
and the lingerings of religion ever grew fainter.

Near nightfall he was at his post, at the Temple of Saturn. Pratinas was awaiting him. The
Greek had only a few words of greeting, and the curt injunction:--"Draw your cloak up to shield
your face, and follow me." Then they passed out from the Forum, forced their way through the
crowded streets, and soon were through the Porta Ratumena, outside the walls, and struck out
across the Campus Martius, upon the Via Flaminia. It was rapidly darkening. The houses grew fewer
and fewer.

At a little distance the dim structures of the Portico and Theatre of Pompeius could be seen, looming
up to an exaggerated size in the evening haze. A grey fog was drifting up from the Tiber, and
out of a rift in a heavy cloud-bank a beam of the imprisoned moon was struggling. Along the
road were peasants with their carts and asses hastening home. Over on the Pincian Mount the
dark green masses of the splendid gardens of Pompeius and of Lucullus were just visible. The air
was filled with the croak of frogs and the chirp of crickets, and from the river came the
creak of the sculls and paddles of a cumbrous barge that was working its way down the Tiber.

Ahenobarbus felt awed and uncomfortable. Pratinas, with his mantle wrapped tightly around his
head, continued at a rapid pace. Lucius had left his attendants at home, and now began to recall
gruesome tales of highwaymen and bandits frequenting this region after dark. His fears were not
allayed by noticing that underneath his himation Pratinas occasionally let the hilt of a short
sword peep forth. Still the Greek kept on, never turning to glance at a filthy, half-clad beggar,
who whined after them for an alms, and who did not so much as throw a kiss after the young Roman
when the latter tossed forth a denarius,[60] but snatched up the
coin, muttered at its being no more, and vanished into the gathering
gloom.

[60] Four sesterces, 16 cents.

"Where are you leading me?" asked Ahenobarbus, a second time, after all his efforts to communicate with
the usually fluent Greek met with only monosyllables.

"To the lanista[61] Dumnorix," replied Pratinas, quickening an already
rapid pace.

[61] Keeper of a school of gladiators.

"And his barracks are--?"

"By the river, near the Mulvian bridge."

At length a pile of low square buildings was barely visible in the haze. It was close to the Tiber,
and the rush of the water against the piling of the bridge was distinctly
audible.

As the two drew near to a closed gateway, a number of mongrel dogs began to snap and bark around them.
From within the building came the roar of coarse hilarity and coarser jests. As Pratinas approached
the solidly barred doorway, a grating was pushed aside and a rude voice demanded:--

"Your business? What are you doing here?"

"Is Dumnorix sober?" replied Pratinas, nothing daunted. "If so, tell him to come and speak with
me. I have something for his advantage."

Either Pratinas was well known at the gladiators' school, or something in his speech procured favour.
There was a rattling of chains and bolts, and the door swung open. A man of unusual height
and ponderous proportions appeared in the opening.

That was all which could be seen in the semi-darkness.

"You are Pratinas?" he asked, speaking Latin with a northern accent. The Hellene nodded, and
replied softly: "Yes. No noise. Tell Dumnorix to come quietly."

The two stepped in on to the flags of a courtyard, and the doorkeeper, after rebolting, vanished
into the building. Ahenobarbus could only see that he was standing in a large stone-paved court,
perhaps one hundred and forty feet wide and considerably longer. A colonnade of low whitewashed
pillars ran all about: and behind them stretched rows of small rooms and a few larger apartments.
There were tyros practising with wooden swords in one of the rooms, whence a light streamed,
and a knot of older gladiators was urging them on, mocking, praising, and criticising their
efforts. Now and then a burly gladiator would stroll across the court; but the young noble and his
escort remained hidden in shadow.

Presently a door opened at the other end of the courtyard, and some one with a lantern began
to come toward the entrance. Long before the stranger was near, Ahenobarbus thought he was rising
like a giant out of the darkness; and when at last Dumnorix--for it was he--was close at hand,
both Roman and Greek seemed veritable dwarfs beside him.

Dumnorix--so far as he could be seen in the lantern light--was a splendid specimen of a northern
giant. He was at least six feet five inches in height, and broad proportionately. His fair
straight hair tumbled in disorder over his shoulders, and his prodigiously long mustaches seemed,
to the awed Ahenobarbus, almost to curl down to his neck. His breath came in hot pants like a
winded horse, and when he spoke, it was in short Latin monosyllables,
interlarded with outlandish Gallic oaths.

He wore cloth trousers with bright stripes of red and orange; a short-sleeved cloak of dark stuff,
falling down to the thigh; and over the cloak, covering back and
shoulders, another sleeveless mantle, clasped under the chin with
a huge golden buckle.

At his right thigh hung, from a silver set girdle, by weighty bronze chains, a heavy sabre, of
which the steel scabbard banged noisily as its owner advanced.

"Holla! Pratinas," cried the Gaul, as he came close. "By the holy
oak! but I'm glad to see you!

Come to my room. Have a flagon of our good northern mead."

"Hist," said the Greek, cautiously. "Not so boisterous. Better stay here in the dark. I can't
tell who of your men may hear us."

"As you say," said Dumnorix, setting down the light at a little distance and coming closer.

"You remember that little affair of last year," said Pratinas, continuing;--"how you helped
me get rid of a witness in a very troublesome law case?"

"Ha! ha!" chuckled the giant, "I wish I had the sesterces I won then, in my coffer now."

"Well," replied Pratinas, "I don't need to tell you what I and my noble friend here--Lucius
Domitius Ahenobarbus--have come for. A little more business along the same line. Are you our man?"

"I
should say so," answered Dumnorix, with a grin worthy of a baboon. "Only make it worth my while."

"Now," said Pratinas, sinking his voice still lower, "this affair
of ours will pay you well; but it is more delicate than the other.

A blunder will spoil it all. You must do your best; and we will do the fair thing by you."

"Go on," said the Gaul, folding his huge paws on his breast.

"Have you ever been in Præneste?" questioned Pratinas.

"I matched two mirmillones[62] of mine there against two threces[63] of another lanista, and
my dogs won the prize; but I can't say that I am acquainted with the place," answered the other.

[62] Gladiators equipped as Gaulish warriors.

[63] Buckler men.

"You should find out, then," said Pratinas, "for here lies your work." And then he proceeded, with
occasional prompting from the better-informed Ahenobarbus, to point out the location of Drusus's
estate, and the character and habits of the man whom Dumnorix was
cheerfully proposing to put out of the way.

Dumnorix assented and bade him go on, with hoarse grunts; and when the Greek had concluded, growled
out in his barbarous Latin:--

"But why all this pother?

Why not let me send a knave or two and knock the fellow some dark
night in the head?

It will save us both time and trouble."

"My excellent master of the gladiators," said Pratinas, as smoothly as ever, "you must not
take it ill, if I tell you that to have a taking off such as you propose would be a very bad thing
both for you and the most noble Ahenobarbus. This Drusus is not a helpless wight, without friends,
waiting to become the fair prey of any dagger man.[64] He has friends,
I have learned, who, if he were to be disposed of in such a rude and
bungling manner, would not fail to probe deeply into the whole thing.

Flaccus the great banker, notably, would spare no pains to bring the responsibility of the
matter home, not merely to the poor wretch who struck the blow, but the persons who placed the
weapon in his hands. All of which would be very awkward for Ahenobarbus. No, your rough-and-ready
plan won't in the least work."

[64] Sicarius.

"Well," replied Dumnorix, testily, "I'm a man of shallow wits and hard blows. If I had been of keener
mind, the gods know, I would have been a free chief among the Nervii, instead of making sport for
these straw-limbed Romans. If what I propose won't answer, what can
be done?"

"A great deal," said Pratinas, who knew perfectly how to cringe low, yet preserve his ascendency; "first
of all, it is very necessary that the murderers of the amiable Drusus should receive a meet
reward for their crime--that justice should be speedy and severe."

"Man!" cried Dumnorix, griping the Greek's arm in his tremendous clutch. "What are you asking?"

"By Zeus!" burst out Pratinas, rubbing his crushed member. "What a grip is yours! Don't be alarmed.
Surely you would be as willing to have one or two of your newest tiros hung on a cross, as
stabbed on the arena--especially when it will pay a great deal better?"

"I don't follow you," said the Gaul, though a little reassured.

"Simply this," said Pratinas, who evidently felt that he was coming to the revealing of an
especially brilliant piece of finesse. "My general proposal is this. Let you and your company
march through Præneste,--of course carefully timing your march so as to find the innocent and unfortunate
Drusus at his farm. You will have a very disorderly band of gladiators, and they begin to attack
Drusus's orchard, and maltreat his slaves. You try to stop them,--without avail. Finally, in
a most unfortunate and outrageous outbreak they slay the master of the house. The tumult is quelled.
The heirs proceed against you. You can only hand over the murderers for crucifixion, and offer
to pay any money damages that may be imposed. A heavy fine is laid upon you, as being responsible
for the killing of Drusus by your slaves. You pay the damages. Ahenobarbus marries Cornelia and
enters upon the estate. The world says that all that can be done to atone for Drusus's murder has
been done. All of the guilty are punished. The dead cannot be recalled. The matter is at an
end. Ahenobarbus has what he wished for; you have all the money you paid in damages quietly
refunded; also the cost of the poor rascals crucified, and a fair
sum over and above for your trouble."

"By the god Belew!"[65] cried the enthusiastic Dumnorix. "What a
clever plan! How the world will be cheated! Ha! ha! How sharp you
little Greeks must be. Only I must have fair return for my work, and
an oath that the business shall never be coming to the point of giving
my eyes to the crows. I can't risk my life in anything but a square
fight."

[65] The Gallic sun-god.

"Well," said Pratinas, after a
few words with his companion, "how will this proposition suit you?
All expenses, before and after the affair itself, of course refunded;
one hundred thousand sesterces clear gain for doing the deed, twenty-five
thousand sesterces for every poor fellow we have to nail up to satisfy
the law, and you to be guaranteed against any evil consequence. Is
this sufficient?"

"I think so," growled Dumnorix, in his mustaches,
"but I must have the oath."

"The oath?" said Pratinas, "oh, certainly!"
and the Greek raised his hands toward heaven, and muttered some words
to the effect that "if he and his friend did not fulfil their oath,
let Zeus, the regarder of oaths, destroy them," etc., etc.--an imprecation
which certainly, so far as words went, was strong enough to bind the
most graceless. Then he proceeded to arrange with Dumnorix how the
latter should wait until it was known Drusus had gone back to Præneste,
and was likely to stay there for some time; as to how many gladiators
the lanista was to have ready. Dumnorix complained that the rather
recent law against keeping gladiators at Rome prevented him from assembling
in his school any considerable number. But out of his heterogeneous
collection of Gauls, Germans, Spaniards, Greeks, and Asiatics he would
find enough who could be used for the purpose without letting them
know the full intent with which they were launched against Drusus.
At all events, if their testimony was taken, it would have to be as
slaves on the rack; and if they accused their master of instigating
them to riot, it was what any person would expect of such degraded
and lying wretches. So, after promising to come again with final word
and some bags of earnest-money, Pratinas parted with the lanista,
and he and Lucius Ahenobarbus found themselves again in the now entirely
darkened Campus Martius. Lucius again feared brigands, but they fell
in with no unpleasant nocturnal wayfarers, and reached the city without
incident. Ahenobarbus seemed to himself to be treading on air--Cornelia,
villas, Drusus's money--these were dancing in his head in a delightful
confusion. He had abandoned himself completely to the sway of Pratinas;
the Greek was omniscient, was invincible, was a greater than Odysseus.
Ahenobarbus hardly dared to think for himself as to the plan which
his friend had arranged for him. One observation, however, he made
before they parted.

"You swore that Dumnorix should get into no trouble.
May it not prove expensive to keep him out of difficulty?"

"My dear
Lucius," replied Pratinas, "in cases of that kind there is a line
from the Hippolytus of the immortal tragedian Euripides, which indicates
the correct attitude for a philosopher and a man of discretion to
assume. It runs thus,--

"'My tongue an oath took, but my mind's unsworn.'

Not
an inelegant sentiment, as you must see."

III

We left the excellent
man of learning, Pisander, in no happy frame of mind, after Agias
had been dragged away, presumably to speedy doom. And indeed for many
days the shadow of Valeria's crime, for it was nothing else, plunged
him in deep melancholy. Pisander was not a fool, only amongst his
many good qualities he did not possess that of being able to make
a success in life. He had been tutor to a young Asiatic prince, and
had lost his position by a local revolution; then he had drifted to
Alexandria, and finally Rome, where he had struggled first to teach
philosophy, and found no pupils to listen to his lectures; then to
conduct an elementary school, but his scholars' parents were backward
in paying even the modest fees he charged. Finally, in sheer despair,
to keep from starving, he accepted the position as Valeria's "house-philosopher."

His
condition was infinitely unsatisfactory for a variety of reasons.
The good lady wished him to be at her elbow, ready to read from the
philosophers or have on hand a talk on ethics or metaphysics to deliver
extempore. Besides, though not a slave or freedman, he fared in the
household much worse sometimes than they. A slave stole the dainties,
and drained a beaker of costly wine on the sly. Pisander, like Thales,
who was so intent looking at the stars that he fell into a well, "was
so eager to know what was going on in heaven that he could not see
what was before his feet."[66] And consequently the poor pedant dined
on the remnants left after his employer and her husband had cleared
the board; and had rancid oil and sour wine given him, when they enjoyed
the best. The slaves had snubbed him and made fun of him; the freedmen
regarded him with absolute disdain; Valeria's regular visitors treated
him as a nonentity. Besides, all his standards of ethical righteousness
were outraged by the round of life which he was compelled daily to
witness. The worthy man would long before have ceased from a vassalage
so disgraceful, had he possessed any other means of support. General Van Rensselaer, with
an ascertained army of at least 6,300, of which 2,600 were militia, wrote that he "would cross
the river in the rear of Fort George, take it by storm, carry the Heights of Queenston, destroy
the British ships--the Prince Regent and Earl Moira--at the mouth of the river, leave Brock
no rallying point, appal the minds of the Canadians, and wipe away the past disgrace."

On one of his visits to Fort George he had remarked to Brock, who had laughingly pointed out
two beautiful brass howitzers taken from General Wayne, "Oh, yes, they are old friends of mine;
I must take them back." They were not taken back in Brock's time. Even with his grand army
of 6,300, his 400 Seneca braves, and his written admission that Niagara was weakly garrisoned,
it is certain Van Rensselaer would have still delayed attack, unless he had been told by his
spies that Brock had returned to Detroit. Then, with valour oozing from his finger tips, he
plucked up courage to attack the lair in the lion's absence.

At this juncture an untoward event occurred, in the re-taking by the Americans of the brig
Detroit, formerly the United States brig Adams--captured, as we know, by Roulette--and the
trading brig Caledonia. They were at anchor at the head of the Niagara River, off Black Rock.
The irregular regiments of Hull's command, under the terms of surrender, were on board on their
way to their Ohio homes, via Lake Erie and Buffalo. The two vessels reached Fort Erie harbour
safely, and being rightly regarded by the British as immune from attack, were left undefended,
in charge of an officer and nine men only, most of whom were voyageurs. In addition to the
prisoners, the two brigs carried great quantities of fur and 600 packs of deer skins. During
darkness Lieutenant Ellis, with three armed boats and 150 United States troops and sailors,
dropped alongside. Roulette and his nine men fought desperately, one being killed and four
wounded, but both vessels, of course, fell into the enemy's hands. This attack was contrary
to the rules of war, and a violation of the sanctity of the flag which "continued to float
as long as there were American prisoners on board, awaiting to be landed on United States soil."

Brock regarded this loss as a calamity. It was, he wrote to Prevost, "likely to reduce him
to great distress." His constant fears that the enemy would secure control of both Lakes Erie
and Ontario were well founded. He begged Prevost to let him destroy the vessels Chauncey, the
American, was building on Squaw Island. Prevost, of course, besought him to forbear. Isaac
Brock, exasperated and with tied hands, was "doomed to the bitterest of all griefs, to see
clearly and yet be able to do nothing." Yet while he worked in chains his preparedness was
a source of wonder to those behind the scenes.

Even no less a critic than John Lovett, General Van Rensselaer's military secretary, was impressed
with what he saw through his field-glasses from Lewiston heights. "Every three or four miles,
on every eminence," he wrote a friend, "Brock has erected a snug battery, the last saucy argument
of kings, poking their white noses and round black nostrils right upon your face, ready to
spit fire and brimstone in your very teeth, if you were to offer to turn squatter on John Bull's
land." Influenced by these signs of "business," the United States officers were ordered to
"dress as much like their men as possible, so that at 150 yards they might not be recognized."
This was probably due to one of the last orders issued by our hero, who warned his men that,
when the enemy crossed the river, to withhold their musketry fire until he was well within
range, and then, "if he lands, attack him at the point of the bayonet with determined resolution."

With clairvoyance that would have done credit to a mind-reader, Brock knew that attack was
imminent. To him the wind that blew across the river October 12th was laden with omens of war.
The air seemed charged with the acrid smell of burnt powder. The muffled beat of drums, the
smothered boom of artillery, the subdued clash of steel meeting steel, the stealthy tramp of
armed men, seemed to encompass him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brock was at his headquarters. He gazed from the window. The storm outside was hurling great
splashes of rain against the narrow casement. To and fro, over the carpeted floor, he paced
that evening for an hour or more, uninterrupted and alone. It was thus he marshalled facts
and weighed conclusions. Powerful brain and vigorous frame acted in concert. He was enjoying
the fulfilment of the promise of his youth. God had been good. The world had been tolerant;
his fellow-men--at least those who knew the real Isaac--loyally appreciative. The knowledge
of his honours and fame stirred him to his soul. Not that he was any better, or abler, he meditated,
than other men, but that when "opportunity" offered he was permitted to grasp it.

The influence of the great truth as pronounced in the now familiar couplet inspired him. He
recognized the source whence he derived whatever of success had followed his efforts, and prayed
for greater sagacity, more vigour of body and tenacity of purpose, a complete surrender of
self to the task before him; that if his life was to be the price of duty, he might place it
on the altar of his country without one shred of compunction.

       *       *       *       *       *

He rang the bell for Porter--his body-servant since Dobson's death--directed him to see that
the council room was lighted, that pens, ink, paper and cigars were in place, as a meeting
of his staff was slated for nine, and sought his sanctum.

CHAPTER XXIV.

BROCK'S LAST COUNCIL.

It was long past midnight on the morning of Tuesday, October 13th, 1812, when Brock dismissed
his advisory council of staff officers. An animated discussion had taken place over the strength
of the enemy and the spot he might select to cross the river, for ruses had been resorted to
by Van Bensselaer to deceive the British.

"I dare not, gentlemen," said our hero, in opening the debate, "weaken my flanks at Niagara
and Erie, though I realize I am leaving Queenston not properly protected. I have just learned
that General Dearborn states that while 'Tippecanoe' Harrison invades Canada, at Detroit, with
7,000 men--I do not think it necessary I should point out Detroit on the map," he added with
a smile--"and while a United States squadron--not a British one, mark you--sweeps Lake Ontario
from Sackett's Harbour, Dearborn himself will threaten Montreal from Lake Champlain. While
the east and the west are thus being annexed by the enemy, our friend Van Rensselaer is to
entertain us here.

"An ordinary boat, as we all know, can be rowed across the river at Queenston in less than
ten minutes. Our spies have reported that forty batteaux, to carry forty men each, are in readiness
at Tonawanda. Evans and Macdonell, when they called on Van Rensselaer, saw at least a dozen
boats moored at Lewiston, some of which could carry eighty men. During the deplorable armistice,
as General Sheaffe is aware"--looking at that officer--"Van Rensselaer brought up 400 boats
and batteaux from Ogdensburg and other points, all of his previously blockaded fleet, so the
enemy has no lack of transport. The most effective disposition of our limited force is, I admit,
somewhat of a problem. There is no use in evading the fact that in point of numbers and ordnance
we are too weak, and as Sir George Prevost has written me not to expect any further aid, Colonel
Talbot must send us a few of his militia."

"Macdonell," he said, turning to his aide, "will you write at once, to-night, to Colonel Talbot,
at Port Talbot, stating that I am strongly induced to believe I will soon be attacked, and
tell him that I wish him to send 200 men, the militia under his command, without delay, by
water to Fort Erie."

This was Brock's last official letter dictated in council.

"General Sheaffe," he said, addressing that officer, "you, perhaps, know better than any of
us the particulars of Van Rensselaer's appointment. It seems that he is an amateur soldier,
pitchforked into command against his own will, a victim of New York State politics. While this
is probably so, we must not run away with the idea that his other officers are no better, for,
besides Generals Dearborn and Wadsworth--both soldiers of national repute--his cousin, Colonel
Solomon Van Rensselaer, his chief of staff, is a first-class soldier, a proved fighting man.
The latter is reported to be at the head of 750 well-trained militia, 300 of whom are selected
soldiers, and fifty are said to know every inch of the river. Our spies report the enemy could
ferry 1,500 regulars across in seven trips.

"The safety of our redan on the Heights has given me some concern, but Dennis, Williams and
others report that the height is inaccessible from the river side. If an attack in force is
made at Queenston, we will have to concentrate every available man there--at the risk of weakening
our flanks. Lewiston, as you have seen, is white with tents. At Fort Gray the enemy has two
twenty-four-pounders, waiting to silence our eighteen-pounder in the redan. The Americans have
several mortars and six-pounders on the river bank below Lewiston, ready to ship to any point
by boats specially equipped, or to cover the landing of their troops on our side of the river,
and to drive us back if we attempt to dispute their passage."

In district general orders prepared that night, the last official document signed by General
Sir Isaac Brock, he directed, "in view of the imminence of hostilities, that no further communication
be held with the enemy by flag of truce, or otherwise, unless by his special permission."

"I cannot allow looting," he said. "Arms and other property taken from the enemy are to be
at all times reserved for the public service." Brock's example might have been followed to
advantage in later Canadian campaigns. "I am calling," he continued, "a district court-martial
for nine o'clock to-morrow morning, October 13th, for the trial of three prisoners, a captain
and two subalterns of the 49th and 41st regiments."

That court-martial was not held.

On the day before, Major Evans and Colonel Macdonell had waited upon Van Rensselaer, with a
letter from Brock proposing "an exchange of prisoners of war, to be returned immediately, on
parole." The fact of no reply having been received to this, Brock regarded as ominous.

"I firmly believe, gentlemen," he proceeded, and his confidence and courage was infectious,
"that I could at this moment, by a sudden dash, sweep everything before me between Fort Niagara
and Buffalo, but our success would be transient. Disaffection and desertion is rife in the
American camp. Only the other day we saw six poor fellows perish in mid-stream. To-day more
deserters swam the river safely. Our own force, estimating even 200 Indians under Chief Brant
and Captain Norton, though I expect less than 100 would be nearer the mark, cannot exceed 1,500
men of all arms. These units I have collected from Sandwich to Kingston. Many of our men, as
no one knows better than Quartermaster Nichol, have received no pay, are wearing broken shoes--some
have no shoes at all--no tents and little bedding. It is true that they bear the cold and wet
with an admirable and truly happy content that excites my admiration, but it is no less a disgrace
to the responsible authorities. Sir George Prevost, as you know, has told me 'not to expect
any further aid'--the old parrot cry from headquarters, 'Not a man to spare.' Let me ask the
chief of the Mohawks, who is present, how many warriors he can muster?"

John Brant, or Thayendanegea, as he was known among the Six Nation Indians, was the hereditary
chief. At this time he was but a youth of eighteen--a graceful, dauntless stripling, of surprising
activity, and well educated. At his side sat Captain Jacobs, a swarthy, stalwart brave, famous
for his immense strength, and Captain John Norton, an Englishman, and chief by adoption only,
who, in consideration of Brant's youth, was acting as his deputy and spokesman. The latter
said that since his return from Moraviantown, and the hunting season having commenced, many
of his braves were absent, but he would pledge the Mohawks would muster, when wanted, over
one hundred tried men. Thanking the chiefs for their assurances, Brock continued:

"The enemy has an army of over 6,000. The four twelve-pounders and two hundred muskets captured
with the Detroit is a serious loss to us. If the Detroit is lost to us, however, she is of
no further use to the enemy. We are, I repeat, greatly outweighted and outnumbered by the enemy,
both in siege guns and artillery, and have no forge for heating shot. I have, as a matter of
form, written this day to Sir George Prevost, restating my anxiety to increase our militia
to 2,000 men, but pointing out the difficulties I shall encounter, and the fear that I shall
not be able to effect my object with willing, well-disposed characters. Of one thing, gentlemen,
I am convinced, that were it not for the number of Americans in our ranks we might defy all
the efforts of the enemy against this part of the Province.

"As to 'forbearance,' which I am constantly urged by Sir George Prevost to adopt, you are entitled
to my views. While forbearance may be productive of some good, I gravely doubt the wisdom of
such a policy; but, let me add, I may not, perhaps, have the means of judging correctly. We
cannot, however, disguise the fact we are standing alongside a loaded mine. Let us be prepared
for the explosion. It may come at any moment. Vigilance, readiness and promptness must be our
watchwords. Might I ask you to remember my family motto, 'He who guards never sleeps.' Even
to-morrow may bring surprises--such stormy weather as we are having seems strangely suitable
for covering an attack. But do not, because we were successful at Detroit in stampeding the
United States troops, cherish the impression that General Hull is a sample of American soldiery.
If we are taken by surprise the attack will soon be known, for our range of beacons extends
from the Sugar Loaf to Queenston, from Lundy's Lane to Pelham Heights. Signal guns, also, will
announce any suspicious movement. One word in conclusion. As soldiers you know your duty, and
I think you now all understand the position we are in--as far as I know it.

"General Sheaffe," he continued, turning to that officer, "I am much concerned as to the fate
of this town, Niagara, if its namesake fort on the other side of the river should be tempted
to forget the rules of war and bombard the private buildings here with hot-shot. However, we
will do our best to give the invaders, when they do come, a warm reception. There are two things,
Major," looking towards Evans, his brigade-major and intimate friend, "that our men must not
omit to observe, namely, to 'trust God and keep their powder dry,' a most necessary precaution
if these storms continue."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is worthy of note that while Brock was in conference with his staff, expecting invasion
any day, General Van Rensselaer, at Lewiston, was writing the subjoined brief historical despatch
to his brigadier-general, Smythe:

     "Sir,--To-night, October 12th, I shall attack the enemy's batteries
     on the Heights of Queenston."

       *       *       *       *       *

The weather was tempestuous. Rain clouds shrouded the Heights of Queenston in a black pall.
The wind romped and rioted in the foliage. Brock's estimate of the character of the enemy was
a masterly one. Van Rensselaer was about to verify our hero's prediction.

CHAPTER XXV.

THE MIDNIGHT GALLOP.

Well into the half-light of morning, long after the last of his staff, Evans, Glegg and Macdonell,
had departed, Brock sat alone at his headquarters at Fort George, writing rapidly.

On the oak mantel, an antique clock chimed the passing of the historic hours, with deep, musical
strokes.

Was it presentiment--a clearer understanding that comes to men of active brain and acute perception,
during solitary vigil in the silence of night, when, with heart and soul stripped, they stand
on the threshold of the great divide--that whispered to this "knight of the sword" his doom?
Was it this clearer comprehension that caused our hero to bow his head as a faint message from
an unseen messenger reached him? With a sigh of resignation he arose from the unfinished manuscript
and passed on to his bedroom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Boom! Boom! Boom!

       *       *       *       *       *

A muffled, indistinct roar, a confusion of sounds, aroused the half-conscious sleeper. Brock
sprang from his couch, partly dressed.

The antique clock chimed one--two--three!

"Listen," he muttered to himself, "that was not a signal gun. Surely it was the sound of sustained
firing." As he unlocked the outer door, opening on the barrack-square, the sky above faintly
aglow with the light of warning beacons, the low, steady roll of musketry and louder roar of
distant cannon convinced him that this was far more serious than "the war between sentries."

"My good Porter," he said, speaking calmly to his excited servant, who, himself awakened, came
rushing to his master, "have Alfred saddled at once while I complete dressing, and inform Major
Glegg and Colonel Macdonell that I am off up the river to Queenston."

In another minute Isaac Brock was in the saddle.

As he passed through the gates, thrown open by the sentry, a dragoon, mire from head to foot
from furious riding, handed him a despatch announcing that the enemy had landed in force at
Queenston. A second later, in response to the pressure of his knees, his horse was carrying
our hero at a wild gallop across the common that separated his quarters from the upper village.

Day was near to breaking. The earth steamed from the heavy rain. Passing objects rose out of
the dark mists, magnified and spectral.

At the residence of Captain John Powell, Brock reined up. The household was astir, aroused
by the ominous roar of artillery carried down by the river from the gorge above. He stayed,
without dismounting, long enough to take a cup of coffee brought to him by General Shaw's daughter--a
"stirrup cup"--his last. Then, giving his charger the spur, he rode away to death and distinction,
tenderly waving a broken good-bye to the sad-eyed woman at the porch. This was his betrothed,
who faintly fluttered her kerchief in weeping farewell to the gallant lover she would never
see again.

Brushing his eyes and urging his big grey to greater speed, "Master Isaac," eager to reach
the scene of trouble, struck across the village, his horse's hoof-beats bringing many a citizen
to the door to "God speed him." Some came out to follow him, and many a good wife's face was
pressed to the window to watch "The General! God bless and spare him," as he headed his charger
for the Queenston Road and Brown's Point. Among the more zealous hastening after Brock were
Judge Ralph Clench and a few old half-pay officers of His Majesty's service, who hurried to
Queenston to range themselves in the ranks of the volunteers. Others joined as the signal guns
and the bells of the church of St. Mark's and the court-house spread the alarm.

His road lay up hill. Seven miles back from the shore of Lake Ontario stretched the height
of land, extending west from the river to the head of the lake--a gigantic natural dam, over
300 feet high and twenty miles through; a retaining wall of rock, the greatest original fresh-water
barrage in the world.

He paused a moment at Frields to order the militia company there to follow. Close to Brown's
Point he met another galloper, S.P. Jarvis, of the York volunteers, who was riding so furiously
that he could not check his horse, but shouted as he flew by, "The Americans are crossing the
river in force, sir." Jarvis wheeled and overtook the General, who, without reining up, slackened
his speed sufficiently to tell the rider not to spare his horse, but to hurry on to Fort George
and order General Sheaffe to bring up his entire reserve and let loose Brant's Indian scouts.
A mile or so farther on, Jarvis met Colonel Macdonell, in hot pursuit of their beloved commander.
The aide, in his haste, had left his sword behind him, and borrowed a less modern sabre from
Jarvis, who continued his mad gallop towards Fort George, little thinking he had seen the last
of his gallant General and the dashing aide, meeting, a few minutes later, Major Glegg, also
riding post haste to overtake the General.

Meanwhile our hero had halted for a moment at Brown's Point, only to learn that Cameron's Toronto
company of volunteers had already started, on their own initiative, up the river. Riding hard,
he overtook the excited militiamen. Speaking a word to the officer in charge, he wheeled his
horse in the direction of the Heights, calling upon the detachment in his well-known voice,
and in a way that never failed to exact obedience:

"Now, my men, follow me."

       *       *       *       *       *

The east showed signs of approaching day, and Brock, only two miles from Queenston, was treated
to a spectacle that quickened his pulses. Shells were bursting on the mountain side above the
village. The shadows of the dying night were streaked with the light from an incessant fire
of small-arms. Grapeshot and musket-balls were ploughing up inky river and grim highland. At
Vrooman's battery, on Scott's Point, guarded by Heward's volunteer company from Little York,
and some of Hatt's company of the 5th Lincoln militia, a mile from Queenston, the twenty-four-pound
shells from the gun, mounted en barbette, which commanded at long range both landings, were
leaving behind them furrows of fire in the black gorge. The big gun was pouring a continuous
stream of destructive metal upon the American boats that were attempting the passage of the
river within the limited zone of its fire.[3]

Fort Gray, above Lewiston, was fairly belching flames, to which the isolated eighteen-pounder
on the Queenston redan was roaring an angry and defiant response. Brock's trained ear recognized
the wicked barking of the brass six-pounders, under Dennis of the 49th, mingling with the occasional
boom, of the twenty-four-pound carronade below the village.

The village of Queenston consisted of a small stone-barracks and twenty or more scattered dwellings
in the midst of gardens and orchards. To Brock's right a road from the landing led to St. David's,
from which, at almost right angles, an irregular branch roadway wound up the Heights. The adjacent
table-land west of the village was dotted with farm-houses, partly surrounded by snake-fences
and an occasional stone wall. 

He had his own life to live, and it ran far apart from hers. Perhaps it was as well for Cornelia
that she was forced to spend the winter and ensuing months in the ample purlieus of the palace.
If living were but the gratification of sensuous indolence, if existence were but luxurious
dozing and half-waking, then the palace of the Ptolemies were indeed an Elysium, with its soft-footed,
silent, swift, intelligent Oriental servants; rooms where the eye
grew weary of rare sculpture or fresco; books drawn from the greatest
library in the world--the Museum close at hand; a broad view of the
blue Mediterranean, ever changing and ever the same, and of the swarming
harbour and the bustling city; and gardens upon gardens shut off from
the outside by lofty walls--some great enclosures containing besides
forests of rare trees a vast menagerie of wild beasts, whose roarings
from their cages made one think the groves a tropical jungle; some
gardens, dainty, secluded spots laid out in Egyptian fashion, under
the shade of a few fine old sycamores, with a vineyard and a stone
trellis-work in the midst, with arbours and little parks of exotic
plants, a palm or two, and a tank where the half-tame water-fowl would
plash among the lotus and papyrus plants.

In such a nook as this Cornelia would sit and read all the day long,
and put lotus flowers in her hair, look down into the water, and,
Narcissus-like, fall in love with her own face, and tell herself that
Drusus would be delighted that she had not grown ugly since he parted
with her.

So passed the winter and the spring and early summer months; and,
however hot and parched might be the city under the burning sun, there
was coolness and refreshment in the gardens of the palace.

With it all, however, Cornelia began to wax restive. It is no light thing to command one's self
to remain quiet in Sybaritic ease. More and more she began to wish that this butterfly existence,
this passive basking in the sun of indolent luxury, would come to an end. She commenced again
to wish that she were a man, with the tongue of an orator, the sword
of a soldier, able to sway senates and to lead legions.

       Pothinus finally discovered that he was having some difficulty in
keeping his cage-bird contented.

The eunuch had entertained great expectations of being able to win credit and favour with the
conquerors among the Romans by delivering over Cornelia safe and sound either to Lentulus
Crus or Quintus Drusus. Now he began to fear that Pratinas had advised him ill; that Cornelia and
Fabia were incapable of intriguing in Cleopatra's favour, and by his "protection at the palace"
he was only earning the enmity of his noble guests. But it was too late to retrace his steps,
and he accordingly plied Cornelia with so many additional attentions, presents, and obsequious
flatteries, that she grew heartily disgusted and repined even more over her present situation.

       Bad news came, which added to her discomfort.

Cæsar had been driven from his lines at Dyrrachium. He had lost a great many men. If the Pompeian
sources of information were to be believed, he was now really a negligible
military factor, and the war was practically over.

The tidings fell on Cornelia's soul like lead. She knew perfectly well that the defeat of the
Cæsarians would mean the death of Quintus Drusus. Her uncle and the Domitii, father and son, would be
all powerful, and they never forgave an enmity.
 The cliffs, over
three hundred feet high, rose almost vertically from the water, and the denseness of the shrubs,
tangle and overhanging trees, anchored in the clefts, rendered it impossible for any but exceptionally
active and resolute men, and then only as a forlorn hope, to reach the summit. Projecting ledges
of rock also blocked the way. A large body of men had been seen before daybreak stealing across
the foot-hills, but had evaded pursuit. He believed they had fled to the Black Swamp, four
miles distant.

Seeing that Dennis needed every possible support at the landing, Brock ordered Williams and
his men to proceed to his assistance, and on the latter's departure our hero and his aides
were left alone with the eight gunners.

       *       *       *       *       *

The rain was gradually ceasing. Shafts of light from an unseen sun tinged the edges of the
smoke-coloured clouds with amber and rose. A few spent musket-balls falling about the enclosure
aroused Brock's suspicions. He was watching, from behind the earthen parapet, the flight of
the shells discharged by the eighteen-pounder, and, seeing that they burst too soon, turned
to the gunner.

"Sergeant, you are misjudging your time and distance; we must not waste powder and shot. Your
shells are bursting too soon. Try a longer fuse."

The words were barely out of our hero's mouth when there was a rolling crash of musketry, accompanied
by wild shouts, and a shower of bullets flew zipping over their heads. Shooting high is the
invariable shortcoming of excited marksmen. A moment later the heads of a large force of American
riflemen rose from the rocky ambuscade above and behind them. The next instant the enemy was
in full charge, evidently bent on capturing both the General and the redan.

Brock saw that resistance would be madness. To save the gun and escape capture must be the
"double event." Seizing a ramrod, he ordered an artilleryman to spike the gun, gave the command
to retreat, telling the men to "duck their heads," fearing another discharge, and, leading
his horse, followed by Macdonell and Glegg and the firing squad of eight artillerymen, rushed
down the slope.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a clearer understanding of the situation--a better conception even than our hero had when,
to escape capture and save the lives of his men, he was compelled to abandon the redan--we
must visit Van Rensselaer's camp at Lewiston.

CHAPTER XXVII.

VAN RENSSELAER'S CAMP.

After midnight, on the morning of the 11th, the American general, Van Rensselaer, believing,
as he wrote, "that Brock, with all his disposable forces, had left for Detroit," launched from
the Lewiston landing, under cover of the pitch darkness, thirteen boats capable of carrying
340 armed men.

To Lieutenant Sims, "the man of the greatest skill in the American service," was entrusted
the command. Sims entered the leading boat, and vanished in the gloom. Whether he had taken
all the oars with him, as reported, or whether the furious storm and the sight of the whirling
black waters had frozen the hearts of the troops, must remain a mystery. The other boats did
not follow.

Meanwhile, 350 additional regulars and thirty boats had arrived from Four Mile Creek. Flying
artillery came from Fort Niagara, with still more regulars, and part of Smythe's brigade from
Buffalo. Troops, as Brock's spies had truly reported, now overflowed the United States army
headquarters--three more complete regiments from New York and another from Fort Schlosser.
Lewiston bristled with bayonets. The entire expeditionary force was in command of Colonel Solomon
Van Rensselaer, a militiaman, between whom and the officers commanding the regular troops much
jealousy and great friction existed. Both branches of the service were determined to monopolize
whatever credit might ensue. A storm, more furious than ever, prevailed for twenty-eight hours.
The men sulked in their tents.

On the night of the 12th, the storm having abated, though the sky was black as ink, added numbers
having developed greater courage, Van Rensselaer resolved on another attempt. He secretly notified
Brigade-Major Smythe, in command at Buffalo, that in accordance with the letter reproduced
in a previous chapter, he would storm the Heights of Queenston that night. With experienced
river men as pilots, with picked crews, and protected by the big guns at Fort Gray, 600 men,
with two pieces of light artillery, in thirteen boats, in the grim darkness of the morning
of the 13th--a sinister coincidence--drew up in silence on the wharf. They comprised the first
detachment of 850 regulars and 300 militia, the advance attacking party--"the flower of Wadsworth's
army"--embarked to "carry the Heights of Queenston and appal the minds of Canadians."

Let us trace the fulfilling of Van Rensselaer's boast.

The regulars crossed first, almost out of the line of fire of the British batteries, and under
cover of six of the enemy's field-guns that completely commanded the Canadian shore. Some of
the boats of this flotilla effected, as we know, a landing above the rock, still visible at
the water's edge, under the suspension bridge. Here they disembarked their fighting men--the
13th regulars and some artillery--and, under Van Rensselaer, attempted to form. The empty boats
recrossed the river to ferry over more soldiers.

       *       *       *       *       *

A sentry of the 49th--our hero's regiment--overheard voices and tramping of feet. Scenting
danger, he ran, without firing, to alarm the main guard.

In a few minutes Dennis advanced upon the landing place with forty-six men of his own company
and a few militia, and discharged a murderous volley, leaving Colonel Van Rensselaer, with
eight officers and forty-five men, killed or wounded. The enemy retreated to the water's edge
for shelter, confused and shivering. The Lewiston batteries at once opened fire on the redan
on Queenston Heights. The position of Dennis being thus revealed to Dearborn's gunners, they
immediately turned their battery of six field-pieces upon his handful of men, and the position
proving untenable, he withdrew to the shelter of the village, on the lip of the hill, still
continuing to fire downwards on the invaders.

Vrooman's battery then opened fire, and Crowther brought his two "grasshoppers"--small three-pounders--to
sweep the road leading to the river.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

A FOREIGN FLAG FLIES ON THE REDAN.

It was the crackling of the grenadiers' muskets, the bellowing of Vrooman's big gun, the cannonade
of the twenty-four-pounders of the Lewiston batteries, the roar of the eighteen-pounder in
the British redan, and the streak of crimson light from the long line of beacons which rent
the sky from Fort Erie to Pelham Heights, that had wakened the citizens of Niagara and aroused
Brock from his brief repose.

Captain Wool, of the 13th U.S. regulars--Van Rensselaer being wounded in six places--hurried
his men under the shelter of the overhanging rocks, keeping up an intermittent fire, and waited
for reinforcements. For almost two hours this desultory firing continued. With the cessation
of the storm and arrival of broad daylight, six more boats attempted to reach the Queenston
landing. One boat was sunk by a discharge of grape from Dennis's howitzer; another, with Colonel
Fenwick, of the U.S. artillery, was swept below the landing to a cove where, in the attack
by Cameron's volunteers that followed, Fenwick, terribly wounded, was, with most of his men,
taken prisoner. Another boat drifted under Vrooman's, and was captured there, while others,
more fortunate, landed two additional companies of the 13th, forty artillerymen and some militia.
The shouts of the fighters and screams of the wounded were heard by the hundreds of spectators
who were parading the river bank at Lewiston, all ready to witness "the humiliation of Canada."

General Van Rensselaer had commanded that the "Heights had to be taken." Wool, a gallant soldier,
only twenty-three, suffering from a bullet that had passed through both his thighs--no superior
officer coming to his support--volunteered for the duty. He expressed his eagerness to make
the attempt. Gansfort, a brother officer of Wool's, had been shown by a river guide a narrow,
twisting trail, used at times by fishermen, leading to the summit. This he pointed out to Wool
as a possible pathway to the Heights, where a force of determined men might gain the rear of
the British position. Wool, at the same time, had also been informed that Williams, hitherto
on the Heights, had been ordered to descend the hill to assist Dennis--which was Brock's first
command on reaching the redan. Followed by Van Rensselaer's aide, who had orders "to shoot
every man who faltered," Wool at once commenced the ascent, leaving one hundred of his men
to protect the landing.

Picked artillerymen led the way. Concealed by rock and thicket, and unobserved by the British--the
trail being regarded as impassable--they reached the hill-top, only thirty yards in rear of
the solitary gun in the redan. The noise of their movements was drowned by the crash of the
batteries, which reduced Hamilton's stone house to ruins and drove Crowther and his small gun
out of range. The shells from the enemy's mortars rained upon the village, and his field-pieces
subjected the gardens and orchards of Queenston to a searching inquisition.

On reaching the summit, Wool, when the last straggler had arrived, formed his men, without
losing a minute, and emerging from ambush, fired a badly-aimed volley at the astonished Brock
and his eight gunners, and with a wild shout rushed down upon the redan.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the United States flag was raised over the gun, which Wool, to his deep chagrin, found
spiked, the troops at Lewiston realized that the battery had been taken. Their courage returning,
they rushed to the boats below, hoping to participate in a victory which, while hitherto a
question in their minds, now seemed beyond all doubt.

Brock, on regaining the bottom of the slope, seeing that the main attack was to be made at
Queenston, sent Captain Derenzy with a despatch to Sheaffe at Fort George.

"Instruct Major Evans," he wrote, "to turn every available gun on Fort Niagara, silence its
batteries, and drive out the enemy, for I require every fighting man here; and if you have
not already done so, forward the battalion companies of the 41st and the flank companies of
militia, and join me without delay."

Mounting his horse, he galloped to the far end of the village. Here he held a hurried consultation
with the few officers present, and despatched Macdonell to Vrooman's to bring up Heward's Little
York volunteers at the double. He then instructed Glegg to order Dennis, with the light company
of the 49th, less than fifty strong, and Chisholm's company of the York militia, to join him,
and also to recall Williams and his detachment. When these arrived he took command.

"Captain Williams," said he, "how many men do you muster?"

"Seventy, sir, of all ranks," replied Williams; "forty-nine grenadiers and Captain Chisholm's
company of volunteers."

"We must make the attempt, then," said the General, "to turn the enemy's left flank on the
Heights, and this can only be done by a round-about way." Then, as Dennis joined him, he said,
with a shade of vexation on his face, "It is a waste of time lamenting mistakes, but the overlooking
of that pathway was a serious thing. The re-taking of the redan must be attempted at all hazards.
It is the key, you see, to our position. If we wait for all our reinforcements the task will
only be greater, as it will give the enemy time to establish himself in force, and when he
drills out the spiked gun, the odds against us will be greater still."

Then, after a pause, "We must try and regain that gun without a moment's delay. It will be
hot work, and means a sacrifice, but it is clearly our duty. Macdonell cannot be long. How
are your men?"

"Somewhat fagged, sir," replied Dennis, "and a bit hippish. We've had a trying time, but they
are ready to follow you."

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been truly said of Isaac Brock that he never allowed a thought of self-preservation
or self-interest to affect for one instant his conception of duty. He was blind at this moment
to all personal considerations. He made no effort to shelter himself behind any plausible excuse
that would have been gratefully seized by the timid or calculating man, or to fence with his
duty. His consistency was sublime. "His last moments were in clear keeping with his life and
his belief."

     "He who thinks In strife
       To earn a deathless fame,
     Must do, nor ever care for life."

The little band of heroes fell into line, while their brother hero addressed them.

"Men of the 49th," said Brock, "and my brave volunteers, I have heard of your work this morning,
and the trying circumstances under which you have been fighting. Now, my lads, as you know,
a large body of the enemy has stolen a march on us. They have taken our gun, it is true, but
they will find it spiked! It is our duty to re-take it. Be prepared for slippery footing. Use
every bit of shelter, but when we make the final rush give the enemy no time to think. Pour
in a volley; fire low, and when it comes to in-fighting, use the bayonet resolutely and you
have them beaten. I know I can depend upon you.... There is a foreign flag flying over a British
gun. It must not stay there.... Don't cheer now, men, but save your breath and follow me."

       *       *       *       *       *

There was a cheer, notwithstanding.

CHAPTER XXIX.

THE BATTLE OF QUEENSTON HEIGHTS.

While these fateful and stirring scenes were being enacted at Queenston, a despatch rider arrived
from Evans of Fort George. Without waiting for further instructions, he had, after Brock's
departure, with the first glimpse of daylight, cannonaded Fort Niagara. This he did with typical
thoroughness. His fire was returned with interest. With a license in direct opposition to the
laws of battle, the enemy, under Captain Leonard, turned his guns on the village of Newark,
bombarding public buildings and private residences with hot-shot, laying part of the town in
ashes. This infuriated Evans, and he renewed the siege with so much vigour that he compelled
the American garrison to evacuate. A shot from one of his twelve-pounders burst within the
centre of Fort Niagara and decided Leonard to abandon his position in haste, after suffering
many casualties.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under a nasty crackle of musketry, galling and accurate, which harried the men, already chilled
and strung up with suspense, the small detachment following the courageous Brock from the lower
village soon reached the stone walls that surrounded a residence at the base of the hill. Here
our hero dismounted, handed his horse to an orderly, and directed the men to find shelter.
A moment later, taking advantage of a lull in the firing, he vaulted over the wall, and waving
his sword above his head, shouted to the grenadiers a word of encouragement. They answered
with a cheer, still following him as he led the way up the steep ascent towards the captured
battery.

Wool, within the enclosure of the redan, was closely watching the steady advance of the small
body of resolute men breasting the Height.

The purpose of these men was unmistakable. As they drew closer, scarlet uniform and polished
bayonet blazed and flashed in the sunshine. Having been heavily reinforced, he detached a party
of 150 picked regulars, and with these moved out to meet the small band of British led by Brock.
A brief exchange of shots took place, and the Americans fell back, firing.

Though the rain had ceased the trees were gemmed with drops that still dripped. The ground
was strewn with wet leaves, slippery, and affording treacherous foothold. Progress was slow
and laborious. As the hillside grew steeper, a man here and there slid, lurched and fell. To
maintain any semblance of formation was impossible. The fire grew hotter. Ball and buckshot
and half-ounce bullets down-poured on them from above. "Death crouched behind every rock and
lurked in every hollow."

Had Brock's handful of loyalists been able to rush headlong, spurred by lust of conflict, and
lock bayonets with the enemy, another tale might have been told. But the effect of the futile
struggle for foothold on the hillside, seamed with slippery depressions, in the teeth of a
blizzard of lead, soon showed. The bullet-swept ascent was a cruel test for men already fagged
and faint. As for our hero, though storm-beaten, stained with mud, and hungry as a wolf, he
was still the same indomitable youth who had scaled the cut cliffs of Cobo in search of seagulls'
eggs. His vigour and disregard of danger were magnificent. His example, splendid.

Brock may not have been judicially precautious. Had he waited for reinforcements--there were
none nearer than Fort George--his own life might possibly have been preserved. As an alternative
he could perhaps have withdrawn and sought shelter in the village. But--apart from the peril
to his own prestige--who would care to estimate the ulterior effect upon his men if such an
example had been set them? These rough Canadian irregulars consisted, as they do to-day, of
the finest fighting material in the world. The law of self-preservation had no place in the
litany of Isaac Brock. He was a daily dealer in self-sacrifice. Besides, this was not the time
or place to calculate involved issues. He was not a cold-blooded politician, nor was he an
opportunist; he was merely a patriot and a soldier fighting for hearth and home, for flag and
country. It was not an issue that could be left to arbitration in the hereafter, or threshed
out by judge and jury. The situation called for instant action. To do his obvious duty rather
than to know it, seemed to our hero the only honorable exit from the dilemma, even though it
resulted in his own undoing.

Not until the dead are mustered by the God of hosts--at the last roll-call--will this noble
soldier's conception of duty and his sacrifice be truly appraised.

God and the right was carved deep in the heart of Isaac Brock. Though he felt for his men,
it was in a compassionate, not a weak way. War without bloodshed was inconceivable. He had
been trained in an age and in a school that regarded blood-shedding in the protection of the
right as wholly justifiable, as it was inevitable. Is there any change in respect to the application
of this doctrine to-day? For himself he had no compassion whatever. His faith in the cause
compelled him to fight to a finish. He was not of the potter's common clay of which fatalists
are made. How many of these faithful fellows, he wondered, as his alert mind rapidly reviewed
the present and recalled the past--Canadian and Celt, Irish and Anglo-Saxon, Protestant and
Catholic, whom "neither politics, sect or creed could, in such a crisis, keep apart"--would
leave their bodies to bleach on that hill-side? How many of them were destined to yield their
lives for honour's sake, to die with their valour unrecorded in the defence--in the case of
numbers of them--not of their own, but of their brother's rights?

       *       *       *       *       *

The next second he was wondering what was doing at St. Peter's Port or London. It would be
noon there. Were the good brothers and sister thinking of "Master Isaac" at that moment? Then,
swifter than light, he was at Niagara, and the bowed figure of a woman at a porch, with pale,
upturned face, who that morning had bade him a silent farewell, rose before him--surely it
was years ago--the woman to whom he was betrothed. Then, in a flash, he turned to see some
wavering figures around him, some of his own men--not a few wounded--who faltered and shrank
from the screaming buckshot, and dropped to the rear.

The soldier awoke.

"This is the first time," he shouted, "I have ever seen the 49th turn their backs! Surely the
heroes of Egmont will never tarnish their record!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The rebuke stung. The panting ranks closed up.

CHAPTER XXX.

THE DEATH OF ISAAC BROCK.

At this moment Colonel Macdonell, excited and eager to participate, reached the foot of the
mountain at the head of the supports for which the General had despatched him. These consisted
of about thirty of Heward's flank company of militia and thirty of the 49th--almost breathless
and much exhausted, having run most of the way. Brock's small force--those actually at his
side--were Chisholm's and Cameron's companies of the Toronto and York volunteers--a mere handful
of perhaps eighty all told. These, together with Macdonell's men, who were at the foot of the
hill on the right, now numbered less than 190 of all ranks.

For an instant there was a pause. Brock spoke hurriedly to his aide.

"If Williams and Macdonell can but outflank the Americans on the summit and scale the mountain
in rear of the redan on the right, nothing can prevent our driving them out. Our place is here."

"But, General," interposed his aide, who worshipped his commanding officer, "I pray you, let
me lead, or at least do take proper precautions. If you are wounded, think what may befall us."

"Master Glegg," hurriedly replied Brock, "I must remain at the head of these men. Duty and
desire compel me. Should I fall, there are others not less competent."

A half smile, a touch of the arm, and the two men separated. A long separation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Deceived by the scarlet uniforms of the militia flank companies, Wool believed that the attacking
party was composed exclusively of regulars, so steady was their advance. His own force now
consisted of 500 men, over 300 of whom were regulars. Notwithstanding his much greater strength
and vastly superior position, being protected by artificial brush-shelters and logs, and the
withering fire with which he met the dogged progress of the British, his flanks, pressed by
Williams and Macdonell, began to shrink. The moment was a critical one for our hero.

The supreme effort must be made.

Glancing below, Brock, even at that instant, for a fleeting moment was conscious of the beauty
of the country spread beneath him. Almost as far as eye could reach extended an immense, partly
pastoral plain, studded with villages, groves, winding streams, cultivated farms, orchards,
vineyards and meadows. In places a dense forest, decorated with autumn's mellow tints, and
furrowed by the black gorge of the Niagara, stretched to the horizon. Across all, shadows of
racing clouds gave emphasis to the brilliant flood of sunshine. No fairer scene ever greeted
the eye of man. The entire landscape breathed peace. Above it, however, in detached masses,
hung lurid billows--the smoke of battle.... The serene vision faded, and in its place, in brutal
contrast, came cruel, imperious bugle calls, the metallic rattle of fire-arms, the deep thunder
of artillery, the curdling cry of wounded men.

Isaac's senses were insulted by the carnage of war.

       *       *       *       *       *

He now noticed that the supports, led by his plucky aide at the foot of the hill, were flagging.
He shouted back, "Push on, York Volunteers!"

Our hero's robust figure was a conspicuous object for the American riflemen. While telling
his men to take advantage of every bit of shelter, he paid little attention to himself. His
uniform, his position at the head of his men, his loud words of command, stamped him a man
of mark, a soldier of distinction, a special target for Wool's sharpshooters. 

       Ha! ha! this is the vengeance for Hellas, for the sack and razing
of Corinth and all the other atrocities!

Rome can conquer with the sword; but we Greeks, though conquered, can, unarmed, conquer Rome.
How these Italians can waste their money!

       Villas, statues, pretty slaves, costly vases, and tables of mottled
cypress,[29] oysters worth their weight in gold, and I know not what
else!

And I, poor Pratinas, the Greek, who lives in an upper floor of a Subura house at only two
thousand sesterces rental, find in these noble Roman lords only so
much plunder.

       Ha! ha! Hellas, thou art avenged!"

[29] A "fad" of this time. Such tables often cost $20,000.

And gathering his mantle about him, he went down the several flights of very rickety stairs, and
found himself in the buzzing street.

       II

The Romans hugged a fond belief that houses shut out from sunlight and air were extremely healthy.
If such were the fact, there should have been no sickness in a great
part of the capital.

The street in which Pratinas found himself was so dark, that he was fain to wait till his eyes
accommodated themselves to the change. The street was no wider than an alley, yet packed with
booths and hucksters,--sellers of boiled peas and hot sausage, and fifty other wares. On the
worthy Hellene pressed, while rough German slaves or swarthy Africans
jostled against him; the din of scholars declaiming in an adjoining
school deafened him; a hundred unhappy odors made him wince.

Then, as he fought his way, the streets grew a trifle wider; as he
approached the Forum the shops became more pretentious; at last he
reached his destination in the aristocratic quarter of the Palatine,
and paused before a new and ostentatious mansion, in whose vestibule
was swarming a great bevy of clients, all come in the official calling
costume--a ponderous toga--to pay their respects to the great man.

       But as the inner door was pushed aside by the vigilant keeper, all
the rest of the crowd were kept out till Pratinas could pass within.

The atrium of the house was a splendid sight, with its veined marble
pillars, mosaic floor, bubbling fountain, choice frescoes, and expensive
furniture upholstered in Tyrian purple.

       A little in the rear of this gorgeous room was seated in a high armchair
the individual who boasted himself the lord of this establishment,
Lucius Atilius Calatinus.

He was a large, coarse man, with a rough, bull-dog face and straight
red hair.

       He had been drinking heavily the night before, and his small bluish
eyes had wide dark circles beneath them, and his breath showed strongly
the garlic with which he had seasoned the bread and grapes of his
early lunch.

He was evidently very glad to see his Greek visitor, and drove the six large, heavily gemmed
rings which he wore on one of his fat fingers, almost into the other's
hand when he shook it.

       

"Well met, Pratinas!" was his salutation. "Tell me, is that little affair of yours settled?
Have you stopped the mouth of that beastly fellow, Postumus Pyrgensis, who said that I was
a base upstart, with no claim to my gentile name, and a bad record as a tax farmer in Spain, and
therefore should not be elected tribune[30]?"

[30] The ten tribunes had power to convene the people and Senate,
propose laws and "veto" the actions of other magistrates.

       

SUPPLEMENT

AFTER BROCK'S DEATH.

The "Story of Isaac Brock" would be incomplete without an epitome of the events that terminated
the Battle of Queenston Heights and resulted in an overwhelming victory for the British.

General Brock was killed in action at about half-past seven on the morning of October 13th,
1812. His body was removed from Government House, Niagara, to a cavalier bastion at Fort George,
for final sepulture. This bastion was selected by Major Glegg, it being the one which Brock's
own genius had lately suggested--the one from which the range of an observer's vision covered
the principal points of approach--and had just been finished under his daily superintendence.

After he fell, the handful of men who were with him, overcome by his tragic end, overwhelmed
by superior numbers and a hurricane of buckshot and bullets, wavered, and though Dennis attempted
to rally them, fell back and retreated to the far end of Queenston village. Here, about two
hours later, Colonel Macdonell, Brock's aide, collected and reformed the scattered units, and
made another bold dash to rescale the heights and retake the redan. A detailed account of the
incidents that followed in dramatic succession would fill a book.

With the cry of "Revenge the General!" from the men of the 49th, Macdonell, on Brock's charger,
led the forlorn attack, supported by Dennis. At the same moment, Williams, with his detachment,
emerged from the thicket, shouting to his men, "Feel firmly to the right, my lads; advance
steadily, charge them home, and they cannot stand you." The two detachments then combined,
and Macdonell ordering a general advance, they once more breasted the ascent.

The enemy, over four hundred strong, but without proper formation, fired an independent volley
at the British as they approached to within thirty yards of the redoubt. This was responded
to with vigour, and grenadiers and volunteers, in response to brave Macdonell's repeated calls,
charged fiercely on Wool's men, now huddled in disorder around the eighteen-pounder. Some of
them started to run towards the river bank. One American officer, Ogilvie, of the 13th regulars,
thinking the situation hopeless, raised his handkerchief on his sword-point in token of surrender.
Wool, a soldier of different calibre, tore it down, and a company of United States infantry
coming at that moment to his assistance, he rallied his men.

The momentary advantage gained by Macdonell's small band of heroes was lost, and in the exchange
of shots that followed, Macdonell's horse--Brock's charger--was killed under him while he--his
uniform torn with bullets--was thrown from the saddle as the animal plunged in its death struggle--receiving
several ghastly bullet wounds, from which he died the following day, after enduring much agony.
Williams, a moment later, fell desperately wounded; Dennis, suffering from a severe head wound,
at first refused to quit the field, but Cameron having removed the sorely-stricken Macdonell,
and Williams having recovered consciousness and escaped, the dispirited men fell back, retreated
down the mountain at Parrott's Tavern, retiring upon Vrooman's battery. Here they awaited,
unmolested, until two in the afternoon, the arrival of reinforcements from Fort George. The
fight, though short, had been furious and deadly. Americans and British alike were glad to
take breath.

Meanwhile, unobserved, young Brant, with 120 Mohawk Indians, had scaled the mountain, east
of St. David's, outflanking the Americans, and hemmed them in until Captains Derenzy, of the
41st, and Holcroft, of the Artillery, arrived with the car-brigade from Fort George and trained
two field-guns and a howitzer upon the landing. Merritt, with a troop of mounted infantry,
at the same time reached the village by the Queenston road. This movement, which was a ruse,
deceived the enemy, who at once redisposed his troops in readiness for an attack from this
new quarter.

The American commander was ignorant of the fact that General Sheaffe--with four companies of
the 41st, 308 strong, the same number of militia, and a company of negro troops from Niagara,
refugee slaves from the United States--was at that moment approaching his rear in the rear
of the Indians. The British advanced in crescent-shaped formation, hidden by mountain and bush,
and were shortly joined by a few more regulars and by two flank companies of the 2nd regiment
of militia from Chippewa. Indeed, many persons of all ranks of life, even veterans exempt by
age, seized their muskets and joined the column to repel the invaders, "unappalled" by Dearborn's
threats of conquest or by the death of their "beloved hero, Isaac Brock." By this movement
the British escaped the enfilading fire of the Lewiston batteries, the steep ascent of the
heights in the teeth of the enemy's field-works, and compelled him to change front. The British
of all ranks numbered less than one thousand.

The United States troops, which had been heavily reinforced, consisted at this time of about
one thousand fighting men, on and about the mountain. This number was slowly supplemented by
fresh arrivals from Lewiston, encouraged when they saw the American flag planted on the redan.
The wounded were sent across the river. Nearly all of the new arrivals were regulars. Colonel
Winfield Scott, of Mexican fame, a tried soldier, six feet four in his stockings, was now in
command, supported by a second field-piece and many sharp-shooters. Van Rensselaer, narrowly
escaping capture, had retreated by boat to Lewiston, ostensibly to bring over more troops.
Finding the conditions unfavourable, he did not do so, but sent over General Wadsworth, as
a vicarious sacrifice, to take command. The gun in the redan had been unspiked, and the summit
strongly entrenched, but as Scott's men betrayed strange lukewarmness, orders were given "to
shoot any man leaving his post."

Sheaffe's men having rested after their forced tramp, a few spherical case-shot by Holcroft
drove out the American riflemen. His gunners had at last silenced the Lewiston batteries, and
finding the river range, sunk almost every boat that attempted to cross. The Indians were now
ordered to drive in the enemy's pickets slowly. Scouting the woods, they routed his outposts.

About four p.m. Captain Bullock, with two flank companies of militia and 150 men of the 41st,
advanced, and after firing a volley in the face of a dense smoke, charged the enemy's right,
which broke in great confusion. A general advance was ordered, and, with wild warwhoops by
the Indians and white men, the heights were rushed, Wadsworth's veterans were stampeded, the
redan retaken at the point of the bayonet, and Scott's command forced to the scarp of the cliff
overhanging the river.

The American soldiers, to quote United States historians, now "fled like sheep," and scuttled
off in all directions. Some raced headlong down the main road, seeking shelter under the muzzles
of Holcroft's guns; some sought refuge in the houses; others raced to the landing only to find
the boats no longer there. Not a few, hot pressed by Brant's avenging Mohawks, threw themselves
over the precipice, preferring suicide to the redman's tomahawk. Others plunged into the Niagara,
essaying to swim its irresistible eddies, only to be blown out of the green water by Holcroft's
grapeshot or sucked down by the river's silent whirlpools.

One boat, with fifty struggling refugees, sank with its entire crew. Two others similarly laden
were beached below the village, with only one dozen out of one hundred souls still living.
The river presented a shocking scene. On the face of the water men, many maimed and wounded,
fought and struggled for survival. This pitiful spectacle was actually taking place under the
eyes of several thousands of American soldiers on the Lewiston bank, who, almost impossible
to believe, and to their lasting disgrace, refused to join, or attempt even to succour, their
comrades--deaf to all entreaty--allowing them to perish. Every room and shack at Queenston
was an improvised hospital or morgue, filled with the mangled bodies of the quick and dead.

Cruikshank says 120 wounded United States officers and men were taken, of whom thirty died
at hospital in Queenston and Niagara, while 140 more were ferried across to Lewiston. Lossing,
the American historian, solemnly records the "fact" that "less than 600 American troops of
all ranks ever landed at Queenston," and that "of these only 300 were overpowered"--some of
the United States histories of the colonial wars need drastic revision--yet 958 American soldiers
were taken prisoners by the British; "captured by a force," so officially wrote Colonel Van
Rensselaer, after the battle, "amounting to only about one-third of the united number of the
American troops." Captain Gist, of the U.S. army, placed their own killed at 400.

Among those who, when defeat was certain, fled to the water's edge, after fighting valiantly,
was Colonel Winfield Scott, General Wadsworth, and other United States officers. Pursued by
the Indians, they lowered themselves from shrub to shrub. When escape was hopeless, Scott tied
the white cravat of his comrade, Totten, on his sword point, and with another officer, Gibson,
was hurrying to present this flag of truce, when two Indians confronted them on the narrow
trail. Jacobs, Brant's powerful follower, wrenched Scott's sword away, hatchets were drawn,
and had not a British grenadier sergeant rushed forward, Winfield Scott would have fared badly.

General Van Rensselaer's defeat was complete and disastrous. His chagrin at his failure "to
appal the minds of the Canadians" was so great that ten days later he resigned his command.

The account between Canada and the United States at sundown on that day stood as follows: Total
American force engaged, 1,600. Killed and wounded, or sent back across the river, during the
fight, 500. Prisoners, 73 officers, including two generals and five colonels, together with
852 rank and file. Total loss, 1,425 men, besides the colours of the New York regiment, one
six-pounder, 815 carbines and bayonets, and 5,950 rounds of ball and buckshot.

The total British force engaged was 1,000. Of these 800 were regulars and militia, and 200
Indians. Killed, 14, including one major-general and one aide. Wounded and missing, 96. Total
American loss, 1,425. Total British loss, 110. The next day the British General, Sheaffe, Isaac
Brock's successor, signed another armistice. The second armistice within a period of nine weeks!

Such is the story of the Battle of Queenston Heights.

SUBSEQUENT EVENTS OF THE CAMPAIGN OF 1812.

After Van Rensselaer resigned his command in favour of Brigadier-General Smyth, the effect
of the British victory upon the United States troops at Lewiston was beyond belief. While the
British soldiers were, with characteristic indifference, hard at work at Fort George cutting
wood and threshing straw, the American soldiers across the river, according to their own historians,
were deserting by the hundreds. Of General Tannehill's brigade of 1,414 of all ranks, 1,147
deserted within a few days. Twenty of these were officers.

Had the British been allowed to profit by this demoralization of the enemy and followed up
their brilliant successes, they could, as Brock predicted, have swept the frontier from Chippewa
to Sackett's Harbour, and probably prevented a continuance of the two years' war. The Sheaffe-Prevost
inexcusable thirty days' truce was the very respite the enemy had prayed for. More men and
more munitions were hurriedly despatched to all the United States frontier forts, and renewed
courage imparted to some of the commanders and their hesitating brigades. The first to waken
up after the expiration of this, to the Americans, merciful truce, was General Dearborn, who,
with 2,000 men, attacked Odelltown, only to be driven back to Lake Champlain by de Salaberry.
This reverse was followed in the last days of November by an attack by General Smyth, with
400 of his 4,300 men, upon a four-gun battery, defended by sixty-five men, above Garden Island,
on the Niagara River. Elated with his success, he took for his rallying cry, "The cannon lost
at Detroit--or death!" and again crossed the river with thirty-two boats and 900 men, and descended
upon Fort Erie. Meanwhile, Colonel Bisshopp had retaken the fort, with its American captors,
and with a handful of regulars and militia awaited "annihilation." As Smyth's flotilla advanced,
Bisshopp poured in a hot fire, sinking two boats. This reception did not accord with Smyth's
views of the ethics of war, and forgetting all about the "lost guns," and disliking, upon reflection,
the idea of "death," he at once turned tail. At Buffalo he was publicly pelted by the populace,
and for his cowardice was dismissed the service by the United States Senate without the formality
of a trial. Dearborn--strange to say--having for the time lost his taste for fighting, went
into winter quarters, and Canada, in universal mourning for Brock, but still confident and
undaunted, rested on her arms. The year 1812 closed without further incident.

The period thus ended had been a momentous one. Brilliant reputations had been made and lost. A
permanent government by one strong man will be the only one practicable to save the world from
anarchy. Have you realized that?"

"I only know, Imperator," said Drusus, gloomily, "that no future state
can be worse than ours to-day, when the magistrates of the Republic
are the most grievous despots."

Cæsar shook his head.

"You magnify your own wrongs and mine. If mere revenge prompts us, we are worse than Xerxes, or Sulla.
The gods alone can tell us what is right."

"The gods!" cried Drusus, half sunken though he was in a weary lethargy, "do you believe there
are any gods?"

Cæsar threw back his head. "Not always; but at moments I do not believe in them, I know! And
now I know that gods are guiding us!"

"Whither?" exclaimed the young man, starting from his weary drowsiness.

"I know not whither; neither do I care. Enough to be conscious that they guide us!"

And then, as though there was no pressing problem involving the peace of the civilized world
weighing upon him, the proconsul stood by in kind attention while Antiochus and an attendant bathed
the wearied messenger's feet before taking him away to rest.

After Drusus had been carried to his room, Cæsar collected the manuscripts
and tablets scattered about the apartment, methodically placed them
in the proper cases and presses, suffered himself to be undressed,
and slept late into the following morning, as sweetly and soundly
as a little child.

II

On the next day Cæsar called before him the thirteenth legion,--the only force he had at Ravenna,--and
from a pulpit in front of the prætorium he told them the story of
what had happened at Rome; of how the Senate had outraged the tribunes
of the plebs, whom even the violent Sulla had respected; of how the
mighty oligarchy had outraged every soldier in insulting their commander.
Then Curio, just arrived, declaimed with indignant fervour of the
violence and fury of the consuls and Pompeius; and when he concluded,
the veterans could restrain their ardour and devotion no more, five
thousand martial throats roared forth an oath of fealty, and as many
swords were waved on high in mad defiance to the Senate and the Magnus.
Then cohort after cohort cried out that on this campaign they would
accept no pay; and the military tribunes and centurions pledged themselves,
this officer for the support of two recruits, and that for three.

It
was a great personal triumph for Cæsar. He stood receiving the pledges
and plaudits, and repaying each protestation of loyalty with a few
gracious words, or smiles, that were worth fifty talents to each acclaiming
maniple. Drusus, who was standing back of the proconsul, beside Curio,
realized that never before had he seen such outgoing of magnetism
and personal energy from man to man, one mind holding in vassalage
five thousand. Then Procter, inflated by his victory
at Frenchtown, and overrating his military skill, attacked Fort Meigs, on the Maumee River,
was badly repulsed, and hopelessly lost all prestige.

This defeat of the British was followed by Dearborn's assault upon Fort George. With 7,000
men behind him, aided by the guns of Chauncey's fleet at the river mouth, he captured the time-worn
fortification, and the Niagara frontier--despite the dogged resistance of General Vincent,
who had to retreat with the crippled remnant of his 1,400 men--was at last in the possession
of the enemy. This win was made more complete by General Prevost's belated and, of course,
futile attack upon Sackett's Harbour. When assured success stared him in the face, his flaccid
nature suggested retreat, and what might have been a signal victory became a disgraceful failure.
The position of affairs at this time was admirably summed up in a letter written by Quartermaster
Nichol. "Alas! we are no longer commanded by Isaac Brock.... Confidence seems to have vanished
from the land, and gloomy despondency in those who are at our head has taken its place." Brock's
courage, judgment, military skill and personal magnetism were never so much needed.

To offset these reverses, the brilliant victory of the British ship Shannon over the American
war vessel Chesapeake, in a naval duel fought outside Boston harbour, somewhat restored British
complacence. This was the prelude to another victory on land. Vincent, after being bombarded
out of Fort George, slowly retreated with his broken command towards Burlington, cleverly flirting
with the enemy, and drawing him farther and farther inland, finally reforming his wearied men
near Stony Creek, sixteen miles from the lake's head. Here the enemy, 3,000 strong, went into
camp. It was here that FitzGibbon--General Brock's old-time sergeant-major and faithful protégé--now
in command of a company of the 49th, disguised as a settler, penetrated the enemy's camp, and
was convinced a night attack would be successful. While the advance guard of the enemy was
driving in the British decoy pickets, 800 of Vincent's force, under Harvey, surprised and charged
them in the darkness, capturing two American generals, 120 prisoners, and four cannon, without
the loss of a man.

Sheaffe was now transferred to Montreal, and De Rottenberg assumed military command in Upper
Canada. Three weeks later an American, Colonel Boerstler, was ordered to surprise a small party
of British at Beaver Dams (now Thorold). Lieutenant FitzGibbon, in command, was informed of
the proposed attack. An heroic woman--Laura Secord--the wife of a wounded militiaman at Queenston,
and to whose house Brock's body was borne after he fell, learned of the pending surprise by
overhearing a conversation between some American officers. Her resolution was soon formed.
Despite the fact that twenty miles through gloomy forest, filled with hostile Indians, lay
between her home and the British camp, she tramped the distance unattended, though not unmolested,
and reached the Stone House in time to warn the plucky grenadier. The wily Irishman at once
despatched a party of Caughnawaga Indians to divert the enemy's attention. Advancing with a
few soldiers, and finding Boerstler and his force drawn up in an opening of the woods, uncertain
what to do, he boldly ordered that officer to surrender with his entire command of 540 soldiers,
though he had but forty-seven men to enforce the conditions. His demand was instantly complied
with.

To equalize in part this game of international see-saw, Chauncey again visited York with fourteen
ships, mounting 114 guns, and plundered the defenceless capital.

On Lake Erie, Perry, with nine ships and a total broadside of 936 pounds of metal, defeated
Barclay's six Canadian ships, with a total broadside of 459 pounds. These facts must be taken
into impartial consideration in weighing the issue. In the west, Procter, still suffering from
the shock received at Fort Meigs, with 407 troops and 800 Indians, retreated up the Thames
valley, neglecting to burn his bridges in his retreat, with General Harrison and an army of
3,500 men in hot pursuit. The American general brought him to bay at Moraviantown, and in the
frozen swamps the dispirited British, having lost all confidence in their fleeing commander,
surrendered or escaped. It was here that the gallant and high-minded Tecumseh met his death,
under distressing circumstances. The story was circulated that, mortified at Procter's proposed
flight, the Shawanese chief was only restrained from shooting that officer by the interference
of Colonel Elliott. For his conduct and the unexplained disaster at Moraviantown, Procter was
court-martialed, severely condemned, and suspended from his command for six months.

The defeat of Procter was counterbalanced, however, by Colonel de Salaberry's dramatic victory
over General Hampton. With 350 French Canadian Voltigeurs he hypnotized 3,500 United States
troops at Chateauguay. When the fight was hottest the gallant Frenchman ordered his buglers
to sound the advance, an alarming fanfare, accompanied by discharges of musketry from various
points of the surrounding forest, and the enemy, thinking he was about to be attacked and flanked
by superior numbers, was seized with panic, stampeded, and never halted in his retreat until
he had placed twenty-five miles of country between him and the "French devils." After this,
occurred the historic battle of Chrysler's Farm, on the St. Lawrence, when 2,000 U.S. regulars
under General Boyd, with six field-guns, were routed, with a loss of 102 killed and 237 wounded,
by a force composed of 380 regulars, militia and Indians, under Colonel Morrison, and driven
back into American territory.

In the second week of December, General McClure evacuated Fort George, but before doing so
burned 149 of the public buildings and private houses in Newark and Queenston, by order of
John Armstrong, U.S. Secretary of War, compelling 400 women and children to seek shelter in
the woods, with the thermometer ranging around zero. Even Lossing, the American historian,
condemned this as "a wanton act, contrary to the usages of war, and leaving a stain upon the
American character." The outrage brought its own punishment within the week. Colonel Murray,
with 550 soldiers, captured the United States Fort Niagara, killing sixty-five men and taking
344 prisoners, and before the close of the year, with his heart on fire, the British general,
Riall, crossed the river with 500 Indians and sacked Lewiston, Youngstown, Tuscarora and Manchester,
only desisting from his excusable incendiarism when he had burned Buffalo and laid Black Rock
in ashes. January 1st, 1814, was ushered in with the Cross of St. George floating over the
battered ramparts of the American Fort Niagara.

Thus ended the year of our Lord 1813, for ever memorable in North American history as a twelve
months of almost incessant warfare, famous for its records of conspicuous courage, much military
incompetence, and great and lamentable carnage. A year, notwithstanding its sheaf of blunders,
that should be canonized by all true Canadians, for it was a year that emphasized in an astounding
manner the pluck and bull-dog tenacity of the Canadian militiaman, disclosing his deep love
for country that resisted unto death the lawless attacks of a wanton invader.

THE CAMPAIGN OF 1814.

In March, 1814, General Wilkinson again undertook the forlorn hope of capturing Canada, leading
5,000 men against 350 British, under Hancock, at Lacolle, on Lake Champlain. After five hours
of red-hot fighting, he was compelled to fall back on Plattsburg. A month later Admiral Sir
James Yeo and General Drummond, with 750 men, landed under the batteries at Oswego, and in
the teeth of a sustained fire of cannon and musketry, "gathered in" that historic town and
sixty prisoners.

To and fro, like a pendulum, swayed the scene of action--to-day east, to-morrow west. Colonel
Campbell and 500 American soldiers, with nothing better to do, made a bonfire of Port Dover,
the incident being officially described by the U.S. War Department as "an error of judgment."
Then General Brown, backed by an army of 6,000 U.S. veterans, swooped down like "a wolf on
the fold" on Fort George, and annexed it and the garrison of 170 men. The British general,
Riall, still possessing the fighting mania, and some 1,800 men, locked horns with General Brown
and 3,000 of his veterans, and the Battle of Chippewa added another victory to the American
record. The enemy then pillaged St. David's, while Riall--both sides having suffered heavily--retreated
to the head of Lundy's Lane, a narrow roadway close to the Falls of Niagara, and stood at bay.

Three weeks elapsed, when General Drummond, realizing Riall's danger, hastened from York to
his assistance, reaching Lundy's Lane with 800 men at the moment that General Brown, with his
reinforced army of over 4,000 men, was within 600 yards of the British outposts. A moment later
the contest was on, the bloodiest and probably the most brilliant battle of the whole campaign.
It was a bitterly contested fight for seven hours--a death struggle for the survival of the
fittest. "Show that to Pausanias. He will honour every request you make, be it for a million sesterces."

Agias
bowed and was off. For the last time Drusus was tempted to call him back and say that the flight
would begin at once. But the nimble Greek was already out of sight, and heroism became a necessity.
Drusus resolutely turned his steps toward the senate-house. Not having been able to forecast
the immediate moves of the enemy, he had not arranged for hurried flight; it was to be regretted,
although he had known that on that day the end of the crisis would come. He soon met Antonius,
and imparted to him what he had just learned from Agias, and the precautions taken.
Antonius shook his head, and remarked:--

"You ought not to go with
me. When day was breaking, and the American general found his casualties
exceeded one thousand, he withdrew his shattered army of invaders to Fort Erie. The British
loss was 84 killed and 557 wounded. Lundy's Lane has been likened to the storming of St. Sebastian
or the deathly duel at Quatre Bras. Both invaders and defenders exhibited heroism--worthy,
in the case of the enemy, of a higher cause. General Drummond was wounded, and a son of General
Hull, of Detroit notoriety, was among the killed.

Though the battle of Lundy's Lane, fought on July 25th, was the last great engagement in 1814,
and practically ended the war, the campaign was not destined to close without an exhibition
of constitutional timidity on the part of Prevost, the man with the liquid backbone. With 11,000
seasoned veterans who had campaigned under Wellington, he advanced, September 14th, on Plattsburg,
garrisoned by only 4,000 Americans, and when victory smiled in his face, he actually ordered
the retreat. Overcome with humiliation, his officers broke their swords, declaring they "could
never serve again," and sullenly retraced their steps to the frontier. This was the crowning
episode that destroyed Prevost's reputation. Death rescued him from the disgrace of court-martial.

How clear-cut and free from blemish, in contrast with that of many of his contemporaries, stands
out the brilliant record of Isaac Brock.

The Treaty of Ghent--while satisfactory to the people of Canada, bringing as it did a cessation
of hostilities, permanent peace, and recognition of their rights--was received with mixed satisfaction
by both political parties in the United States, after the first flush of excitement had passed
away. "What," the citizens asked each other, "have we gained by a war into which the country
was dragged by President Madison in defence of free-trade and sailors' rights, and in opposition
to paper blockades?"

In the articles of peace, these vexed questions (as related in Chapters VIII. and XIV.)--questions
which, as we have seen, were advanced by the United States Government as the real cause for
war, were not even mentioned. Some worthy Americans, having suffered from the fighting qualities
of the Canadian loyalists, publicly stated that the "declaration of peace had delivered them
from great peril."

Another United States historian (Johnston) writes that "peace secured not one of the objects
for which war had been declared, for, though Britain put a stop to the irritating ... practice
of searching American vessels flying an American flag, she was not bound by the terms of the
treaty to do so." In the words of another recorder (Taylor), "Britain ceased the practice of
search, not on account of war, nor of the treaty, but because the necessity of doing so had
passed away--the European war being over."

WHAT OF CANADA?

Canada, young as she was in the arts of peace and cruel practices of war, while honouring the
memory of her heroes who had fallen in the splendid struggle against invasion, wasted no time
in idle tears. The very atmosphere of her high northern latitude, the breath of life that rose
from lake and forest, prairie and mountain, was fast developing a race of men with bodies enduring
as iron and minds as highly tempered as steel. She drew another and a deeper breath, and, forecasting
her destiny, with shoulders squared and fixed resolve, made ready to create an empire of industrial
greatness which, under Providence, was to rank second to none.

The influence of Brock's life, achievements and death upon the Canadian people was more far-reaching
than boy, or even man, would suppose. It aroused in the people not only the questionable human
desire to avenge his death, but an unexpressed resolve to emulate his high manliness, his fixity
of purpose, and his well-ordered courage in defence of the right.

       *       *       *       *       *

It remains for the youth of Canada to proudly cherish the memory of Isaac Brock, and to never
lose an opportunity to follow the example he set for them by his splendid deeds.

APPENDIX.

EXPLANATORY NOTES ON THE ILLUSTRATIONS.

NO. 1. FRONTISPIECE.

Major-General Sir Isaac Brock.

Reproduction of a copy of the original water-color and chalk drawing in the possession of Sir
Isaac Brock's great-niece, Miss Tupper, of Candee, Guernsey. Copied for Miss Agnes FitzGibbon,
of Toronto, by Alyn Williams, President of the Miniature Painters' Association of Great Britain,
1897, and not hitherto published. Adjudged by relatives to be an exact facsimile of Williams'
portrait. Miss FitzGibbon writes that "the original painting is on similar paper to that on
which Major-General Brock's last general orders are written, the size corresponding to the
space between the watermarks. Dated 1811." Artist unknown.

NO. 2. FACING PAGE 11.

"St. Peter's Port, Guernsey, in 18×6."

By an unknown artist. (An × was frequently used for a "0" at that time.) The original drawing
was found among a number of unframed prints in a collection obtained by John Naegely, Esq.,
who presented it to the Grange Club, Guernsey, in 1870. It now hangs over the mantelpiece in
the club reception room. The original is drawn in very fine pencil and water-color--a style
of art fashionable at that period. Photographed for Miss Agnes FitzGibbon in 1902. Brock's
father's house, where our hero was born--now converted into a wholesale merchant's warehouse--stands
at the point where two lines, drawn from the spots indicated by a cross (+) on the margin,
would intersect. On the frame above the picture are the words, "Guernsey in 18×6"; below, "Presented
to the Grange Club by John Naegely, Esq., 9th March, 1870."

NO. 3. FACING PAGE 27.

Navy Hall, Remnant of the old "Red Barracks," Niagara, 1797.

Navy Hall consisted of four buildings erected about 1787. One was altered in 1792 for Governor
Simcoe. Another was fitted up for Parliament when it met at Newark (Niagara), 1792-1797. The
building here shown was afterwards used for troops and called the "Red Barracks." From a photograph
in possession of Miss Carnochan, Niagara.

NO. 4. FACING PAGE 32.

Colonel James FitzGibbon.

From a photograph in possession of Miss Agnes FitzGibbon, of Toronto, his granddaughter. Taken
by his nephew, Gerald FitzGibbon, 10 Merrion Square, Dublin.

NO. 5. FACING PAGE 40.

Queenston Road, about 1824.

Original water-color painting by Charles W. Jefferys, O.S.A., Toronto, from a photograph in
possession of Miss Carnochan, showing the ruins of William Lyon Mackenzie's printing office,
the Colonial Advocate, as it appeared twelve years after the battle of Queenston Heights.

NO. 6. FACING PAGE 52.

Ruins of old Powder Magazine, Fort George.

Photograph in possession of Miss Carnochan.

NO. 7. FACING PAGE 64.

Brock's Cocked Hat.

Water-color sketch by Harry Carter, Toronto, from photograph in possession of Miss Carnochan. You
know the girl, then?" said the other, with the most excruciating inquisitiveness.

"Know her?" raged Agias, "I love the sunbeam on which her eyes rest. Speak! Tell me all, everything,
all about it I Quick! I must know!"

Pisander drew himself together, and with a deliberation that was nearly
maddening to his auditor, began:--

"Well, you see, I had occasion
this morning to be in Calatinus's library.

Yes, I remember, I was just putting the new copy of Theognis back
into the cupboard, when I noticed that the Mimnermus was not neatly
rolled, and so I happened to stay in the room, and--"

"By Zeus, speak faster and to the point!" cried Agias.

"Oh, there wasn't very much to it all! Why, how excited you are! Pratinas
came into the atrium, and Calatinus was already there.

Reproduced, by permission, from A.C. Casselman's "Richardson's War of 1812." From a silhouette
in possession of John Alexander Macdonell, K.C., Alexandria, Ontario. Colonel Macdonell, who
was provincial aide-de-camp to Brock, was member of Parliament for Glengarry and Attorney-General
of Upper Canada. Died, October 14th, 1812, from wounds received at battle of Queenston Heights,
aged 27.

NO. 11. FACING PAGE 117.

Queenston Heights and Brock's Monument.

As it appeared about 1830, excepting that the present monument has been substituted for the
old one. Original water-color painting by C.M. Manly, A.R.C.A., Toronto, from a photograph
in possession of Miss Carnochan.

NO. 12. FACING PAGE 121.

"Major-General Brock, 18x6."

From a vignette photograph loaned by Miss FitzGibbon, Toronto, and now published for the first
time in any Life of Brock. As doubt has been expressed by some admirers of Brock as to the
authenticity of this portrait, Miss FitzGibbon's written endorsation is here quoted:

"The photograph is from an original miniature portrait of Major-General (afterwards Sir) Isaac
Brock, painted by J. Hudson, 18x6--1806--the date of General Brock's last visit to England.
The miniature is now in possession of Miss S. Mickle, Toronto."

This full-face vignette is of exceptional interest, all other portraits of Brock being in profile,
and is likely to challenge preconceived notions.

NO. 13. FACING PAGE 128.

Powder Magazine, Fort George, Niagara.

This powder magazine was first built in 1796. Reproduced from a photograph in possession of
Miss Carnochan, Niagara.

NO. 14. FACING PAGE 135.

Brock's Midnight Gallop.

Original water-color painting by Charles W. Jefferys, O.S.A., Toronto. As a matter of fact,
the hour of Brock's gallop from Fort George to Queenston, as described in Chapter XXV., was
not "midnight," but shortly before daybreak. It is this time, "between the lights," with sky
and atmosphere aglow from the fire of the batteries, that the artist cleverly depicts. 

Then he stepped down from the pulpit.

Beyond a few menials and Drusus and that young man's late comrade
in danger, no one else was visible.

The transaction had been so sudden as to have something of the phantasmagoric about it.

Original in possession of Miss Helen Tupper, Guernsey.

NO. 16. FACING PAGE 156.

Death of Isaac Brock.

Original water-color sketch by Charles W. Jefferys, O.S.A., Toronto. Shows our hero falling
after being hit by the fatal bullet fired by an Ohio rifleman, while courageously heading the
charge in the attempt to recapture the redan.

NO. 17. FACING PAGE 159.

Brock's Coat, worn at Queenston Heights.

From photograph, loaned by Miss FitzGibbon, of the coat worn by Brock at Queenston Heights,
showing the hole made by the entry of the fatal bullet. Photographed, 1902, from the original
in the possession of Miss Tupper, of Guernsey.

NO. 18. FACING PAGE 161.

Battle of Queenston.

Facsimile drawing by Harry Carter, Toronto, of an old sketch credited to Major Dennis (page
161), which appears on an early map of Upper Canada, published by O.G. Steele--presumably of
Buffalo--in 1840. Underneath the original print are the following words, reproduced verbatim:

     "BATTLE OF QUEENSTON.
     AFTER A SKETCH BY MAJOR DENNIS,
     13TH OCT., 1813,

Which ended in a complete victory on the part of the British, having captured 927 men, killed
or wounded about 500, taken 1,400 stand of arms, a six-pounder, and a stand of colors."

(See, also, Explanatory Note to No. 15.)

NO. 19. FACING PAGE 163.

Plan of Battle of Queenston.

Reproduced from an historical pamphlet loaned by Mrs. Currie, of Niagara, showing the plan
of battleground, disposition of troops, and topography of adjacent country. 

Here was the oak under which Cornelia and he had gathered acorns.

The remnants of the little brush house they had built still survived.

His step quickened. He heard the rush of the little stream that wound
through the grove. Interesting from the fact
that it is the only picture known which shows the churches of St. Mark's and St. Andrew's,
Niagara (Newark), Canadian side, and the lighthouse which, built in 1803, stood on the spot
where Fort Mississauga now stands.

NO. 21. FACING PAGE 172.

Cenotaph, Queenston Heights.

Erected near the spot where Brock fell. It bears the following inscription:

       "NEAR THIS SPOT
        MAJOR-GENERAL
    SIR ISAAC BROCK, K.C.B.,
PROVISIONAL LIEUTENANT-GOVERNOR OF
        UPPER CANADA,
   FELL ON 13TH OCTOBER, 1812,
  WHILE ADVANCING TO REPEL THE
       INVADING ENEMY."

NO. 22. FACING PAGE 174.

Brock's Monument.

On October 13th, 1824, the remains of Brock and his gallant aide, Macdonell, were removed from
the bastion at Fort George and placed in a vault beneath the monument which had been erected
on Queenston Heights by the Legislature to commemorate our hero's death. On Good Friday, April
17th, 1840, this monument was shattered by an explosion of gunpowder placed within the basement
by a rebel of 1837 named Lett. In 1853 the cornerstone of a new monument, as shown at page
174, the cost of which was borne by the people of Canada, was erected on the same spot, and
on October 13th, forty-one years after the British victory at Queenston, and the anniversary
of Brock's splendid death, the remains of the two heroes were re-interred and deposited in
two massive stone sarcophagi in the vault of the new monument.

