I know not whether it was the cause or the consequence of this sentiment that Balzac was a
thorough legitimist. He does not believe in the vitality of the old order, any more than he
believes in the truth of Catholicism. But he regrets the extinction of the ancient faiths,
which he admits to be unsuitable; and sees in their representatives the only picturesque and
really estimable elements that still survived in French society. He heartily despises the modern
mediævalists, who try to spread a thin varnish over a decaying order; the world is too far
gone in wickedness for such a futile remedy. The old chivalrous sentiments of the genuine noblesse
are giving way to the base chicanery of the bourgeois who supplant them: the peasantry are
mean, avaricious, and full of bitter jealousy; but they are triumphantly rooting out the last
vestiges of feudalism. Democracy and communism are the fine names put forward to justify the
enmity of those who have not, against those who have. Their success means merely an approaching
'descent of Niagara,' and the growth of a more debasing and more materialist form of despotism.
But it would be a mistake to assume that this view of the world implies that Balzac is in a
state of lofty moral indignation. Nothing can be further from the case. The world is wicked;
but it is fascinating. Society is very corrupt, it is true; but intensely and permanently amusing.
Paris is a hell; but hell is the only place worth living in. The play of evil passions gives
infinite subjects for dramatic interests. The financial warfare is more diabolical than the
old literal warfare, but quite as entertaining. There is really as much romance connected with
bills of exchange as with swords and lances, and rigging the market is nothing but the modern
form of lying in ambush. Goneril and Regan are triumphant; but we may admire the grace of their
manners and the dexterity with which they cloak their vices. Iago not only poisons Othello's
peace of mind, but, in the world of Balzac, he succeeds to Othello's place, and is universally
respected. The story receives an additional flavour. In a characteristic passage, Balzac regrets
that Molière did not continue 'Tartufe.' It would then have appeared how bitterly Orgon regretted
the loss of the hypocrite, who, it is said, made love to his wife, but who, at any rate, had
an interest in making things pleasant. Your conventional catastrophe is a mistake in art, as
it is a misrepresentation of facts. Tartufe has a good time of it in Balzac: instead of meeting
with an appropriate punishment, he flourishes and thrives, and we look on with a smile not
altogether devoid of complacency. Shall we not take the world as it is, and be amused at the
'Comédie Humaine,' rather than fruitlessly rage against it? It will be played out whether we
like it or not, and we may as well adapt our tastes to our circumstances.

Ought we to be shocked at this extravagant cynicism; to quote it, as respectable English journalists
used to do, as a proof of the awful corruption of French society, or to regard it as semi-humorous
exaggeration? I can't quite sympathise with people who take Balzac seriously. I cannot talk
about the remorseless skill with which he tears off the mask from the fearful corruptions of
modern society, and penetrates into the most hidden motives of the human heart; nor can I infer
from his terrible pictures of feminine suffering that for every one of those pictures a woman's
heart had been tortured to death. This, or something like this, I have read; and I can only
say that I don't believe a word of it. Balzac, indeed, as compared with our respectable romancers,
has the merit of admitting passions whose existence we scrupulously ignore; and the further
merit that he takes a far wider range of sentiment, and does not hold by the theory that the
life of a man or a woman closes at the conventional end of a third volume. But he is above
all things a dreamer, and his dreams resemble nightmares. Powerfully as his actors are put
upon the stage, they seem to me to be, after all, 'such stuff as dreams are made of.' A genuine
observer of life does not find it so highly spiced, and draws more moderate conclusions. Balzac's
characters run into typical examples of particular passions rather than genuine human beings;
they are generally monomaniacs. Balthazar Claes, who gives up his life to search for the philosopher's
stone, is closely related to them all; only we must substitute for the philosopher's stone
some pet passion, in which the whole nature is absorbed. They have the unnatural strain of
mind which marks the approach to madness. It is not ordinary daylight which illuminates Balzac's
dreamland, but some fantastic combination of Parisian lamps, which tinges all the actors with
an unearthly glare, and distorts their features into extravagant forms. The result has, as
I have said, a strange fascination; but one is half-ashamed of yielding, because one feels
that it is due to the use of rather unholy drugs. The vapours that rise from his magic caldron
and shape themselves into human forms smell unpleasantly of sulphur, or perhaps of Parisian sewers.

The highest poetry, like the noblest morality, is the product of a thoroughly healthy mind.
A diseased tendency in one respect is certain to make itself manifest in the other. Now Balzac,
though he shows some powers which are unsurpassed or unequalled, possessed a mind which, to
put it gently, was not exactly well regulated. He took a pleasure in dwelling upon horrors
from which a healthy imagination shrinks, and rejoiced greatly in gloating over the mysteries
of iniquity. I do not say that this makes his work immoral in the ordinary sense. Probably
few people who are likely to read Balzac would be any the worse for the study. But, from a
purely artistic point of view, he is injured by his morbid tendencies. The highest triumph
of style is to say what everybody has been thinking in such a way as to make it new; the greatest
triumph of art is to make us see the poetical side of the commonplace life around us. Balzac's
ambition was, doubtless, aimed in that direction. He wished to show that life in Paris or at
Tours was as interesting to the man of real insight as any more ideal region. In a certain
sense, he has accomplished his purpose. He has discovered food for a dark and powerful imagination
in the most commonplace details of daily life. But he falls short in so far as he is unable
to represent things as they are, and has a taste for impossible horrors. There are tragedies
enough all round us for him who has eyes to see. Balzac is not content with the materials at
hand, or rather he has a love for the more exceptional and hideous manifestations. Therefore
the 'Comédie Humaine,' instead of being an accurate picture of human life, and appealing to
the sympathies of all human beings, is a collection of monstrosities, whose vices are unnatural,
and whose virtues are rather like their vices. One feels that there is something narrow and
artificial about his work. It is intensely powerful, but it is not the highest kind of power.
He makes the utmost of the gossip of a club smoking-room, or the scandal of a drawing-room,
or perhaps of a country public-house; but he represents a special phase of manners, and that
not a particularly pleasant one, rather than the more fundamental and permanent sentiments
of mankind. When shall we see a writer who can be powerful without being spasmodic, and pierce
through the surface of society without seeking for interest in its foulest abysses?

DE QUINCEY

Little more than fourteen years ago there passed from among us a man who held a high and very
peculiar position in English literature. In 1821 De Quincey first published the work with which
his name is most commonly associated, and at uncertain intervals he gave tokens to mankind
of his continued presence on earth. What his life may have been in the intervals seems to have
been at times unknown even to his friends. He began by disappearing from school and from his
family, and seems to have fallen into the habit of temporary eclipses. At one moment he dropped
upon his acquaintance from the clouds; at another he would vanish into utter darkness for weeks
or months together. One day he came to dine with Christopher North--so we are told in the professor's
life--was detained for the night by a heavy storm of rain, and prolonged his impromptu visit
for a year. During that period his habits must have been rather amazing to a well-regulated
household. His wants, indeed, were simple, and, in one sense, regular; a particular joint of
mutton, cut according to a certain mathematical formula, and an ounce of laudanum, made him
happy for a day. But in the hours when ordinary beings are awake he was generally to be found
stretched in profound opium-slumbers upon a rug before the fire, and it was only about two
or three in the morning that he gave unequivocal symptoms of vitality, and suddenly gushed
forth in streams of wondrous eloquence to the supper parties detained for the purpose of witnessing
the display. Between these irregular apparitions we are lastly given to understand that his
life was so strange that its details would be incredible. What these incredible details may
have been, I have no means of knowing. It is enough that he was a strange unsubstantial being,
flitting uncertainly about in the twilight regions of society, emerging by fits and starts
into visibility, afflicted with a general vagueness as to the ordinary duties of mankind, and
generally taking much more opium than was good for him. He tells us, indeed, that he broke
off his over-mastering habit by vigorous efforts; as he also tells us that opium is a cure
for most grievous evils, and especially saved him from an early death by consumption. It is
plain enough, however, that he never really refrained for any length of time; and perhaps we
should congratulate ourselves on a propensity, unfortunate it may be, for its victim, but leading
to the Confessions as one collateral result.

The life of De Quincey by "H. A. Page," published since this was written, has removed much
of the mystery; and it has also done much to raise in some respects our estimate of his character.
With all his weaknesses De Quincey undoubtedly was a man who could excite love as well as pity.
Incapable, to a grotesque degree, of anything like business, he did his best to discharge domestic
duties: he had a punctilious sense of honour, and got himself into difficulties by a generosity
which was certainly not corrected by the virtue of prudence. But I will not attempt to sum
up the facts, for which, as for a higher estimate than I can subscribe of his intellectual
position, I gladly refer to his biography. I have only to do with the De Quincey of books which
have a singular fascination. De Quincey himself gives thanks for four circumstances. It would
be useless to inquire whether a more bracing atmosphere and a less retired spot might have
been more favourable to his talents; but we may trace the influence of these conditions of
his early life upon his subsequent career.

       *       *       *       *       *

De Quincey implicitly puts forward a claim which has been accepted by all competent critics.
They declare, and he tacitly assumes, that he is a master of the English language. He claims
a sort of infallibility in deciding upon the precise use of words and the merits of various
styles. But he explicitly claims something more. He declares that he has used language for
purposes to which it has hardly been applied by any prose writers. The 'Confessions of an Opium-eater'
and the 'Suspiria de Profundis' are, he tells us, 'modes of impassioned prose, ranging under
no precedents that I am aware of in any literature.' The only confessions that have previously
made any great impression upon the world are those of St. Augustine and of Rousseau; but, with
one short exception in St. Augustine, neither of those compositions contains any passion, and,
therefore, De Quincey stands absolutely alone as the inventor and sole performer on a new musical
instrument--for such an instrument is the English language in his hands. He belongs to a genus
in which he is the only individual. The novelty and the difficulty of the task must be his
apology if he fails, and causes of additional glory if he succeeds. He alone of all human beings
who have written since the world began, has entered a path, which the absence of rivals proves
to be encumbered with some unusual obstacles. The accuracy and value of so bold a claim require
a short examination. After all, every writer, however obscure, may contrive by a judicious
definition to put himself into a solitary class. He has some peculiarities which distinguish
him from all other mortals. He is the only journalist who writes at a given epoch from a particular
garret in Grub Street, or the only poet who is exactly six feet high and measures precisely
forty-two inches round the chest. Any difference whatever may be applied to purposes of classification,
and the question is whether the difference is, or is not, of much importance. By examining,
therefore, the propriety of De Quincey's view of his own place in literature, we shall be naturally
led to some valuation of his distinctive merits. In deciding whether a bat should be classed
with birds or beasts, we have to determine the nature of the beast and the true theory of his
wings. And De Quincey, if the comparison be not too quaint, is like the bat, an ambiguous character,
rising on the wings of prose to the borders of the true poetical region.

De Quincey, then, announces himself as an impassioned writer, as a writer in impassioned prose,
and, finally, as applying impassioned prose to confessions. The first question suggested by
this assertion concerns the sense of the word 'impassioned.' There is very little of what one
ordinarily means by passion in the Confessions or elsewhere. There are no explosions of political
wrath, such as animate the 'Letters on a Regicide Peace,' or of a deep religious emotion, which
breathes through many of our greatest prose writers. The language is undoubtedly a vehicle
for sentiments of a certain kind, but hardly of that burning and impetuous order which we generally
indicate by impassioned. It is deep, melancholy reverie, not concentrated essence of emotion;
and the epithet fails to indicate any specific difference between himself and many other writers.
The real peculiarity is not in the passion expressed, but in the mode of expressing it. De
Quincey resembles the story-tellers mentioned by some Eastern travellers. So extraordinary
is their power of face, and so skilfully modulated are the inflections of their voices, that
even a European, ignorant of the language, can follow the narrative with absorbing interest.
One may fancy that if De Quincey's language were emptied of all meaning whatever, the mere
sound of the words would move us, as the lovely word Mesopotamia moved Whitefield's hearer.
The sentences are so delicately balanced, and so skilfully constructed, that his finer passages
fix themselves in the memory without the aid of metre. Humbler writers are content if they
can get through a single phrase without producing a decided jar. They aim at keeping up a steady
jog-trot, which shall not give actual pain to the jaws of the reader. They no more think of
weaving whole paragraphs or chapters into complex harmonies, than an ordinary pedestrian of
'going to church in a galliard and coming home in a coranto.' Even our great writers generally
settle down to a stately but monotonous gait, after the fashion of Johnson or Gibbon, or are
content with adopting a style as transparent and inconspicuous as possible. Language, according
to the common phrase, is the dress of thought; and that dress is the best, according to modern
canons of taste, which attracts least attention from its wearer. De Quincey scorns this sneaking
maxim of prudence, and boldly challenges our admiration by indulgence in what he often calls
'bravura.' His language deserves a commendation sometimes bestowed by ladies upon rich garments,
that it is capable of standing up by itself. The form is so admirable that, for purposes of
criticism, we must consider it as something apart from the substance. The most exquisite passages
in De Quincey's writings are all more or less attempts to carry out the idea expressed in the
title of the dream fugue. They are intended to be musical compositions, in which words have
to play the part of notes. They are impassioned, not in the sense of expressing any definite
sentiment, but because, from the structure and combination of the sentences, they harmonise
with certain phases of emotion.

Briefly, De Quincey is doing in prose what every great poet does in verse. The specific mark
thus indicated is still insufficient to give him a solitary position among writers. All great
rhetoricians, as De Quincey defines and explains the term, rise to the borders of poetry, and
the art which has recently been cultivated among us under the name of word-painting may be
more fitly described as an attempt to produce poetical effects without the aid of metre. From
most of the writers described under this rather unpleasant phrase he differs by the circumstance,
that his art is more nearly allied to music than to painting. Or, if compared to any painters,
it must be to those who care comparatively little for distinct portraiture or dramatic interest.
He resembles rather the school which is satisfied by contemplating gorgeous draperies, and
graceful limbs and long processions of imposing figures, without caring to interpret the meaning
of their works, or to seek for more than the harmonious arrangement of form and colour. In
other words, his prose-poems should be compared to the paintings which aim at an effect analogous
to that of stately pieces of music. Milton is the poet whom he seems to regard with the sincerest
admiration; and he apparently wishes to emulate the majestic rhythm of the 'God-gifted organ-voice
of England.' Or we may, perhaps, admit some analogy between his prose and the poetry of Keats,
though it is remarkable that he speaks with very scant appreciation of his contemporary. The
'Ode to a Nightingale,' with its marvellous beauty of versification and the dim associations
half-consciously suggested by its language, surpasses, though it resembles, some of De Quincey's
finest passages; and the 'Hyperion' might have been translated into prose as a fitting companion
for some of the opium dreams. It is in the success with which he produces such effects as these
that De Quincey may fairly claim to be unsurpassed in our language. Pompous (if that word may
be used in a good sense) declamation in prose, where the beauty of the thought is lost in the
splendour of the style, is certainly a rare literary product. Of the great rhetoricians whom
De Quincey quotes in the Essay on Rhetoric just noticed, such men as Burke and Jeremy Taylor
lead us to forget the means in the end. They sound the trumpet as a warning, not for the mere
delight in its volume of sound. Perhaps his affinity to Sir Thomas Browne is more obvious;
and one can understand the admiration which he bestows upon the opening bar of a passage in
the Urn-burial:--'Now since these bones have rested quietly in the grave under the drums and
tramplings of three conquests,' &c. 'What a melodious ascent,' he exclaims, 'as of a prelude
to some impassioned requiem breathing from the pomps of earth and from the sanctities of the
grave! What a fluctus decumanus of rhetoric! Time expounded, not by generations or centuries,
but by vast periods of conquests and dynasties; by cycles of Pharaohs and Ptolemies, Antiochi
and Arsacides! And these vast successions of time distinguished and figured by the uproars
which revolve at their inaugurations; by the drums and tramplings rolling overhead upon the
chambers of forgotten dead--the trepidations of time and mortality vexing, at secular intervals,
the everlasting sabbaths of the grave!'

The commentator is seeking to eclipse the text, and his words are at once a description and
an example of his own most characteristic rhetoric. Wordsworth once uttered an aphorism which
De Quincey repeats with great admiration: that language is not, as I have just said, the dress,
but 'the incarnation of thought.' But though accepting and enforcing the doctrine by showing
that the 'mixture is too subtle, the intertexture too ineffable' to admit of expression, he
condemns the style which is the best illustration of its truth. He is very angry with the admirers
of Swift; De Foe and 'many hundreds' of others wrote something quite as good; it only wanted
'plain good sense, natural feeling, unpretendingness, some little scholarly practice in putting
together the clockwork of sentences, and, above all, the advantage of an appropriate subject.'
Could Swift, he asks, have written a pendant to passages in Sir W. Raleigh, or Sir Thomas Browne,
or Jeremy Taylor? He would have cut the same figure as 'a forlorn scullion from a greasy eating-house
at Rotterdam, if suddenly called away in vision to act as seneschal to the festival of Belshazzar
the King, before a thousand of his lords.' And what, we may retort, would Taylor, or Browne,
or De Quincey himself, have done, had one of them been wanted to write down the project of
Wood's halfpence in Ireland? He would have resembled a king in his coronation robes compelled
to lead a forlorn hope up the scaling ladders. The fact is, that Swift required for his style
not only the plain good sense and other rare qualities enumerated, but pungent humour, quick
insight, deep passion, and general power of mind, such as is given to few men in a century.
But, as in his case the thought is really incarnated in the language we cannot criticise the
style separately from the thoughts, or we can only assign, as its highest merit, its admirable
fitness for producing the desired effect. It would be wrong to invert De Quincey's censure,
and blame him because his gorgeous robes are not fitted for more practical purposes. To everything
there is a time; for plain English, and for De Quincey's highly-wrought passages.

It would be difficult or impossible, and certainly it would be superfluous, to define with
any precision the peculiar flavour of De Quincey's style. A few specimens would do more than
any description; and De Quincey is too well known to justify quotation. It may be enough to
notice that most of his brilliant performances are variations on the same theme. He appeals
to our terror of the infinite, to the shrinking of the human mind before astronomical distances
and geological periods of time. He paints vast perspectives, opening in long succession, till
we grow dizzy in the contemplation. The cadence of his style suggests sounds echoing each other,
and growing gradually fainter, till they die away into infinite distance. Two great characteristics,
he tells us, of his opium dreams were a deep-seated melancholy and an exaggeration of the things
of space and time. Nightly he descended 'into chasms and sunless abysses, depths below depths,
from which it seemed hopeless that he could ever reascend.' He saw buildings and landscapes
'in proportion so vast as the human eye is not fitted to receive.' He seemed to live ninety
or a hundred years in a night, and even to pass through periods far beyond the limits of human
existence. Melancholy and an awe-stricken sense of the vast and vague are the emotions which
he communicates with the greatest power; though the melancholy is too dreamy to deserve the
name of passion, and the terror of the infinite is not explicitly connected with any religious
emotion. It is a proof of the fineness of his taste, that he scarcely ever falls into bombast;
we tremble at his audacity in accumulating gorgeous phrases; but we confess that he is justified
by the result. The only exception that I can remember is the passage in 'The English Mailcoach,'
where his exaggerated patriotism leads him into what strikes me at least as a rather vulgar
bit of claptrap. If any reader will take the trouble to compare De Quincey's account of a kind
of anticipation of the Balaclava charge at the battle of Talavera, with Napier's description
of the same facts, he will be amused at the distortion of history; but whatever the accuracy
of the statements, one is a little shocked at finding 'the inspiration of God' attributed to
the gallant dragoons who were cut to pieces on that occasion, as other gallant men have been
before and since. The phrase is overcharged, and inevitably suggests a cynical reaction of
mind. The ideas of dragoons and inspiration do not coalesce so easily as might be wished; but,
with this exception, I think that his purple patches are almost irreproachable, and may be
read and re-read with increasing delight. I know of no other modern writer who has soared into
the same regions with so uniform and easy a flight.

The question is often raised how far the attempt to produce by one art effects specially characteristic
of another can be considered as legitimate; whether, for example, a sculptor, when encroaching
upon the province of the painter, or a prose writer attempting to rival poets, may not be summarily
condemned. The answer probably would be that a critic who lays down such rules is erecting
himself into a legislator, when he should be a simple observer. Success justifies itself; and
when De Quincey obtains, without the aid of metre, graces which few other writers have won
by the same means, it is all the more creditable to De Quincey. A certain presumption, however,
remains in such cases, that the failure to adopt the ordinary methods implies a certain deficiency
of power. If we ask why De Quincey, who trenched so boldly upon the peculiar province of the
poet, yet failed to use the poetical form, there is one very obvious answer. He has one intolerable
fault, a fault which has probably done more than any other to diminish his popularity, and
which is, of all faults, most diametrically opposed to poetical excellence. He is utterly incapable
of concentration. He is, from the very principles on which his style is constructed, the most
diffuse of writers. Other men will pack half-a-dozen distinct propositions into a sentence,
and care little if they are somewhat crushed and distorted in the process. De Quincey insists
upon putting each of them separately, smoothing them out elaborately, till not a wrinkle disturbs
their uniform surface, and then presenting each of them for our acceptance with a placid smile.
His commendable desire for lucidity of expression makes him nervously anxious to avoid any
complexity of thought. Each step of his argument, each shade of meaning, and each fact in his
narrative, must have its own separate embodiment; and every joint and connecting link must
be carefully and accurately defined. The clearness is won at a price. There is some advantage
in this elaborate method of dissecting out every distinct fibre and ramification of an argument.
But, on the whole, one is apt to remember that life is limited, and that there are some things
in this world which must be taken for granted. If a man's boyhood fill two volumes, and if
one of these (though under unfavourable circumstances) took six months to revise, it seems
probable that in later years he would have taken longer to record events than to live them.
No autobiography written on such principles could ever reach even the middle life of the author.
Take up, for example, the first volume of his collected works. Why, on the very first page,
having occasion to mention Christendom in the fifteenth century, should he provide against
some eccentric misconception by telling us that it did not, at that time, include any part
of America? Why should it take considerably more than a page to explain that when a schoolmaster
begins lessons punctually, and leaves off too late, there will be an encroachment on the hours
of play? Or two pages to describe how a porter dropped a portmanteau on a flight of stairs,
and didn't waken a schoolmaster? Or two more to account for the fact that he asked a woman
the meaning of the noise produced by the 'bore' in the Dee, instead of waiting till she spoke
to him? Impassioned prose may be a very good thing; but when its current is arrested by such
incessant stoppages, and the beauty of the English language displayed by showing how many faultless
sentences may be expended on an exhaustive description of irrelevant trifles, the human mind
becomes recalcitrant. A man may become prolix from the fulness or fervency of his mind; but
prolixity produced by this finical minuteness of language, ends by distressing one's nerves.
It is the same sense of irritation as is produced by waiting for the tedious completion of
an elaborate toilette, and one is rather tempted to remember Artemus Ward's description of
the Fourth of July oration, which took four hours 'to pass a given point.'

This peculiarity of his style is connected with other qualities upon which a great deal of
eulogy has been bestowed. There are two faculties in which, so far as my experience goes, no
man, woman, or child ever admits his or her own deficiency. The driest of human beings will
boast of their sense of humour; and the most perplexed, of their logical acuteness. De Quincey
has been highly praised, both as a humorist and as a logician. He believed in his own powers,
and exhibits them rather ostentatiously. He says, pleasantly enough, but not without a substratum
of real conviction, that he is 'a doctor seraphicus, and also inexpugnabilis upon quillets
of logic.' I confess that I am generally sceptical as to the merits of infallible dialecticians,
because I have observed that a man's reputation for inexorable logic is generally in proportion
to the error of his conclusions. A logician, in popular estimation, seems to be one who never
shrinks from a reductio ad absurdum. His merits are measured, not by the accuracy of his conclusions,
but by the distance which separates them from his premisses. The explanation doubtless lies
in the general impression that logic is concerned with words and not with things. There is
a vague belief that by skilfully linking syllogisms you can form a chain sufficiently strong
to cross the profoundest abyss, and which will need no test of observation and verification.
A dexterous performer, it is supposed, might pass from one extremity of the universe to the
other without ever touching ground; and people do not observe that the refusal to draw an inference
may be just as great a proof of logical skill as ingenuity in drawing it. Now De Quincey's
claim to infallibility would be plausible, if we still believed that to define words accurately
is the same thing as to discover facts, and that binding them skilfully together is equivalent
to reasoning securely. He is a kind of rhetorical Euclid. He makes such a flourish with his
apparatus of axioms and definitions that you do not suspect any lurking fallacy. He is careful
to show you the minutest details of his argumentative mechanism. Each step in the process is
elaborately and separately set forth; you are not assumed to know anything, or to be capable
of supplying any links for yourself; it shall not even be taken for granted without due notice
that things which are equal to a third thing are equal to each other; and the consequence is,
that few people venture to question processes which seem to be so plainly set forth, and to
advance by such a careful development.

When, indeed, De Quincey has a safe guide, he can put an argument with admirable clearness.
The expositions of political economy, for example, are clear and ingenious, though even here
I may quote Mr. Mill's remark, that he should have imagined a certain principle--obvious enough
when once stated--to have been familiar to all economists, 'if the instance of Mr. De Quincey
did not prove that the complete non-recognition and implied denial of it are compatible with
great intellectual ingenuity and close intimacy with the subject-matter.'[4] Upon this question,
Mr. Shadworth Hodgson has maintained that De Quincey was in the right as against Mill, and
I cannot here argue the point. I think, however, that all economists would admit that De Quincey's
merits were confined to an admirable exposition of another man's reasoning, and included no
substantial addition to the inquiry. Certainly he does not count as one of those whose writings
marked any epoch in the development of the science--if it be a science. Admirable skill of
expression is, indeed, no real safeguard against logical blunders; and I will venture to say
that De Quincey rarely indulges in this ostentatious logical precision without plunging into
downright fallacies. I will take two instances. The first is trifling, but characteristic.
Poor Dr. Johnson used to reproach himself, as De Quincey puts it, 'with lying too long in bed.'
How absurd! is the comment. The doctor got up at eleven because he went to bed at three. If
he had gone to bed at twelve, could he not easily have got up at eight? The remark would have
been sound in form, though a quibble in substance, if Johnson had complained of lying in bed
'too late;' but as De Quincey himself speaks of 'too long' instead of 'too late,' it is an
obvious reply that eight hours are of the same length at every period of the day. The great
logician falls into another characteristic error in the same paragraph. Dr. Johnson, he says,
was not 'indolent;' but he adds that Johnson 'had a morbid predisposition to decline labour
from his scrofulous habit of body,' which was increased by over-eating and want of exercise.
It is a cruel mode of vindication to say that you are not indolent, but only predisposed by
a bad constitution and bad habits to decline labour; but the advantage of accurate definition
is, that you can knock a man down with one hand, and pick him up with the other.

To take a more serious case. De Quincey undertakes to refute Hume's memorable argument against
miracles. There are few better arenas for intellectual combats, and De Quincey has in it an
unusual opportunity for display. He is obviously on his mettle. He comes forward with a whole
battery of propositions, carefully marshalled in strategical order, and supported by appropriate
'lemmas.' One of his arguments, whether cogent or not, is that Hume's objection will not apply
to the evidence of a multitude of witnesses. Now, a conspicuous miracle, he says, can be produced
resting on such evidence, to wit, that of the thousands fed by a few loaves and fishes. The
simplest infidel will, of course, reply that as these thousands of witnesses cannot be produced,
the evidence open to us reduces itself to that of the Evangelists. De Quincey recollects this,
and replies to it in a note. That is, to make up the multitude, you have to reckon as witnesses
all those persons who did not contradict the 'silent appeal,' or whose contradiction has not
reached us. With such canons of criticism it is hard to say what might not be proved. When
a man with a great reputation for learning and logical ability tries to put us off with these
wretched quibbles, one is fairly bewildered. He shows an ignorance of the real strength and
weakness of the position, which, but for his reputation, one would summarily explain by incapacity
for reasoning. As it is, we must suppose that, living apart from the daily battle of life,
he had lost that quick instinct possessed by all genuine logicians for recognising the vital
points of an argument. A day in a court of justice would have taught him more about evidence
than a month spent over Aristotle. He had become fitter for the parade of the fencing-room
than for the real thrust and parry of a duel in earnest. The mere rhetorical flourish pleases
him as much as a blow at his antagonist's heart. Another glaring instance in the same paper
is his apparent failure to perceive that there is a difference between proving that such a
prophecy as that announcing the fall of Babylon was fulfilled, and proving that it was supernaturally
inspired. Hume, without a tenth part of the logical apparatus, would have exposed the fallacy
in a sentence. Paley, whom he never tires of treating to contemptuous abuse, was incapable
of such feeble sophistry. De Quincey, in short, was a very able expositor; but he was not,
though under better discipline he might probably have become, a sound original thinker. He
is an interpreter, not an originator of thought. His skill in setting forth an argument blinds
him to its most palpable defects. If language is a powerful weapon in his hands, it is only
when the direction of the blow is dictated by some more manly, if less ingenious, understanding.

Let us inquire, and it is a more delicate question, whether he is better qualified to use it
as a plaything. He has a reputation as a humorist. The Essay on Murder considered as one of
the Fine Arts is probably the most popular of his writings. The conception is undoubtedly meritorious,
and De Quincey returns to it more than once in his other works. The description of the Williams
murders is inimitable, and the execution even in the humorous passages is frequently good.
Many of the best things ever said are couched in a similar form: the old remark that the use
of language is the concealment of thought; the saying that the half is greater than the whole,
and that two and two don't always make four, are familiar instances; but each of them really
contains a profound truth expressed in a paradoxical form, which is a sufficient justification
of their extraordinary popularity. But if every inversion of a commonplace were humorous, we
should be able to make jokes by machinery. There is no humour that I can see in the statement
that honesty is the worst policy, or that procrastination saves time; and De Quincey's phrase,
though I admit that it is amusing as a kind of summary of his essay, seems to me to rank little
higher than an ingenious pun. It is a clever trick of language, but does not lead any further.

