This is a list of unfamiliar (to me) words.

apologue
  Moral fable; an allegory.

arbitral
  Relating to arbiters or arbitration.

bahn
  Pathway.

Belial
  Spirit of evil personified; the devil; Satan; worthlessness.

billet-doux
  Love letter.

chatelaine
  Mistress of a castle or fashionable household. Clasp or chain for
  holding keys, trinkets, etc., worn at the waist by women; woman's
  lapel ornament resembling this.

confabulations
  Conversation; discussion.

Credat Judaeus Apella! [non ego]
  "Let the Jew Apella believe it; not I".
  Roughly, "tell it to someone else, not me."

escutcheon
  Shield or similar surface showing a coat of arms.

flagitious
  Shamefully wicked, persons, actions, or times.
  Heinous or flagrant crime;

grandiloquently
  Speaking or expressed in a lofty style; pompous, bombastic, turgid,
  pretentious.

identic
  Identical in form, as when two or more governments deal simultaneously
  with another government.

lycanthropy
  In folklore, ability to assume the form and characteristics of a wolf.

Mare Liberum
  Body of navigable water to which all nations have unrestricted access.

mendax
 Given to lying.

miching mallecho
  Sneaky mischief.

Mittel-Europa
  German term approximately equal to Central Europe.

non possumus
  We cannot.

obeisance
  Movement of the body showing respect or deferential courtesy; bow,
  curtsy, or similar gesture.

passier-scheine
  Pass; permit.

persona grata
  Acceptable person or diplomatic representative.

poilus
  French soldier, especially in World War I.

Potsdam
  Capital city of the federal state of Brandenburg in Germany, southwest
  of Berlin. Berlin was the official capital of Prussia and later of the
  German Empire, but the court remained in nearby Potsdam, and many
  government officials also settled in Potsdam. The city lost this
  status as a second capital in 1918, when World War I ended and the
  emperor Wilhelm II was deposed.

refractory (persons)
  Hard or impossible to manage; stubbornly disobedient.

sagacity
  Sound judgment.

schmuck
  Obnoxious, contemptible, clumsy or stupid person.

schrecklichkeit
  Frightfulness; horror.

soubrette
  Maidservant in a play displaying coquetry, pertness, and a tendency to
  engage in intrigue. Flirtatious or frivolous young woman.

trepanning
  Using a small circular saw with a center pin mounted on a strong
  hollow metal shaft that is attached a transverse handle: used in
  surgery to remove circular disks of bone from the skull.

ululation
  Howl, as a dog or a wolf; hoot, as an owl; to lament loudly and
  shrilly.

Vallombrosa
  Resort in central Italy, near Florence; a famous abbey.

vicegerent
  Person appointed by a head of state to act as an administrative deputy.

voluble
  Continuous flow of words; fluent; glib; talkative: articulate,
  garrulous, loquacious.  APOLOGUE

III. THE WERWOLF AT LARGE

IV.  GERMAN MENDAX

V.   A DIALOGUE ON PEACE BETWEEN A HOUSEHOLDER AND A BURGLAR

VI.  STAND FAST, YE FREE!

VII. PAX HUMANA

FOREWORD

This brief series of chapters is not a tale

  "Of moving accidents by flood and field,
  Of hair-breadth 'scapes i' the imminent deadly breach."

Some dangers I have passed through during the last three years, but nothing to speak of.

Nor is it a romance in the style of those thrilling novels of secret diplomacy which I peruse
with wonder and delight in hours of relaxation, chiefly because they move about in worlds regarding
which I have no experience and little faith.

There is nothing secret or mysterious about the American diplomatic service, so far as I have
known it. Of course there are times when, like every other honestly and properly conducted
affair, it does not seek publicity in the newspapers. That, I should suppose, must always be
a fundamental condition of frank and free conversation between governments as between gentlemen.
There is a certain kind of reserve which is essential to candor.

But American diplomacy has no picturesque meetings at midnight in the gloom of lonely forests;
no confabulations in black cellars with bands of hireling desperadoes waiting to carry out
its decrees; no disguises, no masks, no dark lanterns--nothing half so exciting and melodramatic.
On the contrary, it is amazingly plain and straightforward, with plenty of hard work, but always
open and aboveboard. That is the rule for the diplomatic service of the United States.

Its chief and constant aims are known to all men. First, to maintain American principles and
interests, and to get a fair showing for them in the world. Second, to preserve and advance
friendly relations and intercourse with the particular nation to which the diplomat is sent.
Third, to promote a just and firm and free peace throughout the world, so that democracy everywhere
may live without fear.

It was the last of these three aims that acted as the main motive in my acceptance of President
Wilson's invitation to go out as American Minister to the Netherlands and Luxembourg in the
summer of 1913. It was pleasant, of course, to return for a while to the land from which my
ancestors came so long ago. It seemed also that some useful and interesting work might be done
to forward the common interests and ideals of the United States and the Netherlands--that brave,
liberty-loving nation from which our country learned and received so much in its beginnings--and
in particular that there might be opportunity for co-operation in the Far East, where the Dutch
East Indies and the Philippines are next-door neighbors. But the chief thing that drew me to
Holland was the desire to promote the great work of peace which had been begun by the International
Peace Conferences at The Hague. This indeed was what the President especially charged me to do.

Two conferences had already been held and had accomplished much. But their work was incomplete.
It lacked firm attachments and sanctions. It was left to a certain extent "hanging in the air."
It needed just those things which the American delegates to the Conference of 1907 had advocated--the
establishment of a Permanent Court of Arbitral Justice; an International Prize Court; an agreement
for the protection of private property at sea in time of war; the further study and discussion
of the question of the reduction of armaments by the nations; and so on. Most of these were
the things of which Germany had hitherto prevented the attainment. A third International Peace
Conference was necessary to secure and carry on the work of the first two. The President told
me to do all that I properly could to forward the assembling of that conference in the Palace
of Peace at the earliest possible date.

So I went to Holland as an envoy of the world-peace founded on justice which is America's great
desire. For that cause I worked and strove. Of that cause I am still a devoted follower and
servant. I am working for it now, but with a difference. It is evident that we cannot maintain
that cause, as the world stands to-day, without fighting for it. And after it is won, it will
need protection. It must be Peace with Righteousness and Power.

The following chapters narrate some of the experiences--things seen and heard and studied during
my years of service abroad--which have forced me to this conclusion. To the articles which
were published in Scribner's Magazine for September, October, and November, 1917, I have added
two short chapters on the cause of the war and the kind of peace America is fighting for.

The third peace conference is more needed, more desirable, than ever. But we shall never get
it until the military forces of Germany are broken, and the predatory Potsdam gang which rules
them is brought low.

Chapter I

FAIR-WEATHER AND STORM SIGNS

I

It takes a New England farmer to note and interpret the signs of coming storm on a beautiful
and sunny day. Perhaps his power is due in part to natural sharpness, and in part to the innate
pessimism of the Yankee mind, which considers the fact that the hay is cut but not yet in the
barn a sufficient reason for believing that "it'll prob'ly rain t'morrow."

I must confess that I had not enough of either of these qualities to be observant and fearful
of the presages of the oncoming tempest which lurked in the beautiful autumn and winter of
1913-14 in Europe. Looking back at them now, I can see that the signs were ominous. But anybody
can be wise after the event, and the role of a reminiscent prophet is too easy to be worth playing.

Certainly all was bright and tranquil when we rolled through the pleasant land of France and
the rich cities of Belgium, and came by ship-thronged Rotterdam to The Hague in the first week
of October, 1913. Holland was at her autumnal best. Wide pastures wonderfully green were full
of drowsy, contented cattle. The level brown fields and gardens were smoothly ploughed and
harrowed for next year's harvest, and the vast tulip-beds were ready to receive the little
gray bulbs which would overflow April with a flood-tide of flowers. On the broad canals innumerable
barges and sloops and motor-boats were leisurely passing, and on the little side-canals and
ditches which drained the fields the duckweed spread its pale-emerald carpet undisturbed. In
the woods--the tall woods of Holland--the elms and the lindens were putting on frosted gold,
and the massy beeches glowed with ruddy bronze in the sunlight. The quaint towns and villages
looked at themselves in the waters at their feet and were content. Slowly the long arms of
the windmills turned in the suave and shimmering air. Everybody, in city and country, seemed
to be busy without haste. And overhead, the luminous cloud mountains--the poor man's Alps--marched
placidly with the wind from horizon to horizon.

The Hague--that "largest village in Europe," that city of three hundred thousand inhabitants
set in the midst of a park, that seat of government which does not dare to call itself the
capital because Amsterdam is jealous--was in especially good form and humor, looking forward
to a winter of unhurried gayety and feasting such as the Hollanders love. The new Palace of
Peace, given by Mr. Andrew Carnegie for the use of the Permanent Court of Arbitration and its
auxiliary bodies, had been opened with much ceremony in September. Situated before the entrance
of that long, tree-embowered avenue which is called the Old Scheveningen Road, the edifice
has an imposing exterior although a mixture of architects in the process of building has given
it something the look of a glorified railway station. But the interior is altogether dignified
and splendid, more palatial, in fact, than any of the royal residences. It is lined with costly
marbles, rare Eastern woods, wonderful Japanese tapestries, and adorned with gifts from all
the nations, except the United States, which had promised to give a marble statue representing
"Peace through Justice," to be placed on the central landing of the great Stairway of Honor,
the most conspicuous position in the whole building. The promise had been standing for some
years, but not the statue. One of my first minor tasks at The Hague was to see to it that active
steps were taken at Washington to fulfil this promise, and to fill this empty place which waits
for the American sculpture.

Meantime the rich collection of books on international law was being arranged and classified
in the library under the learned direction of M. Alberic Rolin. The late roses were blooming
abundantly in the broad gardens of the palace. Thousands of visitors were coming every day
to see this new wonder of the world, the royal house of "Vrede door Recht."

Queen Wilhelmina was still at her country palace, Het Loo, in Gelderland. It was about the
middle of October that I was invited there to lunch and to have my first audience with Her
Majesty, and to present my letter of credence as American Minister.

The journey of three or four hours was made in company with the Dutch Minister of Foreign Affairs,
Jonkheer Loudon, who represented the Netherlands at Washington for several years and is an
intelligent and warm friend of the United States, and the Japanese Minister, Mr. Aimaro Sato,
a very agreeable gentleman (and, by the way, an ardent angler), who now represents Japan at
Washington. He talked a little, and with great good sense and feeling, of the desirability
of a better understanding and closer relations between the United States and Japan. I liked
what he said and the way he said it. But most of our conversation on that pleasant journey,
it must be confessed, was personal and anecdotic--fish-stories not excluded.

The ceremony of presenting the letter of credence, which I had rather dreaded, was in fact
quite simple and easy. I handed to Her Majesty the commendatory epistle of the President (beginning,
as usual, "Great and good friend") and made a short speech in English, according to the regulations.
The Queen, accepting the letter, made a brief friendly reply in French, which is the language
of the court, and passed at once into an informal conversation in English. She speaks both
languages fluently and well. Her first inquiry, according to royal custom, was about family
matters; the number of the children; the health of the household; the finding of a comfortable
house to live in at The Hague, and so on. There is something very homely and human in the good
manners of a real court. Then the Queen asked about the Dutch immigrants in America, especially
in recent times--were they good citizens? I answered that we counted them among the best, especially
strong in agriculture and in furniture-making, where I had seen many of them in the famous
shops of Grand Rapids, Michigan. The Queen smiled, and said that the Netherlands, being a small
country, did not want to lose too many of her good people.

The impression left upon me by this first interview, and deepened by all that followed, was
that Queen Wilhelmina is a woman admirably fit for her task. Her natural shyness of temperament
is sometimes misinterpreted as a haughty reserve. But that is not correct. She is, in fact,
most sincere and straightforward, devoted to her duty and very intelligent in doing it, one
of the ablest and sanest crowned heads in Europe, an altogether good ruler for the very democratic
country of the Netherlands.

We settled down in the home which I had rented at The Hague. It was a big, dignified house
on the principal street, the Lange Voorhout, which is almost like a park, with four rows of
trees down the middle. Our house had once been the palace of the Duchess of Saxe-Weimar, a
princess of the Orange-Nassau family. But it was not at all showy, only comfortable and large.
This was fortunate for our country when the rush of fugitive American tourists came at the
beginning of the war, for every room on the first floor, and the biggest room on the second
floor, were crowded with the work that we had to do for them.

But during the first winter everything went smoothly; there was no hurry and no crowding. The
Queen came back to her town palace. The rounds of ceremonial visits were ground out. The Hague
people and our diplomatic colleagues were most cordial and friendly. There were dinners and
dances and court receptions and fancy-dress balls--all of a discreet and moderate joyousness
which New York and Newport, perhaps even Chicago and Hot Springs, would have called tame and
rustic. The weather, for the first time in several years, was clear, cold, and full of sunshine.
The canals were frozen. Everybody, from grandparents to grandchildren, including the Crown
Princess Juliana, went on skates, which greatly added to the gayety of the nation.

At the same time there was plenty of work to do. The affairs of the legation had to be straightened
out; the sending of despatches and the carrying out of instructions speeded up; the arrangements
for a proposed international congress on education in the autumn of 1914, forwarded; the Bryan
treaty for a year of investigation before the beginning of hostilities--the so-called "Stop-Look-Listen"
treaty--modified and helped through; and the thousand and one minor, unforeseen jobs that fall
on a diplomatic chief carefully attended to.

II

Through all this time the barometer stood at "Set Fair." The new Dutch Ministry, which Mr.
Cort van der Linden, a wise and eloquent philosophic liberal, had formed on the mandate of
the Queen, seemed to have the confidence of the Parliament. Although it had no pledged majority
of any party or bloc behind it, the announcement of its simple programme of "carrying out the
wishes of the majority of the voters as expressed in the last election," met with approval
on every side. The "Anti-Revolutionary" lion lay down with the "Christian-Historical" lamb;
the "Liberal" bear and the "Clerical" cow fed together; and the sucking "Social-Democrat" laid
his hand on the "Reactionary" adder's den. It was idyllic. Real progress looked nearly possible.

The international sky was clear except for the one big cloud, which had been there so long
that the world had grown used to it. The Great Powers kept up the mad race of armaments, purchasing
mutual terror at the price of billions of dollars every year.

Now the pace was quickened, but the race remained the same, with Germany still in the lead.
Her new army bill of 1912 provided for a peace strength of 870,000 men, and a war strength
of 5,400,000 men. Russia followed with a bill raising the term of military service from three
to three and a half years; France with a bill raising the term of service from two to three
years (but this was not until in June, 1913). Great Britain, with voluntary service, still
had a comparatively small army: in size "contemptible," as Kaiser Wilhelm called it later,
but in morale and spirit unsurpassed. Evidently the military force of Germany, which lay like
a glittering sword in her ruler's hand, was larger, better organized and equipped, than any
other in the world.

But might it not still be used as a make-weight in the scales of negotiation rather than as
a weapon of actual offense? Might not the Kaiser still be pleased with his dramatic role of
"the war-lord who kept the peace"? Might he not do again as he did successfully in 1909, when
Austria violated the provisions of the Congress of Berlin (1878) by annexing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and Germany protected the theft; and with partial success at Algeciras in 1906, and after the
Agadir incident in 1911, when Germany gained something she wanted though less than she claimed?
Might he not still be content with showing and shaking the sword, without fleshing it in the
body of Europe? It seemed wiser, because safer for Germany, that the Kaiser should follow that
line. The methodical madness of a forced war looked incredible.

Thus all of us who were interested in the continuance and solidification of the work of the
peace conferences at The Hague reasoned ourselves into a peaceful hope. We knew that no other
power except Germany was really prepared for war. We knew that the effort to draw Great Britain
into an offensive and defensive alliance with Germany had failed, although London was willing
to promise help to Berlin if attacked. We remembered Bismarck's warning that a war against
Russia and Great Britain at the same time would be fatal, and we trusted that it had not been
forgotten in Berlin. We knew that Germany, under her policy of industrial development and pacific
penetration, was prospering more than ever, and we thought she might enjoy that enough to continue
it. We hoped that a third peace conference would be assembled before a general conflict of
arms could be launched, and that some things might be done there which would make wilful and
aggressive war vastly more dangerous and difficult, if not impossible. So we were at ease in
Zion and worked in the way which seemed most promising for the peace of the world.

But that way was not included in the German plan. It was remote from the Berlin-Baghdad-Bahn.
It did not lead toward a dominant imperial state of Mittel-Europa, with tentacles reaching
out to ports on every sea and strait. The plan for another Hague conference failed to interest
the ruling clique at Berlin and Potsdam because they had made "other arrangements."

Very gradually slight indications of this fact began to appear, though they were not clearly
understood at the time. It was like watching a stage-curtain which rises very slowly a little
way and then stops. Through the crack one could see feet moving about and hear rumbling noises.
Evidently a drama was in preparation. But what it was to be could hardly be guessed. Then,
after a long wait, the curtain rose swiftly. The tragedy was revealed. Flames burst forth from
the stage and wrapped the whole house in fire. Some of the spectators were the first victims.
The conflagration still rages. It will not be put out until the flame-lust is smothered in
the hearts of those who kindled and spread the great fire in Europe.

III

I must get back from this expression of my present feelings and views to the plain story of
the experiences which gradually made me aware of the actual condition of affairs in Europe
and the great obstacle to a durable peace in the world.

The first thing that disquieted me a little was the strange difficulty encountered in making
the preliminary arrangements for the third peace conference. The final resolution of the second
conference in 1907, unanimously recommended, first, that the next conference, should be held
within a period of eight years, and second, that a preparatory committee should be appointed
two years beforehand, to consider the subjects which were ripe for discussion, and to draw
up a programme which could be examined in advance by the countries interested. That, of course,
was necessary. No sensible government will go into a conference blindfold, without knowing
what is to be talked about.

But in 1914, when the matter came into my hands, the lapse of time and the negligence of the
nations (the United States included) had made it too late to fulfil both of these recommendations.
If one was carried out the other must be modified or disregarded. The then Secretary of State,
Mr. Bryan, instructed me to endeavor to have the conference called in 1915, that is, within
the period of eight years. After careful investigation and earnest effort, I reported that
it could not be done at that date. The first thing was to get the preparatory committee, which
would require at least two years for its formation and work. Toward this point, then, with
the approval of the President, I steered and rowed hard, receiving the warmest sympathy and
most effective co-operation from Jonkheer Loudon,  the Netherlands Minister of Foreign Affairs.
Indeed the entire Dutch Government, with the Queen at the head, were favorable. Holland naturally
likes to have the peace conferences at The Hague. They add to the dignity of the country. The
honor is well-deserved, for Holland may fairly be called the fountainhead of modern international
law, and has produced many of its best expounders, from Grotius and Bynkershoek to Asser. Moreover,
as a side consideration, these meetings bring a multitude of visitors to the country, some
famous and many profitable, and this is not bad for business. So the movement is generally popular.

My own particular suggestion toward getting the required "preparatory committee" seemed to
its author to have the double advantage of practical speed and representative quality. It was
to make use, at least for the first steps, of a body already in existence and in which all
the nations were represented. But there is no need of describing it, because it did not go
through. I was not so much stuck upon it that any other fair and speedy plan would not have
received my hearty backing.

But the trouble was that, push as hard as we would, there was no plan that would move beyond
a certain point. There it stood still. Washington and The Hague were earnest and enthusiastic.
St. Petersburg was warmly interested, but showed a strong preference for its own plan, and
a sense of its right to a leading place as the proposer of the first conference. London and
Paris seemed favorable to the general idea, and took an expectant attitude toward any proposal
of organization that would be on the level and fair for everybody. Berlin was singularly reserved
and vague. It said little or nothing. It did not seem to care about the matter.

I talked informally with my German friends at The Hague. They were polite and attentive. They
may have had a real interest in the subject, but it was not shown so that you could notice
it. They expressed opinions on the value of peace conferences in general which I am not at
liberty to repeat. The idea of a third conference at The Hague may have seemed beautiful to
them, but it looked as if they felt that it was lacking in actuality. Possibly I did not understand
them. That was just the trouble--I could not. It was all puzzling, baffling, mysterious.

It seemed as if all our efforts to forward the calling of the next conference in the interest
of permanent peace brought up dead against an invisible barrier, an impassable wall like the
secret line drawn in the air by magic, thinner than a cobweb, more impenetrable than steel.
What was it? Indifference? General scepticism? Preoccupation with other designs which made
the discussion of peace plans premature and futile? I did not know. But certainly there was
something in the way, and the undiscovered nature of that something was food for thought.

The next jolt that was given to my comfortable hope that the fair weather in Europe was likely
to last for some time was a very slight incident that happened in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,
to which small sovereign state I was also accredited as American Minister.

The existence and status of Luxembourg in Europe before the war are not universally understood
in America, and it may be useful to say a few words about it. The grand duchy is a tiny independent
country, about 1,000 square miles of lovely hills and dales and table-lands, clothed with noble
woods, watered by clear streams, and inhabited by about 250,000 people of undoubted German-Keltic
stock and of equally undoubted French sympathies. The land lies in the form of a northward-pointing
triangle between Germany, Belgium, and France. The sovereign is the Grand Duchess Marie Adelheid
(of Nassau), a beautiful, sincere, high-spirited girl who succeeded to the crown on her father's
death. The political leader for twenty-five years was the Minister-President Paul Eyschen,
an astute statesman and a devoted patriot, who nursed his little country in his arms like a
baby and brought it to a high degree of prosperity and contentment.

Like Belgium, Luxembourg was a neutralized country--the former by the Treaty of 1831; the latter
by the Treaty of 1867; both treaties were signed and guaranteed by the Great Powers. But there
was a distinct difference between the two neutralities. That of Belgium was an armed neutrality;
her forts and her military forces were left to her. That of Luxembourg was a disarmed neutrality;
her only fortress was dismantled and razed to the ground, and her army was reduced and limited
to one company of gendarmes and one company of infantry. Thus Belgium had the right, the duty,
and the power to resist if her territory were violated by the armed forces of a belligerent.
But Luxembourg was made powerless to resist; she could only protest.

Remember this when you consider the fates which fell on the two countries. Remember how the
proud and independent little duchy must have felt beforehand, standing without a weapon amid
the mighty armed powers of Europe.

It was in February or early in March, 1914, that the Grand Duchess sent out an invitation to
the Diplomatic Corps to attend a court function. We all went gladly because of the pleasantness
of the land and the good hospitality of the palace. There were separate audiences with Her
Royal Highness in the morning, a big luncheon given by the Cabinet and the city authorities
at noon, a state dinner in the old Spanish palace at night, and after that a gala concert.
It was then that the incident occurred. I had heard in the town that thirty military officers
from the German garrison at Trier, a few miles away on the border, were coming, invited or
self-invited, to the concert, and the Luxembourgers did not like the idea at all. Well, the
Germans came in a body, some of them courteous and affable, the others stiff, wooden, high-chinned,
and staring--distinctly a foreign group. They were tactless enough to propose staying over
the next day. A big crowd of excited Luxembourgers filled the streets in the morning and gave
every sign of extreme dissatisfaction. "What were these Prussian soldiers doing there? Had
they come to spy out the land and the city in preparation for an invasion? Was there a stray
prince or duke among them who wanted to marry the Grand Duchess? The music was over. These
Kriegs-Herren had better go home at once--at once, did they understand?" Yes, they understood,
and they went by the next train, which took them to Trier in an hour.

It was a very trivial affair. But it seemed to throw some light on the mentality of the German
army. It also made me reflect upon the state of mind of this little unarmed country living
next door to the big military machine and directly on the open way to France. Yet we all laughed
and joked about the incident on the way back to Holland in the train. Only the French, German,
Italian, and Belgian Ministers were not with us, for these countries have separate missions
in Luxembourg.

At The Hague everything pursued its tranquil course as usual. Golf set in. The tulips bloomed
in a sea of splendor. I strove at the footless task of promoting the third peace conference.
It was not until the season of Pentecost, 1914, that I went to Luxembourg again, intending
to gather material for a report on the flourishing steel industry there, which had developed
some new processes, and to get a little trout-fishing on the side. During that pleasant journey
two things happened which opened my eyes.

