At New Milford, Connecticut, they show you Falls Mountain, with the cairn erected by his tribe
in 1735 to chief Waramaug, who wished to be buried there, so that, when he was cold and lonely
in the other life, he could return to his body and muse on the lovely landscape that he so
enjoyed. The will-o'-the-wisp flickered on the mountain's edge at night, and flecks of dew-vapor
that floated from the wood by day were sometimes thought to be the spirit of the chief. He
had a daughter, Lillinonah, whose story is related to Lover's Leap, on the riverward side of
the mountain. She had led to the camp a white man, who had been wandering beside the Housatonic,
ill and weak, vainly seeking a way out of the wilderness, and, in spite of the dark looks that
were cast at him and her, she succeeded in making him, for that summer, a member of the tribe.
As the man grew strong with her care he grew happy and he fell in love. In the autumn he said
to her, "I wish to see my people, and when I have done so I will come back to you and we shall
be man and wife." They parted regretfully and the winter passed for the girl on leaden feet.
With spring came hope. The trails were open, and daily she watched for her white lover. The
summer came and went, and the autumn was there again. She had grown pale and sad, and old Waramaug
said to young Eagle Feather, who had looked softly on her for many years, "The girl sickens
in loneliness. You shall wed her." This is repeated to her, and that evening she slips away
to the river, enters a canoe, casts away the paddle, and drifts down the stream. Slowly, at
first, but faster and faster, as the rapids begin to draw it, skims the boat, but above the
hoarse brawling of the waters she hears a song in a voice that she knows--the merry troll of
a light heart. The branches part at Lover's Leap and her lover looks down upon her. The joyous
glance of recognition changes to a look of horror, for the boat is caught. The girl rises and
holds her arms toward him in agonized appeal. Life, at any cost! He, with a cry, leaps into
the flood as the canoe is passing. It lurches against a rock and Lillinonah is thrown out.
He reaches her. The falls bellow in their ears. They take a last embrace, and two lives go
out in the growing darkness.

GOD ON THE MOUNTAINS

From the oldest time men have associated the mountains with visitations of God. Their height,
their vastness, their majesty made them seem worthy to be stairs by which the Deity might descend
to earth, and they stand in religious and poetic literature to this day as symbols of the largest
mental conceptions. Scriptural history is intimately associated with them, and the giving of
the law on Sinai, amid thunder and darkness, is one of the most tremendous pictures that imagination
can paint. Ararat, Hermon, Horeb, Pisgah, Calvary, Adam's Peak, Parnassus, Olympus! How full
of suggestion are these names! And poetic figures in sacred writings are full of allusion to
the beauty, nobility, and endurance of the hills.

It is little known that many of our own mountains are associated with aboriginal legends of
the Great Spirit. According to the Indians of California, Mount Shasta was the first part of
the earth to be made. The Great Spirit broke a hole through the floor of heaven with a rock,
and on the spot where this rock had stopped he flung down more rocks, with earth and snow and
ice, until the mass had gained such a height that he could step from the sky to its summit.
Running his hands over its sides he caused forests to spring up. The leaves that he plucked
he breathed upon, tossed into the air, and, lo! they were birds. Out of his own staff he made
beasts and fishes, to live on the hills and in the streams, that began to appear as the work
of worldbuilding went on. The earth became so joyous and so fair that he resolved at last to
live on it, and he hollowed Shasta into a wigwam, where he dwelt for centuries, the smoke of
his lodge-fire (Shasta is a volcano) being often seen pouring from the cone before the white
man came.

According to the Oregon Indians the first man was created at the base of the Cascade Range,
near Wood River, by Kmukamtchiksh, "the old man of the ancients," who had already made the
world. The Klamaths believe Kmukamtchiksh a treacherous spirit, "a typical beast god," yet
that he punishes the wicked by turning them into rocks on the mountain-sides or by putting
them into volcanic fires.

Sinsinawa Mound, Wisconsin, was the home of strange beings who occupied caverns that few dared
to enter. Enchanted rivers flowed through these caves to heaven. The Catskills and Adirondacks
were abodes of powerful beings, and the Highlands of the Hudson were a wall within which Manitou
confined a host of rebellious spirits. When the river burst through this bulwark and poured
into the sea, fifty miles below, these spirits took flight, and many succeeded in escaping.
But others still haunt the ravines and bristling woods, and when Manitou careers through the
Hudson canon on his car of cloud, crying with thunder voice, and hurling his lightnings to
right and left as he passes, the demons scream and howl in rage and fear lest they be recaptured
and shut up forever beneath the earth.

The White Mountains were held in awe by Indians, to whom they were homes of great and blessed
spirits. Mount Washington was their Olympus and Ararat in one, for there dwelt God, and there,
when the earth was covered with a flood, lived the chief and his wife, whom God had saved,
sending forth a hare, after the waters had subsided, to learn if it were safe to descend. From
them the whole country was peopled with red men. Yet woe betide the intruder on this high and
holy ground, for an angered deity condemned him to wander for ages over the desolate peaks
and through the shadowy chasms rifted down their sides. The despairing cries of these condemned
ones, in winter storms, even frightened the early white settlers in this region, and in 1784
the women of Conway petitioned three clergymen "to lay the spirits." The Northwestern Indians
tell of a flood in which all perished save one man, who fled to Mount Tacoma. To prevent him
from being swept away a spirit turned him into stone. When the flood had fallen the deity took
one of his ribs and made a woman of it. Then he touched the stone man back to life.

There were descendants of Manitou on the mountains, too, of North Carolina, but the Cherokees
believe that those heights are bare because the devil strode over them on his way to the Devil's
Court House (Transylvania County, North Carolina), where he sat in judgment and claimed his
own. Monsters were found in the White Mountains. Devil's Den, on the face of Mount Willard,
was the lair of one of them--a strange, winged creature that strewed the floor of its cave
with brute and human skeletons, after preying on their flesh.

The ideas of supernatural occurrences in these New Hampshire hills obtained until a recent
date, and Sunday Mountain is a monument to the dire effects of Sabbath-breaking that was pointed
out to several generations of New Hampshire youth for their moral betterment. The story goes
that a man of the adjacent town of Oxford took a walk one Sunday, when he should have taken
himself to church; and, straying into the woods here, he was delivered into the claws and maws
of an assemblage of bears that made an immediate and exemplary conclusion of him.

The grand portrait in rock in Profile Notch was regarded with reverence by the few red men
who ventured into that lonely defile. When white men saw it they said it resembled Washington,
and a Yankee orator is quoted as saying, "Men put out signs representing their different trades.
Jewellers hang out a monster watch, shoemakers a huge boot, and, up in Franconia, God Almighty
has hung out a sign that in New England He makes men."

To Echo Lake, close by, the deity was wont to repair that he might contemplate the beauties
of nature, and the clear, repeated echoes were his voice, speaking in gentleness or anger.
Moosilauke--meaning a bald place, and wrongly called Moose Hillock--was declared by Waternomee,
chief of the Pemigewassets, to be the home of the Great Spirit, and the first time that red
men tried to gain the summit they returned in fear, crying that Gitche Manitou was riding home
in anger on a storm--which presently, indeed, burst over the whole country. Few Indians dared
to climb the mountain after that, and the first fruits of the harvest and first victims of
the chase were offered in propitiation to the deity. At Seven Cascades, on its eastern slope,
one of Rogers's Rangers, retreating after the Canadian foray, fell to the ground, too tired
for further motion, when a distant music of harps mingled with the cascade's plash, and directly
the waters were peopled with forms glowing with silver-white, like the moonstone, that rose
and circled, hand in hand, singing gayly as they did so. The air then seemed to be flooded
with rosy light and thousands of sylvan genii ascended altars of rock, by steps of rainbow,
to offer incense and greet the sun with song. A dark cloud passed, daylight faded, and a vision
arose of the massacre at St. Francis, a retreat through untried wilderness, a feast on human
heads, torture, and death; then his senses left the worn and starving man. But a trapper who
had seen his trail soon reached him and led him to a friendly settlement, where he was told
that only to those who were about to take their leave of earth was it given to know those spirits
of fountain and forest that offered their voices, on behalf of nature, in praise of the Great
Spirit. To those of grosser sense, on whom the weight of worldliness still rested, this halcyon
was never revealed.

It was to Mount Washington that the Great Spirit summoned Passaconaway, when his work was done,
and there was his apotheosis.

The Indians account in this manner for the birth of the White Mountains: A red hunter who had
wandered for days through the forest without finding game dropped exhausted on the snow, one
night, and awaited death. But he fell asleep and dreamed. In his vision he saw a beautiful
mountain country where birds and beasts and fruits were plenty, and, awaking from his sleep,
he found that day had come. Looking about the frozen wilderness in despair, he cried, "Great
Master of Life, where is this country that I have seen?" And even as he spoke the Master appeared
and gave to him a spear and a coal. The hunter dropped the coal on the ground, when a fire
spread from it, the rocks burning with dense smoke, out of which came the Master's voice, in
thunder tones, bidding the mountains rise. The earth heaved and through the reek the terrified
man saw hills and crags lifting--lifting--until their tops reached above the clouds, and from
the far summits sounded the promise, "Here shall the Great Spirit live and watch over his children."
Water now burst from the rocks and came laughing down the hollows in a thousand brooks and
rills, the valleys unfolded in leaf and bloom, birds sang in the branches, butterflies-like
winged flowers flitted to and fro, the faint and cheerful noise of insect life came from the
herbage, the smoke rolled away, a genial sun blazed out, and, as the hunter looked in rapture
on the mighty peaks of the Agiochooks, God stood upon their crest.