XLV.  The general odium in which he was held received an increase by the great scarcity of
corn, and an occurrence connected with it.  For, as it happened just at that time, there arrived
from Alexandria a ship, which was said to be freighted (374) with dust for the wrestlers belonging
to the emperor [621].  This so much inflamed the public rage, that he was treated with the
utmost abuse and scurrility.  Upon the top of one of his statues was placed the figure of a
chariot with a Greek inscription, that "Now indeed he had a race to run; let him be gone."
A little bag was tied about another, with a ticket containing these words; "What could I do?"--"Truly
thou hast merited the sack." [622]  Some person likewise wrote on the pillars in the forum,
"that he had even woke the cocks [623] with his singing."  And many, in the night-time, pretending
to find fault with their servants, frequently called for a Vindex. [624]

XLVI.  He was also terrified with manifest warnings, both old and new, arising from dreams,
auspices, and omens.  He had never been used to dream before the murder of his mother.  After
that event, he fancied in his sleep that he was steering a ship, and that the rudder was forced
from him: that he was dragged by his wife Octavia into a prodigiously dark place; and was at
one time covered over with a vast swarm of winged ants, and at another, surrounded by the national
images which were set up near Pompey's theatre, and hindered from advancing farther; that a
Spanish jennet he was fond of, had his hinder parts so changed, as to resemble those of an
ape; and having his head only left unaltered, neighed very harmoniously.  The doors of the
mausoleum of Augustus flying open of themselves, there issued from it a voice, calling on him
by name. The Lares being adorned with fresh garlands on the calends (the first) of January,
fell down during the preparations for sacrificing to them. While he was taking (375) the omens,
Sporus presented him with a ring, the stone of which had carved upon it the Rape of Proserpine.
When a great multitude of the several orders was assembled, to attend at the solemnity of making
vows to the gods, it was a long time before the keys of the Capitol could be found.  And when,
in a speech of his to the senate against Vindex, these words were read, "that the miscreants
should be punished and soon make the end they merited," they all cried out, "You will do it,
Augustus."  It was likewise remarked, that the last tragic piece which he sung, was Oedipus
in Exile, and that he fell as he was repeating this verse:

    Thanein m' anoge syngamos, maetaer, pataer.
    Wife, mother, father, force me to my end.

XLVII.  Meanwhile, on the arrival of the news, that the rest of the armies had declared against
him, he tore to pieces the letters which were delivered to him at dinner, overthrew the table,
and dashed with violence against the ground two favourite cups, which he called Homer's, because
some of that poet's verses were cut upon them.  Then taking from Locusta a dose of poison,
which he put up in a golden box, he went into the Servilian gardens, and thence dispatching
a trusty freedman to Ostia, with orders to make ready a fleet, he endeavoured to prevail with
some tribunes and centurions of the pretorian guards to attend him in his flight; but part
of them showing no great inclination to comply, others absolutely refusing, and one of them
crying out aloud,

    Usque adeone mori miserum est?
    Say, is it then so sad a thing to die? [625]

