  That she should be startled at me instead of at the other
man, was too many for me; I couldn't make head or tail of it.  And that she should seem to
consider me a spectacle, and totally overlook her own merits in that respect, was another puzzling
thing, and a display of magnanimity, too, that was surprising in one so young. There was food
for thought here.  I moved along as one in a dream.

As we approached the town, signs of life began to appear.  At intervals we passed a wretched
cabin, with a thatched roof, and about it small fields and garden patches in an indifferent
state of cultivation.  There were people, too; brawny men, with long, coarse, uncombed hair
that hung down over their faces and made them look like animals.  They and the women, as a
rule, wore a coarse tow-linen robe that came well below the knee, and a rude sort of sandal,
and many wore an iron collar.  The small boys and girls were always naked; but nobody seemed
to know it.  All of these people stared at me, talked about me, ran into the huts and fetched
out their families to gape at me; but nobody ever noticed that other fellow, except to make
him humble salutation and get no response for their pains.

In the town were some substantial windowless houses of stone scattered among a wilderness of
thatched cabins; the streets were mere crooked alleys, and unpaved; troops of dogs and nude
children played in the sun and made life and noise; hogs roamed and rooted contentedly about,
and one of them lay in a reeking wallow in the middle of the main thoroughfare and suckled
her family. Presently there was a distant blare of military music; it came nearer, still nearer,
and soon a noble cavalcade wound into view, glorious with plumed helmets and flashing mail
and flaunting banners and rich doublets and horse-cloths and gilded spearheads; and through
the muck and swine, and naked brats, and joyous dogs, and shabby huts, it took its gallant
way, and in its wake we followed. Followed through one winding alley and then another,--and
climbing, always climbing--till at last we gained the breezy height where the huge castle stood.
There was an exchange of bugle blasts; then a parley from the walls, where men-at-arms, in
hauberk and morion, marched back and forth with halberd at shoulder under flapping banners
with the rude figure of a dragon displayed upon them; and then the great gates were flung open,
the drawbridge was lowered, and the head of the cavalcade swept forward under the frowning
arches; and we, following, soon found ourselves in a great paved court, with towers and turrets
stretching up into the blue air on all the four sides; and all about us the dismount was going
on, and much greeting and ceremony, and running to and fro, and a gay display of moving and
intermingling colors, and an altogether pleasant stir and noise and confusion.

CHAPTER II

KING ARTHUR'S COURT

The moment I got a chance I slipped aside privately and touched an ancient common looking man
on the shoulder and said, in an insinuating, confidential way:

"Friend, do me a kindness.  Do you belong to the asylum, or are you just on a visit or something
like that?"

He looked me over stupidly, and said:

"Marry, fair sir, me seemeth--"

"That will do," I said; "I reckon you are a patient."

I moved away, cogitating, and at the same time keeping an eye out for any chance passenger
in his right mind that might come along and give me some light.  I judged I had found one,
presently; so I drew him aside and said in his ear:

"If I could see the head keeper a minute--only just a minute--"

"Prithee do not let me."

"Let you what?"

"Hinder me, then, if the word please thee better.  Then he went on to say he was an under-cook
and could not stop to gossip, though he would like it another time; for it would comfort his
very liver to know where I got my clothes.  As he started away he pointed and said yonder was
one who was idle enough for my purpose, and was seeking me besides, no doubt.  This was an
airy slim boy in shrimp-colored tights that made him look like a forked carrot, the rest of
his gear was blue silk and dainty laces and ruffles; and he had long yellow curls, and wore
a plumed pink satin cap tilted complacently over his ear.  By his look, he was good-natured;
by his gait, he was satisfied with himself.  He was pretty enough to frame.  He arrived, looked
me over with a smiling and impudent curiosity; said he had come for me, and informed me that
he was a page.

"Go 'long," I said; "you ain't more than a paragraph."

It was pretty severe, but I was nettled.  However, it never phazed him; he didn't appear to
know he was hurt.  He began to talk and laugh, in happy, thoughtless, boyish fashion, as we
walked along, and made himself old friends with me at once; asked me all sorts of questions
about myself and about my clothes, but never waited for an answer--always chattered straight
ahead, as if he didn't know he had asked a question and wasn't expecting any reply, until at
last he happened to mention that he was born in the beginning of the year 513.

It made the cold chills creep over me!  I stopped and said, a little faintly:

"Maybe I didn't hear you just right.  Say it again--and say it slow.  What year was it?"

"513."

"513!  You don't look it!  Come, my boy, I am a stranger and friendless; be honest and honorable
with me.  Are you in your right mind?"

He said he was.

"Are these other people in their right minds?"

He said they were.

"And this isn't an asylum?  I mean, it isn't a place where they cure crazy people?"

He said it wasn't.

"Well, then," I said, "either I am a lunatic, or something just as awful has happened.  Now
tell me, honest and true, where am I?"

"IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT."

I waited a minute, to let that idea shudder its way home, and then said:

"And according to your notions, what year is it now?"

"528--nineteenth of June."

I felt a mournful sinking at the heart, and muttered: "I shall never see my friends again--never,
never again.  They will not be born for more than thirteen hundred years yet."

I seemed to believe the boy, I didn't know why.  Something in me seemed to believe him--my
consciousness, as you may say; but my reason didn't.  My reason straightway began to clamor;
that was natural.  I didn't know how to go about satisfying it, because I knew that the testimony
of men wouldn't serve--my reason would say they were lunatics, and throw out their evidence.
But all of a sudden I stumbled on the very thing, just by luck.  I knew that the only total
eclipse of the sun in the first half of the sixth century occurred on the 21st of June, A.D.
528, O.S., and began at 3 minutes after 12 noon.  I also knew that no total eclipse of the
sun was due in what to me was the present year--i.e., 1879. So, if I could keep my anxiety
and curiosity from eating the heart out of me for forty-eight hours, I should then find out
for certain whether this boy was telling me the truth or not.

Wherefore, being a practical Connecticut man, I now shoved this whole problem clear out of
my mind till its appointed day and hour should come, in order that I might turn all my attention
to the circumstances of the present moment, and be alert and ready to make the most out of
them that could be made.  One thing at a time, is my motto--and just play that thing for all
it is worth, even if it's only two pair and a jack.  I made up my mind to two things: if it
was still the nineteenth century and I was among lunatics and couldn't get away, I would presently
boss that asylum or know the reason why; and if, on the other hand, it was really the sixth
century, all right, I didn't want any softer thing: I would boss the whole country inside of
three months; for I judged I would have the start of the best-educated man in the kingdom by
a matter of thirteen hundred years and upward.  I'm not a man to waste time after my mind's
made up and there's work on hand; so I said to the page:

"Now, Clarence, my boy--if that might happen to be your name --I'll get you to post me up a
little if you don't mind.  What is the name of that apparition that brought me here?"

"My master and thine?  That is the good knight and great lord Sir Kay the Seneschal, foster
brother to our liege the king."

"Very good; go on, tell me everything."

He made a long story of it; but the part that had immediate interest for me was this: He said
I was Sir Kay's prisoner, and that in the due course of custom I would be flung into a dungeon
and left there on scant commons until my friends ransomed me--unless I chanced to rot, first.
I saw that the last chance had the best show, but I didn't waste any bother about that; time
was too precious.  The page said, further, that dinner was about ended in the great hall by
this time, and that as soon as the sociability and the heavy drinking should begin, Sir Kay
would have me in and exhibit me before King Arthur and his illustrious knights seated at the
Table Round, and would brag about his exploit in capturing me, and would probably exaggerate
the facts a little, but it wouldn't be good form for me to correct him, and not over safe,
either; and when I was done being exhibited, then ho for the dungeon; but he, Clarence, would
find a way to come and see me every now and then, and cheer me up, and help me get word to
my friends.

Get word to my friends!  I thanked him; I couldn't do less; and about this time a lackey came
to say I was wanted; so Clarence led me in and took me off to one side and sat down by me.

Well, it was a curious kind of spectacle, and interesting. It was an immense place, and rather
naked--yes, and full of loud contrasts. It was very, very lofty; so lofty that the banners
depending from the arched beams and girders away up there floated in a sort of twilight; there
was a stone-railed gallery at each end, high up, with musicians in the one, and women, clothed
in stunning colors, in the other.  The floor was of big stone flags laid in black and white
squares, rather battered by age and use, and needing repair. As to ornament, there wasn't any,
strictly speaking; though on the walls hung some huge tapestries which were probably taxed
as works of art; battle-pieces, they were, with horses shaped like those which children cut
out of paper or create in gingerbread; with men on them in scale armor whose scales are represented
by round holes--so that the man's coat looks as if it had been done with a biscuit-punch. 
There was a fireplace big enough to camp in; and its projecting sides and hood, of carved and
pillared stonework, had the look of a cathedral door.  Along the walls stood men-at-arms, in
breastplate and morion, with halberds for their only weapon --rigid as statues; and that is
what they looked like.

In the middle of this groined and vaulted public square was an oaken table which they called
the Table Round.  It was as large as a circus ring; and around it sat a great company of men
dressed in such various and splendid colors that it hurt one's eyes to look at them.  They
wore their plumed hats, right along, except that whenever one addressed himself directly to
the king, he lifted his hat a trifle just as he was beginning his remark.

Mainly they were drinking--from entire ox horns; but a few were still munching bread or gnawing
beef bones.  There was about an average of two dogs to one man; and these sat in expectant
attitudes till a spent bone was flung to them, and then they went for it by brigades and divisions,
with a rush, and there ensued a fight which filled the prospect with a tumultuous chaos of
plunging heads and bodies and flashing tails, and the storm of howlings and barkings deafened
all speech for the time; but that was no matter, for the dog-fight was always a bigger interest
anyway; the men rose, sometimes, to observe it the better and bet on it, and the ladies and
the musicians stretched themselves out over their balusters with the same object; and all broke
into delighted ejaculations from time to time. In the end, the winning dog stretched himself
out comfortably with his bone between his paws, and proceeded to growl over it, and gnaw it,
and grease the floor with it, just as fifty others were already doing; and the rest of the
court resumed their previous industries and entertainments.

As a rule, the speech and behavior of these people were gracious and courtly; and I noticed
that they were good and serious listeners when anybody was telling anything--I mean in a dog-fightless
interval.  And plainly, too, they were a childlike and innocent lot; telling lies of the stateliest
pattern with a most gentle and winning naivety, and ready and willing to listen to anybody
else's lie, and believe it, too.  It was hard to associate them with anything cruel or dreadful;
and yet they dealt in tales of blood and suffering with a guileless relish that made me almost
forget to shudder.

I was not the only prisoner present.  There were twenty or more. Poor devils, many of them
were maimed, hacked, carved, in a frightful way; and their hair, their faces, their clothing,
were caked with black and stiffened drenchings of blood.  They were suffering sharp physical
pain, of course; and weariness, and hunger and thirst, no doubt; and at least none had given
them the comfort of a wash, or even the poor charity of a lotion for their wounds; yet you
never heard them utter a moan or a groan, or saw them show any sign of restlessness, or any
disposition to complain.  The thought was forced upon me: "The rascals--they have served other
people so in their day; it being their own turn, now, they were not expecting any better treatment
than this; so their philosophical bearing is not an outcome of mental training, intellectual
fortitude, reasoning; it is mere animal training; they are white Indians."

CHAPTER III

KNIGHTS OF THE TABLE ROUND

Mainly the Round Table talk was monologues--narrative accounts of the adventures in which these
prisoners were captured and their friends and backers killed and stripped of their steeds and
armor. As a general thing--as far as I could make out--these murderous adventures were not
forays undertaken to avenge injuries, nor to settle old disputes or sudden fallings out; no,
as a rule they were simply duels between strangers--duels between people who had never even
been introduced to each other, and between whom existed no cause of offense whatever.  Many
a time I had seen a couple of boys, strangers, meet by chance, and say simultaneously, "I can
lick you," and go at it on the spot; but I had always imagined until now that that sort of
thing belonged to children only, and was a sign and mark of childhood; but here were these
big boobies sticking to it and taking pride in it clear up into full age and beyond.  Yet there
was something very engaging about these great simple-hearted creatures, something attractive
and lovable.  There did not seem to be brains enough in the entire nursery, so to speak, to
bait a fish-hook with; but you didn't seem to mind that, after a little, because you soon saw
that brains were not needed in a society like that, and indeed would have marred it, hindered
it, spoiled its symmetry--perhaps rendered its existence impossible.

There was a fine manliness observable in almost every face; and in some a certain loftiness
and sweetness that rebuked your belittling criticisms and stilled them.  A most noble benignity
and purity reposed in the countenance of him they called Sir Galahad, and likewise in the king's
also; and there was majesty and greatness in the giant frame and high bearing of Sir Launcelot
of the Lake.

There was presently an incident which centered the general interest upon this Sir Launcelot.
At a sign from a sort of master of ceremonies, six or eight of the prisoners rose and came
forward in a body and knelt on the floor and lifted up their hands toward the ladies' gallery
and begged the grace of a word with the queen. The most conspicuously situated lady in that
massed flower-bed of feminine show and finery inclined her head by way of assent, and then
the spokesman of the prisoners delivered himself and his fellows into her hands for free pardon,
ransom, captivity, or death, as she in her good pleasure might elect; and this, as he said,
he was doing by command of Sir Kay the Seneschal, whose prisoners they were, he having vanquished
them by his single might and prowess in sturdy conflict in the field.

Surprise and astonishment flashed from face to face all over the house; the queen's gratified
smile faded out at the name of Sir Kay, and she looked disappointed; and the page whispered
in my ear with an accent and manner expressive of extravagant derision--

"Sir Kay, forsooth!  Oh, call me pet names, dearest, call me a marine!  In twice a thousand
years shall the unholy invention of man labor at odds to beget the fellow to this majestic lie!"

Every eye was fastened with severe inquiry upon Sir Kay. But he was equal to the occasion.
He got up and played his hand like a major--and took every trick.  He said he would state the
case exactly according to the facts; he would tell the simple straightforward tale, without
comment of his own; "and then," said he, "if ye find glory and honor due, ye will give it unto
him who is the mightiest man of his hands that ever bare shield or strake with sword in the
ranks of Christian battle--even him that sitteth there!" and he pointed to Sir Launcelot. 
Ah, he fetched them; it was a rattling good stroke.  Then he went on and told how Sir Launcelot,
seeking adventures, some brief time gone by, killed seven giants at one sweep of his sword,
and set a hundred and forty-two captive maidens free; and then went further, still seeking
adventures, and found him (Sir Kay) fighting a desperate fight against nine foreign knights,
and straightway took the battle solely into his own hands, and conquered the nine; and that
night Sir Launcelot rose quietly, and dressed him in Sir Kay's armor and took Sir Kay's horse
and gat him away into distant lands, and vanquished sixteen knights in one pitched battle and
thirty-four in another; and all these and the former nine he made to swear that about Whitsuntide
they would ride to Arthur's court and yield them to Queen Guenever's hands as captives of Sir
Kay the Seneschal, spoil of his knightly prowess; and now here were these half dozen, and the
rest would be along as soon as they might be healed of their desperate wounds.

Well, it was touching to see the queen blush and smile, and look embarrassed and happy, and
fling furtive glances at Sir Launcelot that would have got him shot in Arkansas, to a dead
certainty.

Everybody praised the valor and magnanimity of Sir Launcelot; and as for me, I was perfectly
amazed, that one man, all by himself, should have been able to beat down and capture such battalions
of practiced fighters.  I said as much to Clarence; but this mocking featherhead only said:

"An Sir Kay had had time to get another skin of sour wine into him, ye had seen the accompt
doubled."

I looked at the boy in sorrow; and as I looked I saw the cloud of a deep despondency settle
upon his countenance.  I followed the direction of his eye, and saw that a very old and white-bearded
man, clothed in a flowing black gown, had risen and was standing at the table upon unsteady
legs, and feebly swaying his ancient head and surveying the company with his watery and wandering
eye. The same suffering look that was in the page's face was observable in all the faces around--the
look of dumb creatures who know that they must endure and make no moan.

"Marry, we shall have it again," sighed the boy; "that same old weary tale that he hath told
a thousand times in the same words, and that he will tell till he dieth, every time he hath
gotten his barrel full and feeleth his exaggeration-mill a-working.  Would God I had died or
I saw this day!"

"Who is it?"

"Merlin, the mighty liar and magician, perdition singe him for the weariness he worketh with
his one tale!  But that men fear him for that he hath the storms and the lightnings and all
the devils that be in hell at his beck and call, they would have dug his entrails out these
many years ago to get at that tale and squelch it.  He telleth it always in the third person,
making believe he is too modest to glorify himself--maledictions light upon him, misfortune
be his dole!  Good friend, prithee call me for evensong."

The boy nestled himself upon my shoulder and pretended to go to sleep.  The old man began his
tale; and presently the lad was asleep in reality; so also were the dogs, and the court, the
lackeys, and the files of men-at-arms.  The droning voice droned on; a soft snoring arose on
all sides and supported it like a deep and subdued accompaniment of wind instruments.  Some
heads were bowed upon folded arms, some lay back with open mouths that issued unconscious music;
the flies buzzed and bit, unmolested, the rats swarmed softly out from a hundred holes, and
pattered about, and made themselves at home everywhere; and one of them sat up like a squirrel
on the king's head and held a bit of cheese in its hands and nibbled it, and dribbled the crumbs
in the king's face with naive and impudent irreverence.  It was a tranquil scene, and restful
to the weary eye and the jaded spirit.

This was the old man's tale.  With that they saw a damsel going upon the lake.

Sir Dinadan the Humorist was the first to awake, and he soon roused the rest with a practical
joke of a sufficiently poor quality. He tied some metal mugs to a dog's tail and turned him
loose, and he tore around and around the place in a frenzy of fright, with all the other dogs
bellowing after him and battering and crashing against everything that came in their way and
making altogether a chaos of confusion and a most deafening din and turmoil; at which every
man and woman of the multitude laughed till the tears flowed, and some fell out of their chairs
and wallowed on the floor in ecstasy.  It was just like so many children. Sir Dinadan was so
proud of his exploit that he could not keep from telling over and over again, to weariness,
how the immortal idea happened to occur to him; and as is the way with humorists of his breed,
he was still laughing at it after everybody else had got through.  He was so set up that he
concluded to make a speech --of course a humorous speech.  I think I never heard so many old
played-out jokes strung together in my life.  He was worse than the minstrels, worse than the
clown in the circus.  It seemed peculiarly sad to sit here, thirteen hundred years before I
was born, and listen again to poor, flat, worm-eaten jokes that had given me the dry gripes
when I was a boy thirteen hundred years afterwards.  It about convinced me that there isn't
any such thing as a new joke possible.  Everybody laughed at these antiquities --but then they
always do; I had noticed that, centuries later. However, of course the scoffer didn't laugh--I
mean the boy.  No, he scoffed; there wasn't anything he wouldn't scoff at. He said the most
of Sir Dinadan's jokes were rotten and the rest were petrified.  I said "petrified" was good;
as I believed, myself, that the only right way to classify the majestic ages of some of those
jokes was by geologic periods.  But that neat idea hit the boy in a blank place, for geology
hadn't been invented yet. However, I made a note of the remark, and calculated to educate the
commonwealth up to it if I pulled through.  It is no use to throw a good thing away merely
because the market isn't ripe yet.

Now Sir Kay arose and began to fire up on his history-mill with me for fuel.  It was time for
me to feel serious, and I did.  Sir Kay told how he had encountered me in a far land of barbarians,
who all wore the same ridiculous garb that I did--a garb that was a work of enchantment, and
intended to make the wearer secure from hurt by human hands.  However he had nullified the
force of the enchantment by prayer, and had killed my thirteen knights in a three hours' battle,
and taken me prisoner, sparing my life in order that so strange a curiosity as I was might
be exhibited to the wonder and admiration of the king and the court.  He spoke of me all the
time, in the blandest way, as "this prodigious giant," and "this horrible sky-towering monster,"
and "this tusked and taloned man-devouring ogre", and everybody took in all this bosh in the
naivest way, and never smiled or seemed to notice that there was any discrepancy between these
watered statistics and me. He said that in trying to escape from him I sprang into the top
of a tree two hundred cubits high at a single bound, but he dislodged me with a stone the size
of a cow, which "all-to brast" the most of my bones, and then swore me to appear at Arthur's
court for sentence.  He ended by condemning me to die at noon on the 21st; and was so little
concerned about it that he stopped to yawn before he named the date.

I was in a dismal state by this time; indeed, I was hardly enough in my right mind to keep
the run of a dispute that sprung up as to how I had better be killed, the possibility of the
killing being doubted by some, because of the enchantment in my clothes. And yet it was nothing
but an ordinary suit of fifteen-dollar slop-shops. Still, I was sane enough to notice this
detail, to wit: many of the terms used in the most matter-of-fact way by this great assemblage
of the first ladies and gentlemen in the land would have made a Comanche blush.  Indelicacy
is too mild a term to convey the idea.  However, I had read "Tom Jones," and "Roderick Random,"
and other books of that kind, and knew that the highest and first ladies and gentlemen in England
had remained little or no cleaner in their talk, and in the morals and conduct which such talk
implies, clear up to a hundred years ago; in fact clear into our own nineteenth century--in
which century, broadly speaking, the earliest samples of the real lady and real gentleman discoverable
in English history--or in European history, for that matter--may be said to have made their
appearance.  Suppose Sir Walter, instead of putting the conversations into the mouths of his
characters, had allowed the characters to speak for themselves?  We should have had talk from
Rebecca and Ivanhoe and the soft lady Rowena which would embarrass a tramp in our day.  However,
to the unconsciously indelicate all things are delicate.  King Arthur's people were not aware
that they were indecent and I had presence of mind enough not to mention it.

They were so troubled about my enchanted clothes that they were mightily relieved, at last,
when old Merlin swept the difficulty away for them with a common-sense hint.  He asked them
why they were so dull--why didn't it occur to them to strip me.  In half a minute I was as
naked as a pair of tongs!  And dear, dear, to think of it: I was the only embarrassed person
there.  Everybody discussed me; and did it as unconcernedly as if I had been a cabbage. Queen
Guenever was as naively interested as the rest, and said she had never seen anybody with legs
just like mine before.  It was the only compliment I got--if it was a compliment.

Finally I was carried off in one direction, and my perilous clothes in another.  I was shoved
into a dark and narrow cell in a dungeon, with some scant remnants for dinner, some moldy straw
for a bed, and no end of rats for company.

CHAPTER V

AN INSPIRATION

I was so tired that even my fears were not able to keep me awake long.

When I next came to myself, I seemed to have been asleep a very long time.  My first thought
was, "Well, what an astonishing dream I've had!  I reckon I've waked only just in time to keep
from being hanged or drowned or burned or something....  I'll nap again till the whistle blows,
and then I'll go down to the arms factory and have it out with Hercules."

But just then I heard the harsh music of rusty chains and bolts, a light flashed in my eyes,
and that butterfly, Clarence, stood before me!  I gasped with surprise; my breath almost got
away from me.

"What!" I said, "you here yet?  Go along with the rest of the dream! scatter!"

But he only laughed, in his light-hearted way, and fell to making fun of my sorry plight.

"All right," I said resignedly, "let the dream go on; I'm in no hurry."

"Prithee what dream?"

"What dream?  Why, the dream that I am in Arthur's court--a person who never existed; and that
I am talking to you, who are nothing but a work of the imagination."

"Oh, la, indeed! and is it a dream that you're to be burned to-morrow?  Ho-ho--answer me that!"

The shock that went through me was distressing.  I now began to reason that my situation was
in the last degree serious, dream or no dream; for I knew by past experience of the lifelike
intensity of dreams, that to be burned to death, even in a dream, would be very far from being
a jest, and was a thing to be avoided, by any means, fair or foul, that I could contrive. 
So I said beseechingly:

"Ah, Clarence, good boy, only friend I've got,--for you are my friend, aren't you?--don't fail
me; help me to devise some way of escaping from this place!"

"Now do but hear thyself!  Escape?  Why, man, the corridors are in guard and keep of men-at-arms."

"No doubt, no doubt.  But how many, Clarence?  Not many, I hope?"

"Full a score.  One may not hope to escape."  After a pause --hesitatingly: "and there be other
reasons--and weightier."

"Other ones? What are they?"

"Well, they say--oh, but I daren't, indeed daren't!"

"Why, poor lad, what is the matter?  Why do you blench?  Why do you tremble so?"

"Oh, in sooth, there is need!  I do want to tell you, but--"

"Come, come, be brave, be a man--speak out, there's a good lad!"

He hesitated, pulled one way by desire, the other way by fear; then he stole to the door and
peeped out, listening; and finally crept close to me and put his mouth to my ear and told me
his fearful news in a whisper, and with all the cowering apprehension of one who was venturing
upon awful ground and speaking of things whose very mention might be freighted with death.

"Merlin, in his malice, has woven a spell about this dungeon, and there bides not the man in
these kingdoms that would be desperate enough to essay to cross its lines with you!  Now God
pity me, I have told it!  Ah, be kind to me, be merciful to a poor boy who means thee well;
for an thou betray me I am lost!"

I laughed the only really refreshing laugh I had had for some time; and shouted:

"Merlin has wrought a spell!  Merlin, forsooth!  That cheap old humbug, that maundering old
ass?  Bosh, pure bosh, the silliest bosh in the world!  Why, it does seem to me that of all
the childish, idiotic, chuckle-headed, chicken-livered superstitions that ev --oh, damn Merlin!"

But Clarence had slumped to his knees before I had half finished, and he was like to go out
of his mind with fright.

"Oh, beware!  These are awful words!  Any moment these walls may crumble upon us if you say
such things.  Oh call them back before it is too late!"

Now this strange exhibition gave me a good idea and set me to thinking.  If everybody about
here was so honestly and sincerely afraid of Merlin's pretended magic as Clarence was, certainly
a superior man like me ought to be shrewd enough to contrive some way to take advantage of
such a state of things.  I went on thinking, and worked out a plan. Then I said:

"Get up.  Pull yourself together; look me in the eye.  Do you know why I laughed?"

"No--but for our blessed Lady's sake, do it no more."

"Well, I'll tell you why I laughed.  Because I'm a magician myself."

"Thou!"  The boy recoiled a step, and caught his breath, for the thing hit him rather sudden;
but the aspect which he took on was very, very respectful.  I took quick note of that; it indicated
that a humbug didn't need to have a reputation in this asylum; people stood ready to take him
at his word, without that. I resumed.

"I've known Merlin seven hundred years, and he--"

"Seven hun--"

"Don't interrupt me.  He has died and come alive again thirteen times, and traveled under a
new name every time: Smith, Jones, Robinson, Jackson, Peters, Haskins, Merlin--a new alias
every time he turns up.  I knew him in Egypt three hundred years ago; I knew him in India five
hundred years ago--he is always blethering around in my way, everywhere I go; he makes me tired.
He don't amount to shucks, as a magician; knows some of the old common tricks, but has never
got beyond the rudiments, and never will. He is well enough for the provinces--one-night stands
and that sort of thing, you know--but dear me, he oughtn't to set up for an expert--anyway
not where there's a real artist.  Now look here, Clarence, I am going to stand your friend,
right along, and in return you must be mine.  I want you to do me a favor.  I want you to get
word to the king that I am a magician myself--and the Supreme Grand High-yu-Muck-amuck and
head of the tribe, at that; and I want him to be made to understand that I am just quietly
arranging a little calamity here that will make the fur fly in these realms if Sir Kay's project
is carried out and any harm comes to me.  Will you get that to the king for me?"

The poor boy was in such a state that he could hardly answer me. It was pitiful to see a creature
so terrified, so unnerved, so demoralized.  But he promised everything; and on my side he made
me promise over and over again that I would remain his friend, and never turn against him or
cast any enchantments upon him. Then he worked his way out, staying himself with his hand along
the wall, like a sick person.

Presently this thought occurred to me: how heedless I have been! When the boy gets calm, he
will wonder why a great magician like me should have begged a boy like him to help me get out
of this place; he will put this and that together, and will see that I am a humbug.

I worried over that heedless blunder for an hour, and called myself a great many hard names,
meantime.  But finally it occurred to me all of a sudden that these animals didn't reason;
that they never put this and that together; that all their talk showed that they didn't know
a discrepancy when they saw it.  I was at rest, then.

But as soon as one is at rest, in this world, off he goes on something else to worry about.
It occurred to me that I had made another blunder: I had sent the boy off to alarm his betters
with a threat--I intending to invent a calamity at my leisure; now the people who are the readiest
and eagerest and willingest to swallow miracles are the very ones who are hungriest to see
you perform them; suppose I should be called on for a sample?  Suppose I should be asked to
name my calamity?  Yes, I had made a blunder; I ought to have invented my calamity first. 
"What shall I do? what can I say, to gain a little time?"  I was in trouble again; in the deepest
kind of trouble...

"There's a footstep!--they're coming.  If I had only just a moment to think....  Good, I've
got it.  I'm all right."

You see, it was the eclipse.  It came into my mind in the nick of time, how Columbus, or Cortez,
or one of those people, played an eclipse as a saving trump once, on some savages, and I saw
my chance.  I could play it myself, now, and it wouldn't be any plagiarism, either, because
I should get it in nearly a thousand years ahead of those parties.

Clarence came in, subdued, distressed, and said:

"I hasted the message to our liege the king, and straightway he had me to his presence.  He
was frighted even to the marrow, and was minded to give order for your instant enlargement,
and that you be clothed in fine raiment and lodged as befitted one so great; but then came
Merlin and spoiled all; for he persuaded the king that you are mad, and know not whereof you
speak; and said your threat is but foolishness and idle vaporing.  They disputed long, but
in the end, Merlin, scoffing, said, 'Wherefore hath he not named his brave calamity?  Verily
it is because he cannot.'  This thrust did in a most sudden sort close the king's mouth, and
he could offer naught to turn the argument; and so, reluctant, and full loth to do you the
discourtesy, he yet prayeth you to consider his perplexed case, as noting how the matter stands,
and name the calamity--if so be you have determined the nature of it and the time of its coming.
Oh, prithee delay not; to delay at such a time were to double and treble the perils that already
compass thee about.  Oh, be thou wise--name the calamity!"

I allowed silence to accumulate while I got my impressiveness together, and then said:

"How long have I been shut up in this hole?"

"Ye were shut up when yesterday was well spent.  It is 9 of the morning now."

"No!  Then I have slept well, sure enough.  Nine in the morning now!  And yet it is the very
complexion of midnight, to a shade. This is the 20th, then?"

"The 20th--yes."

"And I am to be burned alive to-morrow."  The boy shuddered.

"At what hour?"

"At high noon."

"Now then, I will tell you what to say."  I paused, and stood over that cowering lad a whole
minute in awful silence; then, in a voice deep, measured, charged with doom, I began, and rose
by dramatically graded stages to my colossal climax, which I delivered in as sublime and noble
a way as ever I did such a thing in my life: "Go back and tell the king that at that hour I
will smother the whole world in the dead blackness of midnight; I will blot out the sun, and
he shall never shine again; the fruits of the earth shall rot for lack of light and warmth,
and the peoples of the earth shall famish and die, to the last man!"

I had to carry the boy out myself, he sunk into such a collapse. I handed him over to the soldiers,
and went back.

CHAPTER VI

THE ECLIPSE

In the stillness and the darkness, realization soon began to supplement knowledge.  The mere
knowledge of a fact is pale; but when you come to realize your fact, it takes on color. It
is all the difference between hearing of a man being stabbed to the heart, and seeing it done.
In the stillness and the darkness, the knowledge that I was in deadly danger took to itself
deeper and deeper meaning all the time; a something which was realization crept inch by inch
through my veins and turned me cold.

