EVIL

       *       *       *       *       *

Brion entered the temple and stood as if rooted to the ground. There was a horror in this place--it
clung to everything. Muffled and hooded men stood silent and unmoving about the room, their
attention rigidly focused on a figure in the center. Brion wondered how he knew they were men--only
their eyes showed, eyes completely empty of expression yet somehow reminding him of a bird of prey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then suddenly the figure in the center moved. It was a weird, crazily menacing action--and
in an instant Brion knew he had found the enemy, the source of the evil that infected the PLANET
OF THE DAMNED.

Bantam Books by Harry Harrison

Ask your bookseller for the books you have missed.

     DEATHWORLD
     DEATHWORLD II
     PLANET OF THE DAMNED
     TWO TALES AND EIGHT TOMORROWS
     THE JUPITER LEGACY (PLAGUE FROM SPACE)

               PLANET OF
               THE DAMNED

     BY HARRY HARRISON

A NATIONAL GENERAL COMPANY

PLANET OF THE DAMNED

A Bantam Book / published January 1962 New Bantam edition published February 1971

All rights reserved. Copyright © 1962, by Harry Harrison.

This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by mimeograph or any other means, without
permission.

For information address: Bantam Books, Inc.

       *       *       *       *       *

Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada

       *       *       *       *       *

Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, Inc., a National General company. Its trade-mark,
consisting of the words "Bantam Books" and the portrayal of a bantam, is registered in the
United States Patent Office and in other countries. Marca Registrada. Bantam Books, Inc., 666
Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10019.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

                    For my Mother and Father--

                      RIA AND LEO HARRISON

I

     A man said to the universe:
     "Sir, I exist!"
     "However" replied the universe,
     "The fact has not created in me
      A sense of obligation."

                         STEPHEN CRANE

Sweat covered Brion's body, trickling into the tight loincloth that was the only garment he
wore. The light fencing foil in his hand felt as heavy as a bar of lead to his exhausted muscles,
worn out by a month of continual exercise. These things were of no importance. The cut on his
chest, still dripping blood, the ache of his overstrained eyes--even the soaring arena around
him with the thousands of spectators--were trivialities not worth thinking about. There was
only one thing in his universe: the button-tipped length of shining steel that hovered before
him, engaging his own weapon. He felt the quiver and scrape of its life, knew when it moved
and moved himself to counteract it. And when he attacked, it was always there to beat him aside.

A sudden motion. He reacted--but his blade just met air. His instant of panic was followed
by a small sharp blow high on his chest.

"Touch!" A world-shaking voice bellowed the word to a million waiting loudspeakers, and the
applause of the audience echoed back in a wave of sound.

"One minute," a voice said, and the time buzzer sounded.

Brion had carefully conditioned the reflex in himself. A minute is not a very large measure
of time and his body needed every fraction of it. The buzzer's whirr triggered his muscles
into complete relaxation. Only his heart and lungs worked on at a strong, measured rate. His
eyes closed and he was only distantly aware of his handlers catching him as he fell, carrying
him to his bench. While they massaged his limp body and cleansed the wound, all of his attention
was turned inward. He was in reverie, sliding along the borders of consciousness. The nagging
memory of the previous night loomed up then, and he turned it over and over in his mind, examining
it from all sides.

It was the very unexpectedness of the event that had been so unusual. The contestants in the
Twenties needed undisturbed rest, therefore nights in the dormitories were as quiet as death.
During the first few days, of course, the rule wasn't observed too closely. The men themselves
were too keyed up and excited to rest easily. But as soon as the scores began to mount and
eliminations cut into their ranks, there was complete silence after dark. Particularly so on
this last night, when only two of the little cubicles were occupied, the thousands of others
standing with dark, empty doors.

Angry words had dragged Brion from a deep and exhausted sleep. The words were whispered but
clear--two voices, just outside the thin metal of his door. Someone spoke his name.

"... Brion Brandd. Of course not. Whoever said you could was making a big mistake and there
is going to be trouble--"

"Don't talk like an idiot!" The other voice snapped with a harsh urgency, clearly used to command.
"I'm here because the matter is of utmost importance, and Brandd is the one I must see. Now
stand aside!"

"The Twenties--"

"I don't give a damn about your games, hearty cheers and physical exercises. This is important,
or I wouldn't be here!"

The other didn't speak--he was surely one of the officials--and Brion could sense his outraged
anger. He must have drawn his gun, because the intruder said quickly, "Put that away. You're
being a fool!"

"Out!" was the single snarled word of the response. There was silence then and, still wondering,
Brion was once more asleep.

"Ten seconds."

The voice chopped away Brion's memories and he let awareness seep back into his body. He was
unhappily conscious of his total exhaustion. The month of continuous mental and physical combat
had taken its toll. It would be hard to stay on his feet, much less summon the strength and
skill to fight and win a touch.

"How do we stand?" he asked the handler who was kneading his aching muscles.

"Four-four. All you need is a touch to win!"

"That's all he needs too," Brion grunted, opening his eyes to look at the wiry length of the
man at the other end of the long mat. No one who had reached the finals in the Twenties could
possibly be a weak opponent, but this one, Irolg, was the pick of the lot. A red-haired mountain
of a man, with an apparently inexhaustible store of energy. That was really all that counted
now. There could be little art in this last and final round of fencing. Just thrust and parry,
and victory to the stronger.

Brion closed his eyes again and knew the moment he had been hoping to avoid had arrived.

Every man who entered the Twenties had his own training tricks. Brion had a few individual
ones that had helped him so far. He was a moderately strong chess player, but he had moved
to quick victory in the chess rounds by playing incredibly unorthodox games. This was no accident,
but the result of years of work. He had a standing order with off-planet agents for archaic
chess books, the older the better. He had memorized thousands of these ancient games and openings.
This was allowed. Anything was allowed that didn't involve drugs or machines. Self-hypnosis
was an accepted tool.

It had taken Brion over two years to find a way to tap the sources of hysterical strength.
Common as the phenomenon seemed to be in the textbooks, it proved impossible to duplicate.
There appeared to be an immediate association with the death-trauma, as if the two were inextricably
linked into one. Berserkers and juramentados continue to fight and kill though carved by scores
of mortal wounds. Men with bullets in the heart or brain fight on, though already clinically
dead. Death seemed an inescapable part of this kind of strength. But there was another type
that could easily be brought about in any deep trance--hypnotic rigidity. The strength that
enables someone in a trance to hold his body stiff and unsupported except at two points, the
head and heels. This is physically impossible when conscious. Working with this as a clue,
Brion had developed a self-hypnotic technique that allowed him to tap this reservoir of unknown
strength--the source of "second wind," the survival strength that made the difference between
life and death.

It could also kill--exhaust the body beyond hope of recovery, particularly when in a weakened
condition as his was now. But that wasn't important. Others had died before during the Twenties,
and death during the last round was in some ways easier than defeat.

Breathing deeply, Brion softly spoke the auto-hypnotic phrases that triggered the process.
Fatigue fell softly from him, as did all sensations of heat, cold and pain. He could feel with
acute sensitivity, hear, and see clearly when he opened his eyes.

With each passing second the power drew at the basic reserves of life, draining it from his body.

When the buzzer sounded he pulled his foil from his second's startled grasp, and ran forward.
Irolg had barely time to grab up his own weapon and parry Brion's first thrust. The force of
his rush was so great that the guards on their weapons locked, and their bodies crashed together.
Irolg looked amazed at the sudden fury of the attack--then smiled. He thought it was a last
burst of energy, he knew how close they both were to exhaustion. This must be the end for Brion.

They disengaged and Irolg put up a solid defense. He didn't attempt to attack, just let Brion
wear himself out against the firm shield of his defense.

Brion saw something close to panic on his opponent's face when the man finally recognized his
error. Brion wasn't tiring. If anything, he was pressing the attack. A wave of despair rolled
out from Irolg--Brion sensed it and knew the fifth point was his.

Thrust--thrust--and each time the parrying sword a little slower to return. Then the powerful
twist that thrust it aside. In and under the guard. The slap of the button on flesh and the
arc of steel that reached out and ended on Irolg's chest over his heart.

Waves of sound--cheering and screaming--lapped against Brion's private world, but he was only
remotely aware of their existence. Irolg dropped his foil, and tried to shake Brion's hand,
but his legs suddenly gave way. Brion had an arm around him, holding him up, walking towards
the rushing handlers. Then Irolg was gone and he waved off his own men, walking slowly by himself.

Except that something was wrong and it was like walking through warm glue. Walking on his knees.
No, not walking, falling. At last. He was able to let go and fall.

II

Ihjel gave the doctors exactly one day before he went to the hospital. Brion wasn't dead, though
there had been some doubt about that the night before. Now, a full day later, he was on the
mend and that was all Ihjel wanted to know. He bullied and strong-armed his way to the new
Winner's room, meeting his first stiff resistance at the door.

"You're out of order, Winner Ihjel," the doctor said. "And if you keep on forcing yourself
in here, where you are not wanted, rank or no rank, I shall be obliged to break your head."

Ihjel had just begun to tell him, in some detail, just how slim his chances were of accomplishing
that, when Brion interrupted them both. He recognized the newcomer's voice from the final night
in the barracks.

"Let him in, Dr. Caulry," he said. "I want to meet a man who thinks there is something more
important than the Twenties."

While the doctor stood undecided, Ihjel moved quickly around him and closed the door in his
flushed face. He looked down at the Winner in the bed. There was a drip plugged into each one
of Brion's arms. His eyes peered from sooty hollows; the eyeballs were a network of red veins.
The silent battle he fought against death had left its mark. His square, jutting jaw now seemed
all bone, as did his long nose and high cheekbones. They were prominent landmarks rising from
the limp greyness of his skin. Only the erect bristle of his close-cropped hair was unchanged.
He had the appearance of having suffered a long and wasting illness.

"You look like sin," Ihjel said. "But congratulations on your victory."

"You don't look so very good yourself--for a Winner," Brion snapped back. His exhaustion and
sudden peevish anger at this man let the insulting words slip out. Ihjel ignored them.

But it was true; Winner Ihjel looked very little like a Winner, or even an Anvharian. He had
the height and the frame all right, but it was draped in billows of fat--rounded, soft tissue
that hung loosely from his limbs and made little limp rolls on his neck and under his eyes.
There were no fat men on Anvhar, and it was incredible that a man so gross could ever have
been a Winner. If there was muscle under the fat it couldn't be seen. Only his eyes appeared
to still hold the strength that had once bested every man on the planet to win the annual games.
Brion turned away from their burning stare, sorry now he had insulted the man without good
reason. He was too sick, though, to bother about apologizing.

Ihjel didn't care either. Brion looked at him again and felt the impression of things so important
that he himself, his insults, even the Twenties were of no more interest than dust motes in
the air. It was only a fantasy of a sick mind, Brion knew, and he tried to shake the feeling
off. The two men stared at each other, sharing a common emotion.

The door opened soundlessly behind Ihjel and he wheeled about, moving as only an athlete of
Anvhar can move. Dr. Caulry was halfway through the door, off balance. Two men in uniform came
close behind him. Ihjel's body pushed against them, his speed and the mountainous mass of his
flesh sending them back in a tangle of arms and legs. He slammed the door and locked it in
their faces.

"I have to talk to you," he said, turning back to Brion. "Privately," he added, bending over
and ripping out the communicator with a sweep of one hand.

"Get out," Brion told him. "If I were able--"

"Well, you're not, so you're just going to have to lie there and listen. I imagine we have
about five minutes before they decide to break the door down, and I don't want to waste any
more of that. Will you come with me offworld? There's a job that must be done; it's my job,
but I'm going to need help. You're the only one who can give me that help.

"Now refuse," he added as Brion started to answer.

"Of course I refuse," Brion said, feeling a little foolish and slightly angry, as if the other
man had put the words into his mouth. "Anvhar is my planet--why should I leave? My life is
here and so is my work. I also might add that I have just won the Twenties. I have a responsibility
to remain."

"Nonsense. I'm a Winner, and I left. What you really mean is you would like to enjoy a little
of the ego-inflation you have worked so hard to get. Off Anvhar no one even knows what a Winner
is--much less respects one. You will have to face a big universe out there, and I don't blame
you for being a little frightened."

Someone was hammering loudly on the door.

"I haven't the strength to get angry," Brion said hoarsely. "And I can't bring myself to admire
your ideas when they permit you to insult a man too ill to defend himself."

"I apologize," Ihjel said, with no hint of apology or sympathy in his voice. "But there are
more desperate issues involved than your hurt feelings. We don't have much time now, so I want
to impress you with an idea."

"An idea that will convince me to go offplanet with you? That's expecting a lot."

"No, this idea won't convince you--but thinking about it will. If you really consider it you
will find a lot of your illusions shattered. Like everyone else on Anvhar, you're a scientific
humanist, with your faith firmly planted in the Twenties. You accept both of these noble institutions
without an instant's thought. All of you haven't a single thought for the past, for the untold
billions who led the bad life as mankind slowly built up the good life for you to lead. Do
you ever think of all the people who suffered and died in misery and superstition while civilization
was clicking forward one more slow notch?"

"Of course I don't think about them," Brion retorted. "Why should I? I can't change the past."

"But you can change the future!" Ihjel said. "You owe something to the suffering ancestors
who got you where you are today. If Scientific Humanism means anything more than just words
to you, you must possess a sense of responsibility. Don't you want to try and pay off a bit
of this debt by helping others who are just as backward and disease-ridden today as great-grandfather
Troglodyte ever was?"

The hammering on the door was louder. This and the drug-induced buzzing in Brion's ear made
thinking difficult. "Abstractly, I of course agree with you," he said haltingly. "But you know
there is nothing I can do personally without being emotionally involved. A logical decision
is valueless for action without personal meaning."

"Then we have reached the crux of the matter," Ihjel said gently. His back was braced against
the door, absorbing the thudding blows of some heavy object on the outside. "They're knocking,
so I must be going soon. I have no time for details, but I can assure you upon my word of honor
as a Winner that there is something you can do. Only you. If you help me we might save seven
million human lives. That is a fact."

The lock burst and the door started to open. Ihjel shouldered it back into the frame for a
final instant.

"Here is the idea I want you to consider. Why is it that the people of Anvhar, in a galaxy
filled with warring, hate-filled, backward planets, should be the only ones who base their
entire existence on a complicated series of games?"

III

This time there was no way to hold the door. Ihjel didn't try. He stepped aside and two men
stumbled into the room. He walked out behind their backs without saying a word.

"What happened? What did he do?" the doctor asked, rushing in through the ruined door. He swept
a glance over the continuous recording dials at the foot of Brion's bed. Respiration, temperature,
heart, blood pressure--all were normal. The patient lay quietly and didn't answer him.

For the rest of that day, Brion had much to think about. It was difficult. The fatigue, mixed
with the tranquilizers and other drugs, had softened his contact with reality. His thoughts
kept echoing back and forth in his mind, unable to escape. What had Ihjel meant? What was that
nonsense about Anvhar? Anvhar was that way because--well, it just was. It had come about naturally.
Or had it?

The planet had a very simple history. From the very beginning there had never been anything
of real commercial interest on Anvhar. Well off the interstellar trade routes, there were no
minerals worth digging and transporting the immense distances to the nearest inhabited worlds.
Hunting the winter beasts for their pelts was a profitable but very minor enterprise, never
sufficient for mass markets. Therefore no organized attempt had ever been made to colonize
the planet. In the end it had been settled completely by chance. A number of offplanet scientific
groups had established observation and research stations, finding unlimited data to observe
and record during Anvhar's unusual yearly cycle. The long-duration observations encouraged
the scientific workers to bring their families and, slowly but steadily, small settlements
grew up. Many of the fur hunters settled there as well, adding to the small population. This
had been the beginning.

Few records existed of those early days, and the first six centuries of Anvharian history were
more speculation than fact. The Breakdown occurred about that time, and in the galaxy-wide
disruption Anvhar had to fight its own internal battle. When the Earth Empire collapsed it
was the end of more than an era. Many of the observation stations found themselves representing
institutions that no longer existed. The professional hunters no longer had markets for their
furs, since Anvhar possessed no interstellar ships of its own. There had been no real physical
hardship involved in the Breakdown as it affected Anvhar, since the planet was completely self-sufficient.
Once they had made the mental adjustment to the fact that they were now a sovereign world,
not a collection of casual visitors with various loyalties, life continued unchanged. Not easy--living
on Anvhar is never easy--but at least without difference on the surface.

The thoughts and attitudes of the people were, however, going through a great transformation.
Many attempts were made to develop some form of stable society and social relationship. Again,
little record exists of these early trials, other than the fact of their culmination in the
Twenties.

To understand the Twenties, you have to understand the unusual orbit that Anvhar tracks around
its sun, 70 Ophiuchi. There are other planets in this system, all of them more or less conforming
to the plane of the ecliptic. Anvhar is obviously a rogue, perhaps a captured planet of another
sun. For the greatest part of its 780-day year it arcs far out from its primary, in a high-angled
sweeping cometary orbit. When it returns there is a brief, hot summer of approximately eighty
days before the long winter sets in once more. This severe difference in seasonal change has
caused profound adaptations in the native life forms. During the winter most of the animals
hibernate, the vegetable life lying dormant as spores or seeds. Some of the warm-blooded herbivores
stay active in the snow-covered tropics, preyed upon by fur-insulated carnivores. Though unbelievably
cold, the winter is a season of peace in comparison to the summer.

For summer is a time of mad growth. Plants burst into life with a strength that cracks rocks,
growing fast enough for the motion to be seen. The snowfields melt into mud and within days
a jungle stretches high into the air. Everything grows, swells, proliferates. Plants climb
on top of plants, fighting for the life-energy of the sun. Everything is eat and be eaten,
grow and thrive in that short season. Because when the first snow of winter falls again, ninety
per cent of the year must pass until the next coming of warmth.

Mankind has had to adapt to the Anvharian cycle in order to stay alive. Food must be gathered
and stored, enough to last out the long winter. Generation after generation had adapted until
they look on the mad seasonal imbalance as something quite ordinary. The first thaw of the
almost nonexistent spring triggers a wide-reaching metabolic change in the humans. Layers of
subcutaneous fat vanish and half-dormant sweat glands come to life. Other changes are more
subtle than the temperature adjustment, but equally important. The sleep center of the brain
is depressed. Short naps or a night's rest every third or fourth day becomes enough. Life takes
on a hectic and hysterical quality that is perfectly suited to the environment. By the time
of the first frost, rapid-growing crops have been raised and harvested, sides of meat either
preserved or frozen in mammoth lockers. With this supreme talent of adaptability mankind has
become part of the ecology and guaranteed his own survival during the long winter.

Physical survival has been guaranteed. But what about mental survival? Primitive Earth Eskimos
can fall into a long doze of half-conscious hibernation. Civilized men might be able to do
this, but only for the few cold months of terrestrial midwinter. It would be impossible to
do during a winter that is longer than an Earth year. With all the physical needs taken care
of, boredom became the enemy of any Anvharian who was not a hunter. And even the hunters could
not stay out on solitary trek all winter. Drink was one answer, and violence another. Alcoholism
and murder were the twin terrors of the cold season, after the Breakdown.

It was the Twenties that ended all that. When they became a part of normal life the summer
was considered just an interlude between games. The Twenties were more than just a contest--they
became a way of life that satisfied all the physical, competitive and intellectual needs of
this unusual planet. They were a decathlon--rather a double decathlon--raised to its highest
power, where contests in chess and poetry composition held equal place with those in ski-jumping
and archery. Each year there were two planet-wide contests held, one for men and one for women.
This was not an attempt at sexual discrimination, but a logical facing of facts. Inherent differences
prevented fair contests--for example, it is impossible for a woman to win a large chess tournament--and
this fact was recognized. Anyone could enter for any number of years. There were no scoring
handicaps.

When the best man won he was really the best man. A complicated series of playoffs and eliminations
kept contestants and observers busy for half the winter. They were only preliminary to the
final encounter that lasted a month, and picked a single winner. That was the title he was
awarded. Winner. The man--and woman--who had bested every other contestant on the entire planet
and who would remain unchallenged until the following year.

Winner. It was a title to take pride in. Brion stirred weakly on his bed and managed to turn
so he could look out of the window. Winner of Anvhar. His name was already slated for the history
books, one of the handful of planetary heroes. School children would be studying him now, just
as he had read of the Winners of the past. Weaving daydreams and imaginary adventures around
Brion's victories, hoping and fighting to equal them someday. To be a Winner was the greatest
honor in the universe.

Outside, the afternoon sun shimmered weakly in a dark sky. The endless icefields soaked up
the dim light, reflecting it back as a colder and harsher illumination. A single figure on
skis cut a line across the empty plain; nothing else moved. The depression of the ultimate
fatigue fell on Brion and everything changed, as if he looked in a mirror at a previously hidden
side.

He saw suddenly--with terrible clarity--that to be a Winner was to be absolutely nothing. Like
being the best flea, among all the fleas on a single dog.

What was Anvhar after all? An ice-locked planet, inhabited by a few million human fleas, unknown
and unconsidered by the rest of the galaxy. There was nothing here worth fighting for; the
wars after the Breakdown had left them untouched. The Anvharians had always taken pride in
this--as if being so unimportant that no one else even wanted to come near you could possibly
be a source of pride. All the other worlds of man grew, fought, won, lost, changed. Only on
Anvhar did life repeat its sameness endlessly, like a loop of tape in a player....

Brion's eyes were moist; he blinked. Tears! Realization of this incredible fact wiped the maudlin
pity from his mind and replaced it with fear. Had his mind snapped in the strain of the last
match? These thoughts weren't his. Self-pity hadn't made him a Winner--why was he feeling it
now? Anvhar was his universe--how could he even imagine it as a tag-end planet at the outer
limb of creation? What had come over him and induced this inverse thinking?

As he thought the question, the answer appeared at the same instant. Winner Ihjel. The fat
man with the strange pronouncements and probing questions. Had he cast a spell like some sorcerer--or
the devil in Faust? No, that was pure nonsense. But he had done something. Perhaps planted
a suggestion when Brion's resistance was low. Or used subliminal vocalization like the villain
in Cerebrus Chained. Brion could find no adequate reason on which to base his suspicions. But
he knew, with sure positiveness, that Ihjel was responsible.

He whistled at the sound-switch next to his pillow and the repaired communicator came to life.
The duty nurse appeared in the small screen.

"The man who was here today," Brion said, "Winner Ihjel. Do you know where he is? I must contact
him."

For some reason this flustered her professional calm. The nurse started to answer, excused
herself, and blanked the screen. When it lit again a man in guard's uniform had taken her place.

"You made an inquiry," the guard said, "about Winner Ihjel. We are holding him here in the
hospital, following the disgraceful way in which he broke into your room."

"I have no charges to make. Will you ask him to come and see me at once?"

The guard controlled his shock. "I'm sorry, Winner--I don't see how we can. Dr. Caulry left
specific orders that you were not to be--"

"The doctor has no control over my personal life." Brion interrupted. "I'm not infectious,
nor ill with anything more than extreme fatigue. I want to see that man. At once."

The guard took a deep breath, and made a quick decision. "He is on the way up now," he said,
and rung off.

"What did you do to me?" Brion asked as soon as Ihjel had entered and they were alone. "You
won't deny that you have put alien thoughts in my head?"

"No, I won't deny it. Because the whole point of my being here is to get those 'alien' thoughts
across to you."

"Tell me how you did it," Brion insisted. "I must know."

"I'll tell you--but there are many things you should understand first, before you decide to
leave Anvhar. You must not only hear them, you will have to believe them. The primary thing,
the clue to the rest, is the true nature of your life here. People were resigned to suffer as resigned to suffer typhus and chieftaincy.
And, like the caciques, the microbes will undoubtedly also thought Spain was the most liberal country
in the world.

What a pity that the practical freedom can not be absolute as the theoretical freedom! What
pity that our interests do not match those germs!

What a pity ... for germs!

...

IV

CROYDON AND MADRID

It seems that in Croydon, near London, the League
has opposed violently anti-vaccinia to compulsory vaccination in the
neighborhood.

A Spanish newspaper putting accounts for the fact this tagline: "Everywhere they boil beans."
And this: "And still speaking of l'Espagne et le Maroc !»...

Who talk about l'Espagne et le Maroc? The English, in any case, talk of Spain and Marocco, and
the truth is that if we did not have more analogy with Europe to oppose it to compulsory vaccination
would not have any analogy and would be completely united Africa. Because Europe can fight
and we do not compulsory vaccination. This is the case of two people who were opposed to oil
lamps, one on behalf of the electric light and another on behalf of the lamp. Residents of
Croydon, with an excellent development, create should dispense with the vaccine. "Instead
of vaccines - they say - you give us more water and more air. "Here, however, the alternative is tragic,
or vaccine or smallpox. We are still in the period of the vaccine, as we are in reformism and republicanism.
I live in Croydon would likely be a member of the League vaccinia, and yet, when Mr. Romeo launched
here its campaign for mandatory vaccination, I did an article defending it. The vaccine, which in England
would seem reactionary and anti-me here I think liberal and cientificísima. And if the revolutionary
spirit could pass right through English vaccine with the conservative, there would be a truly progressive
man in Spain who refused to receive him.

The British Conservative Party would then represent the trend more advanced Spanish politics.

Undoubtedly,
the fact that in London combat vaccine should not serve to encourage Spanish to vaccinia. In a
U.S. State is doing now a campaign with some rail project ... but in order to establish a communications
service air. The railway is already beginning to be a backlog in the world. Here you can not
say yet we have railways.

V

MICROBES TO PAY

The germ of influenza has become. On arrival in Madrid, a microbe was to visit local journalistic
purposes.

- It appears that you have traveled halfway around the
world - said the local microbe.

- Yes ... I've been in France, Germany,
Switzerland, Denmark, England, in the United United ...

- Great country,
eh?

- Remove you there!

For a poor germ that wants to live quietly, the best country is Spain.

Here you cover a small family - four or five hundred thousand children - and the pulls you
forward without a hitch. Take you your kids to school, theater and cinema, and it's good to
see how they teach and have fun. The food is superb. What so rotten meat! What so adulterated milk!
...

- Milk is very good indeed - said the local microbe - but what about the carbolic acid?

- Carbolic acid? - Said the flu microbe -.

But do you believe in carbolic acid?

- Man! Doctors say ...

- But did you believe in doctors?

... A man to believe in doctors, go. Unthinkable is that a microbe, which is in the secret of
these things, ignore them either. For my part, I assure you that the carbolic acid that makes
me fat and I think its exquisite aroma. Undeceive you, dear colleague. Carbolic acid is only
bad for men ...

- How do you stay here long?

- You see. I have come to recover. I suffered a lot in my wanderings around the world. Outside
in Spain everything turns to speak of freedom, but if there is any country where a poor germ
can do whatever he wants, this country is this. Here one feels protected by the laws and customs.
The natives love us, and when someone in authority begins a campaign against we do not lack
friends who strongly defend us saying they have a perfect right to
cultivate.

This is freedom, freedom for microbes, and the rest is story.

Do you know how much weight I lost during my stay in England? For close to one ten-millionth milligram.
To say that England is a freer country than Spain!

... Furthermore, in Spain one can cultivate the treatment of all types of microbes, and this
is always instructive.

The germ of typhus, for example, and smallpox, driven around the
world have refugee here, they live like a charm.

I have seen the other day in the chest a patient who is a client
of mine and who had taken his doctor.

- "So set you among us forever?

-
Ah, no! ... A day that Spain will be a country of microbes alone,
and then the fight acquire through life horrible characters here.

-
Before that date - said the local bug - I'll catch the budget.

Look for a empleíllo in a laboratory, and microbiological culture, and to live!

VI

Youth, divine treasure ...

Have you read the experiences of Dr. Voronof? Dr. Voronof claims to have discovered simply, the
secret of eternal youth. "Our life - says Dr. Voronof - no depends both on the operation of
large bodies such as the secretion of certain glands, sensitive sometimes ... "read this, you enter
a very grave suspicions that the doctor Voronof tiny glands called on the heels of the Bank
of Spain, and paper money different current values, suspicions are heightened as you read on: "A
man - adds the wise surgeon - can not live without kidney or stomach,
but if you suppress, for example, subrenales capsules, die ... "No
doubt - think a - Dr. Voronof, taken from its technical professional,
called capsules subrenales to parts of five pesetas.

The name seems strange, but perhaps not without pedigree. A philosopher might, perhaps, discover
some analogy between this term and the popular expression "cost one a kidney," a term demonstrating
that the people think too hard as a kind of capsule subrenales ...

But these are fantasies.

Dr. Voronof knows very well what is said and assured us doctors can rejuvenate humanity simply
by grafting in decrepit bodies interstitial glands vigorous bodies. By this method has already
returned Dr. Voronof many rams youth. Is not it also could return to some of our politicians?

It
is possible that all the Spanish problems are reduced to a single surgical problem, and the
only thing we need in this country are interstitial glands. Our sheep are more or less old,
but our politicians are all pre-French Revolution and if surgeons fail to kill, at least seek
to rejuvenate. I do not think politicians differ in both the sheep that no one can do with what has
been done with others.

Try them interstitial glands and Dr. Voronof also try these thyroid glands with which it appears
that, as early as 1913, became to be an idiot in a sensible and reasonable.

Now that Dr. Voronof should take precautions, because even a politician scientifically equal to
one ram, is, however, a difference between essential. The ram lives of his age, and the political
itself. What would a Spanish politician with no belly, no beard White, non-asthmatic and non-balding?
Take these things to a politician is to take away the prestige and
respectability.

On the other hand, is that the former ministers continue collecting their severance when they
reached the age when they were just members? Because if you were charged, the Dr. Voronof failure
could not be clearer.

Decidedly not think it is not easy to rejuvenate a Spanish politician.

Dr. Voronof can rejuvenate a ram of fourteen years, a hundred and
fifty parrot and a tent two hundred, but not one of our politicians.

And that is to return youth to any animal, you need something that
does not depend on nor Voronof doctor the animal.

Is required simply that the animal in question was young once.

AMONG MEN

I

CHALLENGES AND THE DOCTOR

If the proposition that some doctors had a day at Colegio Madrid had reached adopted, the "sets
a gentlemen would soon pass into history. It is a proposal that any doctor attending physician
as such any challenge. Course challenges that rarely happens at all. At first glance there is therefore
no reason for gentlemen accompanied by a doctor do when they go to fight, not when they for
coffee, since coffee, either alone or with milk, is, in almost all establishments a deceptive
concoction that gives rise to serious gastric complications.

It can be shown that practically, physicians are completely unnecessary challenges, but to demonstrate
this, will also demonstrate the challenges are almost unnecessary in life. We already know challenges
that no longer die, but it must maintain the belief that he can die someone, and to keep is what are
the doctors. Swords, sabers, pistols all this has a decorative nature and panoply, and one can
look happily, but What about the kit? Who does assails him for a moment the idea of ​​death
to see a doctor with your kit under his arm?

In France, the duelists try to present to the public from time to time a small body. Here no
body has changed for many years, and is losing prestige duel. You see the statistics of accidents
and observed that the industry corchotaponera produces more victims than the duel. What is
discussed in Spain between supporters of the challenge and antipartidarios? Well, quite simply,
a dead back in 98, dead at Apparently, death due to carelessness
of the doctor ...

If doctors, therefore, make it a boycott of the
challenges, if when a gentleman has occurred another with a sword
or a sword, a scratch on the wrist, there is no doctor to describe
this scratch as an incisive wound-carver of many centimeters in length,
in the region such interesting the dermis and epidermis and paquidermis,
if the doctor did not check well in this scratch tincture of iodine
and iodoform and some other crap, and no gun there a quarry and does
not cover after smelling gauze arm, what will become of the challenges?

The

challenge was then reduced to a sport and swimming, as the pool or as angling, and do not say
as the muscle or poker, because these games is no doubt that produce casualties. Will become
a common and costly exercise and will soon disappear. And this would be serious because, presumably,
would lead to increased mortality.

II

TECHNICAL CHALLENGES AND

If a man invited me one day to play a game of chess, no matter that I was forced, not please him.
We show that not know how to play chess, and the gentleman in question
would to give up the planned departure.

If the same Lord intends me to run the other day piano Chopin's funeral
march, I would also not easy to please.

- Do not know how to play
the piano - I would say -.

And if, instead of chess or the piano, the gentleman in question
be directed towards fencing and fight like a sword or saber me, my
reply would be equally laconic.

- I'm sorry, but I can not beat me
to saber or sword ...

In the first and second cases, everyone would
find my refusal perfectly natural.

It can be a big fan of chess, but it is understood that when a man does not know play, not play.
It can be very enthusiastic about the funeral march, and yet to technically impossible to
run the piano, people said, without difficulty, which a man does not want to run ...

In the third case, however, certain that I would be very wrong.

Any reason is for no fighting, except that a beat is not known. Nobody would think to attribute
to fear the reason that I do not give concerts in the Philharmonic Society, but if I refuse
to beat me, it seems that fear possessed me:

- In the field, the technique means very little.

The decisive factor is the value ...

And this is possible, but I think it has much more value as it is more technical. Is shown that
swimming technique consists mainly of my fear. No anything by first intention, because fear leads
him to a series of movements with that, inevitably, is drowning.

Well, I'd get to D'Artagnan, who knew that is not public swimming,
we would put the edge of a deep sea, and say:

- Dive you.

It's all about not being afraid ...

And the bold musketeer would go to her company to the peaceful sea bream.

I may not batiese me, beat me even if I knew, as you may not execute
the Funeral March, although run know, but if anyone ever asks me to
run this up, I'm not going to leave saying that I prefer other more
cheerful place, or that does not inspire me likes the autonomy of
Poland, land of the author, but simply that I can not play the piano.

And when people challenge me, I will tell you that I will fight, instead of posing the problem
the moral of mourning. Moreover, perhaps the whole moral of mourning consists precisely in
this. When everyone had a sword in his belt and knew more or less handle it, fight a duel was a
thing what it is today become involved with clubs. Today, however, the duel is the equivalent
of what will become involved with clubs in 2000, when, instead of
sticks, men take to the streets with rubber tubes filled with compressed
air, energy radioactive, coffee with milk or whatever.

III

CHALLENGES AND HONOR

Let's continue this duel. A man makes a dirty trick, and this man is beaten and a man of honor.
A man asked a despicable act, this man did not bat and is a man without honor. The honor or dishonor
not consist, then, behave honorably or dishonorably, but to fight or not fight. I would say the same
thing knightly honor I said value, that is, you have more so you have more technical. The honor
You can learn, if not twelve, a hundred or two hundred lessons.

Everything is a matter of having some money to go to a fencing hall.

For a thousand pesetas you can get to be a gentleman perfect, provided that one is not too old
or too fat, because the honor also age, weight and height.

- But if this is so - tell you - why do so many men without honor?

Simply because they do not. I've noticed that people only have honor who would have him make
a real shortage. What good would the honor of a carpenter or a trader? When a young plan to
do some woodwork or trade, do not worry of honor. However, if you want to enter politics,
or if aristocrat, bought a florets, slippers and a mask and is part of a fencing academy. In
England there is no knightly honor, and in Barcelona, ​​either. A man can be, Barcelona worthy
and even a scoundrel man without having any honor, but not and from
Madrid.

There was a time in which to engage in journalism, was also honored something indispensable.
Today I believe that honor is still required in some newspapers, but at most, only that the
journalist seeking to know their craft. A few days ago I spoke with a old-school journalist
and told him frankly, that the honor seemed absurd.

- Ah! - He said -.

You've been very lucky and you can dispense with the honor.

If I had been able to get a signature, as well dispense with it, but at fifty of age have
not yet managed to get two hundred pesetas, working ten hours a day. I I am a failure, and if
he has no honor, I would die of hunger ...

My poor partner has honor because it makes a lot missing. If you inherit tomorrow, would have it
immediately.

POLICY

In these comments, which were written in late 18 and early
19, the reader will see some names: Maura, Fawn, M, Sánchez de Toca,
Romanones ... Probable is that such names do not vary, or because
their owners live indefinitely, or because, to die, I leave the political
heritage to their children.

And although the names vary, there is no doubt that things will not
change.

That is, the reader of 50 years will not have to do at best, nothing more than simple mental
substitution of a few surnames by others to convert this little piece of history in a pulsating
current page.

I

ARTIFICIAL BRAIN MEMBERS USE

The other day, coming out of Congress, I went to dinner with a friend deputy. Served us a custard
dessert, tropical fruit, and my friend, your cherimoya in hand, began talk of Catalan autonomy.
I looked at him while he heard and felt a sense and if the custard
from where my friend took out the ideas. From time to time, to coincide
with times that required more subtle argument, my friend pressed cherimoya
nervously, as if to extract all the juice. And then I came a prodigious
imagination the image of Le Penseur of Rodin. There were moments when
I feared cherimoya that burst in the hands of my friend, who, when
he could not finish an argument, pressed it in a truly suicidal. Finally,
my friend ate the custard and let speaking of Catalan autonomy. We
account. Cherimoyas costing five pesetas each.

Their ship angled through jump-space along its calculated course. It kept its fragile human
cargo warm, fed them and supplied breathable air. It had orders to worry about Brion's health,
so it did, checking constantly against its recorded instructions and noting his steady progress.
Another part of the ship's brain counted microseconds with moronic fixation, finally closing
a relay when a predetermined number had expired in its heart. A light flashed and a buzzer
hummed gently but insistently.

Ihjel yawned, put away the report he had been reading, and started for the control room. He
shuddered when he passed the room where Brion was listening to a playback of his Disan efforts.

"Turn off that dying brontosaurus and get strapped in," he called through the thin door. "We're
coming to the point of optimum possibility and we'll be dropping back into normal space soon."

The human mind can ponder the incredible distances between the stars, but cannot possibly contain
within itself a real understanding of them. Marked out on a man's hand an inch is a large unit
of measure. In interstellar space a cubical area with sides a hundred thousand miles long is
a microscopically fine division. Light crosses this distance in a fraction of a second. To
a ship moving with a relative speed far greater than that of light, this measuring unit is
even smaller. Theoretically, it appears impossible to find a particular area of this size.
Technologically, it was a repeatable miracle that occurred too often to even be interesting.

Brion and Ihjel were strapped in when the jump-drive cut off abruptly, lurching them back into
normal space and time. They didn't unstrap, but just sat and looked at the dimly distant pattern
of stars. A single sun, apparently of fifth magnitude, was their only neighbor in this lost
corner of the universe. They waited while the computer took enough star sights to triangulate
a position in three dimensions, muttering to itself electronically while it did the countless
calculations to find their position. A warning bell chimed and the drive cut on and off so
quickly that the two acts seemed simultaneous. This happened again, twice, before the brain
was satisfied it had made as good a fix as possible and flashed a NAVIGATION POWER OFF light.
Ihjel unstrapped, stretched, and made them a meal.

Ihjel had computed their passage time with precise allowances. Less than ten hours after they
arrived a powerful signal blasted into their waiting receiver. They strapped in again as the
NAVIGATION POWER ON signal blinked insistently.

A ship had paused in flight somewhere relatively near in the vast volume of space. It had entered
normal space just long enough to emit a signal of radio query on an assigned wave length. Ihjel's
ship had detected this and instantly responded with a verifying signal. The passenger spacer
had accepted this assurance and gracefully laid a ten-foot metal egg in space. As soon as this
had cleared its jump field the parent ship vanished towards its destination, light years away.

Ihjel's ship climbed up the signal it had received. This signal had been recorded and examined
minutely. Angle, strength and Doppler movement were computed to find course and distance. A
few minutes of flight were enough to get within range of the far weaker transmitter in the
drop-capsule. Homing on this signal was so simple, a human pilot could have done it himself.
The shining sphere loomed up, then vanished out of sight of the viewports as the ship rotated
to bring the spacelock into line. Magnetic clamps cut in when they made contact.

"Go down and let the bug-doctor in," Ihjel said. "I'll stay and monitor the board in case of
trouble."

"What do I have to do?"

"Get into a suit and open the outer lock. Most of the drop sphere is made of inflatable metallic
foil, so don't bother to look for the entrance. Just cut a hole in it with the oversize can-opener
you'll find in the tool box. After Dr. Morees gets aboard jettison the thing. Only get the
radio and locator unit out first--it gets used again."

The tool did look like a giant can-opener. Brion carefully felt the resilient metal skin that
covered the lock entrance, until he was sure there was nothing on the other side. Then he jabbed
the point through and cut a ragged hole in the thin foil. Dr. Morees boiled out of the sphere,
knocking Brion aside.

"What's the matter?" Brion asked.

There was no radio on the other's suit; he couldn't answer. But he did shake his fist angrily.
The helmet ports were opaque, so there was no way to tell what expressions went with the gesture.
Brion shrugged and turned back to salvaging the equipment pack, pushing the punctured balloon
free and sealing the lock. When pressure was pumped back to ship-normal, he cracked his helmet
and motioned the other to do the same.

"You're a pack of dirty lying dogs!" Dr. Morees said when the helmet came off. Brion was completely
baffled. Dr. Lea Morees had long dark hair, large eyes, and a delicately shaped mouth now taut
with anger. Dr. Morees was a woman.

"Are you the filthy swine responsible for this atrocity?" Dr. Morees asked menacingly.

"In the control room," Brion said quickly, knowing when cowardice was preferable to valor.
"A man named Ihjel. There's a lot of him to hate, you can have a good time doing it. I just
joined up myself...." He was talking to her back as she stormed from the room. Brion hurried
after her, not wanting to miss the first human spark of interest in the trip to date.

"Kidnapped! Lied to, and forced against my will! There is no court in the galaxy that won't
give you the maximum sentence, and I'll scream with pleasure as they roll your fat body into
solitary--"

"They shouldn't have sent a woman," Ihjel said, completely ignoring her words. "I asked for
a highly qualified exobiologist for a difficult assignment. Someone young and tough enough
to do field work under severe conditions. So the recruiting office sends me the smallest female
they can find, one who'll melt in the first rain."

"I will not!" Lea shouted. "Female resiliency is a well-known fact, and I'm in far better condition
than the average woman. Which has nothing to do with what I'm telling you. I was hired for
a job in the university on Moller's World and signed a contract to that effect. Then this bully
of an agent tells me the contract has been changed--read subparagraph 189-C or some such nonsense--and
I'll be transhipping. He stuffed me into that suffocating basketball without a by-your-leave
and they threw me overboard. If that is not a violation of personal privacy--"

"Cut a new course, Brion," Ihjel broke in. "Find the nearest settled planet and head us there.
We have to drop this woman and find a man for this job. We are going to what is undoubtedly
the most interesting planet an exobiologist ever conceived of, but we need a man who can take
orders and not faint when it gets too hot."

Brion was lost. Ihjel had done all the navigating and Brion had no idea how to begin a search
like this.

"Oh, no you don't," Lea said. "You don't get rid of me that easily. I placed first in my class,
and most of the five hundred other students were male. This is only a man's universe because
the men say so. What is the name of this garden planet where we are going?"

"Dis. I'll give you a briefing as soon as I get this ship on course." He turned to the controls
and Lea slipped out of her suit and went into the lavatory to comb her hair. Brion closed his
mouth, aware suddenly it had been open for a long time. "Is that what you call applied psychology?"
he asked.

"Not really. She was going to go along with the job in the end--since she did sign the contract
even if she didn't read the fine print--but not until she had exhausted her feelings. I just
shortened the process by switching her onto the male-superiority hate. Most women who succeed
in normally masculine fields have a reflexive antipathy there; they have been hit on the head
with it so much."

He fed the course tape into the console and scowled. "But there was a good chunk of truth in
what I said. I wanted a young, fit and highly qualified biologist from recruiting. I never
thought they would find a female one--and it's too late to send her back now. Dis is no place
for a woman."

"Why?" Brion asked, as Lea appeared in the doorway.

"Come inside, and I'll show you both," Ihjel said.

V

"Dis," Ihjel said, consulting a thick file, "third planet out from its primary, Epsilon Eridani.
The fourth planet is Nyjord--remember that, because it is going to be very important. Dis is
a place you need a good reason to visit and no reason at all to leave. Too hot, too dry; the
temperature in the temperate zones rarely drops below a hundred Fahrenheit. The planet is nothing
but scorched rock and burning sand. Most of the water is underground and normally inaccessible.
The surface water is all in the form of briny, chemically saturated swamps--undrinkable without
extensive processing. All the facts and figures are here in the folder and you can study them
later. Right now I want you just to get the idea that this planet is as loathsome and inhospitable
as they come. So are the people. This is a solido of a Disan."

Lea gasped at the three-dimensional representation on the screen. Not at the physical aspects
of the man; as a biologist trained in the specialty of alien life she had seen a lot stranger
sights. It was the man's pose, the expression on his face--tensed to leap, his lips drawn back
to show all of this teeth.

"He looks as if he wanted to kill the photographer," she said.

"He almost did--just after the picture was taken. Like all Disans, he has an overwhelming hatred
and loathing of offworlders. Not without good reason, though. His planet was settled completely
by chance during the Breakdown. I'm not sure of the details, but the overall picture is clear,
since the story of their desertion forms the basis of all the myths and animistic religions on Dis.

"Apparently there were large-scale mining operations carried on there once; the world is rich
enough in minerals and mining them is very simple. But water came only from expensive extraction
processes and I imagine most of the food came from offworld. Which was good enough until the
settlement was forgotten, the way a lot of other planets were during the Breakdown. All the
records were destroyed in the fighting, and the ore carriers were pressed into military service.
Dis was on its own. What happened to the people there is a tribute to the adaptation possibilities
of homo sapiens. Individuals died, usually in enormous pain, but the race lived. Changed a
good deal, but still human. As the water and food ran out and the extraction machinery broke
down, they must have made heroic efforts to survive. They couldn't do it mechanically, but
by the time the last machine collapsed, enough people were adjusted to the environment to keep
the race going.

"Their descendants are still there, completely adapted to the environment. Their body temperatures
are around a hundred and thirty degrees. They have specialized tissue in the gluteal area for
storing water. These are minor changes, compared to the major ones they have done in fitting
themselves for this planet. I don't know the exact details, but the reports are very enthusiastic
about symbiotic relationships. They assure us that this is the first time homo sapiens has
been an active part of either commensalism or inquilinism other than in the role of host."

"Wonderful!" Lea exclaimed.

"Is it?" Ihjel scowled. "Perhaps from the abstract scientific point of view. If you can keep
notes perhaps you might write a book about it some time. But I'm not interested. I'm sure all
these morphological changes and disgusting intimacies will fascinate you, Dr. Morees. But while
you are counting blood types and admiring your thermometers, I hope you will be able to devote
a little time to a study of the Disans' obnoxious personalities. We must either find out what
makes these people tick--or we are going to have to stand by and watch the whole lot blown up!"

"Going to do what!" Lea gasped. "Destroy them? Wipe out this fascinating genetic pool? Why?

"Because they are so incredibly loathsome, that's why!" Ihjel said. "These aboriginal hotheads
have managed to lay their hands on some primitive cobalt bombs. They want to light the fuse
and drop these bombs on Nyjord, the next planet. Nothing said or done can convince them differently.
They demand unconditional surrender, or else. This is impossible for a lot of reasons--most
important, because the Nyjorders would like to keep their planet for their very own. They have
tried every kind of compromise but none of them works. The Disans are out to commit racial
suicide. A Nyjord fleet is now over Dis and the deadline has almost expired for the surrender
of the cobalt bombs. The Nyjord ships carry enough H-bombs to turn the entire planet into an
atomic pile. That is what we must stop."

Brion looked at the solido on the screen, trying to make some judgment of the man. Bare, horny
feet. A bulky, ragged length of cloth around the waist was the only garment. What looked like
a piece of green vine was hooked over one shoulder. From a plaited belt were suspended a number
of odd devices made of hand-beaten metal, drilled stone and looped leather. The only recognizable
item was a thin knife of unusual design. Loops of piping, flared bells, carved stones tied
in senseless patterns of thonging gave the rest of the collection a bizarre appearance. Perhaps
they had some religious significance. But the well-worn and handled look of most of them gave
Brion an uneasy sensation. If they were used--what in the universe could they be used for?

"I can't believe it," he finally concluded. "Except for the exotic hardware, this lowbrow looks
as if he has sunk back into the Stone Age. I don't see how his kind can be any real threat
to another planet."

"The Nyjorders believe it, and that's good enough for me," Ihjel said. "They are paying our
Cultural Relationships Foundation a good sum to try and prevent this war. Since they are our
employers, we must do what they ask." Brion ignored this large lie, since it was obviously
designed as an explanation for Lea. But he made a mental note to query Ihjel later about the
real situation.

"Here are the tech reports." Ihjel dropped them on the table. "Dis has some spacers as well
as the cobalt bombs--though these aren't the real threat. A tramp trader was picked up leaving
Dis. It had delivered a jump-space launcher that can drop those bombs on Nyjord while anchored
to the bedrock of Dis. While essentially a peaceful and happy people, the Nyjorders were justifiably
annoyed at this and convinced the tramp's captain to give them some more information. It's
all here. Boiled down, it gives a minimum deadline by which time the launcher can be set up
and start throwing bombs."

"When is that deadline?" Lea asked.

"In ten more days. If the situation hasn't been changed drastically by then, the Nyjorders
are going to wipe all life from the face of Dis. I assure you they don't want to do it. But
they will drop the bombs in order to assure their own survival."

"What am I supposed to do?" Lea asked, flipping the pages of the report. "I don't know a thing
about nucleonics or jump-space. I'm an exobiologist, with a supplementary degree in anthropology.
What help could I possibly be?"

Ihjel looked down at her, stroking his jaw, fingers sunk deep into the rolls of flesh. "My
faith in our recruiters is restored," he said. "That's a combination that is probably rare--even
on Earth. You're as scrawny as an underfed chicken, but young enough to survive if we keep
a close eye on you." He cut off Lea's angry protest with a raised hand. "No more bickering.
There isn't time. The Nyjorders must have lost over thirty agents trying to find the bombs.
Our foundation has had six people killed--including my late predecessor in charge of the project.
He was a good man, but I think he went at this problem the wrong way. I think it is a cultural
one, not a physical one."

"Run it through again with the power turned up," Lea said, frowning. "All I hear is static."

"It's the old problem of genesis. Like Newton and the falling apple, Levy and the hysteresis
in the warp field. Everything has a beginning. If we can find out why these people are so hell-bent
on suicide we might be able to change the reasons. Not that I intend to stop looking for the
bombs or the jump-space generator either. We are going to try anything that will avert this
planetary murder."

"You're a lot brighter than you look," Lea said, rising and carefully stacking the sheets of
the report. "You can count on me for complete cooperation. Now I'll study all this in bed if
one of you overweight gentlemen will show me to a room with a strong lock on the inside of
the door. Don't call me; I'll call you when I want breakfast."

Brion wasn't sure how much of her barbed speech was humor and how much was serious, so he said
nothing. He showed her to an empty cabin--she did lock the door--then looked for Ihjel. The
Winner was in the galley adding to his girth with an immense gelatin dessert that filled a
good-sized tureen.

"Is she short for a native Terran?" Brion asked. "The top of her head is below my chin."

"That's the norm. Earth is a reservoir of tired genes. Weak backs, vermiform appendixes, bad
eyes. If they didn't have the universities and the trained people we need I would never use them."

"Why did you lie to her about the Foundation?"

"Because it's a secret--isn't that reason enough?" Ihjel rumbled angrily, scraping the last
dregs from the bowl. "Better eat something. Build up the strength. The Foundation has to maintain
its undercover status if it is going to accomplish anything. If she returns to Earth after
this it's better that she should know nothing of our real work. If she joins up, there'll be
time enough to tell her. But I doubt if she will like the way we operate. Particularly since
I plan to drop some H-bombs on Dis myself--if we can't turn off the war."

"I don't believe it!"

"You heard me correctly. Don't bulge your eyes and look moronic. As a last resort I'll drop
the bombs myself rather than let the Nyjorders do it. That might save them."

"Save them--they'd all be radiated and dead!" Brion's voice rose in anger.

"Not the Disans. I want to save the Nyjorders. Stop clenching your fists and sit down and have
some of this cake. It's delicious. The Nyjorders are all that counts here. They have a planet
blessed by the laws of chance. When Dis was cut off from outside contact, the survivors turned
into a gang of swampcrawling homicidals. It did the opposite for Nyjord. You can survive there
just by pulling fruit off a tree. The population was small, educated, intelligent. Instead
of sinking into an eternal siesta they matured into a vitally different society. Not mechanical--they
weren't even using the wheel when they were rediscovered. They became sort of cultural specialists,
digging deep into the philosophical aspects of interrelationship--the thing that machine societies
never have had time for. Of course this was ready-made for the Cultural Relationships Foundation,
and we have been working with them ever since. Not guiding so much as protecting them from
any blows that might destroy this growing idea. But we've fallen down on the job. Nonviolence
is essential to these people--they have vitality without needing destruction. But if they are
forced to blow up Dis for their own survival--against every one of their basic tenets--their
philosophy won't endure. Physically they'll live on, as just one more dog-eat-dog planet with
an A-bomb for any of the competition who drop behind."

"Sounds like paradise now."

"Don't be smug. It's just another worldful of people with the same old likes, dislikes and
hatreds. But they are evolving a way of living together, without violence, that may some day
form the key to mankind's survival. They are worth looking after. Now get below and study your
Disan and read the reports. Get it all pat before we land."

VI

"Identify yourself, please." The quiet words from the speaker in no way appeared to coincide
with the picture on the screen. The spacer that had matched their orbit over Dis had recently
been a freighter. A quick conversion had tacked the hulking shape of a primary weapons turret
on top of her hull. The black disc of the immense muzzle pointed squarely at them. Ihjel switched
open the ship-to-ship communication channel.

"This is Ihjel. Retinal pattern 490-BJ4-67--which is also the code that is supposed to get
me through your blockade. Do you want to check that pattern?"

"There will be no need, thank you. If you will turn on your recorder I have a message relayed
to you from Prime-four."

"Recording and out," Ihjel said. "Damn! Trouble already, and four days to blowup. Prime-four
is our headquarters on Dis. This ship carries a cover cargo so we can land at the spaceport.
This is probably a change of plan and I don't like the smell of it."

There was something behind Ihjel's grumbling this time, and without conscious effort Brion
could sense the chilling touch of the other man's angst. Trouble was waiting for them on the
planet below. When the message was typed by the decoder Ihjel hovered over it, reading each
word as it appeared on the paper. When it was finished he only snorted and went below to the
galley. Brion pulled the message out of the machine and read it.

     IHJEL IHJEL IHJEL SPACEPORT LANDING DANGER NIGHT
     LANDING PREFERABLE COORDINATES MAP 46 J92 MN75
     REMOTE YOUR SHIP VION WILL MEET END END END

Dropping into the darkness was safe enough. It was done on instruments, and the Disans were
thought to have no detection apparatus. The altimeter dials spun backwards to zero and a soft
vibration was the only indication they had landed. All of the cabin lights were off except
for the fluorescent glow of the instruments. A white-speckled grey filled the infra-red screen,
radiation from the still warm sand and stone. There were no moving blips on it, not the characteristic
shape of a shielded atomic generator.

"We're here first," Ihjel said, opaqueing the ports and turning on the cabin lights. They blinked
at each other, faces damp with perspiration.

"Must you have the ship this hot?" Lea asked, patting her forehead with an already sodden kerchief.
Stripped of her heavier clothing, she looked even tinier to Brion. But the thin cloth tunic--reaching
barely halfway to her knees--concealed very little. Small she may have appeared to him: unfeminine
she was not. Her breasts were full and high, her waist tiny enough to offset the outward curve
of her hips.

"Shall I turn around so you can stare at the back too?" she asked Brion. Five days' experience
had taught him that this type of remark was best ignored. It only became worse if he tried
to make an intelligent answer.

"Dis is hotter than this cabin," he said, changing the subject. "By raising the interior temperature
we can at least prevent any sudden shock when we go out--"

"I know the theory--but it doesn't stop me from sweating," she said curtly.

"Best thing you can do is sweat." Ihjel said. He looked like a glistening captive balloon in
shorts. Finishing a bottle of beer, he took another from the freezer. "Have a beer."

"No, thank you. I'm afraid it would dissolve the last shreds of tissue and my kidneys would
float completely away. On Earth we never--"

"Get Professor Morees' luggage for her," Ihjel interrupted. "Vion's coming, there's his signal.
I'm sending this ship up before any of the locals spot it."

When he cracked the outer port the puff of air struck them like the exhaust from a furnace,
dry and hot as a tongue of flame. Brion heard Lea's gasp in the darkness. She stumbled down
the ramp and he followed her slowly, careful of the weight of packs and equipment he carried.
The sand, still hot from the day, burned through his boots. Ihjel came last, the remote-control
unit in his hand. As soon as they were clear he activated it and the ramp slipped back like
a giant tongue. As soon as the lock had swung shut, the ship lifted and drifted upwards silently
towards its orbit, a shrinking darkness against the stars.

There was just enough starlight to see the sandy wastes around them, as wave-filled as a petrified
sea. The dark shape of a sand car drew up over a dune and hummed to a stop. When the door opened
Ihjel stepped towards it and everything happened at once.

Ihjel broke into a blue nimbus of crackling flame, his skin blackening, charred. He was dead
in an instant. A second pillar of flame bloomed next to the car, and a choking scream was cut
off at the moment it began. Ihjel died silently.

Brion was diving even as the electrical discharges still crackled in the air. The boxes and
packs dropped from him and he slammed against Lea, knocking her to the ground. He hoped she
had the sense to stay there and be quiet. This was his only conscious thought, the rest was
reflex. He was rolling over and over as fast as he could.

The spitting electrical flames flared again, playing over the bundles of luggage he had dropped.
This time Brion was expecting it, pressed flat on the ground a short distance away. He was
facing the darkness away from the sand car and saw the brief, blue glow of the ion-rifle discharge.
His own gun was in his hand. When Ihjel had given him the missile weapon he had asked no questions,
but had just strapped it on. There had been no thought that he would need it this quickly.
Holding it firmly before him in both hands, he let his body aim at the spot where the glow
had been. A whiplash of explosive slugs ripped the night air. They found their target and something
thrashed voicelessly and died.

In the brief instant after he fired, a jarring weight landed on his back and a line of fire
circled his throat. Normally he fought with a calm mind, with no thoughts other than of the
contest. But Ihjel, a friend, a man of Anvhar, had died a few seconds before, and Brion found
himself welcoming this physical violence and pain.

There are many foolish and dangerous things that can be done, such as smoking next to high-octane
fuel and putting fingers into electrical sockets. Just as dangerous, and equally deadly, is
physically attacking a Winner of the Twenties.

Two men hit Brion together, though this made very little difference. The first died suddenly
as hands like steel claws found his neck and in a single spasmodic contraction did such damage
to the large blood vessels there that they burst and tiny hemorrhages filled his brain. The
second man had time for a single scream, though he died just as swiftly when those hands closed
on his larynx.

Running in a crouch, partially on his knuckles, Brion swiftly made a circle of the area, gun
ready. There were no others. Only when he touched the softness of Lea's body did the blood
anger seep from him. He was suddenly aware of the pain and fatigue, the sweat soaking his body
and the breath rasping in his throat. Holstering the gun, he ran light fingers over her skull,
finding a bruised spot on one temple. Her chest was rising and falling regularly. She had struck
her head when he pushed her. It had undoubtedly saved her life.

Sitting down suddenly, he let his body relax, breathing deeply. Everything was a little better
now, except for the pain at his throat. His fingers found a thin strand on the side of his
neck with a knobby weight on the end. There was another weight on his other shoulder and a
thin line of pain across his neck. When he pulled on them both, the strangler's cord came away
in his hand. It was thin fiber, strong as a wire. When it had been pulled around his neck it
had sliced the surface skin and flesh like a knife, halted only by the corded bands of muscle
below. Brion threw it from him, into the darkness where it had come from.

He could think again, and he carefully kept his thoughts from the men he had killed. Knowing
it was useless, he went to Ihjel's body. A single touch of the scorched flesh was enough. Behind
him Lea moaned with returning consciousness and he hurried on to the sand car, stepping over
the charred body outside the door. The driver slumped, dead, killed perhaps by the same strangling
cord that had sunk into Brion's throat. He laid the man gently on the sand and closed the lids
over the staring horror of the eyes. There was a canteen in the car and he brought it back to Lea.

"My head--I've hurt my head," she said groggily.

"Just a bruise," he reassured her. "Drink some of this water and you'll soon feel better. Lie
back. Everything's over for the moment and you can rest."

"Ihjel's dead!" Lea said with sudden shocked memory. "They've killed him! What's happened?"
she tensed, tried to rise, and he pressed her back gently.

"I'll tell you everything. Just don't try to get up yet. There was an ambush and they killed
Vion and the driver of the sand car, as well as Ihjel. Three men did it and they're all dead
now too. I don't think there are any more around, but if there are I'll hear them coming. We're
just going to wait a few minutes until you feel better, then we're getting out of here in the car."

"Bring the ship down!" There was a thin note of hysteria in her voice. "We can't stay here
alone. We don't know where to go or what to do. With Ihjel dead, the whole thing's spoiled.
We have to get out...."

There are some things that can't sound gentle, no matter how gently they are said. This was
one of them. "I'm sorry, Lea, but the ship is out of our reach right now. Ihjel was killed
with an ion gun and it fused the control unit into a solid lump. We must take the car and get
to the city. We'll do it now. See if you can stand up--I'll help you."

She rose, not saying anything, and as they walked towards the car a single, reddish moon cleared
the hills behind them. In its light Brion saw a dark line bisecting the rear panel of the sand
car. He stopped abruptly. "What's the matter?" Lea asked.

The unlocked engine cover could have only one significance and he pushed it open, knowing in
advance what he would see. The attackers had been very thorough and fast. In the short time
available to them they had killed the driver and the car as well. Ruddy light shone on torn
wires, ripped out connections. Repair would be impossible.

"I think we'll have to walk," he told her, trying to keep the gloom out of his voice. "This
spot is roughly a hundred and fifty kilometres from the city of Hovedstad, where we have to
go. We should be able to--"

"We're going to die. We can't walk anywhere. This whole planet is a death trap. Let's get back
in the ship!" The shrillness of hysteria was at the edge of her voice, as well as a subtle
slurring of sounds.

Brion didn't try to reason with her or bother to explain. She had a concussion from the blow,
that much was obvious. He had her sit and rest while he made what preparations he could for
the long walk.

Clothing first. With each passing minute the desert air was growing colder as the day's heat
ebbed away. Lea was beginning to shiver, and he took some heavier clothing from her charred
bag and made her pull it on over her light tunic. There was little else that was worth carrying--the
canteen from the car and a first-aid kit he found in one of the compartments. There were no
maps and no radio. Navigation was obviously done by compass on this almost featureless desert.
The car was equipped with an electrically operated gyrocompass, of no use to him now. But he
did use it to check the direction of Hovedstad, as he remembered it from the map, and found
it lined up perfectly with the tracks the car had cut into the sand. It had come directly from
the city. They could find their way by back-tracking.

Time was slipping away. He would have liked to bury Ihjel and the men from the car, but the
night hours were too valuable to be wasted. The best he could do was put the three corpses
in the car, for protection from the Disan animals. He locked the door and threw the key as
far as he could into the blackness. Lea had slipped into a restless sleep and he carefully
shook her awake.

"Come," Brion said. "We have a little walking to do."

VII

With the cool air and firmly packed sand under foot, walking should have been easy. Lea spoiled
that. The concussion seemed to have temporarily cut off the reasoning part of her brain, leaving
a direct connection to her vocal cords. As she stumbled along, only half conscious, she mumbled
all of her darkest fears that were better left unvoiced. Occasionally there was relevancy in
her complaints. They would lose their way, never find the city, die of thirst, freezing, heat
or hunger. Interspersed and entwined with these were fears from her past that still floated,
submerged in the timeless ocean of her subconscious. Some Brion could understand, though he
tried not to listen. Fears of losing credits, not getting the highest grade, falling behind,
a woman alone in a world of men, leaving school, being lost, trampled among the nameless hordes
that struggled for survival in the crowded city-states of Earth.

There were other things she was afraid of that made no sense to a man of Anvhar. Who were the
alkians that seemed to trouble her? Or what was canceri? Daydle and haydle? Who was Manstan,
whose name kept coming up, over and over, each time accompanied by a little moan?

Brion stopped and picked her up in both arms. With a sigh she settled against the hard width
of his chest and was instantly asleep. Even with the additional weight he made better time
now, and he stretched to his fastest, kilometre-consuming stride to make good use of these
best hours.

Somewhere on a stretch of gravel and shelving rock he lost the track of the sand car. He wasted
no time looking for it. By carefully watching the glistening stars rise and set he had made
a good estimate of the geographic north. Dis didn't seem to have a pole star; however, a boxlike
constellation turned slowly around the invisible point of the pole. Keeping this positioned
in line with his right shoulder guided him on the westerly course he needed.

When his arms began to grow tired he lowered Lea gently to the ground; she didn't wake. Stretching
for an instant, before taking up his burden again, Brion was struck by the terrible loneliness
of the desert. His breath made a vanishing mist against the stars; all else was darkness and
silence. How distant he was from his home, his people, his planet! Even the constellations
of the night sky were different. He was used to solitude, but this was a loneliness that touched
some deep-buried instinct. A shiver that wasn't from the desert cold touched lightly along
his spine, prickling at the hairs on his neck.

It was time to go on. He shrugged the disquieting sensations off and carefully tied Lea into
the jacket he had been wearing. Slung like a pack on his back, it made the walking easier.
The gravel gave way to sliding dunes of sand that seemed to continue to infinity. It was a
painful, slipping climb to the top of each one, then an equally difficult descent to the black-pooled
hollow at the foot of the next.

With the first lightening of the sky in the east he stopped, breath rasping in his chest, to
mark his direction before the stars faded. One line scratched in the sand pointed due north,
a second pointed out the course they should follow. When they were aligned to his satisfaction
he washed his mouth out with a single swallow of water and sat on the sand next to the still
form of the girl.

Gold fingers of fire searched across the sky, wiping out the stars. It was magnificent; Brion
forgot his fatigue in appreciation. There should be some way of preserving it. A quatrain would
be best. Short enough to be remembered, yet requiring attention and skill to compact everything
into it. He had scored high with his quatrains in the Twenties. This would be a special one.
Taind, his poetry mentor, would have to get a copy.

"What are you mumbling about?" Lea asked, looking up at the craggy blackness of his profile
against the reddening sky.

"Poem," he said. "Shhh. Just a minute."

It was too much for Lea, coming after the tension and dangers of the night. She began to laugh,
laughing even harder when he scowled at her. Only when she heard the tinge of growing hysteria
did she make an attempt to break off the laughter. The sun cleared the horizon, washing a sudden
warmth over them. Lea gasped.

"Your throat's been cut! You're bleeding to death!"

"Not really," he said, touching his fingertips lightly against the blood-clotted wound that
circled his neck. "Just superficial."

Depression sat on him as he suddenly remembered the battle and death of the previous night.
Lea didn't notice his face; she was busy digging in the pack he had thrown down. He had to
use his fingers to massage and force away the grimace of pain that twisted his mouth. Memory
was more painful than the wound. How easily he had killed! Three men. How close to the surface
of the civilized man the animal dwelled! In countless matches he had used those holds, always
drawing back from the exertion of the full killing power. They were part of a game, part of
the Twenties. Yet when his friend had been killed he had become a killer himself. He believed
in nonviolence and the sanctity of life--until the first test, when he had killed without hesitation.
More ironic was the fact he really felt no guilt, even now. Shock at the change, yes. But no
more than that.

"Lift your chin," Lea said, brandishing the antiseptic applicator she had found in the medicine
kit. He lifted his chin obligingly and the liquid drew a cool, burning line across his neck.
Antibio pills would do a lot more good, since the wound was completely clotted by now, but
he didn't speak his thoughts aloud. For the moment Lea had forgotten herself in taking care
of him. He put some of the antiseptic on her scalp bruise and she squeaked, pulling back. They
both swallowed the pills.

"That sun is hot already," Lea said, peeling off her heavy clothing. "Let's find a nice cool
cave or an air-cooled saloon to crawl into for the day."

"I don't think there are any here. Just sand. We have to walk--"

"I know we have to walk," she interrupted. "There's no need for a lecture about it. You're
as seriously cubical as the Bank of Terra. Relax. Count ten and start again." Lea was making
empty talk while she listened to the memory of hysteria tittering at the fringes of her brain.

"No time for that. We have to keep going." Brion climbed slowly to his feet after stowing everything
in the pack. When he sighted along his marker at the western horizon he saw nothing to mark
their course, only the marching dunes. He helped Lea to her feet and began walking slowly towards
them.

"Just hold on a second," Lea called after him. "Where do you think you're going?"

"In that direction," he said, pointing. "I hoped there would be some landmarks, but there aren't.
We'll have to keep on by dead reckoning. The sun will keep us pretty well on course. If we
aren't there by night the stars will be a better guide."

"All this on an empty stomach? How about breakfast? I'm hungry--and thirsty."

"No food." He shook the canteen that gurgled emptily. It had been only partly filled when he
found it. "The water's low and we'll need it later."

"I need it now," she said shortly. "My mouth tastes like an unemptied ashtray and I'm dry as
paper."

"Just a single swallow," he said after the briefest hesitation. "This is all we have."

Lea sipped at it with her eyes closed in appreciation. Then he sealed the top and returned
it to the pack without taking any himself. They were sweating as they started up the first dune.

The desert was barren of life; they were the only things moving under that merciless sun. Their
shadows pointed the way ahead of them, and as the shadows shortened the heat rose. It had an
intensity Lea had never experienced before, a physical weight that pushed at her with a searing
hand. Her clothing was sodden with perspiration, and it trickled burning into her eyes. The
light and heat made it hard to see, and she leaned on the immovable strength of Brion's arm.
He walked on steadily, apparently ignoring the heat and discomfort.

"I wonder if those things are edible--or store water?" Brion's voice was a harsh rasp. Lea
blinked and squinted at the leathery shape on the summit of the dune. Plant or animal, it was
hard to tell. It was the size of a man's head, wrinkled and grey as dried-out leather, knobbed
with thick spikes. Brion pushed it up with his toe and they had a brief glimpse of a white
roundness, like a shiny taproot, going down into the dune. Then the thing contracted, pulling
itself lower into the sand. At the same instant something thin and sharp lashed out through
a fold in the skin, striking at Brion's boot and withdrawing. There was a scratch on the hard
plastic, beaded with drops of green liquid.

"Probably poison," he said, digging his toe into the sand. "This thing is too mean to fool
with--without a good reason. Let's keep going."

It was before noon when Lea fell down. She really wanted to go on, but her body wouldn't obey.
The thin soles of her shoes were no protection against the burning sand and her feet were lumps
of raw pain. 

It was that man high, dry, aquiline, low color, age fifty, more or least sparse gray hair,
bushy eyebrows, cheeks, carefully shaved, leaving under the nose only a meager mustache that
each day would be more meager thanks to work for both of sides invaders carried out the knife:
the expression of face, stern and imposing, to which helped in no small part of those bushy
eyebrows that the good gentleman had received from heaven, and used to bow and extend the
conversation a prodigious manner and in greater portion is still some way extraordinary swell cheeks
and blowing air slowly and smoothly, which instilled in the party respect and veneration. He
played some important positions in government, and had been foundered after being named Sen. ministerial:
This was the dream of his life, had assets of fortune, and enjoyed great consideration among
his relatives and friends, to crown, however, the building of their respectability, that a stone
had been raised to work for many years, missing one shot, but catch him, there was no one doubted
it, the family was waiting with eagerness, the friends gave it as safe in a more or less brief.

II

In
the hallway waiting for Henry to his cousin Michael, who, so he raised his arms was and playing
the castanets took three or four heels in the air near him.

- Do you want to go down to the garage until lunchtime?

- What if mom is?

Miguel made a gesture of contempt. Henry hesitated a few moments, but finally decided quietly
opened the door and escape by the stairs.

Henry was a boy he kept at that time an incredible likeness ratter of those who now have prestige
among the ladies, then wrote a lot, but still ugly to which a good man can be. He wore usually made
matted hair and loom blurry nose full of snot, dirty hands and clothing and studded broken scrofula.
Only when her mother Dona Martina came to lie or take him out to walk to church or visiting to a
house he could see, but for this lady needed to lead him the second floor and was closeted
with him in a room that could be called for ablutions; After half an hour after suffering
a reasonable amount of Repelon, lugs ears and slapping, Dona Martina always thought indispensable
link to their task, leaving Enrique good crying and sighing, but clean as a whistle. And to another.
At home, where neatness prevailed, he looked evil eye and was often the victim for his aversion
to that precious quality, not only of parental correction, but the cruel and unthinkable onslaught
of her older sister Eulalia, a young sixteen Aprils not too flowery chaste, clean, industrious,
diligent, full, in short, domestic virtues, the care of their parents and the target of hatred of
Henry and cousin Michael.

- Listen, Miguel - Enrique said quietly, as they descended the stairs cautiously the yard, - why
do you want dad?

- To tell me that my dad is getting married - Miguel replied, shrugging
his shoulders with indifference.

- Who?

- With a lady.

- So you'll
have mom soon?

Miguel did not consider it necessary to reply.

- Are you happy?

-
What do I care?

- Are not you afraid you have?

... (Enrique nodded expressive thrashing.)

Michael looked a little
embarrassed.

- Why?

- Moms always hit more than dads - sententiously
said Enrique.

Michael paused for a moment and then said:

- If pegase me, I would
stick to her dad.

Henry would not insist.

In this crossed the courtyard and entered the garage.

What is there to spot did not and least reported, a number of pranks, all in flagrant opposition
to the integrity and cleaning of costumes: suffice it to say that came late in the stable, mounted
the horses, cribs were filled with straw, they swept the dirt, not yet satisfied, taking brush and
scraper, began to dust them out (and throw it over themselves.) When it was approaching lunchtime,
they were both disgusted to watch, so much so that Enrique, who, as we have said, had no inclination
toward cleaning up well determined, was thought for a moment looking at and looking at his
cousin.

- Do you know that we are pigs, Miguel?

He nodded, looking and looking at his cousin too.

- If we go to the dining room so mom gives me a gig ... Recontras what gig!

Miguel, with whom he was to be the case, was content to shake a bit
the dust.

- Look, we go to bed and Eulalia, the second floor, and
there we can wash ... I with these hands do not go to the dining room.

Indeed, Henry's hands at that time were not visible.

They came up with the same caution that had come down the stairs, threw a Enrique look at the
cabinet of his mother, and learning that Eulalia was there, and without fear rose whatsoever
to the second floor of the room and took possession of that lady. The first thing they did was
put on the door latch so that not surprised. Then they began to use and abuse of media copious
grooming that there existed, dipped both hands in the basin, which trasvertía the clearest water;
apoderáronse a wonderful bar of soap almonds, and within minutes, by dint of rubbing with her,
fell by almost one third hand, took the sponges, soaked in water in the jar and passed them repeatedly
Sometimes the face and head, not content with this, they took their sacrilegious hands to
the jar the ointment, the oil bottle and the bottles of essences, marinated and perfumed to all without
any mourning, not satisfied yet, dared to take the same powder puff Rice who served the sultan
pulcrísima to hide certain importunate rosettes that erysipelas had been born in his face and
smeared her in the midst of rude laughter; then took his audacity to still using a bottle of
rouge, lipstick, noses and our ears, as pigs were unclean, then turned to wash with the sponge
and dry with towels hanging from both of pristine sides of the toilet; finally washed their teeth
and teeth with brushes esmeradísimamente that this effect were there first by rubbing a box
of tooth powders. This magnificent and scrupulous washing of braces, crowned, according to both
the work of grooming that so successfully had been undertaken, and decided to go down to dinner.
But before leaving, they thought had happened to his pants covered in dust and filth; back
to dip the sponge, because they found no brushes, and rub it till cover stains. The boots were
too, and even more than the pants, in a state of merit, and Miguel went solicitous with sponge
to clean them, but Henry, not finding the means quite adequate, entered the bedroom of his
sister and they are cleaned well with the quilt of the bed. Aha! and are arranged one pair
of birds, they look in the wardrobe mirror and let out a sigh of
satisfaction.

However, Michael ponders for a moment and says:

- Look, you, if
Eulalia come now!

...

- It does not rise until bedtime ... Can not you see we eat now? And if it comes, What, recontra?
The day I hit again, I give in the face with the shovel (here Enrique took a bronze ad hoc
had hidden in the lining of the jacket). She does not have what hit me, against! Is my mother
in case? Ah, recontra; paste to get a word because he knows Dad! When mom before, and saved
it to touch my hair, clothes. And it say! Coscorron Menudo has sucked yesterday! ... And mom told
me: "Do not be silly, Henry, the day you hit your sister, throw it in the head with whatever's
at hand. "Here's the shovel; Come, come!

... Go, man, that is no longer suffering!

All day hits you wilt, like I was an artillery mule! ...

- But boy, if you give the shovel to kill it!

- That the mate, recontra!

What is in the world that sow? Always getting where do not call! Caciplándolo everything! Nose
poking in the things of his brothers ... I no longer take it anymore, recontra!

Despite the provisions of Henry bellicose about their sister, remained
a moment suspense and pale heard footsteps in the corridor, which
proved his cousin Miguel still had not entirely abandoned the self-preservation.

The steps are away at last without the disastrous result that was
feared, and Enrique calmer voice said:

- I think it's time to eat.

We go down before we call.

Indeed, when the two cousins ​​came to the main floor, the family was already in the dining room
it was a spacious room, furnished also to the former. In the center a large table carved oak covered
with tablecloth and cluttered with plates, cups, fruit and confectionery, judging by the number
of diners, there were guests. On the table burned a hanging bronze lamp the ceiling. The cupboards
were almost touching it and were also carved oak, chairs also oak,
all of oak.

This hardwood, solid and stern, seemed the symbol of that respectable family.

Sitting at the table and reading a newspaper, was the owner of the house, D. Bernardo Rivera
hideously wrinkled his forehead, not because he was upset, but because this was his habit whenever
I read something, kept in front of the newspapers and books attitude hostile prevented and
does not want to be the plaything of glittering sophistry or phrases. Dona Martina, his wife,
was spinning around the room, anxious that nothing should be wanting, or on, the board and dressers.
She was a woman of about forty, of medium height, plump, would not have been ugly to twenty,
open and friendly face, but ordinary, the size and the most ordinary yet, because the womb
had grown in recent years much most of the bill and had no brace that holds it, the shrill voice
and out of tune, gestures looking sharp and sweet and rosy, wore a brown velvet, which that time
was the most luxurious among the ladies of quality, but warned that this velvet was not as
well attached to their flesh as expected, given the imposing appearance and taste and elegance concluded
that reigned in the house. Was this (let's say in secret the reader, because in secrecy and
heard it said the family friends when they played this issue), in which Mrs. Martin had been
ironing in his youthful years, ironing the house of her husband, or rather, the parents of her
husband. How D. Bernardo Rivera had fallen so low and Dona Martina had risen so high, it was
not easy to explain At that time, years ago there was no such difficulty for those who appreciate
at its true value, solid pink meat and the good lady. This purpose there were a thousand stories
more or less funny that all the attention on her eulogy, Mrs. Martin had been in their flowering
times, an impregnable fortress, the fortress of Figueras and the citadel of Santona were castles of
cards at his side, their conditions had led to resistance happy conclusion that we see today.
True or false these sayings malicious, the result is that D. Bernardo was married and his wife
had to save himself from a blow huge gap between his humility and grandeur and authority that
had accompanied Mr. de Rivera from his earliest years. Does this lady actually saved? In concept
D. Bernard did not, and this was the most painful thorn in his life, which galled him many satisfaction
that the company had provided .. However, it must be admitted that she had done all that was
on their side, if he had not succeeded, acháquese all least in the absence of goodwill. And
we still believe her husband who was somewhat exaggerated in this point, for Dona Martina knew
very well, after a few years, get your friends husband with dignity and not with distinction,
and knew also prepare a table with elegance and ride in a carriage along the Castellana without
going stiff and uncomfortable in the seat, also learned not to fall asleep at the Teatro Real
and greet their friends from afar repeated opening and closing Sometimes the hand, offered the house
pretty well, but always with the same phrases he learned of the latest trends and applications; was
put rice powder and painted eyebrows when went to a soiree, and finally, though with strong Spanish
accent, had come to speak moderately French.

Despite all this, Mr. Rivera was not satisfied.

Not that he should report it foolishly and the first to arrive, as the caution was one of his
predominant qualities, but betrayed him to his close friends. Bernardo was wife scolded her face
too with raised voices and that its polite phrases were always the same and pronounced in string
as a lesson, which gave confidence to any friend without hesitation and began in domestic affairs,
who did not observe, in short, people who frequented the house, that dignity and reserve, this
impressive calm themselves a perfect lady. This chapter charges that Mr. Rivera was kept against
his wife, had caused serious trouble marriage.

Sitting in a chair working with ivory needle in a blanket of yarn
was Eulalia whose features greatly resembled that of his dad, was
also long face, aquiline of eyebrows and lips hanging expressing a
deep contempt for everything ranging his eyes as he had almost always
wrinkled forehead, which gave his face an expression hostile, fortunately
not very common in the daughters of his years, for Eulalia was in
age of love, illusions, tenderness, redness and innocence, even though
no these things were noted in it.

When the two cousins ​​stepped on the chair, raised his head and stuck them an intense look searching,
by tacit agreement they pretended not to notice. But against what they expected, instead of converting
back to work, followed ever more fixed and more searching on them to the point of upsetting
them. To avoid influence fascinating approached the gentlemen who were there, which they were
greeted with pats on the face.

Dona Martina, Miguel after giving a resounding kiss on her forehead, asked them where they had
been: Miguel said aloud, to hear him Eulalia, who had spent the afternoon in Carlos Enrique room
and play with map puzzles. Upon hearing this Charles, who had a year older than Henry, flew
into a madman, saying that if he again tangled with its maps, was to make in the face of his
brother and cousin as they were sounded, but that reassured him at once, expressing so low
that it had gone with his puzzles, but Eulalia bottles: not only quieted, but had a real satisfaction
because to hate Eulalia were unanimous in the house, unless his father and mother.

Carlitos was the handsome son of Mr. Rivera had, and most also applied. Face round, pink, regular
features, expressive black eyes and long lashes villages. All his studies at the school were
crowned with flattering success; diplomas border colors, books, silvered metal medal, even a laurel wreath
with silk ribbons mourn and runny made abundantly Dona Martina, when in the hands of the teacher
was Solemnly down the head of his son. But his favorite study was
always geography especially astronomy.

The globes and armillary spheres which had been purchased his father, can not easily be counted,
in spite of being a man of science, these artifacts lasted a short time in full in his hands, and
that Charlie was not limited to study the lesson, like any ordinary boy, but the loftiness
of his thought drew him to search out the secrets of our planet's topography, for which major
roads devised communication was careful to note in ink on the globe, crossing the mountains Higher
seas and lakes and saving through amazing bridges that no engineer world would have dared even to imagine.
Many times, however, the ink ran on the skin that was covered and the balloon was a mess, and repurchased
another father, so that the fire of passion is not extinguished geographic in children. Well concerning
the areas, passed the same. Charlie did not see the celestial spaces the astonishment of the ignorant
man or properly respected the immutable laws that determine revolutions of the stars, familiar
with every movement of rotation and translation was when it seemed new planetary systems, making
a simple satellite to the moon, verbi and grace, star fixed and rotating around all the planets,
including land, or imagining new and capricious eclipses, showing both stars ever seen, or
possible, in such a position. All of which was often that more astounded when his work was Charlie,
the device did crash! jumped some of the most important dislocábanse with it a few more, and
the sky was suffering complete disorder, as if it arrived the day of reckoning. But as stated
Carlitos so decided to call the Great Architect of the Universe and dad did not want in any
way otherwise, the next day was another area in which to continue their astronomical experiences.

Henry
had managed to appease his brother, not of the same fate Eulalia, who, after often lift their heads
and swallow it to look, it was decided to get out of chair and stealthily approaching him and
his cousin, with great dissimulation also put the nose on head of both, and ensuring that gave off
an aromatic smell very strong, sudden left and rushed from the room. Miguel Enrique and looked shocked,
but drawing strength of weakness, came to Vincent, the first of the sons of Mr. de Rivera, and
began to examine carefully the watch chain that recently bought his father.

Vicente was three years older than Charles, that is, thirteen, but looked like being ten and six height,
and thirty for his extraordinary gravity. He was a boy long face and yellow meat dry and angular,
opaque gaze, gestures, head up and rested, man mature.

It was not so applied or had the happy dispositions of his brother for science and the arts, but
instead had an elegance and distinction of manner, which was completely D. subdued Bernardo.
He spoke very little, not ever played, his pleasures were to leave walk with his dad and other
older men, and thus might see him friends and colleagues Institute. Preocupábale much more clothing
account, saying of her mother, who looked so with a grudge: had not ever made him well-tailored
clothes, and ironing it give him pleasure, for that purpose, provided that premiered a suit
or boots or shirt put clean, arming a jollín you heard throughout
the house; true that these were the only moments in giving an account
of himself and showed a boot, because everything else in this world
seemed have you not care, but anyway, was a postmodern bothered much,
and what he said Dona Martina quite right: - If this child is so irrelevant
now for clothes, what do when you have twenty years!

Indeed, when he was twenty years, there was just unbearable. I must say that D. Bernardo did
not share the dislike of his wife to Vincent, before believed that neatness as a precious quality
that reminded him that adorned him in his childhood. Regalábale often, sometimes with a cane,
sometimes with a pin tie, others in a ring of little value, and the day he turned thirteen, he bought
silver watch chain double.
 Half are clerical people from my staff.
     The others a mixed bag of whoever was close enough to
     be pulled in on this crash assignment. It developed so
     fast we never saw it coming. And I'm afraid we've done
     little or nothing to stop it. We can't get access to
     the natives here, not in the slightest. It's
     frightening! They don't fit! I've done Poisson
     Distributions on a dozen different factors and none of
     them can be equated. The Pareto Extrapolations don't
     work. Our field men can't even talk to the natives and
     two have been killed trying. The ruling class is
     unapproachable and the rest just keep their mouths shut
     and walk away.

     I'm going to take a chance and try to talk to
     Lig-magte, perhaps I can make him see sense. I doubt
     if it will work and there is a chance he will try
     violence with me. The nobility here are very prone to
     violence. If I get back all right you won't see this
     note. Otherwise--good-by, Ihjel. Try to do a better job
     than I did.
                                          Aston Mervv

     P.S. There is a problem with the staff. They are
     supposed to be saviors, but without exception they all
     loathe the Disans. I'm afraid I do too.

Brion ticked off the relevant points in the letter. He had to find some way of discovering
what Pareto Extrapolations were--without uncovering his own lack of knowledge. The staff would
vanish in five minutes if they knew how new he was at the job. Poisson Distribution made more
sense. It was used in physics as the unchanging probability of an event that would be true
at all times. Such as the numbers of particles that would be given off by a lump of radioactive
matter during a short period. From the way Mervv used it in his letter it looked as if the
societics people had found measurable applications in societies and groups. At least on other
planets. None of the rules seemed to be working on Dis. Ihjel had admitted that, and Mervv's
death had proven it. Brion wondered who this Lig-magte was who appeared to have killed Mervv.

A forged cough broke through Brion's concentration, and he realized that Faussel had been standing
in front of his desk for some minutes. Brion looked up and mopped perspiration from his face.

"Your air conditioner seems to be out of order," Faussel said. "Should I have the mechanic
look at it?"

"There's nothing wrong with the machine; I'm just adapting to Dis's climate. What else do you
want, Faussel?"

The assistant had a doubting look that he didn't succeed in hiding. He also had trouble believing
the literal truth. He placed the small stack of file folders on the desk.

"These are the reports to date, everything we have uncovered about the Disans. It's not very
much; but considering the anti-social attitudes on this lousy world it is the best we could
do." A sudden thought hit him, and his eyes narrowed slyly. "It can't be helped, but some of
the staff have been wondering out loud about that native that contacted us. How did you get
him to help you? We've never gotten to first base with these people, and as soon as you land
you have one working for you. You can't stop people from thinking about it, you being a newcomer
and a stranger. After all, it looks a little odd--" He broke off in midsentence as Brion looked
at him in cold fury.

"I can't stop people from thinking about it--but I can stop them from talking. Our job is to
contact the Disans and stop this suicidal war. I have done more in one day than you all have
done since you arrived. I have accomplished this because I am better at my work than the rest
of you. That is all the information any of you are going to receive. You are dismissed."

White with anger, Faussel turned on his heel and stamped out--to spread the word about what
a slave-driver the new director was. They would then all hate him passionately, which was just
the way he wanted it. He couldn't risk exposure as the tyro he was. And perhaps a new emotion,
other than disgust and defeat, might jar them into a little action. They certainly couldn't
do any worse than they had been doing.

It was a tremendous amount of responsibility. For the first time since setting foot on this
barbaric planet Brion had time to stop and think. He was taking an awful lot upon himself.
He knew nothing about this world, nor about the powers involved in the conflict. Here he sat
pretending to be in charge of an organization he had first heard about only a few weeks earlier.
It was a frightening situation. Should he slide out from under?

There was just one possible answer, and that was no. Until he found someone else who could
do better, he seemed to be the one best suited for the job. And Ihjel's opinion had to count
for something. Brion had felt the surety of the man's conviction that Brion was the only one
who might possibly succeed in this difficult spot.

Let it go at that. If he had any qualms it would be best to put them behind him. Aside from
everything else, there was a primary bit of loyalty involved. Ihjel had been an Anvharian and
a Winner. Maybe it was a provincial attitude to hold in this big universe--Anvhar was certainly
far enough away from here--but honor is very important to a man who must stand alone. He had
a debt to Ihjel, and he was going to pay it off.

Once the decision had been made, he felt easier. There was an intercom on the desk in front
of him and he leaned with a heavy thumb on the button labeled Faussel.

"Yes?" Even through the speaker the man's voice was cold with ill-concealed hatred.

"Who is Lig-magte? And did the former director ever return from seeing him?"

"Magte is a title that means roughly noble or lord. Lig-magte is the local overlord. He has
an ugly stoneheap of a building just outside the city. He seems to be the mouthpiece for the
group of magter that are pushing this idiotic war. As to your second question, I have to answer
yes and no. We found Director Mervv's head outside the door next morning with all the skin
gone. We knew who it was because the doctor identified the bridgework in his mouth. Do you
understand?"

All pretense of control had vanished, and Faussel almost shrieked the last words. They were
all close to cracking up, if he was any example. Brion broke in quickly.

"That will be all, Faussel. Just get word to the doctor that I would like to see him as soon
as I can." He broke the connection and opened the first of the folders. By the time the doctor
called he had skimmed the reports and was reading the relevant ones in greater detail. Putting
on his warm coat, he went through the outer office. The few workers still on duty turned their
backs in frigid silence.

Doctor Stine had a pink and shiny bald head that rose above a thick black beard. Brion had
liked him at once. Anyone with enough firmness of mind to keep a beard in this climate was
a pleasant exception after what he had met so far.

"How's the new patient, Doctor?"

Stine combed his beard with stubby fingers before answering. "Diagnosis: heat-syncope. Prognosis:
complete recovery. Condition fair, considering the dehydration and extensive sunburn. I've
treated the burns, and a saline drip is taking care of the other. She just missed going into
heat-shock. I have her under sedation now."

"I'd like to have her up and helping me tomorrow morning. Could she do this--with stimulants
or drugs?"

"She could--but I don't like it. There might be side factors, perhaps long-standing debilitation.
It's a chance."

"A chance we will have to take. In less than seventy hours this planet is due for destruction.
In attempting to avert that tragedy I'm expendable, as is everyone else here. Agreed?"

The doctor grunted deep in his beard and looked Brion's immense frame up and down. "Agreed,"
he said, almost happily. "It is a distinct pleasure to see something beside black defeat around
here. I'll go along with you."

"Well, you can help me right now. I checked the personnel roster and discovered that out of
the twenty-eight people working here there isn't a physical scientist of any kind--other than
yourself."

"A scruffy bunch of button-pushers and theoreticians. Not worth a damn for field work, the
whole bunch of them!" The doctor toed the floor switch on a waste receptacle and spat into
it with feeling.

"Then I'm going to depend on you for some straight answers," Brion said. "This is an un-standard
operation, and the standard techniques just don't begin to make sense. Even Poisson Distributions
and Pareto Extrapolations don't apply here." Stine nodded agreement and Brion relaxed a bit.
He had just relieved himself of his entire knowledge of societics, and it had sounded authentic.
"The more I look at it the more I believe that this is a physical problem, something to do
with the exotic and massive adjustments the Disans have made to this hellish environment. Could
this tie up in any way with their absolutely suicidal attitude towards the cobalt bombs?"

"Could it? Could it?" Dr. Stine paced the floor rapidly on his stocky legs, twining his fingers
behind his back. "You are bloody well right it could. Someone is thinking at last and not just
punching bloody numbers into a machine and sitting and scratching his behind while waiting
for the screen to light up with the answers. Do you know how Disans exist?" Brion shook his
head. "The fools here think it disgusting but I call it fascinating. They have found ways to
join a symbiotic relationship with the life forms on this planet. Even a parasitic relationship.
You must realize that living organisms will do anything to survive. Castaways at sea will drink
their own urine in their need for water. Disgust at this is only the attitude of the overprotected
who have never experienced extreme thirst or hunger. Well, here on Dis you have a planet of
castaways."

Stine opened the door of the pharmacy. "This talk of thirst makes me dry." With economically
efficient motions he poured grain alcohol into a beaker, thinned it with distilled water and
flavored it with some crystals from a bottle. He filled two glasses and handed Brion one. It
didn't taste bad at all.

"What do you mean by parasitic, Doctor? Aren't we all parasites of the lower life forms? Meat
animals, vegetables and such?"

"No, no--you miss the point! I speak of parasitic in the exact meaning of the word. You must
realize that to a biologist there is no real difference between parasitism, symbiosis, mutualism,
biontergasy, commensalism--"

"Stop, stop!" Brion said. "Those are just meaningless sounds to me. If that is what makes this
planet tick I'm beginning to see why the rest of the staff has that lost feeling."

"It is just a matter of degree of the same thing. Look. You have a kind of crustacean living
in the lakes here, very much like an ordinary crab. It has large claws in which it holds anemones,
tentacled sea animals with no power of motion. The crustacean waves these around to gather
food, and eats the pieces they capture that are too big for them. This is biontergasy, two
creatures living and working together, yet each capable of existing alone.

"Now, this same crustacean has a parasite living under its shell, a degenerated form of a snail
that has lost all powers of movement. A true parasite that takes food from its host's body
and gives nothing in return. Inside this snail's gut there is a protozoan that lives off the
snail's ingested food. Yet this little organism is not a parasite, as you might think at first,
but a symbiote. It takes food from the snail, but at the same time it secretes a chemical that
aids the snail's digestion of the food. Do you get the picture? All these life forms exist
in a complicated interdependence."

Brion frowned in concentration, sipping at the drink. "It's making some kind of sense now.
Symbiosis, parasitism and all the rest are just ways of describing variations of the same basic
process of living together. And there is probably a grading and shading between some of these
that make the exact relationship hard to define."

"Precisely. Existence is so difficult on this world that the competing forms have almost died
out. There are still a few left, preying off the others. It was the cooperating and interdependent
life forms that really won out in the race for survival. I say life forms with intent. The
creatures here are mostly a mixture of plant and animal, like the lichens you have elsewhere.
The Disans have a creature they call a "vaede" that they use for water when traveling. It has
rudimentary powers of motion from its animal part, yet uses photosynthesis and stores water
like a plant. When the Disans drink from it the thing taps their blood streams for food elements."

"I know," Brion said wryly. "I drank from one. You can see my scars. I'm beginning to comprehend
how the Disans fit into the physical pattern of their world, and I realize it must have all
kinds of psychological effects on them. Do you think this has any effect on their social organization?"

"An important one. But maybe I'm making too many suppositions now. Perhaps your researchers
upstairs can tell you better; after all, this is their field."

Brion had studied the reports on the social setup and not one word of them made sense. They
were a solid maze of unknown symbols and cryptic charts. "Please continue, Doctor," he insisted.
"The societics reports are valueless so far. There are factors missing. You are the only one
I have talked to so far who can give me any intelligent reports or answers."

"All right then--be it on your own head. The way I see it, you've got no society here at all,
just a bunch of rugged individualists. Each one for himself, getting nourishment from the other
life forms of the planet. If they have a society, it is orientated towards the rest of the
planetary life--instead of towards other human beings. Perhaps that's why your figures don't
make sense. They are set up for the human societies. In their relations with each other, these
people are completely different."

"What about the magter, the upper-class types who build castles and are causing all this trouble?"

"I have no explanation," Dr. Stine admitted. "My theories hold water and seem logical enough
up to this point. But the magter are the exception, and I have no idea why. They are completely
different from the rest of the Disans. Argumentative, blood-thirsty, looking for planetary
conquest instead of peace. They aren't rulers, not in the real sense. They hold power because
nobody else wants it. They grant mining concessions to offworlders because they are the only
ones with a sense of property. Maybe I'm going out on a limb. But if you can find out why they
are so different you may be onto the clue to our difficulties."

For the first time since his arrival Brion began to feel a touch of enthusiasm. Plus a sense
of the remote possibility that there might even be a solution to the deadly problem. He drained
his glass and stood up.

"I hope you'll wake your patient early, Doctor. You might be as interested in talking to her
as I am. If what you told me is true, she could well be our key to the answer. She is Professor
Lea Morees, and she is just out from Earth with degrees in exobiology and anthropology, and
has a head stuffed with vital facts."

"Wonderful!" Stine said. "I shall take care of the head, not only because it is so pretty but
because of its knowledge. Though we totter on the edge of atomic destruction I have a strange
feeling of optimism--for the first time since I landed on this planet."

IX

The guard inside the front entrance of the Foundation building jumped at the thunderous noise
and reached for his gun. He dropped his hand sheepishly when he realized it was only a sneeze--though
a gargantuan one. Brion came up, sniffling, huddling down into his coat. "I'm going out before
I catch pneumonia," he said. The guard saluted dumbly, and after checking his proximity detector
screens he slipped out and the heavy portal thudded shut behind him. The street was still warm
from the heat of the day and he sighed happily and opened his coat.

This was partly a reconnaissance trip--and partly a way of getting warmed up. There was little
else he could do in the building; the staff had long since retired. He had slept for a half
an hour, and had waked refreshed and ready to work. All of the reports he could understand
had been read and reread until they were memorized. He could use the time now, while the rest
of them were asleep, to get better acquainted with the main city of Dis.

As he walked the dark streets he realized how alien the Disan way of life was to everything
he knew. This city--Hovedstad--literally meant "main place" in the native language. And that's
all it was. It was only the presence of the offworlders that made it into a city. Building
after building, standing deserted, bore the names of mining companies, traders, space transporters.
None of them was occupied now. Some still had lights burning, switched on by automatic apparatus,
others were as dark as the Disan structures. There weren't many of these native constructions
and they seemed out of place among the rammed earth and prefab offworld buildings. Brion examined
one that was dimly illuminated by the light on the corner of VEGAN SMELTERS, LTD.

It consisted of a single large room, resting right on the ground. There were no windows, and
the whole thing appeared to have been constructed of some sort of woven material plastered
with stone-hard mud. Nothing was blocking the door and he was thinking seriously of going in
when he became aware that he was being followed.

It was only a slight noise, almost lost in the night. Normally it would never have been noticed,
but tonight Brion was listening with his entire body. Someone was behind him, swallowed up
in the pools of darkness. Brion shrank back against the wall. There was very little chance
this could be anyone but a Disan. He had a sudden memory of Mervv's severed head as it had
been discovered outside the door.

Ihjel had helped him train his empathetic sense and he reached out with it. It was difficult
working in the dark; he could be sure of nothing. Was he getting a reaction--or just wishing
for one? Why did it have a ring of familiarity to it? A sudden idea struck him.

"Ulv," he said, very softly. "This is Brion." He crouched, ready for any attack.

"I know," a voice said softly in the night. "Do not talk. Walk in the direction you were going
before."

Asking questions now would accomplish nothing. Brion turned instantly and did as he was bidden.
The buildings grew further apart until he realized from the sand underfoot that he was back
in the planet-wide desert. It could be a trap--he hadn't recognized the voice behind the whisper--yet
he had to take this chance. A darker shape appeared in the dark night near him, and a burning
hot hand touched his arm lightly.

"I will walk ahead. Follow close behind me." The words were louder and this time Brion recognized
the voice.

Without waiting for an answer, Ulv turned and his dimly seen shape vanished into the darkness.
Brion moved swiftly after him, until they walked side by side over the rolling hills of sand.
The sand merged into hard-baked ground, became cracked and scarred with rock-filled gulleys.
They followed a deepening gulley that grew into a good-sized ravine. When they turned an angle
of the ravine Brion saw a weak yellow light coming from an opening in the hard dirt wall.

Ulv dropped on all fours and vanished through the shoulder-wide hole. Brion followed him, trying
to ignore the growing tension and unease he felt. Crawling like this, head down, he was terribly
vulnerable. He tried to shrug off the feeling, mentally blaming it on tense nerves.

The tunnel was short and opened into a larger chamber. A sudden scuffle of feet sounded at
the same instant that a wave of empathetic hatred struck him. It took vital seconds to fight
his way out of the trapping tunnel, to roll clear and bring his gun up. During those seconds
he should have died. The Disan poised above him had the short-handled stone hammer raised to
strike a skull-crushing blow.

Ulv was clutching the man's wrist, fighting silently to keep the hammer from falling. Neither
combatant said a word, the rasp of their calloused feet on the sand the only sound. Brion backed
away from the struggling men, his gun centered on the stranger. The Disan followed him with
burning eyes, and dropped the hammer as soon as it was obvious the attack had failed.

"Why did you bring him here?" he growled at Ulv. "Why didn't you kill him?"

"He is here so we can listen to what he says, Gebk. He is the one I told you of, that I found
in the desert."

"We listen to what he says and then we kill him," Gebk said with a mirthless grin. The remark
wasn't meant to be humorous, but was made in all seriousness. Brion recognized this and knew
that there was no danger for the present moment. He slid the gun away, and for the first time
looked around the chamber.

It was domed in shape and was still hot from the heat of the day. Ulv took off the length of
cloth he had wrapped around his body against the chill, and refolded it as a kilt, strapping
it on under his belt artifacts. He grunted something unintelligible and when a muttered answer
came, Brion for the first time became aware of the woman and the child.

The two sat against the far wall, squatting on either side of a heap of fibrous plants. Both
were nude, clothed only in the matted hair that fell below their shoulders. The belt of strange
tools could not be classified as clothing. Even the child wore a tiny replica of her mother's.
Putting down a length of plant she had been chewing, the woman shuffled over to the tiny fire
that illuminated the room. A clay pot stood over it, and from this she ladled three bowls of
food for the men. It smelled atrocious, and Brion tried not to taste or smell the sickening
mixture while he ate it. He used his fingers, as did the other men, and did not talk while
he ate. There was no way to tell if the silence was ritual or habit. It gave him a chance for
a closer look at the Disan way of living.

The cave was obviously hand-made; tool marks could be clearly seen in the hard clay of the
walls, except in the portion opposite the entrance. This was covered with a network of roots,
rising out of the floor and vanishing into the roof of earth above. Perhaps this was the reason
for the cave's existence. The thin roots had been carefully twisted and plaited together until
they formed a single swollen root in the center, as thick as a man's arm. From this hung four
of the vaedes: Ulv had placed his there before he sat down. The teeth must have instantly sunk
in, for it hung unsupported--another link in the Disan life cycle. This appeared to be the
source of the vaede's water that nourished the people.

Brion was aware of eyes upon him and turned and smiled at the little girl. She couldn't have
been over six years old, but she was already a Disan in every way. She neither returned his
smile nor changed her expression, unchildlike in its stolidity. Her hands and jaw never stopped
as she worked on the lengths of fibrous plant her mother had placed before her. The child split
them with a small tool and removed a pod of some kind. This was peeled--partially by scraping
with a different tool, and partially by working between her teeth. It took long minutes to
remove the tough rind; the results seemed scarcely worth it. A tiny wriggling object was finally
disclosed which the girl instantly swallowed. She then began working on the next pod.

Ulv put down his clay bowl and belched. "I brought you to the city as I told you I would,"
he said. "Have you done as you said you would?"

"What did he promise?" Gebk asked.

"That he would stop the war. Have you stopped it?"

"I am trying to stop it," Brion said. "But it is not that easy. I'll need some help. It is
your life that needs saving--yours and your families'. If you would help me--"

"What is the truth?" Ulv broke in savagely. "All I hear is difference, and there is no longer
any way to tell truth. For as long as always we have done as the magter say. We bring them
food and they give us the metal and sometimes water when we need it. As long as we do as they
ask they do not kill us. They live the wrong way, but I have had bronze from them for my tools.
They have told us that they are getting a world for us from the sky people, and that is good."

"It has always been known that the sky people are evil in every way, and only good can come
from killing them," Gebk said.

Brion stared back at the two Disans and their obvious hatred. "Then why didn't you kill me,
Ulv?" he asked. "That first time in the desert, or tonight when you stopped Gebk?"

"I could have. But there was something more important. What is the truth? Can we believe as
we have always done? Or should we listen to this?"

He threw a small sheet of plastic to Brion, no bigger than the palm of his hand. A metal button
was fastened to one corner of the wafer, and a simple drawing was imbedded in the wafer. Brion
held it to the light and saw a picture of a man's hand squeezing the button between thumb and
forefinger. It was a subminiaturized playback; mechanical pressure on the case provided enough
current to play the recorded message. The plastic sheet vibrated, acting as a loudspeaker.

Though the voice was thin and scratchy, the words were clearly audible. It was an appeal for
the Disan people not to listen to the magter. It explained that the magter had started a war
that could have only one ending--the destruction of Dis. Only if the magter were thrown down
and their weapons discovered could there be any hope.

"Are these words true?" Ulv asked.

"Yes," Brion said.

"They are perhaps true," Gebk said, "but there is nothing that we can do. I was with my brother
when these word-things fell out of the sky and he listened to one and took it to the magter
to ask them. They killed him, as he should have known they would do. The magter kill us if
they know we listen to the words."

"And the words tell us we will die if we listen to the magter!" Ulv shouted, his voice cracking.
Not with fear, but with frustration at the attempt to reconcile two opposite points of view.
Up until this time his world had consisted of black and white values, with very few shadings
of difference in between.

"There are things you can do that will stop the war without hurting yourself or the magter,"
Brion said, searching for a way to enlist their aid.

"Tell us," Ulv grunted.

"There would be no war if the magter could be contacted, made to listen to reason. They are
killing you all. You could tell me how to talk to the magter, how I could understand them--"

"No one can talk to the magter," the woman broke in. "If you say something different they will
kill you as they killed Gebk's brother. So they are easy to understand. That is the way they
are. They do not change." She put the length of plant she had been softening for the child
back into her mouth. Her lips were deeply grooved and scarred from a lifetime of this work,
her teeth at the sides worn almost to the bone.

"Mor is right," Ulv said. "You do not talk to magter. What else is there to do?"

Brion looked at the two men before he spoke, and shifted his weight. The motion brought his
fingertips just a few inches from his gun. "The magter have bombs that will destroy Nyjord--this
is the next planet, a star in your sky. If I can find where the bombs are, I will have them
taken away and there will be no war."

"You want to aid the devils in the sky against our own people!" Gebk shouted, half rising.
Ulv pulled him back to the ground, but there was no more warmth in his voice as he spoke.

"You are asking too much. You will leave now."

"Will you help me, though? Will you help stop the war?" Brion asked, aware he had gone too
far, but unable to stop. Their anger was making them forget the reasons for his being there.

"You ask too much," Ulv said again. "Go back now. We will talk about it."

"Will I see you again? How can I reach you?"

"We will find you if we wish to talk to you," was all Ulv said. If they decided he was lying
he would never see them again. There was nothing he could do about it.

"I have made up my mind," Gebk said, rising to his feet and drawing his cloth up until it covered
his shoulders. "You are lying and this is all a lie of the sky people. If I see you again I
will kill you." He stepped to the tunnel and was gone.

There was nothing more to be said. Brion went out next--checking carefully to be sure that
Gebk really had left--and Ulv guided him to the spot where the lights of Hovedstad were visible.
He did not speak during their return journey and vanished without a word. Brion shivered in
the night chill of the air and wrapped his coat more tightly around himself. Depressed, he
walked back towards the warmer streets of the city.

It was dawn when he reached the Foundation building; a new guard was at the front entrance.
No amount of hammering or threats could convince the man to open until Faussel came down, yawning
and blinking with sleep. He was starting some complaint when Brion cut him off curtly and ordered
him to finish dressing and report for work at once. Still feeling elated, Brion hurried into
his office and cursed the overly efficient character who had turned on his air conditioner
to chill the room again. When he turned it off this time he removed enough vital parts to keep
it out of order for the duration.

When Faussel came in he was still yawning behind his fist--obviously a low morning-sugar type.
"Before you fall on your face, go out and get some coffee," Brion said. "Two cups. I'll have
a cup too."

"That won't be necessary," Faussel said, drawing himself up stiffly. "I'll call the canteen
if you wish some." He said it in the iciest tone he could manage this early in the morning.

In his enthusiasm Brion had forgotten the hate campaign he had directed against himself. "Suit
yourself," he said shortly, getting back into the role. "But the next time you yawn there'll
be a negative entry in your service record. If that's clear--you can brief me on this organization's
visible relations with the Disans. How do they take us?"

Faussel choked and swallowed a yawn. "I believe they look on the C.R.F. people as some species
of simpleton, sir. They hate all offworlders; memory of their desertion has been passed on
verbally for generations. So by their one-to-one logic we should either hate back or go away.
We stay instead. And give them food, water, medicine and artifacts. Because of this they let
us remain on sufferance. I imagine they consider us do-gooder idiots, and as long as we cause
no trouble they'll let us stay." He was struggling miserably to suppress a yawn, so Brion turned
his back and gave him a chance to get it out.

"What about the Nyjorders? How much do they know of our work?" Brion looked out the window
at dusty buildings, outlined in purple against the violent colors of the desert sunrise. 

D. Bernard stopped to take a look at Michael, who at the time he heard his uncle, or not listening
(this could never find Bernardo), gave endless laps between fingers to a Greek vessel that served
as press mud papers. Quitóselo hand gently colocolo in place and returned to pick up the ride interrupted
the thread of his discourse.

- The pain you felt your father was great, and has kept and who is at all times of her widowhood
the respect due to the memory of a lady like your mother as principal. For space of two years spent
mourning not only him but brought him to the servants, the carriage and horses, not well-trod
the halls until the year elapsed, or received theirs more than the entire Friends confidence
thus acquired the respect and consideration of the people. But as things can not and should not
be the end, after two or three years, your father went back into the life of the distinguished
society, wherein his name, his rank in the army and his fortune is entitled to shine among the first.
Then he started playing the real disadvantages of his condition. In a house of the importance Fernando
the lady is absolutely indispensable, you can not understand this because you are very young, Michael,
was a child! ...

D. Bernardo felt back to his nephew with deep compassion.

- The presence of a lady, a lady, informed the house a certain brightness or name and money alone
can achieve. Your poor father has been deprived for eight years giving dances, dinners, or even
a tea ... Who would do the honors? ... And your home is one of the best in Madrid, is decorated
with taste, but somewhat neglected some time now. It is a shame and great that he could not even
play now The spacious and elegant living room you have. Furthermore, as I have observed and found
also some people in the family and without, at the home of some confusion reigns Fernando inevitable,
for good a housekeeper, how good they are the servants, it is not possible to properly address all
the details ... Education yourself, Miguel, walketh neglected to
tell people.

I've been told at home swear like a trooper ...

These last words were said D. Bernardo with higher pitch and standing in front of his nephew. He
smiled embarrassed, but seeing the guy furrowed brows, he fell seriously again.

- Of course! a parent by more than endeavor can not get your child to learn certain rules of
etiquette, not failing to miss a single moment. This can only do a woman, a mother ... So from a
long time I have advised my brother and me whole family, not just the family but few friends
are interested in him, which again take state, set his house on foot and save it deserves
the honor of the family ... At last, yielding to my repeated entreaties, and I repeat that not
only mine, but to of all his relatives and friends, your father has
thought to give your home a woman and you a Mom ... But understand
it well, Miguel, only for the reasons outlined above, no other one,
your father has consented to take state ... Do you do well the job
?....

Miguel looked at him and he looked again with eyes wide open,
not moving, he felt like atrocious going to play with his cousin Henry.

-
Now, the same as your father to me, the whole family, we hope that
the presence Your new mom operating in a favorable change your behavior,
you leave these manners, proper of riffraff, not men, do not spend
the day stuck in the kitchen, listening to the nonsense of the servants,
who do not you crawl on the floor like a dog, spoiling the clothes;
you are, in short, less wild and shameless.

A Miguel fancied that he was insulting his uncle, so, taking advantage of their laps, he made
some disparaging faces, and, not satisfied with this, another round one far more rude sign that
the groom had taught him, and that view it would have left absorbed the respectable gentleman.

-
With that we, Miguel, besides many other beneficial changes in your house have to make sure,
and age you have no understanding yet ..... And right for today.

 They are attempting
to uncover the weapons by sheer strength of arms."

This was the best news yet. Brion controlled his voice and kept his expression calm when he
spoke. "I don't know how far I can stretch your cooperation--but could you possibly tell me
how to get in touch with them?"

Kraft allowed himself a small smile. "I'll give you the wave length on which you can reach
their radio. They call themselves the 'Nyjord army.' When you talk to them you can do me a
favor. Pass on a message. Just to prove things aren't bad enough, they've become a little worse.
One of our technical crews has detected jump-space energy transmissions in the planetary crust.
The Disans are apparently testing their projector, sooner than we had estimated. Our deadline
has been revised by one day. I'm afraid there are only two days left before you must evacuate."
His eyes were large with compassion. "I'm sorry. I know this will make your job that much harder."

Brion didn't want to think about the loss of a full day from his already close deadline. "Have
you told the Disans this yet?"

"No," Krafft told him. "The decision was reached a few minutes before your call. It is going
on the radio to Lig-magte now."

"Can you cancel the transmission and let me take the message in person?"

"I can do that." Krafft thought for a moment. "But it would surely mean your death at their
hands. They have no hesitation in killing any of our people. I would prefer to send it by radio."

"If you do that you will be interfering with my plans, and perhaps destroying them under the
guise of saving my life. Isn't my life my own--to dispose of as I will?"

For the first time Professor Krafft was upset. "I'm sorry, terribly sorry. I'm letting my concern
and worry wash over into my public affairs. Of course you may do as you please; I could never
think of stopping you." He turned and said something inaudible offscreen. "The call is cancelled.
The responsibility is yours. All our wishes for success go with you. End of transmission."

"End of transmission," Brion said, and the screen went dark.

"Faussel!" he shouted into the intercom. "Get me the best and fastest sand car we have, a driver
who knows his way around, and two men who can handle a gun and know how to take orders. We're
going to get some positive action at last."

X

"It's suicide," the taller guard grumbled.

"Mine, not yours, so don't worry about it," Brion barked at him. "Your job is to remember your
orders and keep them straight. Now--let's hear them again."

The guard rolled his eyes up in silent rebellion and repeated in a toneless voice: "We stay
here in the car and keep the motor running while you go inside the stone pile there. We don't
let anybody in the car and we try and keep them clear of the car--short of shooting them, that
is. We don't come in, no matter what happens or what it looks like, but wait for you here.
Unless you call on the radio, in which case we come in with the automatics going and shoot
the place up, and it doesn't matter who we hit. This will be done only as a last resort."

"See if you can't arrange that last resort thing," the other guard said, patting the heavy
blue barrel of his weapon.

"I meant that last resort," Brion said angrily. "If any guns go off without my permission you
will pay for it, and pay with your necks. I want that clearly understood. You are here as a
rear guard and a base for me to get back to. This is my operation and mine alone--unless I
call you in. Understood?"

He waited until all three men had nodded in agreement, then checked the charge on his gun--it
was fully loaded. It would be foolish to go in unarmed, but he had to. One gun wouldn't save
him. He put it aside. The button radio on his collar was working and had a strong enough signal
to get through any number of walls. He took off his coat, threw open the door and stepped out
into the searing brilliance of the Disan noon.

There was only the desert silence, broken by the steady throb of the car's motor behind him.
Stretching away to the horizon in every direction was the eternal desert of sand. The keep
stood nearby, solitary, a massive pile of black rock. Brion plodded closer, watching for any
motion from the walls. Nothing stirred. The high-walled, irregularly shaped construction sat
in a ponderous silence. Brion was sweating now, only partially from the heat.

He circled the thing, looking for a gate. There wasn't one at ground level. A slanting cleft
in the stone could be climbed easily, but it seemed incredible that this might be the only
entrance. A complete circuit proved that it was. Brion looked unhappily at the slanting and
broken ramp, then cupped his hands and shouted loudly.

"I'm coming up. Your radio doesn't work any more. I'm bringing the message from Nyjord that
you have been waiting to hear." This was a slight bending of the truth without fracturing it.
There was no answer--just the hiss of wind-blown sand against the rock and the mutter of the
car in the background. He started to climb.

The rock underfoot was crumbling and he had to watch where he put his feet. At the same time
he fought a constant impulse to look up, watching for anything falling from above. Nothing
happened. When he reached the top of the wall he was breathing hard; sweat moistened his body.
There was still no one in sight. He stood on an unevenly shaped wall that appeared to circle
the building. Instead of having a courtyard inside it, the wall was the outer face of the structure,
the domed roof rising from it. At varying intervals dark openings gave access to the interior.
When Brion looked down, the sand car was just a dun-colored bump in the desert, already far
behind him.

Stooping, he went through the nearest door. There was still no one in sight. The room inside
was something out of a madman's funhouse. It was higher than it was wide, irregular in shape,
and more like a hallway than a room. At one end it merged into an incline that became a stairwell.
At the other it ended in a hole that vanished in darkness below. Light of sorts filtered in
through slots and holes drilled into the thick stone wall. Everything was built of the same
crumble-textured but strong rock. Brion took the stairs. After a number of blind passages and
wrong turns he saw a stronger light ahead, and went on. There was food, metal, even artifacts
of the unusual Disan design in the different rooms he passed through. Yet no people. The light
ahead grew stronger, and the last passageway opened and swelled out until it led into the large
central chamber.

This was the heart of the strange structure. All the rooms, passageways and halls existed just
to give form to this gigantic chamber. The walls rose sharply, the room being circular in cross
section and growing narrower towards the top. It was a truncated cone, since there was no ceiling;
a hot blue disk of sky cast light on the floor below.

On the floor stood a knot of men who stared at Brion.

Out of the corner of his eyes, and with the very periphery of his consciousness, he was aware
of the rest of the room--barrels, stores, machinery, a radio transceiver, various bundles and
heaps that made no sense at first glance. There was no time to look closer. Every fraction
of his attention was focused on the muffled and hooded men.

He had found the enemy.

Everything that had happened to him so far on Dis had been preparation for this moment. The
attack in the desert, the escape, the dreadful heat of sun and sand. All this had tempered
and prepared him. It had been nothing in itself. Now the battle would begin in earnest.

None of this was conscious in his mind. His fighter's reflexes bent his shoulders, curved his
hands before him as he walked softly in balance, ready to spring in any direction. Yet none
of this was really necessary. All the danger so far was nonphysical. When he did give conscious
thought to the situation he stopped, startled. What was wrong here? None of the men had moved
or made a sound. How could he even know they were men? They were so muffled and wrapped in
cloth that only their eyes were exposed.

No doubt, however, existed in Brion's mind. In spite of muffled cloth and silence, he knew
them for what they were. The eyes were empty of expression and unmoving, yet were filled with
the same negative emptiness as those of a bird of prey. They could look on life, death, and
the rending of flesh with the same lack of interest and compassion. All this Brion knew in
an instant of time, without words being spoken. Between the time he lifted one foot and walked
a step he understood what he had to face. There could be no doubt, not to an empathetic.

From the group of silent men poured a frost-white wave of unemotion. An empathetic shares what
other men feel. He gets his knowledge of their reaction by sensing lightly their emotions,
the surges of interest, hate, love, fear, desire, the sweep of large and small sensations that
accompany all thought and action. The empathetic is always aware of this constant and silent
surge, whether he makes the effort to understand it or not. He is like a man glancing across
the open pages of a tableful of books. He can see that the type, words, paragraphs, thoughts
are there, even without focusing his attention to understand any of it.

Then how does the man feel when he glances at the open books and sees only blank pages? The
books are there--the words are not. He turns the pages of one, of the others, flipping the
pages, searching for meaning. There is no meaning. All of the pages are blank.

This was the way in which the magter were blank, without emotions. There was a barely sensed
surge and return that must have been neural impulses on a basic level--the automatic adjustments
of nerve and muscle that keep an organism alive. Nothing more. Brion reached for other sensations,
but there was nothing there to grasp. Either these men were without emotions, or they were
able to block them from his detection; it was impossible to tell which.

Very little time had passed while Brion made these discoveries. The knot of men still looked
at him, silent and unmoving. They weren't expectant, their attitude could not have been called
one of interest. But he had come to them and now they waited to find out why. Any questions
or statements they spoke would be superfluous, so they didn't speak. The responsibility was his.

"I have come to talk with Lig-magte. Who is he?" Brion didn't like the tiny sound his voice
made in the immense room.

One of the men gave a slight motion to draw attention to himself. None of the others moved.
They still waited.

"I have a message for you," Brion said, speaking slowly to fill the silence of the room and
the emptiness of his thoughts. This had to be handled right. But what was right? "I'm from
the Foundation in the city, as you undoubtedly know. I've been talking to the people of Nyjord.
They have a message for you."

The silence grew longer. Brion had no intention of making this a monologue. He needed facts
to operate, to form an opinion. Looking at the silent forms was telling him nothing. Time stretched
taut, and finally Lig-magte spoke.

"The Nyjorders are going to surrender."

It was an impossibly strange sentence. Brion had never realized before how much of the content
of speech was made up of emotion. If the man had given it a positive emphasis, perhaps said
it with enthusiasm, it would have meant, "Success! The enemy is going to surrender!" This wasn't
the meaning.

With a rising inflection on the end it would have been a question. "Are they going to surrender?"
It was neither of these. The sentence carried no other message than that contained in the simplest
meanings of the separate words. It had intellectual connotations, but these could only be gained
from past knowledge, not from the sound of the words. There was only one message they were
prepared to receive from Nyjord. Therefore Brion was bringing the message. If that was not
the message Brion was bringing the men here were not interested.

This was the vital fact. If they were not interested he could have no further value to them.
Since he came from the enemy, he was the enemy. The
entire mass of stone, broad and bold, which makes up the dome rests on sixteen large columns, each
consisting of nine of uneven thickness, thrown with force to give the high masonry paneling,
bare and bleak. The nave is of great daring, and there throughout the building that severe nature of
darkness and solemn simplicity which distinguished especially to the Gothic architecture of France.

The
absence of any luxury, and gold ornaments all strangers to art itself,
is manifested there, revealing the colossal mass of stone and wood
pure (no sumptuous marble or tile) austerely religious feeling that
dominated his greatest creations artists to the people of the Middle
Ages.

For the rest, the religious pictures painted on the stained glass of high ogive, are of much merit,
and therefore can compete with those of Our Lady of Paris.

The choir has exquisite sculptures and bas-reliefs very beautiful in oak and walnut, but it
is difficult appreciate the darkness of the temple, always dark and lonely.

The church of San Pedro, which is also in the Gothic style, pure and
in the same time or perhaps above, located in downtown Lyon, is still
a more vigorous type of their nakedness their sorrow and their overall
proportions.

The facade is beautiful, has just been restored (As will other ancient temples), and one of
the towers has a wealth of sculptures or precious carvings. Long and narrow, has three ships
as well, cut to the headpiece, and their merit lies in the boldness of the nave, arches and full
large spinner. For the rest, their glass mosaics are without merit, and the whole building shows
a desolation and poverty that sad. That temple looks like a vast tomb stone, nude, black, dark
like a feudal castle.

The small church Ainay, abbey, called the attention of all passengers, not have merit as a work
of architecture, but because it is a very historical curiosity particular.

Some claim it was built in the third century, but more certain is that data of V, having been
restored in the IX under Pope Paschal. It is a low building and reduced pure Byzantine style,
and therefore makes a great contrast simplicity charged with the work of the temples of the
Middle Ages.

Ainay church is the oldest in Lyon and there only remains of the times
Merovingian.

It has three naves, and almost as wide as long, has beautiful mosaic glass and tiles that contain
major in ancient history or hieroglyphic characters; and is notable also for its four huge
granite columns, one piece, two which, in a delicious blue, came from a great piece found near
Lyon forming a Roman column.

I've mentioned before the Hotel Dieu, which dominates the spring or
parapet of the Rhone, a beautiful monument, worthy of admiration for
their grandeur and majesty.

I will quote by the way the palace Justice, because both belong to the sumptuous style of the
Renaissance, when art shows subjugated by the rules and symmetry holds academic rather than
inspiration,

The palace, situated on a square to the right bank of the Saône and giving the front, has a splendid
facade resting on a huge monumental colonnade, which begins in huge bleachers and ends in twenty
grand Doric columns, stone pure, maintain the external mass. The main body of the palace is
a vast and rich classroom where public sessions are held Assizes court and have his office
all courts de Lyon. A large rotunda with beautiful frescoes and reliefs covers the main hall, sustained
eight thick columns of granite and marble and jasper are lavished on the pavement and the walls
to give to this "temple of justice" imposing majesty.

       * * * * *

Apart from public monuments and objects I have mentioned, has many other institutes Lyon of a
different order, more or less deserving of attention. These are: the Mint, the great cigar factory,
the deposit of salts and plant the garden again, imitation in miniature Bologna forest - between
those of a material, among the religious, synagogue and Calvinists in practice some temples, and among
those relating to education, welfare and typography, a deaf-mute hospice, several select hospitals,
a library selected with 110,000 volumes, an academy and school of fine arts, many schools notable
for all branches of knowledge, arts and crafts school, observatory, a pawnshop, about thirty
printers, with twelve or fourteen permanent papers, and a multitude of other establishments that make Lyon
a city almost the first order.

As Lyon is the major center of silk production and manufacture, and does so considerable French
role in commerce and even the world are there almost all the consulates
nations, and the movement of the general speculation is huge and the
nature of their changes.

The traveler who ignore certain aspects of the industry, come to Lyon for the purpose of go
to marvel considering the large factories from where the rich silks, and are working to 80.000
workers of either sex. But how is the surprise that such factories do not exist, and that
such a huge production out of Lyon is not the fruit but detailed
operations of small companies and isolated efforts and patients in
the taste and intelligence of workers make much more than the mechanics!

In

effect, the system of the manufacture of silk is a kind of piecework rather than in the organization
of work on a large scale factories have been established manufacturing centers. The silk is harvested
on the plains of the Rhone, the Saone, ETC. by independent smallholders, and ready for collection
after the tissues large speculators and significant plants and then distributed by employers
tissue, to the weavers. In Lyon are counted as eight hundred small factories, and although
most of its owners have the background that they provide you with the looms and machines some
receive advances or loans for the cost of installation. Each of these small factories have
five, ten, twenty, thirty or more workers some (but are rare in many), and the director, which
is a kind of master-worker, get this or the other employer Under an agreement to free, silks
prepared designs or models for the drawings, carvings and other works to be included in a piece of
silk, and all necessary instructions.

The weaver executes his work with the greatest care, using the loom and utensils; but doing it all by
hand, because no machine can run the admirable quirks fashion, embroidery, designs and finest
nuances required when the silk are not stamped. Hence comes the exquisite beauty and superiority
and the high price and limited quantity of silks from Lyon, the world's best in its genre.

But that organization free, spontaneous and very special work, be in- important economic and moral
consequences that caught my attention. Since then, The first result is the independence of the
worker, who, not being a slave to the factory is not subject to receive the law of the capitalist.
The competition held among eight hundred Many small factories and businesses that contract
with them, avoid the vices that would be of agglomeration of production in a few large-scale factories;
plot effects bankruptcies and general crisis of base gives the freedom to work, and sets in a regulate
the value of the product.

VEPE while the worker works with more interest and encouragement, which saves material cousin, takes
more time, working at home, have less chance of vice and the more moral, you feel the consciousness
of his independent personality, and is to covered, in general, those fatal crashes that occur
often in large factories where they work hundreds or thousands of workers Unfortunately, not
all productions provided to the organization happy, because in almost all other machines perform
admirably the work of man or the works are essentially collective.

       * * * * *

       CHAPTER III.

* * * * *

RHONE VALLEY.

The vast Rhone Valley, sandwiched between the Alps or its branches and chain arid mountains of the
Cevennes, a region extremely interesting and beautiful. The Rhone and mighty, always slow to
start, and frequently overflowing on the plain follows the north-south direction of the Cevennes
mountains, almost always by the foot of the rocks bare or steep hills,
fertilizing an immense plain, extending through Provence and part
of Languedoc to the Mediterranean.

The railroad from Lyon to Marseille is the same direction of the river to Tarascon, where he departs
in east direction to go and seek Tyro opulent French trade at midday.

That turn of the railroad makes the traveler has a great interest throughout the journey, because
the scenery is lovely magnificence. To the left or the east face of Alpine north to south
forming three overlapping lines: one to stand out from the clouds the steep snow-covered peaks,
a lower, blue, vague and almost misty, mountains giant without highlights,
and another, in short, shorter and perceptible, composed complicated
mountains and hills that go down in the amphitheater until you find
your seat in the plains of Dauphine and Provence, one of whose centers
delay the city of Grenoble.

To the west, overlooking the sandy bed of the Rhone, which sometimes hides among small wild willow
forests and steep white poplar drinks, runs the mountains of the Ardeche, sad and barren, composed
of a series of burnt and rocky hills, here and there for some open cut. They lack any vegetation,
because the raging winds of the Alps the ground and barely visible, apart in distance, and
some huge castle ruins feudal dominate the highest eminences as leaning over the abyss, and
some Small stocks climbed to the mountains rise to receive such protection castles, each afar
a vast nest of eagles to the spikes attached rocks.

In between those two orographic formations look so different, it takes the opulent valley crossed
by tributaries of the Rhone, including the Durance, which brings water Provence poetics. Queen
wherever the most careful cultivation by a sort of valley endless orchard. It is now many mulberry
dwarf, which provide their food at the manufacturer of silk worm, and make a nice contrast to her
dark green and vigorous, orderly streets that cross in all directions, with clear and vivid
green of almond yellow or nearly intermediaries vineyards beginning to open first leaves. Then,
as you move away from Lyon, is looking to reduce the number of mulberry trees gradually replaced
in the beautiful olive groves of Provence by gray color, whose gray ink, melancholy in the extreme,
stands as an immense shroud on movent the green carpet of wheat planted
in the middle of the wide streets of olive trees.

From Lyon to Marseille the train passes playing in many major cities and towns, some of them
rich in ancient monuments, Roman and feudal traditions and memories of great significance
for the history. The train passed first a considerable tunnel beneath the city of Vienne, located
to the left bank of the Rhone, on a bed of flint and granite rocks, apparently, and at the foot of hills
where terraced vineyards vegetate amphitheater, and then crosses the plain which is center to
Valence, city something considerable, and then continues without
interruption, by Montelimart, Orange, Avignon, Tarascon and Rognac,
to give to the Mediterranean near Marseille.

Wherever there are treasures of architecture, sculpture and painting, that remind you the traveler
everything the Roman civilization, and then the average age of crowded into the fields of southern
Gaul to leave traces of their passage magnificent. Within walking distance Via near Tarascon,
still remains a very famous Saint-Esprit monumental cast bridge by
the Romans on the Rhone, which arouses admiration for the marvels
of that race of giants, and none has achieved perfection imitate greatness
and duration.

Passing through Provence one feels touched by a world of memories that make you dream with the heroic
days of the troubadours of Provence, these inspired and gallant founders French language and
propagators, poetry, music, singing, feeling chivalrous and religion and spirituality of the
Christian idea. In front of Avignon, in whose center hold still magnificent ruins, such as
the famous palace of the Pope, who was resident during the schism, one can not but recall to
Vaucluse, devise poetic figure Laura ungrateful but modest, and whisper
some of the sweet, immortal sonnets of Petrarch, King of the singers
of love.

It is well understood that sentimental and heroic admirable passion, to think of the character
of the XII and XIII, and see the lovely region of Provence, then should be much more beautiful
and rich in inspiration. No less interesting is Tarascon, where are important ruins of monuments,
testimony of a former glory. But from there to Marseille via loses its artistic interest,
because the cord of monumental cities departs southward across the Languedoc, a country half-French,
half-Roman and Spanish. Is current location on the interesting cities of Arles, Nimes and Montpellier,
is very remarkable as a literary and scientific center, not without beauty of art and the
other two as true sanctuaries within its walls bear the wonders of visual art and architecture
and painting that civilization in its march successive treasured
in the south of France.

The plain finally lost his long Rognac horizon, the hills and mountains are complicated, Warning
of the wealthy Marseille and the Mediterranean, a small penetrating Gulf amid the mountains round
the coast surprises travelers, offering in the rich Salinas de Berre,
Martigues Rognac and a beautiful circular lake, calm and clear, whose
waves arrive to the foot of the trees. "Didn't Ihjel also hope that you would give some study to
the natives as well as their environment? The problem is with the Disans--not with the local
wild life."

"But I am studying them," Lea insisted. "The Disans have attained an incredibly advanced form
of commensalism. Their lives are so intimately connected and integrated with the other life
forms that they must be studied in relation to their environment. I doubt if they show as many
external physical changes as little eating-foot Odostomia on the slide here, but there will
surely be a number of psychological changes and adjustments that will crop up. One of these
might be the explanation of their urge for planetary suicide."

"That may be true--but I don't think so," Brion said. "I went on a little expedition this morning
and found something that has more immediate relevancy."

For the first time Lea became aware of his slightly battered condition. Her drug-grooved mind
could only follow a single idea at a time and had over-looked the significance of the bandage
and dirt.

"I've been visiting," Brion said, forestalling the question on her lips. "The magter are the
ones who are responsible for causing the trouble, and I had to see them up close before I could
make any decisions. It wasn't a very pleasant thing, but I found out what I wanted to know.
They are different in every way from the normal Disans. I've compared them. I've talked to
Ulv--the native who saved us in the desert--and I can understand him. He is not like us in
many ways--he certainly couldn't be, living in this oven--but he is still undeniably human.
He gave us drinking water when we needed it, then brought help. The magter, the upper-class
lords of Dis, are the direct opposite. As cold-blooded and ruthless a bunch of murderers as
you can possibly imagine. They tried to kill me when they met me, without reason. Their clothes,
habits, dwellings, manners--everything about them differs from that of the normal Disan. More
important, the magter are as coldly efficient and inhuman as a reptile. They have no emotions,
no love, no hate, no anger, no fear--nothing. Each of them is a chilling bundle of thought
processes and reactions, with all the emotions removed."

"Aren't you exaggerating?" Lea asked. "After all, you can't be sure. It might just be part
of their training not to reveal any emotional state. Everyone must experience emotional states,
whether they like it or not."

"That's my main point. Everyone does--except the magter. I can't go into all the details now,
so you'll just have to take my word for it. Even at the point of death they have no fear or
hatred. It may sound impossible, but it is true."

Lea tried to shake the knots from her drug-hazed mind. "I'm dull today," she said. "You'll
have to excuse me. If these rulers had no emotional responses, that might explain their present
suicidal position. But an explanation like this raises more new problems than it supplies answers
to the old ones. How did they get this way! It doesn't seem humanly possible to be without
emotions of some kind."

"Just my point. Not humanly possible. I think these ruling class Disans aren't human at all,
like the other Disans. I think they are alien creatures--robots or androids--anything except
men. I think they are living in disguise among the normal human dwellers."

At first Lea started to smile, then her feeling changed when she saw his face. "You are serious?"
she asked.

"Never more so. I realize it must sound as if I've had my brains bounced around too much this
morning. Yet this is the only idea I can come up with that fits all of the facts. Look at the
evidence yourself. One simple thing stands out clearly, and must be considered first if any
theory is to hold up. That is the magters' complete indifference to death--their own or anyone
else's. Is that normal to mankind?"

"No--but I can find a couple of explanations that I would rather explore first, before dragging
in an alien life form. There may have been a mutation or an inherited disease that has deformed
or warped their minds."

"Wouldn't that be sort of self-eliminating?" Brion asked. "Anti-survival? People who die before
puberty would find it a little difficult to pass on a mutation to their children. But let's
not beat this one point to death--it's the totality of these people that I find so hard to
accept. Any one thing might be explained away, but not the collection of them. What about their
complete lack of emotion? Or their manner of dress and their secrecy in general? The ordinary
Disan wears a cloth kilt, while the magter cover themselves as completely as possible. They
stay in their black towers and never go out except in groups. Their dead are always removed
so they can't be examined. In every way they act like a race apart--and I think they are."

"Granted for the moment that this outlandish idea might be true, how did they get here? And
why doesn't anyone know about it besides them?"

"Easily enough explained," Brion insisted. "There are no written records on this planet. After
the Breakdown, when the handful of survivors were just trying to exist here, the aliens could
have landed and moved in. Any interference could have been wiped out. Once the population began
to grow, the invaders found they could keep control by staying separate, so their alien difference
wouldn't be noticed."

"Why should that bother them?" Lea asked. "If they are so indifferent to death, they can't
have any strong thoughts on public opinion or alien body odor. Why would they bother with such
a complex camouflage? And if they arrived from another planet, what has happened to the scientific
ability that brought them here?"

"Peace," Brion said. "I don't know enough to be able even to guess at answers to half your
questions. I'm just trying to fit a theory to the facts. And the facts are clear. The magter
are so inhuman they would give me nightmares--if I were sleeping these days. What we need is
more evidence."

"Then get it," Lea said with finality. "I'm not telling you to turn murderer--but you might
try a bit of grave-digging. Give me a scalpel and one of your friends stretched out on a slab
and I'll quickly tell you what he is or is not." She turned back to the microscope and bent
over the eyepiece.

That was really the only way to hack the Gordian knot. Dis had only thirty-six more hours to
live, so individual deaths shouldn't be of any concern. He had to find a dead magter, and if
none was obtainable in the proper condition he had to get one of them by violence. For a planetary
savior, he was personally doing in an awful lot of the citizenry.

He stood behind Lea, looking down at her thoughtfully while she worked. The back of her neck,
lightly covered with gently curling hair, was turned toward him. With one of the about-face
shifts the mind is capable of, his thoughts flipped from death to life, and he experienced
a strong desire to caress this spot lightly, to feel the yielding texture of female flesh....

Plunging his hands deep into his pockets, he walked quickly to the door. "Get some rest soon,"
he called to her. "I doubt if those bugs will give you the answer. I'm going now to see if
I can get the full-sized specimen you want."

"The truth could be anywhere. I'll stay on these until you come back," she said, not looking
up from the microscope.

Up under the roof was a well-equipped communications room. Brion had taken a quick look at
it when he had first toured the building. The duty operator had earphones on--though only one
of the phones covered an ear--and was monitoring through the bands. His shoeless feet were
on the edge of the table, and he was eating a thick sandwich held in his free hand. His eyes
bulged when he saw Brion in the doorway and he jumped into a flurry of action.

"Hold the pose," Brion told him; "it doesn't bother me. And if you make any sudden moves you
are liable to break a phone, electrocute yourself, or choke to death. Just see if you can set
the transceiver on this frequency for me." Brion wrote the number on a scratch pad and slid
it over to the operator. It was the frequency Professor-Commander Krafft had given him for
the radio of the illegal terrorists--the Nyjord army.

The operator plugged in a handset and gave it to Brion. "Circuit open," he mumbled around a
mouthful of still unswallowed sandwich.

"This is Brandd, director of the C.R.F. Come in, please." He went on repeating this for more
than ten minutes before he got an answer.

"What do you want?"

"I have a message of vital urgency for you--and I would also like your help. Do you want any
more information on the radio?

"No. Wait there--we'll get in touch with you after dark." The carrier wave went dead.

Thirty-five hours to the end of the world--and all he could do was wait.

XII

On Brion's desk when he came in, were two neat piles of paper. As he sat down and reached for
them he was conscious of an arctic coldness in the air, a frigid blast. It was coming from
the air-conditioner grill, which was now covered by welded steel bars. The control unit was
sealed shut. Someone was either being very funny or very efficient. Either way, it was cold.
Brion kicked at the cover plate until it buckled, then bent it aside. After a careful look
into the interior he disconnected one wire and shorted it to another. He was rewarded by a
number of sputtering cracks and a quantity of smoke. The compressor moaned and expired.

Faussel was standing in the door with more papers, a shocked expression on his face. "What
do you have there?" Brion asked.

Faussel managed to straighten out his face and brought the folders to the desk, arranging them
on the piles already there. "These are the progress reports you asked for, from all units.
Details to date, conclusions, suggestions, et cetera."

"And the other pile?" Brion pointed.

"Offplanet correspondence, commissary invoices, requisitions." He straightened the edges of
the stack while he answered. "Daily reports, hospital log...." His voice died away and stopped
as Brion carefully pushed the stack off the edge of the desk into the wastebasket.

"In other words, red tape," Brion said. "Well, it's all filed."

One by one the progress reports followed the first stack into the basket, until the desk was
clear. Nothing. It was just what he had expected. But there had always been the off chance
that one of the specialists could come up with a new approach. They hadn't; they were all too
busy specializing.

Outside the sky was darkening. The front entrance guard had been told to let in anyone who
came asking for the director. There was nothing else Brion could do until the Nyjord rebels
made contact. Irritation bit at him. At least Lea was doing something constructive; he could
look in on her.

He opened the door to the lab with a feeling of pleasant anticipation. It froze and shattered
instantly. Her microscope was hooded and she was gone. She's having dinner, he thought, or--she's
in the hospital. The hospital was on the floor below, and he went there first.

"Of course she's here!" Dr. Stine grumbled. "Where else should a girl in her condition be?
She was out of bed long enough today. Tomorrow's the last day, and if you want to get any more
work out of her before the deadline, you had better let her rest tonight. Better let the whole
staff rest. I've been handing out tranquilizers like aspirin all day. They're falling apart."

"The world's falling apart. How is Lea doing?"

"Considering her shape, she's fine. Go in and see for yourself if you won't take my word for
it. I have other patients to look at."

"Are you that worried, Doctor?"

"Of course I am! I'm just as prone to the weakness of the flesh as the rest of you. We're sitting
on a ticking bomb and I don't like it. I'll do my job as long as it is necessary, but I'll
also be damned glad to see the ships land to pull us out. The only skin that I really feel
emotionally concerned about right now is my own. And if you want to be let in on a public secret--the
rest of your staff feels the same way. So don't look forward to too much efficiency."

"I never did," Brion said to the retreating back.

Lea's room was dark, illuminated only by the light of Dis's moon slanting in through the window.
Brion let himself in and closed the door behind him. Walking quietly, he went over to the bed.
Lea was sleeping soundly, her breathing gentle and regular. A night's sleep now would do as
much good as all the medication.

He should have gone then; instead, he sat down in the chair placed next to the head of the
bed. The guards knew where he was--he could wait here just as well as any place else.

It was a stolen moment of peace on a world at the brink of destruction. He was grateful for
it. Everything looked less harsh in the moonlight, and he rubbed some of the tension from his
eyes. Lea's face was ironed smooth by the light, beautiful and young, a direct contrast to
everything else on this poisonous world. Her hand was outside of the covers and he took it
in his own, obeying a sudden impulse. Looking out of the window at the desert in the distance,
he let the peace wash over him, forcing himself to forget for the moment that in one more day
life would be stripped from this planet.

Later, when he looked back at Lea he saw that her eyes were open, though she hadn't moved.
How long had she been awake? He jerked his hand away from hers, feeling suddenly guilty.

"Is the boss-man looking after the serfs, to see if they're fit for the treadmills in the morning?"
she asked. It was the kind of remark she had used with such frequency in the ship, though it
didn't sound quite as harsh now. And she was smiling. Yet it reminded him too well of her superior
attitude towards rubes from the stellar sticks. Here he might be the director, but on ancient
Earth he would be only one more gaping, lead-footed yokel.

"How do you feel?" he asked, realizing and hating the triteness of the words, even as he said them.

"Terrible. I'll be dead by morning. Reach me a piece of fruit from that bowl, will you? My
mouth tastes like an old boot heel. I wonder how fresh fruit ever got here. Probably a gift
to the working classes from the smiling planetary murderers on Nyjord."

She took the apple Brion gave her and bit into it. "Did you ever think of going to Earth?"

Brion was startled. This was too close to his own thoughts about planetary backgrounds. There
couldn't possibly be a connection though. "Never," he told her. "Up until a few months ago
I never even considered leaving Anvhar. The Twenties are such a big thing at home that it is
hard to imagine that anything else exists while you are still taking part in them."

"Spare me the Twenties," she pleaded. "After listening to you and Ihjel, I know far more about
them than I shall ever care to know. But what about Anvhar itself? Do you have big city-states
as Earth does?"

"Nothing like that. For its size, it has a very small population. No big cities at all. I guess
the largest centers of population are around the schools, packing plants, things like that."

"Any exobiologists there?" Lea asked, with a woman's eternal ability to make any general topic
personal.

"At the universities, I suppose, though I wouldn't know for sure. And you must realize that
when I say no big cities, I also mean no little cities. We aren't organized that way at all.
I imagine the basic physical unit is the family and the circle of friends. Friends get important
quickly, since the family breaks up when children are still relatively young. Something in
the genes, I suppose--we all enjoy being alone. I suppose you might call it an inbred survival
trait."

"Up to a point," she said, biting delicately into the apple. "Carry that sort of thing too
far and you end up with no population at all. A certain amount of proximity is necessary for that."

"Of course it is. And there must be some form of recognized relationship or control--that or
complete promiscuity. On Anvhar the emphasis is on personal responsibility, and that seems
to take care of the problem. If we didn't have an adult way of looking at ... things, our kind
of life would be impossible. Individuals are brought together either by accident or design,
and with this proximity must be some certainty of relations...."

"You're losing me," Lea protested. "Either I'm still foggy from the dope, or you are suddenly
unable to speak a word of less than four syllables. You know--whenever this happens with you,
I get the distinct impression that you are trying to cover up something. For Occam's sake,
be specific! Bring me together two of these hypothetical individuals and tell me what happens."

Brion took a deep breath. He was in over his head and far from shore. "Well--take a bachelor
like myself. Since I like cross-country skiing I make my home in this big house our family
has, right at the edge of the Broken Hills. In summer I looked after a drumtum herd, but after
slaughtering my time was my own all winter. I did a lot of skiing, and used to work for the
Twenties. Sometimes I would go visiting. Then again, people would drop in on me--houses are
few and far between on Anvhar. We don't even have locks on our doors. You accept and give hospitality
without qualification. Whoever comes. Male ... female ... in groups or just traveling alone...."

"I get the drift. Life must be dull for a single girl on your iceberg planet. She must surely
have to stay home a lot."

"Only if she wants to. Otherwise she can go wherever she wishes and be welcomed as another
individual. I suppose it is out of fashion in the rest of the galaxy--and would probably raise
a big laugh on Earth--but a platonic, disinterested friendship between man and woman is an
accepted thing on Anvhar."

"Sounds exceedingly dull. If you are all such cool and distant friends, how do babies get made?"

Brion felt his ears reddening, not sure if he was being teased or not. "The same damn way they
get made any place else! But it's not just a reflexive process like a couple of rabbits that
happen to meet under the same bush. It's the woman's choice to indicate if she is interested
in marriage."

"Is marriage the only thing your women are interested in?"

"Marriage or ... anything else. That's up to the girl. We have a special problem on Anvhar--probably
the same thing occurs on every planet where the human race has made a massive adaptation. Not
all unions are fertile and there is always a large percentage of miscarriages. A large number
of births are conceived by artificial insemination. Which is all right when you can't have
babies normally. But most women have an emotional bias towards having their husband's children.
And there is only one way to find out if this is possible."

Lea's eyes widened. "Are you suggesting that your girls see if a man can father children before
considering marriage?"

"Of course. Otherwise Anvhar would have been depopulated centuries ago. Therefore the woman
does the choosing. If she is interested in a man, she says so. If she is not interested, the
man would never think of suggesting anything. It's a lot different from other planets, but
so is our planet Anvhar. It works well for us, which is the only test that applies."

"Just about the opposite of Earth," Lea told him, dropping the apple core into a dish and carefully
licking the tips of her fingers. "I guess you Anvharians would describe Earth as a planetary
hotbed of sexuality. The reverse of your system, and going full blast all the time. There are
far too many people there for comfort. Birth control came late and is still being fought--if
you can possibly imagine that. There are just too many of the archaic religions still around,
as well as crackbrained ideas that have been long entrenched in custom. The world's overcrowded.
Men, women, children, a boiling mob wherever you look. And all of the physically mature ones
seem to be involved in the Great Game of Love. The male is always the aggressor. Not physically--at
least not often--and women take the most outrageous kinds of flattery for granted. At parties
there are always a couple of hot breaths of passion fanning your neck. A girl has to keep her
spike heels filed sharp."

"She has to what?"

"A figure of speech, Brion. Meaning you fight back all the time, if you don't want to be washed
under by the flood."

"Sounds rather"--Brion weighed the word before he said it, but could find none other suitable--"repellent."

"From your point of view, it would be. I'm afraid we get so used to it that we even take it
for granted. Sociologically speaking...." She stopped and looked at Brion's straight back and
almost rigid posture. Her eyes widened and her mouth opened in an unspoken oh of sudden realization.

"I'm being a fool," she said. "You weren't speaking generally at all! You had a very specific
subject in mind. Namely me!"

"Please, Lea, you must understand...."

"But I do!" She laughed. "All the time I thought you were being a frigid and hard-hearted lump
of ice, you were really being very sweet. Just playing the game in good old Anvharian style.
Waiting for a sign from me. We'd still be playing by different rules if you hadn't had more
sense than I, and finally realized that somewhere along the line we must have got our signals
mixed. And I thought you were some kind of frosty offworld celibate." She let her hand go out
and her fingers rustled through his hair. Something she had been wanting to do for a long time.

"I had to," he said, trying to ignore the light touch of her fingers. "Because I thought so
much of you, I couldn't have done anything to insult you. Such as forcing my attentions on
you. Until I began to worry where the insult would lie, since I knew nothing about your planet's
mores."

"Well, you know now," she said very softly. "The men aggress. Now that I understand, I think
I like your way better. But I'm still not sure of all the rules. Do I explain that yes, Brion,
I like you so very much? You are more man, in one great big wide-shouldered lump, than I have
ever met before. It's not quite the time or the place to discuss marriage, but I would certainly
like--"

His arms were around her, holding her to him. Her hands clasped him and their lips sought each
other's in the darkness.

"Gently ..." she whispered. "I bruise easily...."

XIII

"He wouldn't come in, sir. Just hammered on the door and said, 'I'm here, tell Brandd.'"

"Good enough," Brion said, fitting his gun in the holster and sliding the extra clips into
his pocket. "I'm going out now, and I should return before dawn. Get one of the wheeled stretchers
down here from the hospital. I'll want it waiting when I get back."

Outside, the street was darker than he remembered. Brion frowned and his hand moved towards
his gun. Someone had put all the nearby lights out of commission. There was just enough illumination
from the stars to enable him to make out the dark bulk of a sand car.

"Brion Brandd?" a voice spoke harshly from the car. "Get in."

The motor roared as soon as he had closed the door. Without lights the sand car churned a path
through the city and out into the desert. Though the speed picked up, the driver still drove
in the dark, feeling his way with a light touch on the controls. The ground rose, and when
they reached the top of a mesa he killed the engine. Neither the driver nor Brion had spoken
a word since they left.

A switch snapped and the instrument lights came on. In their dim glow Brion could just make
out the other man's hawklike profile. When he moved, Brion saw that his figure was cruelly
shortened. Either accident or a mutated gene had warped his spine, hunching him forward in
eternally bent supplication. Warped bodies were rare--his was the first Brion had ever seen.
He wondered what series of events had kept him from medical attention all his life. This might
explain the bitterness and pain in the man's voice.

"Did the mighty brains on Nyjord bother to tell you that they have chopped another day off
the deadline?" the man asked. "That this world is about to come to an end?"

"Yes, I know," Brion said. "That's why I'm asking your group for help. Our time is running
out too fast."

The man didn't answer; he merely grunted and gave his full attention to the radar pings and
glowing screen. The electronic senses reached out as he made a check on all the search frequencies
to see if they were being followed.

"Where are we going?" Brion asked.

"Out into the desert." The driver made a vague wave of his hand. "Headquarters of the army.
Since the whole thing will be blown up in another day, I guess I can tell you it's the only
camp we have. All the cars, men and weapons are based there. And Hys. He's the man in charge.
Tomorrow it will be all gone--along with this cursed planet. What's your business with us?"

"Shouldn't I be telling Hys that?"

"Suit yourself." Satisfied with the instrument search, the driver kicked the car to life again
and churned on across the desert. "But we're a volunteer army and we have no secrets from each
other. Just from the fools at home who are going to kill this world." There was a bitterness
in his words that he made no attempt to conceal. "They fought among themselves and put off
a firm decision so long that now they are forced to commit murder."

"From what I had heard, I thought that it was the other way around. They call your Nyjord army
terrorists."

"We are. Because we are an army and we're at war. The idealists at home only understood that
when it was too late. If they had backed us in the beginning we would have blown open every
black castle on Dis, searched until we found those bombs. But that would have meant wanton
destruction and death. They wouldn't consider that. Now they are going to kill everyone, destroy
everything." He flicked on the panel lights just long enough to take a compass bearing, and
Brion saw the tortured unhappiness in his twisted body.

"It's not over yet," Brion said. "There is more than a day left, and I think I'm onto something
that might stop the war--without any bombs being dropped."

"You're in charge of the Cultural Relationships Free Bread and Blankets Foundation, aren't
you? What good can your bunch do when the shooting starts?"

"None. But maybe we can put off the shooting. If you are trying to insult me--don't bother.
My irritation quotient is very high."

The driver merely grunted at this, slowing down as they ran through a field of broken rock.
"What is it you want?" he asked.

"We want to make a detailed examination of one of the magter. Alive or dead, it doesn't make
any difference. You wouldn't happen to have one around?"

"No. We've fought with them often enough, but always on their home grounds. They keep all their
casualties, and a good number of ours. What good will it do you anyway? A dead one won't tell
you where the bombs or the jump-space projector is."

"I don't see why I should explain that to you--unless you are in charge. You are Hys, aren't you?"

The driver gave an angry sound, and then was silent while he drove. Finally he asked, "What
makes you think that?"

"Call it a hunch. You don't act very much like a sand-car driver, for one thing. Of course
your army may be all generals and no privates--but I doubt it. I also know that time has almost
run out for all of us. This is a long ride and it would be a complete waste of time if you
just sat out in the desert and waited for me. By driving me yourself you could make your mind
up before we arrived. Could have a decision ready as to whether you are going to help me or
not. Are you?"

"Yes--I'm Hys. But you still haven't answered my question. What do you want the body for?"

"We're going to cut it open and take a good long look. I don't think the magter are human.
They are something living among men and disguised as men--but still not human."

"Secret aliens?" Hys exploded the words in a mixture of surprise and disgust.

"Perhaps. The examination will tell us that."

"You're either stupid or incompetent," Hys said bitterly. "The heat of Dis has cooked your
brains in your head. I'll be no part of this kind of absurd plan."

"You must," Brion said, surprised at his own calmness. He could sense the other man's interest
hidden behind his insulting manner. "I don't even have to give you my reasons. In another day
this world ends and you have no way to stop it. I just might have an idea that could work,
and you can't afford to take any chances--not if you are really sincere. Either you are a murderer,
killing Disans for pleasure, or you honestly want to stop the war. Which is it?"

"You'll have your body all right," Hys grated, hurling the car viciously around a spire of
rock. "Not that it will accomplish anything--but I can find no fault with killing another magter.
We can fit your operation into our plans without any trouble. This is the last night and I
have sent every one of my teams out on raids. We're breaking into as many magter towers as
possible before dawn. There is a slim chance that we might uncover something. It's really just
shooting in the dark, but it's all we can do now. My own team is waiting and you can ride along
with us. The others left earlier. We're going to hit a small tower on this side of the city.
We raided it once before and captured a lot of small arms they had stored there. There is a
good chance that they may have been stupid enough to store something there again. Sometimes
the magter seem to suffer from a complete lack of imagination."

"You have no idea just how right you are," Brion told him.

The sand car slowed down now, as they approached a slab-sided mesa that rose vertically from
the desert. They crunched across broken rocks, leaving no tracks. A light blinked on the dashboard,
and Hys stopped instantly and killed the engine. They climbed out, stretching and shivering
in the cold desert night.

It was dark walking in the shadow of the cliff and they had to feel their way along a path
through the tumbled boulders. A sudden blaze of light made Brion wince and shield his eyes.
Near him, on the ground, was the humming shape of a cancellation projector, sending out a fan-shaped
curtain of vibration that absorbed all the light rays falling upon it. This incredible blackness
made a lightproof wall for the recessed hollow at the foot of the cliff. In this shelter, under
the overhang of rock, were three open sand cars. They were large and armor-plated, warlike
in their scarred grey paint. Men sprawled, talked, and polished their weapons. Everything stopped
when Hys and Brion appeared.

"Load up," Hys called out. "We're going to attack now, same plan I outlined earlier. Get Telt
over here." In talking to his own men some of the harshness was gone from his voice. The tall
soldiers of Nyjord moved in ready obeyance of their commander. They loomed over his bent figure,
most of them twice as tall as he, but there was no hesitation in jumping when he commanded.
They were the body of the Nyjord striking force--he was the brains.

A square-cut, compact man rolled up to Hys and saluted with a leisurely flick of his hand.
He was weighted and slung about with packs and electronic instruments. His pockets bulged with
small tools and spare parts.

"This is Telt," Hys said to Brion. "He'll take care of you. Telt's my personal technical squad.
He goes along on all my operations with his meters to test the interiors of the Disan forts.
So far he's found no trace of a jump-space generator, or excess radioactivity that might indicate
a bomb. Since he's useless and you're useless, you both take care of each other. Use the car
we came in."

Telt's wide face split in a froglike grin; his voice was hoarse and throaty. "Wait. Just wait!
Someday those needles gonna flicker and all our troubles be over. What you want me to do with
the stranger?"

"Supply him with a corpse--one of the magter," Hys said. "Take it wherever he wants and then
report back here." Hys scowled at Telt. "Someday your needles will flicker! Poor fool--this
is the last day." He turned away and waved the men into their sand cars.

"He likes me," Telt said, attaching a final piece of equipment. "You can tell because he calls
me names like that. He's a great man, Hys is, but they never found out until it was too late.
Hand me that meter, will you?"

Brion followed the technician out to the car and helped him load his equipment aboard. When
the larger cars appeared out of the darkness, Telt swung around after them. They snaked forward
in a single line through the rocks, until they came to the desert of rolling sand dunes. Then
they spread out in line abreast and rushed towards their goal.

Telt hummed to himself hoarsely as he drove. He broke off suddenly and looked at Brion. "What
you want the dead Dis for?"

"A theory," Brion answered sluggishly. He had been half napping in the chair, taking the opportunity
for some rest before the attack. "I'm still looking for a way to avert the end."

"You and Hys," Telt said with satisfaction. "Couple of idealists. Trying to stop a war you
didn't start. They never would listen to Hys. He told them in the beginning exactly what would
happen, and he was right. They always thought his ideas were crooked, like him. Growing up
alone in the hill camp, with his back too twisted and too old to be fixed when he finally did
come out. Ideas twisted the same way. Made himself an authority on war. Hah! War on Nyjord--that's
like being an ice-cube specialist in hell. But he knew all about it, though they never would
let him use what he knew. Put granddaddy Krafft in charge instead."

"But Hys is in charge of an army now?"

"All volunteers, too few of them and too little money. Too little and too damned late to do
any good. I'll tell you we did our best, but it could never be good enough. And for this we
get called butchers." There was a catch in Telt's voice now, an undercurrent of emotion he
couldn't suppress. "At home they think we like to kill. Think we're insane. They can't understand
we're doing the only thing that has to be done--"

He broke off as he quickly locked on the brakes and killed the engine. The line of sand cars
had come to a stop. Ahead, just visible over the dunes, was the summit of a dark tower.

"We walk from here," Telt said, standing and stretching. "We can take our time, because the
other boys go in first, soften things up. Then you and I head for the sub-cellar for a radiation
check and find you a handsome corpse."

Walking at first, then crawling when the dunes no longer shielded them, they crept up on the
Disan keep. Dark figures moved ahead of them, stopping only when they reached the crumbling
black walls. They didn't use the ascending ramp, but made their way up the sheer outside face
of the ramparts.

"Line-throwers," Telt whispered. "Anchor themselves when the missile hits, have some kind of
quick-setting goo. Then we go up the filament with a line-climbing motor. Hys invented them."

"Is that the way you and I are going in?" Brion asked.

"No, we get out of the climbing. I told you we hit this rock once before. I know the layout
inside." He was moving while he talked, carefully pacing the distance around the base of the
tower. "Should be right about here."

High-pitched keening sliced the air and the top of the magter building burst into flame. Automatic
weapons hammered above them. Something fell silently through the night and hit heavily on the
ground near them.

"Attack's started," Telt shouted. "We have to get through now, while all the creepies are fighting
it out on top." He pulled a plate-shaped object from one of his bags and slapped it hard against
the wall. It hung there. He twisted the back of it, pulled something and waved Brion to the
ground. "Shaped charge. Should blow straight in, but you never can tell."

The ground jumped under them and the ringing thud was a giant fist punching through the wall.
A cloud of dust and smoke rolled clear and they could see the dark opening in the rock, a tunnel
driven into the wall by the directional force of the explosion. Telt shone a light through
the hole at the crumbled chamber inside.

"Nothing to worry about from anybody who was leaning against this wall. But let's get in and
out of this black beehive before the ones upstairs come down to investigate."

Shattered rock was thick on the floor, and they skidded and tumbled over it. Telt pointed the
way with his light, down a sharply angled ramp. "Underground chambers in the rock. They always
store their stuff down there--"

A smoking, black sphere arced out of the tunnel's mouth, hitting at their feet. Telt just gaped,
but even as it hit the floor Brion was jumping forward. He caught it with the side of his foot,
kicking it back into the dark opening of the tunnel. Telt hit the ground next to him as the
orange flame of an explosion burst below. Bits of shrapnel rattled from the ceiling and wall
behind them.

"Grenades!" Telt gasped. "They've only used them once before--can't have many. Gotta warn Hys."
He plugged a throat mike into the transmitter on his tack and spoke quickly into it. There
was a stirring below and Brion poured a rain of fire into the tunnel.

"They're catching it bad on top, too! We gotta pull out. Go first and I'll cover you."

"I came for my Disan--I'm not leaving until I get one."

"You're crazy! You're dead if you stay!"

Telt was scrambling back towards the crumbled entrance as he talked. His back was turned when
Brion fired. The magter had appeared silently as the shadow of death. They charged without
a sound, running with expressionless faces into the bullets. Two died at once, curling and
folding; the third one fell at Brion's feet. Shot, pierced, dying, but not yet dead. Leaving
a crimson track, it hunched closer, lifting its knife to Brion. He didn't move. How many times
must you murder a man? Or was it a man? His mind and body rebelled against the killing, and
he was almost ready to accept death himself, rather than kill again.

Telt's bullets tore through the body and it dropped with grim finality.

"There's your corpse--now get it out of here!" Telt screeched.

Between them they worked the sodden weight of the dead magter through the hole, their exposed
backs crawling with the expectation of instant death. No further attack came as they ran from
the tower, other than a grenade that exploded too far behind them to do any harm.

One of the armored sand cars circled the keep, headlights blazing, keeping up a steady fire
from its heavy weapons. The attackers climbed into it as they beat a retreat. Telt and Brion
dragged the Disan behind them, struggling through the loose sand towards the circling car.
Telt glanced over his shoulder and broke into a shambling run.

"They're following us!" he gasped. "The first time they ever chased us after a raid!"

"They must know we have the body," Brion said.

"Leave it behind ..." Telt choked. "Too heavy to carry ... anyway!"

"I'd rather leave you," Brion said sharply. "Let me have it." He pulled the corpse away from
the unresisting Telt and heaved it across his own shoulders. "Now use your gun to cover us!"

Telt threw a rain of slugs back towards the dark figures following them. The driver of the
sand car must have seen the flare of their fire, because the truck turned and started towards
them. It braked in a choking cloud of dust and ready hands reached to pull them up. Brion pushed
the body in ahead of himself and scrambled after it. The truck engine throbbed and they churned
away into the blackness, away from the gutted tower.

"You know, that was more like kind of a joke, when I said I'd leave the corpse behind," Telt
told Brion. "You didn't believe me, did you?"

"Yes," Brion said, holding the dead weight of the magter against the truck's side. "I thought
you meant it."

"Ahhh," Telt protested, "you're as bad as Hys. You take things too seriously."

Brion suddenly realized that he was wet with blood, his clothing sodden. His stomach rose at
the thought and he clutched the edge of the sand car. Killing like this was too personal. Talking
abstractedly about a body was one thing, but murdering a man, then lifting his dead flesh and
feeling his blood warm upon you is an entirely different matter. But the magter weren't human,
he knew that. The thought was only mildly comforting.

After they had reached the other waiting sand cars, the raiding party split up. "Each one goes
in a different direction," Telt said, "so they can't track us to the base." He clipped a piece
of paper next to the compass and kicked the motor into life. "We'll make a big U in the desert
and end up in Hovedstad. I got the course here. Then I'll dump you and your friends and beat
it back to our camp. You're not still burned at me for what I said, are you? Are you?"

Brion didn't answer. He was staring fixedly out of the side window.

"What's doing?" Telt asked. Brion pointed out at the rushing darkness.

"Over there," he said, pointing to the growing light on the horizon.

"Dawn," Telt said. "Lotta rain on your planet? Didn't you ever see the sun come up before?"

"Not on the last day of a world."

"Lock it up," Telt grumbled. "You give me the crawls. I know they're going to be blasted. But
at least I know I did everything I could to stop it. How do you think they are going to be
feeling at home--on Nyjord--from tomorrow on?"

"Maybe we can still stop it," Brion said, shrugging off the feeling of gloom. Telt's only answer
was a wordless sound of disgust.

By the time they had cut a large loop in the desert the sun was well up in the sky, the daily
heat begun. Their course took them through a chain of low, flinty hills that cut their speed
almost to zero. They ground ahead in low gear while Telt sweated and cursed, struggling with
the controls. Then they were on firm sand and picking up speed towards the city.

As soon as Brion saw Hovedstad clearly he felt a clutch of fear. From somewhere in the city
a black plume of smoke was rising. It could have been one of the deserted buildings aflame,
a minor blaze. Yet the closer they came, the greater his tension grew. Brion didn't dare put
it into words himself; it was Telt who vocalized the thought.

"A fire or something. Coming from your area, somewhere close to your building."

Within the city they saw the first signs of destruction. Broken rubble on the streets. The
smell of greasy smoke in their nostrils. More and more people appeared, going in the same direction
they were. The normally deserted streets of Hovedstad were now almost crowded. Disans, obvious
by their bare shoulders, mixed with the few offworlders who still remained.

Brion made sure the tarpaulin was well wrapped around the body before they pushed the sand
car slowly through the growing crowd.

"I don't like all this publicity," Telt complained, looking at the people. "It's the last day,
or I'd be turning back. They know our cars; we've raided them often enough." Turning a corner,
he braked suddenly, mouth agape.

Ahead was destruction. Black, broken rubble had been churned into desolation. It was still
smoking, pink tongues of flame licking over the ruins. A fragment of wall fell with a rumbling
crash.

"It's your building--the Foundation building!" Telt shouted. "They've been here ahead of us--must
have used the radio to call a raid. They did a job, explosive of some kind."

Hope was dead. Dis was dead. In the ruin ahead, mixed and broken with other rubble, were the
bodies of all the people who had trusted him. Lea ... beautiful and cruelly dead Lea. Doctor
Stine, his patients, Faussel, all of them. He had kept them on this planet, and now they were
dead. Every one of them. Dead.

Murderer!

XIV

Life was ended. Brion's mind contained nothing but despair and the pain of irretrievable loss.
If his brain had been completely the master of his body he would have died there, for at that
moment there was no will to live. Unaware of this, his heart continued to beat and the regular
motion of his lungs drew in the dreadful sweetness of the smoke-tainted air. With automatic
directness his body lived on.

"What you gonna do?" Telt asked, even his natural exuberation stilled by this. Brion only shook
his head as the words penetrated. What could he do? What could possibly be done?

"Follow me," a voice said in guttural Disan through the opening of a rear window. The speaker
was lost in the crowd before they could turn. Aware now, Brion saw a native move away from
the edge of the crowd and turn to look in their direction. It was Ulv.

"Turn the car--that way!" He punched Telt's arm and pointed. "Do it slowly and don't draw any
attention to us." For a moment there was hope, which he kept himself from considering. The
building was gone, and the people in it all dead. That fact had to be faced.

"What's going on?" Telt asked. "Who was that talked in the window?"

"A native--that one up ahead. He saved my life in the desert, and I think he is on our side.
Even though he's a native Disan, he can understand facts that the magter can't. He knows what
will happen to this planet." Brion was talking to fill his brain with words so he wouldn't
begin to have hope. There was no hope possible.

Ulv moved slowly and naturally through the streets, never looking back. They followed, as far
behind as they dared, yet still keeping him in sight. Fewer people were about here among the
deserted offworld storehouses. Ulv vanished into one of these; LIGHT METALS TRUST LTD., the
sign read above the door. Telt slowed the car.

"Don't stop here," Brion said. "Drive around the corner, and pull up."

Brion climbed out of the car with an ease he did not feel. No one was in sight now, in either
direction. Walking slowly back to the corner, he checked the street they had just left. Hot,
silent and empty.

A sudden blackness appeared where the door of the warehouse had been, and the sudden flickering
motion of a hand. Brion signaled Telt to start, and jumped into the already moving sand car.

"Into that open door--quickly, before anyone sees us!" The car rumbled down a ramp into the
dark interior and the door slid shut behind them.

"Ulv! What is it? Where are you?" Brion called, blinking in the murky interior. A grey form
appeared beside him.

"I am here."

"Did you--" There was no way to finish the sentence.

"I heard of the raid. The magter called together all of us they could to help them carry explosive.
I went along. I could not stop them, and there was no time to warn anyone in the building."

"Then they are all dead?"

"Yes," Ulv nodded. "All except one. I knew I could perhaps save one; I was not sure who. So
I took the woman you were with in the desert--she is here now. She was hurt, but not badly,
when I brought her out."

Guilty relief flooded through Brion. He shouldn't exult, not with the death of everyone in
the Foundation still fresh in his mind. But at that instant he was happy.

"Let me see her," he said to Ulv. He was seized by the sudden fear that there might be a mistake.
Perhaps Ulv had saved a different woman.

Ulv led the way across the empty loading bay. Brion followed closely, fighting down the temptation
to tell him to hurry. When he saw that Ulv was heading towards an office in the far wall, he
could control himself no longer and ran on ahead.

It was Lea, lying unconscious on a couch. Sweat beaded her face and she moaned and stirred
without opening her eyes.

"I gave her sover, then wrapped her in cloth so no one would know," Ulv said.

Telt was close behind them, looking in through the open door.

"Sover is a drug they take from one of their plants," he said. "We got a lot of experience
with it. A little makes a good knock-out drug, but it's deadly poison in large doses. I got
the antidote in the car; wait and I'll get it." He went out.

Brion sat next to Lea and wiped her face clean of dirt and perspiration. The dark shadows under
her eyes were almost black now and her elfin face seemed even thinner. But she was alive--that
was the important thing.

Some of the tension drained away from Brion and he could think again. There was still the job
to do. After this last experience Lea should be in a hospital bed. But this was impossible.
He would have to drag her to her feet and put her back to work. The answer might still be found.
Each second ticked away another fraction of the planet's life.

"Good as new in a minute," Telt said, banging down the heavy med box. He watched intently as
Ulv left the room. "Hys should know about this renegade. Might be useful as a spy, or for information--though
of course it's too late now to do anything, so the hell with it." He pulled a pistol-shaped
hypodermic gun from the box and dialed a number on the side. "Now, if you'll roll her sleeve
up I'll bring her back to life." He pressed the bell-shaped sterilizing muzzle against her
skin and pulled the trigger. The hypo gun hummed briefly, ending its cycle with a loud click.

"Does it work fast?" Brion asked.

"Couple of minutes. Just let her be and she'll come to by herself."

Ulv was in the doorway. "Killer!" he hissed. His blowgun was in his hand, half raised to his mouth.

"He's been in the car--he's seen it!" Telt shouted and grabbed for his gun.

Brion sprang between them, raising his hands. "Stop it! No more killing!" he shouted in Disan.
Then he shook his fist at Telt. "Fire that gun and I'll stuff it down your throat. I'll handle
this." He turned to face Ulv, who hadn't brought the blowgun any closer to his lips. This was
a good sign--the Disan was still uncertain.

"You have seen the body in the car, Ulv. So you must have seen that it is that of a magter.
I killed him myself, because I would rather kill one, or ten, or even a hundred men than have
everyone on this planet destroyed. I killed him in a fair fight and now I am going to examine
his body. There is something very strange and different about the magter, you know that yourself.
If I can find out what it is, perhaps we can make them stop this war, and not bomb Nyjord."

Ulv was still angry, but he lowered the blowgun a little. "I wish there were no offworlders,"
he said. "I wish that none of you had ever come. Nothing was wrong until you started coming.
The magter were the strongest, and they killed; but they also helped. Now they want to fight
a war with your weapons, and for this you are going to kill my world. And you want me to help you!"

"Not me--yourself!" Brion said wearily. "There's no going back, that's the one thing we can't
do. Maybe Dis would have been better off without offplanet contact. Maybe not. In any case,
you have to forget about that. You have contact now with the rest of the galaxy, for better
or for worse. You've got a problem to solve, and I'm here to help you solve it."

Seconds ticked by as Ulv, unmoving, fought with questions that were novel to his life. Could
killing stop death? Could he help his people by helping strangers to fight and kill them? His
world had changed and he didn't like it. He must make a giant effort to change with it.

Abruptly, he pushed the blowgun into a thong at his waist, turned and strode out.

"Too much for my nerves," Telt said, settling his gun back in the holster. "You don't know
how happy I'm gonna be when this whole damn thing is over. Even if the planet goes bang, I
don't care. I'm finished." He walked out to the sand car, keeping a careful eye on the Disan
crouched against the wall.

Brion turned back to Lea, whose eyes were open, staring at the ceiling. He went to her.

"Running," she said, and her voice had a toneless emptiness that screamed louder than any emotion.
"They ran by the open door of my room and I could see them when they killed Dr. Stine. Just
butchered him like an animal, chopping him down. Then one came into the room and that's all
I remember." She turned her head slowly and looked at Brion. "What happened? Why am I here?"

"They're ... dead," he told her. "All of them. After the raid the Disans blew up the building.
You're the only one that survived. That was Ulv who came into your room, the Disan we met in
the desert. He brought you away and hid you here in the city."

"When do we leave?" she asked in the same empty tones, turning her face to the wall. "When
do we get off this planet?"

"Today is the last day. The deadline is midnight. Krafft will have a ship pick us up when we
are ready. But we still have our job to do. I've got that body. You're going to have to examine
it. We must find out about the magter...."

"Nothing can be done now except leave." Her voice was a dull monotone. "There is only so much
that a person can do, and I've done it. Please have the ship come; I want to leave now."

Brion bit his lip in helpless frustration. Nothing seemed to penetrate the apathy into which
she had sunk. Too much shock, too much terror, in too short a time. He took her chin in his
hand and turned her head to face him. She didn't resist, but her eyes were shining with tears;
tears trickled down her cheeks.

"Take me home, Brion, please take me home."

He could only brush her sodden hair back from her face, and force himself to smile at her.
The moments of time were running out, faster and faster, and he no longer knew what to do.
The examination had to be made--yet he couldn't force her. He looked for the med box and saw
that Telt had taken it back to the sand car. There might be something in it that could help--a
tranquilizer perhaps.

Telt had some of his instruments open on the chart table and was examining a tape with a pocket
magnifier when Brion entered. He jumped nervously and put the tape behind his back, then relaxed
when he saw who it was.

"I thought you were the creepie out there, coming for a look," he whispered. "Maybe you trust
him--but I can't afford to. Can't even use the radio. I'm getting out of here now. I have to
tell Hys!"

"Tell him what?" Brion asked sharply. "What is all the mystery about?"

Telt handed him the magnifier and tape. "Look at that--recording tape from my scintillation
counter. Red verticals are five-minute intervals, the wiggly black horizontal line is the radioactivity
level. All this where the line goes up and down, that's when we were driving out to the attack.
Varying hot level of the rock and ground."

"What's the big peak in the middle?"

"That coincides exactly with our visit to the house of horrors! When we went through the hole
in the bottom of the tower!" He couldn't keep the excitement out of his voice.

"Does it mean that...."

"I don't know. I'm not sure. I have to compare it with the other tapes back at base. It could
be the stone of the tower--some of these heavy rocks have got a high natural count. There maybe
could be a box of instruments there with fluorescent dials. Or it might be one of those tactical
atom bombs they threw at us already. Some arms runner sold them a few."

"Or it could be the cobalt bombs?"

"It could be," Telt said, packing his instruments swiftly. "A badly shielded bomb, or an old
one with a crack in the skin, could give a trace like that. Just a little radon leaking out
would do it."

"Why don't you call Hys on the radio and let him know?"

"I don't want Granddaddy Krafft's listening posts to hear about it. This is our job--if I'm
right. And I have to check my old tapes to make sure. But it's gonna be worth a raid, I can
feel that in my bones. Let's unload your corpse." He helped Brion with the clumsy, wrapped
bundle, then slipped into the driver's seat.

"Hold it," Brion said. "Do you have anything in the med box I can use for Lea? She seems to
have cracked. Not hysterical, but withdrawn. Won't listen to reason, won't do anything but
lie there and ask to go home."

"Got the potion here," Telt said, cracking the med box. "Slaughter-syndrome is what our medic
calls it. Hit a lot of our boys. Grow up all your life hating the idea of violence, and it
goes rough when you have to start killing people. Guys break up, break down, go to pieces lots
of different ways. The medic mixed up this stuff. Don't know how it works, probably tranquilizers
and some of the cortex drugs. But it peels off recent memories. Maybe for the last ten, twelve
hours. You can't get upset about what you don't remember." He pulled out a sealed package.
"Directions on the box. Good luck."

"Luck," Brion said, and shook the technician's calloused hand. "Let me know if the traces are
strong enough to be bombs." He checked the street to make sure it was clear, then pressed the
door button. The sand car churned out into the brilliant sunshine and was gone, the throb of
its motor dying in the distance. Brion closed the door and went back to Lea. Ulv was still
crouched against the wall.

There was a one-shot disposable hypodermic in the box. Lea made no protest when he broke the
seal and pressed the needle against her arm. She sighed and her eyes closed again.

When he saw she was resting easily, he dragged in the tarpaulin-wrapped body of the magter.
A work-bench ran along one wall and he struggled the corpse up onto it. He unwrapped the tarpaulin
and the sightless eyes stared accusingly up into his.

Using his knife, Brion cut away the loose, blood-soaked clothing. Strapped under the clothes,
around the man's waist, was the familiar collection of Disan artifacts. This could have significance
either way. Human or humanoid, the creature would still have to live on Dis. Brion threw it
aside, along with the clothing. Nude, pierced, bloody, the corpse lay before him.

In every external physical detail the man was human.

Brion's theory was becoming more preposterous with each discovery. If the magter weren't alien,
how could he explain their complete lack of emotions? A mutation of some kind? He didn't see
how it was possible. There had to be something alien about the dead man before him. The future
of a world rested on this flimsy hope. If Telt's lead to the bombs proved to be false, there
would be no hope left at all.

Lea was still unconscious when he looked at her again. There was no way of telling how long
the coma would last. He would probably have to waken her out of it, but he didn't want to do
it too early. It took an effort to control his impatience, even though he knew the drug needed
time in which to work. He finally decided on at least a minimum of an hour before he should
try to disturb her. That would be noon--twelve hours before destruction.

One thing he should do was to get in touch with Professor-Commander Krafft. Maybe it was being
defeatist, but he had to make sure that they had a way off this planet if the mission failed.
Krafft had installed a relay radio that would forward calls from his personal set. If this
relay had been in the Foundation building, contact was broken. This had to be found out before
it was too late. Brion thumbed on his radio and sent the call. The reply came back instantly.

"This is fleet communications. Will you please keep this circuit open? Commander Krafft is
waiting for this call and it is being put directly through to him now." Krafft's voice broke
in while the operator was still talking.

"Who is making this call--is it anyone from the Foundation?" The old man's voice was shaky
with emotion.

"Brandd here. I have Lea Morees with me...."

"No more? Are there no other survivors from the disaster that destroyed your building?"

"That's it, other than us it's a ... complete loss. With the building and all the instruments
gone, I have no way to contact our ship in orbit. Can you arrange to get us out of here if
necessary?"

"Give me your location. A ship is coming now--"

"I don't need a ship now," Brion interrupted. "Don't send it until I call. If there is a way
to stop your destruction I'll find it. So I'm staying--to the last minute if necessary."

Krafft was silent. There was only the crackle of an open mike and the sound of breathing. "That
is your decision," he said finally. "I'll have a ship standing by. But won't you let us take
Miss Morees out now?"

"No. I need her here. We are still working, looking for--"

"What answer can you find that could possibly avert destruction now?" His tone was between
hope and despair. Brion couldn't help him.

"If I succeed--you'll know. Otherwise, that will be the end of it. End of Transmission." He
switched the radio off.

Lea was sleeping easily when he looked at her, and there was still a good part of the hour
left before he could wake her. How could he put it to use? She would need tools, instruments
to examine the corpse, and there were certainly none here. Perhaps he could find some in the
ruins of the Foundation building. With this thought he had the sudden desire to see the wreckage
up close. There might be other survivors. He had to find out. If he could talk to the men he
had seen working there....

Ulv was still crouched against the wall in the outer room. He looked up angrily when Brion
came over, but said nothing.

"Will you help me again?" Brion asked. "Stay and watch the girl while I go out. I'll be back
at noon." Ulv didn't answer. "I am still looking for the way to save Dis," Brion added.

"Go--I'll watch the girl!" Ulv spat words in impotent fury. "I do not know what to do. You
may be right. Go. She will be safe with me."

Brion slipped out into the deserted street and, half running, half walking, made his way towards
the rubble that had been the Cultural Relationships Foundation. He used a different course
from the one they had come by, striking first towards the outer edge of the city. Once there,
he could swing and approach from the other side, so there would be no indication where he had
come from. The magter might be watching and he didn't want to lead them to Lea and the stolen body.

Turning a corner, he saw a sand car stopped in the street ahead. There was something familiar
about the lines of it. It could be the one he and Telt had used, but he wasn't sure. He looked
around, but the dusty, packed-dirt street was white and empty, shimmering in silence under
the sun. Staying close to the wall and watching carefully, Brion slipped towards the car. When
he came close behind it he was positive it was the one he had been in the night before. What
was it doing here?

Silence and heat filled the street. Windows and doors were empty, and there was no motion in
their shadows. Putting his foot on a bogey wheel, he reached up and grabbed the searing metal
rim of the open window. He pulled himself up and stared at Telt's smiling face.

Smiling in death. The lips pulled back to reveal the grinning teeth, the eyes bursting from
the head, the features swollen and contorted from the deadly poison. A tiny, tufted dart of
wood stuck in the brown flesh on the side of his neck.

XV

Brion hurled himself backward and sprawled flat in the dust and filth of the road. No poison
dart sought him out; the empty silence still reigned. Telt's murderers had come and gone. Moving
quickly, using the bulk of the car as a shield, he opened the door and slipped inside.

They had done a thorough job of destruction. All of the controls had been battered into uselessness,
the floor was a junk heap of crushed equipment, intertwined with loops of recording tape bulging
like mechanical intestines. A gutted machine, destroyed like its driver.

It was easy enough to reconstruct what had happened. The car had been seen when they entered
the city--probably by some of the magter who had destroyed the Foundation building. They had
not seen where it had gone, or Brion would surely be dead by now. But they must have spotted
it when Telt tried to leave the city--and stopped it in the most effective way possible, a
dart through the open window into the unsuspecting driver's neck.

Telt dead! The brutal impact of the man's death had driven all thought of its consequences
from Brion's mind. Now he began to realize. Telt had never sent word of his discovery of the
radioactive trace to the Nyjord army. He had been afraid to use the radio, and had wanted to
tell Hys in person, and to show him the tape. Only now the tape was torn and mixed with all
the others, the brain that could have analyzed it dead.

Brion looked at the dangling entrails of the radio and spun for the door. Running swiftly and
erratically, he fled from the sand car. His own survival and the possible survival of Dis depended
on his not being seen near it. He must contact Hys and pass on the information. Until he did
that, he was the only offworlder on Dis who knew which magter tower might contain the world-destroying
bombs.

Once out of sight of the sand car he went more slowly, wiping the sweat from his streaming
face. He hadn't been seen leaving the car, and he wasn't being followed. The streets here weren't
familiar, but he checked his direction by the sun and walked at a steady fast pace towards
the destroyed building. More of the native Disans were in the streets now. They all noticed
him, some even stopped and scowled fiercely at him. With his emphatic awareness he felt their
anger and hatred. A knot of men radiated death, and he put his hand on his gun as he passed
them. Two of them had their blowguns ready, but didn't use them. By the time he had turned
the next corner he was soaked with nervous perspiration.

Ahead was the rubble of the destroyed building. Grounded next to it was the tapered form of
a spacer's pinnace. Two men had come from the open lock and were standing at the edge of the
burnt area.

Brion's boots grated loudly on the broken wreckage. The men turned quickly towards him, guns
raised. Both of them carried ion rifles. They relaxed when they saw his offworld clothes.

"Bloody damned savages!" one of them growled. He was a heavy-planet man, a squashed-down column
of muscle and gristle, whose head barely reached Brion's chest. A pushed-back cap had the crossed
slide-rule symbol of ship's computer man.

"Can't blame them, I guess," the second man said. He wore purser's insignia. His features were
different, but with the same compacted body the two men were as physically alike as twins.
Probably from the same home planet. "They're gonna get their whole world blown out from under
them at midnight. Looks as if the poor slob in the streets finally realized what is happening.
Hope we're in jump-space by then. I saw Estrada's World get it, and I don't want to see that
again, not twice in one lifetime!"

The computer man was looking closely at Brion, head tilted sideways to see his face. "You need
transportation offworld?" he asked. "We're the last ship at the port, and we're going to boil
out of here as soon as the rest of our cargo is aboard. We'll give you a lift if you need it."

Only by a tremendous effort at control did Brion conceal the destroying sorrow that overwhelmed
him when he looked at that shattered wasteland, the graveyard of so many. "No," he said. "That
won't be necessary. I'm in touch with the blockading fleet and they'll pick me up before midnight."

"You from Nyjord?" the purser growled.

"No," Brion said, still only half aware of the men. "But there is trouble with my own ship."
He realized that they were looking intently at him, that he owed them some kind of explanation.
"I thought I could find a way to stop the war. Now ... I'm not so sure." He hadn't intended
to be so frank with the spacemen, but the words had been uppermost in his thoughts and had
simply slipped out.

The computer man started to say something, but his shipmate speared him in the side with his
elbow. "We blast soon--and I don't like the way these Disans are looking at us. The captain
said to find out what caused the fire, then get the hell back. So let's go."

"Don't miss your ship," the computer man said to Brion, and he started for the pinnace. Then
he hesitated and turned. "Sure there's nothing we can do for you?"

Sorrow would accomplish nothing. Brion fought to sweep the dregs of emotion from his mind and
to think clearly. "You can help me," he said. "I could use a scalpel or any other surgical
instrument you might have." Lea would need those. Then he remembered Telt's undelivered message.
"Do you have a portable radio transceiver? I can pay you for it."

The computer man vanished inside the rocket and reappeared a minute later with a small package.
"There's a scalpel and a magnetized tweezers in here--all I could find in the med kit. Hope
they'll do." He reached inside and swung out the metal case of a self-contained transceiver.
"Take this, it's got plenty of range, even on the longer frequencies."

He raised his hand at Brion's offer to pay. "My donation," he said. "If you can save this planet
I'll give you the whole pinnace as well. We'll tell the captain we lost the radio in some trouble
with the natives. Isn't that right, Moneybags?" He prodded the purser in the chest with a finger
that would have punched a hole through a weaker man.

"I read you loud and clear," the purser said. "I'll make out an invoice so stating, back in
the ship." They were both in the pinnace then, and Brion had to move fast to get clear of the
takeoff blast.

A sense of obligation--the spacemen had felt it too. The realization of this raised Brion's
spirits a bit as he searched through the rubble for anything useful. He recognized part of
a wall still standing as a corner of the laboratory. Poking through the ruins, he unearthed
broken instruments and a single, battered case that had barely missed destruction. Inside was
the binocular microscope, the right tube bent, its lenses cracked and obscured. The left eyepiece
still seemed to be functioning. Brion carefully put it back in the case.

He looked at his watch. It was almost noon. These few pieces of equipment would have to do
for the dissection. Watched suspiciously by the onlooking Disans, he started back to the warehouse.
It was a long, circuitous walk, since he didn't dare give any clues to his destination. Only
when he was positive he had not been observed or followed did he slip through the building's
entrance, locking the door behind him.

Lea's frightened eyes met his when he went into the office. "A friendly smile here among the
cannibals," she called. Her strained expression gave the lie to the cheeriness of her words.
"What has happened? Since I woke up, the great stone face over there"--she pointed to Ulv--"has
been telling me exactly nothing."

"What's the last thing you can remember?" Brion asked carefully. He didn't want to tell her
too much, lest this bring on the shock again. Ulv had shown great presence of mind in not talking
to her.

"If you must know," Lea said, "I remember quite a lot, Brion Brandd. I shan't go into details,
since this sort of thing is best kept from the natives. For the record then, I can recall going
to sleep after you left. And nothing since then. It's weird. I went to sleep in that lumpy
hospital bed and woke up on this couch, feeling simply terrible. With him just sitting there
and scowling at me. Won't you please tell me what is going on?"

A partial truth was best, saving all of the details that he could for later. "The magter attacked
the Foundation building," he said. "They are getting angry at all offworlders now. You were
still knocked out by a sleeping drug, so Ulv helped bring you here. It's afternoon now--"

"Of the last day?" She sounded horrified. "While I'm playing Sleeping Beauty the world is coming
to an end! Was anyone hurt in the attack? Or killed?"

"There were a number of casualties--and plenty of trouble," Brion said. He had to get her off
the subject. Walking over to the corpse, he threw back the cover from its face. "But this is
more important right now. It's one of the magter. I have a scalpel and some other things here--will
you perform an autopsy?"

Lea huddled back on the couch, her arms around herself, looking chilled in spite of the heat
of the day. "What happened to the people at the building?" she asked in a thin voice. The injection
had removed her memories of the tragedy, but echoes of the strain and shock still reverberated
in her mind and body. "I feel so ... exhausted. Please tell me what happened. I have the feeling
you're hiding something."

Brion sat next to her and took her hands in his, not surprised to find them cold. Looking into
her eyes, he tried to give her some of his strength. "It wasn't very nice," he said. "You were
shaken up by it, I imagine that's why you feel the way you do now. But--Lea, you'll have to
take my word for this. Don't ask any more questions. There's nothing we can do now about it.
But we can still find out about the magter. Will you examine the corpse?"

She started to ask something, then changed her mind. When she dropped her eyes Brion felt the
thin shiver that went through her body. "There's something terribly wrong," she said. "I know
that. I guess I'll have to take your word that it's best not to ask questions. Help me up,
will you, darling? My legs are absolutely liquid."

Leaning on him, with his arm around her supporting most of her weight, she went slowly across
to the corpse. She looked down and shuddered. "Not what you would call a natural death," she
said. Ulv watched intently as she took the scalpel out of its holder. "You don't have to look
at this," she told him in halting Disan. "Not if you don't want to."

"I want to," he told her, not taking his eyes from the body. "I have never seen a magter dead
before, or without covering, like an ordinary person." He continued to stare fixedly.

"Find me some drinking water, will you, Brion?" Lea said. "And spread the tarp under the body.
These things are quite messy."

After drinking the water she seemed stronger, and could stand without holding onto the table
with both hands. Placing the tip of the scalpel just below the magter's breast bone, she made
the long post-mortem incision down to the pubic symphysis. The great, body-length wound gaped
open like a red mouth. Across the table Ulv shuddered but didn't avert his eyes.

One by one she removed the internal organs. Once she looked up at Brion, then quickly returned
to work. The silence stretched on and on until Brion had to break it.

"Tell me, can't you? Have you found out anything?"

His words snapped the thin strand of her strength, and she staggered back to the couch and
collapsed onto it. Her bloodstained hands hung over the side, making a strangely terrible contrast
to the whiteness of her skin.

"I'm sorry, Brion," she said. "But there's nothing, nothing at all. There are minor differences,
organic changes I've never seen before--his liver is tremendous, for one thing. But changes
like this are certainly consistent within the pattern of homo sapiens as adapted to a different
planet. He's a man. Changed, adapted, modified--but still just as human as you or I."

"How can you be sure?" Brion broke in. "You haven't examined him completely, have you?" She
shook her head. "Then go on. The other organs. His brain. A microscopic examination. Here!"
he said, pushing the microscope case towards her with both hands.

She dropped her head onto her forearms and sobbed. "Leave me alone, can't you! I'm tired and
sick and fed up with this awful planet. Let them die. I don't care! Your theory is false, useless.
Admit that! And let me wash the filth from my hands...." Sobbing drowned out her words.

Brion stood over her and drew a shuddering breath. Was he wrong? He didn't dare think about
that. He had to go on. Looking down at the thinness of her bent back, with the tiny projections
of her spine showing through the thin cloth, he felt an immense pity--a pity he couldn't surrender
to. This thin, helpless, frightened woman was his only resource. She had to work. He had to
make her work.

Ihjel had done it--used projective empathy to impress his emotions upon Brion. Now Brion must
do it with Lea. He had had some sessions in the art, but not nearly enough to make him proficient.
Nevertheless he had to try.

Strength was what Lea needed. Aloud he said simply, "You can do it. You have the will and the
strength to finish." And silently his mind cried out the order to obey, to share his power
now that hers was drained and finished.

Only when she lifted her face and he saw the dried tears did he realize that he had succeeded.
"You will go on?" he asked quietly.

Lea merely nodded and rose to her feet. She shuffled like a sleepwalker jerked along by invisible
strings. Her strength wasn't her own, and the situation reminded him unhappily of that last
event of the Twenties when he had experienced the same kind of draining activity. She wiped
her hands roughly on her clothes and opened the microscope case.

"The slides are all broken," she said.

"This will do," Brion told her, crashing his heel through the glass partition. Shards tinkled
and crashed to the floor. He took some of the bigger pieces and broke them to rough squares
that would fit under the clips on the stage. Lea accepted them without a word. Putting a drop
of the magter's blood on the slide, she bent over the eyepiece.

Her hands shook when she tried to adjust the focusing. Using low power, she examined the specimen,
squinting through the angled tube. Once she turned the sub-stage mirror a bit to catch the
light streaming in the window. Brion stood behind her, fists clenched, forceably controlling
his anxiety. "What do you see?" he finally blurted out.

"Phagocytes, platelets ... leucocytes ... everything seems normal." Her voice was dull, exhausted,
her eyes blinking with fatigue as she stared into the tube.

Anger at defeat burned through Brion. Even faced with failure, he refused to accept it. He
reached over her shoulder and savagely twisted the turret of microscope until the longest lens
was in position. "If you can't see anything--try the high power! It's there--I know it's there!
I'll get you a tissue specimen." He turned back to the disemboweled cadaver.

His back was turned and he did not see that sudden stiffening of her shoulders, or the sudden
eagerness that seized her fingers as they adjusted the focus. But he did feel the wave of emotion
that welled from her, impinging directly on his empathetic sense. "What is it?" he called to
her, as if she had spoken aloud.

"Something ... something here," she said, "in this leucocyte. It's not normal structure, but
it's familiar. I've seen something like it before, but I just can't remember." She turned away
from the microscope and unthinkingly pressed her gory knuckles to her forehead. "I know I've
seen it before."

Brion squinted into the deserted microscope and made out a dim shape in the center of the field.
It stood out sharply when he focused--the white, jellyfish shape of a single-celled leucocyte.
To his untrained eye there was nothing unusual about it. He couldn't know what was strange,
when he had no idea of what was normal.

"Do you see those spherical green shapes grouped together?" Lea asked. Before Brion could answer
she gasped, "I remember now!" Her fatigue was forgotten in her excitement. "Icerya purchasi,
that was the name, something like that. It's a coccid, a little scale insect. It had those
same shapes collected together within its individual cells."

"What do they mean? What is the connection with Dis?"

"I don't know," she said; "it's just that they look so similar. And I never saw anything like
this in a human cell before. In the coccids, the green particles grow into a kind of yeast
that lives within the insect. Not a parasite, but a real symbiote...."

Her eyes opened wide as she caught the significance of her own words. A symbiote--and Dis was
the world where symbiosis and parasitism had become more advanced and complex than on any other
planet. Lea's thoughts spun around this fact and chewed at the fringes of the logic. Brion
could sense her concentration and absorption. He did nothing to break the mood. Her hands were
clenched, her eyes staring unseeingly at the wall as her mind raced.

Brion and Ulv were quiet, watching her, waiting for her conclusions. The pieces were falling
into shape at last.

Lea opened her clenched hands and smoothed them on her sodden skirt. She blinked and turned
to Brion. "Is there a tool box here?" she asked.

Her words were so unexpected that Brion could not answer for a moment. Before he could say
anything she spoke again.

"Not hand tools; that would take too long. Could you find anything like a power saw? That would
be ideal." She turned back to the microscope, and he didn't try to question her. Ulv was still
looking at the body of the magter and had understood nothing of what they had said.

Brion went out into the loading bay. There was nothing he could use on the ground floor, so
he took the stairs to the floor above. A corridor here passed by a number of rooms. All of
the doors were locked, including one with the hopeful sign TOOL ROOM on it. He battered at
the metal door with his shoulder without budging it. As he stepped back to look for another
way in, he glanced at his watch.

Two o'clock! In ten hours the bombs would fall on Dis.

The need for haste tore at him. Yet there could be no noise--someone in the street might hear
it. He quickly stripped off his shirt and wrapped it in a loose roll around the barrel of his
gun, extending it in a loose tube in front of the barrel. Holding the rolled cloth in his left
hand, he jammed the gun up tight against the door, the muzzle against the lock. The single
shot was only a dull thud, inaudible outside of the building. Pieces of broken mechanism jarred
and rattled inside the lock and the door swung open.

When he came back Lea was standing by the body. He held the small power saw with a rotary blade.
"Will this do?" he asked. "Runs on its own battery; almost fully charged too."

"Perfect," she answered. "You're both going to have to help me." She switched into the Disan
language. "Ulv, would you find some place where you can watch the street without being seen?
Signal me when it is empty. I'm afraid this saw is going to make a lot of noise."

Ulv nodded and went out into the bay, where he climbed a heap of empty crates so he could peer
through the small windows set high in the wall. He looked carefully in both directions, then
waved to her to go ahead.

"Stand to one side and hold the cadaver's chin, Brion," she said. "Hold it firmly so the head
doesn't shake around when I cut. This is going to be a little gruesome. I'm sorry. But it'll
be the fastest way to cut the bone." The saw bit into the skull.

Once Ulv waved them into silence, and shrank back himself into the shadows next to the window.
They waited impatiently until he gave them the sign to continue again. Brion held steady while
the saw cut a circle completely around the skull.

"Finished," Lea said and the saw dropped from her limp fingers to the floor. She massaged life
back into her hands before she finished the job. Carefully and delicately she removed the cap
of bone from the magter's head, exposing his brain to the shaft of light from the window.

"You were right all the time, Brion," she said. "There is your alien."

XVI

Ulv joined them as they looked down at the exposed brain of the magter. The thing was so clearly
evident that even Ulv noticed it.

"I have seen dead animals and my people dead with their heads open, but I have never seen anything
like that before," he said.

"What is it?" Brion asked.

"The invader, the alien you were looking for," Lea told him.

The magter's brain was only two-thirds of what would have been its normal size. Instead of
filling the skull completely, it shared the space with a green, amorphous shape. This was ridged
somewhat like a brain, but the green shape had still darker nodules and extensions. Lea took
her scalpel and gently prodded the dark moist mass.

"It reminds me very much of something that I've seen before on Earth," she said. "The green-fly--Drepanosiphum
platanoides--and an unusual organ it has, called the pseudova. Now that I have seen this growth
in the magter's skull, I can think of a positive parallel. The fly Drepanosiphum also had a
large green organ, only it fills half of the body cavity instead of the head. Its identity
puzzled biologists for years, and they had a number of complex theories to explain it. Finally
someone managed to dissect and examine it. The pseudova turned out to be a living plant, a
yeastlike growth that helps with the green-fly's digestion. It produces enzymes that enable
the fly to digest the great amounts of sugar it gets from plant juice."

"That's not unusual," Brion said, puzzled. "Termites and human beings are a couple of other
creatures whose digestion is helped by internal flora. What's the difference in the green-fly?"

"Reproduction, mainly. All the other gut-living plants have to enter the host and establish
themselves as outsiders, permitted to remain as long as they are useful. The green-fly and
its yeast plant have a permanent symbiotic relationship that is essential to the existence
of both. The plant spores appear in many places throughout the fly's body--but they are always
in the germ cells. Every egg cell has some, and every egg that grows to maturity is infected
with the plant spores. The continuation of the symbiosis is unbroken and guaranteed."

"Do you think those green spheres in the magter's blood cells could be the same kind of thing?"
Brion asked.

"I'm sure of it," Lea said. "It must be the same process. There are probably green spheres
throughout the magters' bodies, spores or offspring of those things in their brains. Enough
will find their way to the germ cells to make sure that every young magter is infected at birth.
While the child is growing, so is the symbiote. Probably a lot faster, since it seems to be
a simpler organism. I imagine it is well established in the brain pan within the first six
months of the infant's life." Do not eat, perhaps, many seafood in Catalonia,
or is the Mediterranean seafood worth less than the Atlantic? On the other hand, is known to
us all the political possibilities of Catalan seafood? If there someone in Spain to study politics
with a truly scientific approach, I propose this problem, which I consider a major interest, but unfortunately,
theres no really serious political treatise.

X

TAKE OVER

"When insubordination manifested in Barcelona or in
another province - said the general Aznar - only proceed energetically
dominates and makes it into law.

""

If necessary - he said - it devastates the population ... "

I believe these words of General Aznar have any more of a project,
and I strange to see that some newspapers reject it without taking
the trouble to study it technically.

Because of course if any difficulty exists in Spain to raze villages, to me seems to be a
purely technical difficulty. That's imagine that the Government can not Barcelona sweep on grounds of
moral, political or legal shows, in my opinion, a profound ignorance about razing. The difficulties
of this triple character have little importance in the country of La Cierva y Sánchez Guerra. Instead,
the difficulties techniques are, in the land of the same gentlemen, some really serious.

And sitting on this, I think we should leave aside considerations idle, and beg General Aznar not
to develop its plan.

When General Aznar, who has in the Army a place so high, has hinted at the idea of ​​razing
Barcelona to dominate the elements rebels, is, undoubtedly, this idea is feasible. However, general:
we need a budget. We want to know how long and how much money it would compromise his honor
to do in Barcelona a sweeping way. The German Army, a formidable material and direction of the
first order, took four years to raze to the satisfaction of Kaiser Reims; and Reims to be one of
the richest cities of France, invested in destroying as much as what she was worth. Of course
we are not as demanding as the former Kaiser. Used countless resignations, we'll probably settle
for a much more devastation wider than that of the city of Reims, but what that would cost us
arrasamientito? The case is that, to avoid the remote possibility of losing Barcelona once, let's
not really to lose twice, first leveled, and second, investing money in the razing which cost
the building. On the other hand, Barcelona is an urgent problem, and if the leveling may take
fifty or sixty years, I do not think that constitutes an effective solution.

I guess the general Aznar will appreciate the difference between those papers that have received manifestations
of the Senate with a clamor sentimental, and I, that focus seriously
on the ground of reality.

Raze Barcelona! "There is no doubt that this would end once and for all with all questions
of Barcelona? The trouble, as say, are the practical difficulties. Sometimes arguing with a friend,
and fails to make adopt my views, I have felt the desire to raze it, and if I refrained, was
not, not, on moral grounds, but precisely because of technical difficulties. And it is - for
borrow a phrase worthy of the Upper House, where did the general manifestations Aznar - who "Individuals
are as people, and people are as individuals."

XI

CONGRESS, TO FORTY DEGREES

The other day, with a heat of forty-something
degrees, I was in Congress.

I had never Spanish political observed at a temperature as high.

Some members, lying on their seats seemed decaying corpses. Smelled bad.

- No doubt - I thought - the Parliament is not a summer show.

For the Summer have bullfights, which are outdoors.

And, speaking to a deputy friend

- Why do not you close? - I said.

- Close? - Said -.

And the legislative work ahead of us, is that it will porters?

- Man! In case of trouble ...

- Everything is back diatribes against the deputy in this country
- said my friend - and the deputy is a martyr.

You see the French deputies. Not content with winning fifteen thousand francs year, they want
to be duplicate diets. The Spanish deputy, however, far from receivables pay. Do you know how much
I have cost me the election? Twenty thousand Durito. This demonstrates
love of country.

And here I have you in the middle of August, breathing the tainted
air.

- Is the air in politics.

I had heard of him, but he had never breathed. When I read in a newspaper that tainted air
of our policy, thought it was of a sentence.

Physically break now and I realize that it is noxious.

- Sometimes it smells like garlic.

- That smell is democracy. It is the very essence of parliamentary system. Do not speak ill
of him ...

Fans spinning at full speed but to no avail.

It is shown that the policy Spanish, subjected to a temperature of
forty degrees, it breaks down completely.

Perhaps also happen the same with the British policy, for example, but when the thermometer
forty degrees in London?

Definitely, we must close the Congress if we do not want to be declared in Madrid, and then spread
throughout the world, a new epidemic Hispanic.

And later you open it later always open on time.

XII

OPTIMISM

I do not know if the reader has noticed my attitude to the future of Spain. So far, this attitude
has been being a skeptic, a man without faith or no hope.

The Conservatives promised us a revolution from above, and I smiled incredulously, the Republicans
and Socialists would announce a revolution from below, and I smile
again with the same incredulity.

- This can not go on - tell me -.

This has to be transformed fatally. The world integer transforms, and Spain is not on the
moon, but in the world ...

All was useless. In the end, I had an idea and that Spain was not in the world but on the moon.
I do not believe in the future of Spain. I was a skeptic ...

It was a skeptic, dear reader, but not anymore.

My skepticism was a cause and this cause just disappeared. Now I have to say that only the
case in question was on the street of Cedaceros, and that was the fence that Mr. Vitor has been,
for so long Madrid obstructing traffic.

When I passed by Cedaceros street, my mind is drowned in a torrent of bitter reflections.

- How are we going to tear down anything in Spain - I thought - if we have not yet collapse
this fence? Press the attack, the Parliament of combat, the people and she still curses standing.
The student youth, hope of the country, came here one night, armed with hammers and picks, and has
assaulted romantically, but the fence remains intact. Until government authorities proposed to
break it down, without any success obtained management ... And what
can you expect from a people who, all he can not demolish a poor wood
fence decayed?

...

Certainly, if I said during the last few years as a pessimistic writer,
This has consisted mainly in the frequency with which roamed through
the streets of Cedaceros.

But at last, the famous fence has fallen to the ground, and now everything seems possible.

-
Some people who have destroyed the fence Vitor - I say - it can kill Mr. Doe policy. Spain will
be transformed. There will come a day when we Madrid to gas for street lighting. We must look
to the future with confidence. Be optimistic ... Within plus or minus years, there would be nothing
amazing that the people of Madrid could go to La Coruna in a twenty-four hours. Everything you
would expect from a people so strong. Trains will walk. A kilo of bread weigh less than three fourths
of kilo. So there may be homes for families wishing to rent ... Let
faith in men who have broken the fence Cedaceros Street.

Anti-politics

I

THE NEW WORLD SCENERY

Every three or four centuries have men, are set to sweep, scrub, to paper and repaint the world.
Do you leave it better? Probably not, but it does not matter. They remove dust, the cool, the
range and give a new interest. If the revolutionaries could change planet from time to time,
and going to stay with the Martians or the Selenites the world, surely,
would not suffer so many changes.

Unfortunately, communications interplanetary have not yet passed the project category, and when
humanity is bored in his old home, begins to take stuff and throw them upside down.

And this is what happens today. The world is changing, to the indignation of many gentlemen
who had settled in the comfortable and to not bother anyone.

These Gentlemen do not see any need for change.

The world seems really good, and Actually, what the world has ever
been better?

It has central heating and trial by jury. Has parliamentary system. Has gas, electric lighting,
telegraph and telephone have, has Compensation for employment laws and has cinematography. A world
with all modern comforts, a world highly recommended.

What happens in this world is not like everybody. The Russians, for example, have aesthetic theories,
and after having transformed the stage set would not be unusual it also transformed the scenery
in the world. And the future world will become, more or least with respect to the world, such
a thing as the Russian ballet in relation to the opera Italian.

What do these workers who assemble the fuss? What do these carpenters? What do these plumbers?
What do these chimney doctors? What do these Paperhangers? ... Want to fix the world, untouched
since the French Revolution, to pull a season a few centuries. If they say could come back
another day!

... But it is useless, and we must resign ourselves to all the hassles of living in a house where
they are doing repairs.

II

THE WORKERS OF LEVITA

I am what is called a proletarian coat. Not that I have a coat.

Not that I be a proletarian. Neither men have Levite are, strictly speaking, proletarians,
or the real proletarians have levitate. I have no coat nor am a proletarian, and yet when I see
that in a conservative newspaper speaks of the proletarians of coat, I can not stop give me the
hint. Undoubtedly, the phrase "proletarian coat" represents a theoretical concept and though
for practical applications in life I do not have no coat, the theory it I have. I have, as they
say, a theoretical coat.

It is a coat you can not pawn; but in theory, this is irrelevant.

In fact, the dress coat proletarian almost always American. Sometimes, you have a smocking to
conquer, in the trendy hotel heiresses or influential politicians. Sometimes has a fracture, and in some
exceptional cases, may present to a jacket, but, then coat never has.

It is truly absurd that belong to a class is characterized only by
the use of a garment that does not use ever.

It is absurd and grotesque being a proletarian coat ...

Several
years ago, the owner of a newspaper where I used to work from Paris,
sent me a letter saying: "The newspaper is going well.

We have a great reputation. Our views are treated with respect in high places. We've conquered the
public in a frock coat, but is not enough. Now we have to win the shirt, and I'm counting on you
... "The man did not I gave up two or three dollars per item, and I said without much enthusiasm:
"The thermometer - I said - make fifteen degrees below zero.

The Sena begins to freeze, and instead of blouse, I would win a good warm coat. "My ideal would
then be a proletarian coat, and I think I did something and into the summer ...

But back to the workers of his coat. "Everyone thinks of the workers - write conservative newspaper
-. Everyone deals with the workers of her blouse. Of the workers frock coat, however, nobody
remembers ... "I do not think anyone will take care of the workers blouse more than themselves.
As to the proletarians of coat, how we will not pass unnoticed, if not we know? How will governments
be set in the proletarian coat if the coat dresses proletarian American?

I propose that we enlevitemos all and which is a great union with their different sections. Then one
day we will, for example, the strike of the literature and from the time agreed to the street would
not a single adjective. What conflict for speed! ... But I'll show you how to do nothing.
Levite proletarians have no survival instinct, addition to having no coat.

III

LABOR AS THE BASE OF A NEW ANTHROPOLOGY

After all, union members do not intend anything so extraordinary as
can be believed.

Who cares that men are classified by nations which are exempt for trades? Race, language, religion, customs
... I agree that this is all a bit vague and a little confusing, but what locksmith?

The unionists claim that where today says 'Spain', 'England', 'France' or 'Germany' morning
say "Union Iron", "Union of Coal", "Union of the Wood", "Union Paper '... At first, naturally,
the members of some unions appear mixed with those of others, in what is now Spain, for example,
men will be both paper men of wood, coal and iron, but ultimately, it is conceivable that each
Union may be localized in where to find their raw materials. Then emerge, not only a new political
geography, but also a new Anthropology. Workers coal will be a very dark race. The masons will
form a very blonde.

If today appear and all the builders of the world, whether or not
children of masons and masonry but is the only bond that unites them,
what will not happen to two centuries of trade unionism?

Probably the various Unions also give rise to different religions,
it is not easy to conceive how you can have the same beliefs and the
same sentiments in the country's coal in the country of lime.

And if it is true that the terminology of trades is the source richest
which nourishes all modern languages, why not assume that each union
will to have their own language, unintelligible to the others?

It seems that the union will make a terrible revolution, but the two centuries unionism, the
world will be, more or less as now. Want a strong union dominate others, they declare war
and millions will die iron men, men coal, cardboard men and men of celluloid ...

Undoubtedly, there is no difference between men classify or categorize
trades of races, religions, languages ​​and customs.

And not only is there a big difference, but being equal. In fact, men never have been classified
by race, religions, languages or customs. The historians have ranked so long after they had made their
own classification, but the first men were classified always trades neither more nor less than
if they had heard or Noy tab of Sucre.

Fishermen meet to settle on the banks of rivers or lakes to build cities, the hunters would
forests. The modern nations are nothing more than a direct consequence of that early unionism.
And so I think it is not hard to imagine the result of Current unionism.

IV

Bolshevism, INFECTIOUS DISEASE

When the first poilus entered German
territory, many French were alarmed.

- Germany - said - is plagued
by Bolshevism.

To see if our soldiers are caught and then spread around ...

And is that for the vast majority of people, Bolshevism is nothing but a disease infectious.
The most serious governments treat it as a new form of flu.

Believe that spread by contagion, like the Spanish flu, and fight
to form cords border health.

A recognized cases carefully isolate them, putting them in prisons,
and, soon prohibit the right of assembly, to avoid overcrowding.

To me, this combat Bolshevism health measures seem to me something like if had intended to fight
the flu reforming the Constitution. I do not think that the health measures have never been very
useful against epidemics, and, of course, I think they are perfectly useless against Bolshevism.

Because,
for me, Bolshevism is not a health issue but a social problem, and in the current state of
science, it seems absurd to pretend that no change of religion or
policy by submitting to medical treatment.

Perhaps the holy water has solved some social problems, but probably not solve the hydrogen peroxide
none. And the proof that Bolshevism is not a disease, is that while the disease only put in
danger to patients, Bolshevism constitutes a danger not only for those are bolchevikis.

But if, despite everything, we still regard Bolshevism as a disease,
what we to do with the other political systems?

What will cure the maurismo, for example? The Bolshevism would become something like a huge gastric
disorder, while most represent political movements impossible to
combat mental deficiencies.

V

THE MAGIC OF MONEY

When the Bolsheviks began to appear in a country, it seems that the rich are quick to make happily
squander their fortunes before the take the trap. So say have proceeded Russian grand dukes and aristocrats
are proceeding Magyars. The Bolshevism is a great stimulant of generosity, so I do not see that
in Spain we run even the slightest risk of going to a Bolshevik regime. When you tell a millionaire
here we go right to Bolshevism, ask him a thousand pesetas, and if
you deny them - to you the deny - is that talk the talk and without
any conviction.

Some say that Bolshevism tends to suppress the money, and this deserves some thought. Certainly, money
is a very bad thing, especially for those who do not; but also a
very good thing, especially for those who treasure.

Some people, when discussing this issue of good and evil of money,
they exclaim:

- Remove you!

... The important thing is to be healthy ...

Probably, these people
are that the money is a disease, and whether, in fact, the forms,
we must agree that, between us, never had endemic characters.

For my part, I confess that money has always seemed to me a miraculous thing. I can not see
a hard process that transforms into potatoes, without imagining the opposite process, and I suppose
that, previously, have been caught kilos and kilos of tasty tuber, which is the overcooked, which
they have been crushed, who have been subjected to various reagents, which is the put in a still
and hard has been obtained as a result. This is what I hard to imagine when you buy a potato,
and this is already quite wonderful, but the wonder grows when I think my drive is not only capable
of being converted into potatoes, but also can be transformed peas,
carrots, lyrical poetry in Cuban cigars and many other objects that
tells me my fantasy.

What else in our modern world has this magical power that is hard, as there is a five dollars?
And how There may be those who despise the money, considering it too prosaic reality?

There is no doubt that money is an excellent thing ... for those who do. If we could have all ...!
But as soon as we had all miraculously disappear virtue at all. I believe it should establish
a peaceful shift to enjoy the money. This will avoid revolutions, big business and a lot of
things more or less annoying.

VI

CRIME TO BE RUSSIAN

A foreigner, a prisoner at the Modelo prison, goes to the newspapers protesting against detention.
"I am a Russian citizen - he says - and I have committed no crime."

A Russian citizen has committed no crime!

... The contradiction is obvious.

It's like saying "a murderer who has not killed anyone," or "a thief
who stole not ever."

Is not that enough offense to Mr. Weissbein the fact that Russian?
Russia is a country too cold too far and too complicated, and our
police has always inspired profound suspicion. In Madrid, Mr. Weissbein,
already quite difficult to be Catalan or Galician so that nobody is
allowed to be Russian. If you want to live peacefully among us, get
Vallecas you or Getafe and renounce any claim incontinently Moscow.

There
is nothing to be Russian, that is, being the country from terrorism
and Bolshevism! ... My friend Corpus Barga, current editor of The
Sun in Paris, was weak enough to be interested in the Russian issues,
and as was made in Spain, his mustache drooping to the Tatar Police
caught him and put him in jail. Another friend of mine, who wanted
to study Russian, was arrested to the third lesson. And if Cristóbal
de Castro, author of Inside Russia, have appointed Governor of Avila,
was when he no longer could anyone doubt that neither Christopher
Castro had come to Russia and never knew a word of Russian.

I do
not know in which of our Criminal Code condemns Russian citizenship,
and therefore not I give the number to Mr. Weissbein. The truth, however,
is that, as the Spanish police suspect that someone may be Russian,
he seeks and stops him. If I have not been to Russia yet is because
I did not want that around, I was locked up forever in the Model Prison.
No no way to be a Russian in Spain, Mr. Weissbein. They have been
persecuted Russian books and forfeited here different times. If you
let me: forget their language and adopt the citizenship of Cuatro
Caminos, which, after the German defeat, is the most distant from
where may be in Madrid.

VII

THE RUSSIAN POLITICAL

Before the war,
Spain did not believe the Russians.

- A Russian? Come on, man! Ulv followed the scent of the magter that hung in the air where they
had passed. When it grew thin he knew they had left the frequently used tunnels and entered
deserted ones. They could only retrace their steps and start again in a different direction.

More maddening than the walking was the way time was running out. Inexorably the glowing hands
crept around the face of Brion's watch until they stood at fifteen minutes before twelve.

"There is a light ahead," Ulv whispered, and Brion almost gasped with relief. They moved slowly
and silently until they stood, concealed by the darkness, looking out into a domed chamber
brightly lit by glowing tubes.

"What is it?" Ulv asked, blinking in the painful wash of illumination after the long darkness.

Brion had to fight to control his voice, to stop from shouting.

"The cage with the metal webbing is a jump-space generator. The pointed, silver shapes next
to it are bombs of some kind, probably the cobalt bombs. We've found it!"

His first impulse was to instantly send the radio call that would stop the waiting fleet of
H-bombers. But an unconvincing message would be worse than no message at all. He had to describe
exactly what he saw here so the Nyjorders would know he wasn't lying. What he told them had
to fit exactly with the information they already had about the launcher and the bombs.

The launcher had been jury-rigged from a ship's jump-space generator; that was obvious. The
generator and its controls were neatly cased and mounted. Cables ran from them to a roughly
constructed cage of woven metal straps, hammered and bent into shape by hand. Three technicians
were working on the equipment. Brion wondered what sort of blood-thirsty war-lovers the magter
had found to handle the bombing for them. Then he saw the chains around their necks and the
bloody wounds on their backs.

He still found it difficult to have any pity for them. They had obviously been willing to accept
money to destroy another planet--or they wouldn't have been working here. They had probably
rebelled only when they had discovered how suicidal the attack would be.

Thirteen minutes to midnight.

Cradling the radio against his chest, Brion rose to his feet. He had a better view of the bombs
now. There were twelve of them, alike as eggs from the same deadly clutch. Pointed like the
bow of a spacer, each one swept smoothly back for its two metres of length, to a sharply chopped-off
end. They were obviously incomplete, the war heads of rockets. One had its base turned towards
him, and he saw six projecting studs that could be used to attach it to the missing rocket.
A circular inspection port was open in the flat base of the bomb.

This was enough. With this description, the Nyjorders would know he couldn't be lying about
finding the bombs. Once they realized this, they couldn't destroy Dis without first trying
to neutralize them.

Brion carefully counted fifty paces before he stopped. He was far enough from the cavern so
he couldn't be heard, and an angle of the cave cut off all light from behind him. With carefully
controlled movements he turned on the power, switched the set to transmit, and checked the
broadcast frequency. All correct. Is it not these considerations too subtle for a
town of few residents?

Indeed, the lord of the province of Guadalajara has had a good idea when peregrina has decided
to admire. Now I understand why so many bad writers are many and
very good fans.

With two more fans, I will have completely idiotic.

XVII

PATHOLOGY LITERATURE

Unfortunately, in Spanish literature that there is no genius. That kind of cult writer, weighted,
healthy, intelligent and well nourished, that Lemaitre considered
superior to the genius and which gives an example of Anatole France,
there is among us.

All our writers belong to the great category. I myself, in my very small scale, what no doubt
that I'm also a genius? And this boy geniuses in literature becomes something like a group
of lame that the door of a church, beg Him to the public showing their money various monstrosities.

When,
in a window, I see one of my books into the books of other Spanish authors, I have the feeling of
being in a hospital waiting room with my mates pain, a visit from some old lady who does not
know how to kill time. Spanish literature in fact, is nothing but a number of diseases, due generally
to sexual disorders defects or nutrition. The one you have liver disease. The other will form
acids in the stomach. The threat of paralysis is usually progressive and has delusions of
grandeur. He suffers from the spleen ... No writer would lose all interest as are applied a
few injections of a product more or less German, or as soon as you subdue a good diet. And indeed,
this case has already been given several times. How many guys who started doing interesting things
did not turn as soon idiots as they are called a good newspaper and given a good salary? The
directors could not understand the cause, however, was a cause very easy to understand: these guys
had never had talent. What they had was hunger.

Normalized to the stomach, remained at the level the most common employee of the Treasury ...

Something
terrible is to be a little monster and realize it! The fearful thing to know that our ingenuity
can be treated medically as an abscess or a disease the kidneys! ... But there is something even
worse in our literature: the squeamish, that is, imaginary disease patients, who, being perfectly
silly, they think attacked genius ...

XVIII

A TEMPEST IN A TEA
CUP

"A distinguished writer - I said in The Sun - complains that
the Spanish have taken the English custom of putting an ax to you.

"This answer Mr. Salaverría saying that I lie, because he never said
that we had taken such Spanish usual.

And here's where I come to learn that Mr. Salaverría has said.

I have not named Mr. Salaverria, I have not any of your personal details or have reproduced
any paragraph you.

And if Mr. Salaverría not have said that the Spanish had taken the English custom of putting an ax
to you, what was going to say now that he had not mentioned?

Saying that he has not said, Mr. Salaverría says he has said. And yes, saying that said, is
that he has not said, then Mr. Salaverría who misses the truth thus committing an act so unworthy
of him as me, because Mr. Salaverría also smart and funny. (The funny smart - writes Mr. Salaverría
- no need to resort to lying.)

What most bothered Mr. Salaverria, feeling alluded to by me, is what I attribute a concept hache dismissive
towards Britain. "I do not know many things - he says -. However, I know the importance of the
ax to the English. "Well, Mr. Salaverria, all has been a joke. The hatchet has no importance
for the British. The man who truly has given importance to the ax has been you. For her, Mr. Salaverria,
has not hesitated to you in attack against an old friend like me, coming up to me to get involved.
Hache Oh! ... You name of a woman ...

XIX

TEA CUP

In case any reader is interested, we reproduce the article
that has led to the previous note.

 He had his deadly blowgun in his hand and his face was an
expressionless mask.

Brion almost smiled at the irony of the situation. In spite of everything he had done to prevent
it, Nyjord had dropped the bombs. And this act alone may have destroyed their own planet. Brion
had it within his power now to stop the launching in the cavern. Should he? Should he save
the lives of his killers? Or should he practice the ancient blood-oath that had echoed and
destroyed down through the ages: An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. It would be so simple.
He literally had to do nothing. The score would be even, and his and the Disans' death avenged.

Did Ulv have his blowgun ready to kill Brion with, if he should try to stop the launchings?
Or had he misread the Disan entirely?

"Will you stop them, Ulv?" he asked.

How large was mankind's sense of obligation? The caveman first had this feeling for his mate,
then for his family. It grew until men fought and died for the abstract ideas of cities and
nations, then for whole planets. Would the time ever come when men might realize that the obligation
should be to the largest and most encompassing reality of all--mankind? And beyond that to
life of all kinds.

Brion saw this idea, not in words but as a reality. When he posed the question to himself in
this way he found that it stated clearly its inherent answer. He pulled his gun out, and as
he did he wondered what Ulv's answer might be.

"Nyjord is medvirk," Ulv said, raising his blowgun and sending a dart across the cavern. It
struck one of the technicians, who gasped and fell to the floor.

Brion's shots crashed into the control board, shorting and destroying it, removing the menace
to Nyjord for all time.

Medvirk, Ulv had said. A life form that cooperates and aids other life forms. It may kill in
self-defense, but it is essentially not a killer or destroyer. Ulv had a lifetime of knowledge
about the interdependency of life. He grasped the essence of the idea and ignored all the verbal
complications and confusions. He had killed the magter, who were his own people, because they
were umedvirk--against life. And he had saved his enemies because they were medvirk.

With this realization came the painful knowledge that the planet and the people that had produced
this understanding were dead.

In the cavern the magter saw the destruction of their plans, and the cave mouth from which
the bullets had come. Silently they rushed to kill their enemy--a concerted wave of emotionless
fury.

Brion and Ulv fought back. Even the knowledge that he was doomed no matter what happened could
not resign Brion to death at the hands of the magter. To Ulv, the decision was much easier.
He was simply killing umedvirk. A believer in life, he destroyed the anti-life.

They retreated into the darkness, still firing. The magter had lights and ion rifles, and were
right behind them. Knowing the caverns better than the men they chased, the pursuers circled.
Brion saw lights ahead and dragged Ulv to a stop.

"They know their way through these caves, and we don't," he said. "If we try to run they'll
just shoot us down. Let's find a spot we can defend and settle into it."

"Back here"--Ulv gave a tug in the right direction--"there is a cave with only one entrance,
and that is very narrow."

"Let's go!"

Running as silently as they could in the darkness, they reached the deadend cavern without
being seen. What noise they made was lost in other footsteps that sounded and echoed through
the connecting caves. Once inside, they found cover behind a ridge and waited. The end was certain.

       *       *       *       *       *

The magter ran swiftly into their cave, flashing his light into all the places of concealment.
The beam passed over the two hidden men, and at the same instant Brion fired. The shot boomed
loudly as the magter fell--a shot that would surely have been heard by the others.

Before anyone else came into the cave, Brion ran over and grabbed the still functioning light.
Propping it on the rocks so it shone on the entrance, he hurried back to shelter beside Ulv.
They waited for the attack.

It was not long in coming. Two magter rushed in, and died. More were outside, Brion knew, and
he wondered how long it would be before they remembered the grenades and rolled one into their
shelter.

An indistinct murmur sounded outside, and sharp explosions. In their hiding place, Brion and
Ulv crouched low and wondered why the attack didn't come. Then one of the magter came in the
entrance, but Brion hesitated before shooting.

The man had backed in, firing behind him as he came.

Ulv had no compunctions about killing, only his darts couldn't penetrate the magter's thick
clothing. As the magter turned, Ulv's breath pulsed once and death stung the back of the other
man's hand. He collapsed into a crumpled heap.

"Don't shoot," a voice called from outside the cave, and a man stepped through the swirling
dust and smoke to stand in the beam from the light.

Brion clutched wildly at Ulv's arm, dragging the blowgun from the Disan's mouth.

The man in the light wore a protective helmet, thick boots and a pouch-hung uniform.

He was a Nyjorder.

The realization was almost impossible to accept. Brion had heard the bombs fall. Yet the Nyjord
soldier was here. The two facts couldn't be accepted together.

"Would you keep a hold on his arm, sir, just in case," the soldier said, glancing warily at
Ulv's blowpipe. "I know what those darts can do." He pulled a microphone from one of his pockets
and spoke into it.

More soldiers crowded into the cave, and Professor-Commander Krafft came in behind them. He
looked strangely out of keeping in the dusty combat uniform. The gun was even more incongruous
in his blue-veined hand. After giving the pistol to the nearest soldier with an air of relief,
he stumbled quickly over to Brion and took his hand.

"It is a profound and sincere pleasure to meet you in person," he said. "And your friend Ulv
as well."

"Would you kindly explain what is going on?" Brion said thickly. He was obsessed by the strange
feeling that none of this could possibly be happening.

"We will always remember you as the man who saved us from ourselves," Krafft said, once again
the professor instead of the commander.

"What Brion wants are facts, Grandpa, not speeches," Hys said. The bent form of the leader
of the rebel Nyjord army pushed through the crowd of taller men until he stood next to Krafft.
"Simply stated, Brion, your plan succeeded. Krafft relayed your message to me--and as soon
as I heard it I turned back and met him on his ship. I'm sorry that Telt's dead--but he found
what we were looking for. I couldn't ignore his report of radioactive traces. Your girl friend
arrived with the hacked-up corpse at the same time I did, and we all took a long look at the
green leech in its skull. Her explanation of what it is made significant sense. We were already
carrying out landings when we had your call about something having been stored in the magter
tower. After that it was just a matter of following tracks--and the transmitter you planted."

"But the explosions at midnight?" Brion broke in. "I heard them!"

"You were supposed to," Hys laughed. "Not only you, but the magter in this cave. We figured
they would be armed and the cave strongly defended. So at midnight we dropped a few large chemical
explosive bombs at the entrance. Enough to kill the guards without bringing the roof down.
We also hoped that the magter deeper in would leave their posts or retreat from the imagined
radiation. And they did. It worked like a charm. We came in quietly and took them by surprise.
Made a clean sweep--killed the ones we couldn't capture."

"One of the renegade jump-space technicians was still alive," Krafft said. "He told us about
your stopping the bombs aimed at Nyjord, the two of you."

None of the Nyjorders there could add anything to his words, not even the cynical Hys. But
Brion could empathize their feelings, the warmth of their intense relief and happiness. It
was a sensation he would never forget.

"There is no more war," Brion translated for Ulv, knowing that the Disan had understood nothing
of the explanation. As he said it, he realized that there was one glaring error in the story.

"You couldn't have done it," Brion said. "You landed on this planet before you had my message
about the tower. That means you still expected the magter to be sending their bombs to Nyjord--and
you made the landings in spite of this knowledge."

"Of course," Professor Krafft said, astonished at Brion's lack of understanding. "What else
could we do? The magter are sick!"

Hys laughed aloud at Brion's baffled expression. "You have to understand Nyjord psychology,"
he said. "When it was a matter of war and killing, my planet could never agree on an intelligent
course. War is so alien to our philosophy that it couldn't even be considered correctly. That's
the trouble with being a vegetable eater in a galaxy of carnivores. You're easy prey for the
first one that lands on your back. Any other planet would have jumped on the magter with both
feet and shaken the bombs out of them. We fumbled it so long it almost got both worlds killed.
Your mind-parasite drew us back from the brink."

"I don't understand," Brion said.

"A simple matter of definition. Before you came we had no way to deal with the magter here
on Dis. They really were alien to us. Nothing they did made sense--and nothing we did seemed
to have the slightest effect on them. But you discovered that they were sick, and that's something
we know how to handle. We're united again; my rebel army was instantly absorbed into the rest
of the Nyjord forces by mutual agreement. Doctors and nurses are on the way here now. Plans
were put under way to evacuate what part of the population we could until the bombs were found.
The planet is united again, and working hard."

"Because the magter are sick, infected by a destructive life form?" Brion asked.

"Exactly so," Professor Krafft said. "We are civilized, after all. You can't expect us to fight
a war--and you surely can't expect us to ignore the plight of sick neighbors?"

"No ... you surely can't," Brion said, sitting down heavily. He looked at Ulv, to whom the
speech had been incomprehensible. Beyond him, Hys wore his most cynical expression as he considered
the frailties of his people.

"Hys," Brion called out, "you translate all that into Disan and explain to Ulv. I wouldn't dare."

XIX

Dis was a floating golden ball, looking like a schoolroom globe in space. No clouds obscured
its surface, and from this distance it seemed warm and attractive set against the cold darkness.
Brion almost wished he were back there now, as he sat shivering inside the heavy coat. He wondered
how long it would be before his confused body-temperature controls decided to turn off the
summer adjustment. He hoped it wouldn't be as sudden or as drastic as turning it on had been.

Delicate as a dream, Lea's reflection swam in space next to the planet. She had come up quietly
behind him in the spaceship's corridor, only her gentle breath and mirrored face telling him
she was there. He turned quickly and took her hands in his.

"You're looking infinitely better," he said.

"Well, I should," she said, pushing back her hair in an unconscious gesture with her hand.
"I've been doing nothing but lying in the ship's hospital, while you were having such a fine
time this last week. Rushing around down there shooting all the magter."

"Just gassing them," he told her. "The Nyjorders can't bring themselves to kill any more, even
if it does raise their own casualty rate. In fact, they are having difficulty restraining the
Disans led by Ulv, who are happily killing any magter they see as being pure umedvirk."

"What will they do when they have all those frothing magter madmen?"

"They don't know yet," he said. "They won't really know until they see what an adult magter
is like with his brain-parasite dead and gone. They're having better luck with the children.
If they catch them early enough, the parasite can be destroyed before it has done too much damage."

Lea shuddered delicately and let herself lean against him. "I'm not that sturdy yet; let's
sit down while we talk." There was a couch opposite the viewport where they could sit and still
see Dis.

"I hate to think of a magter deprived of his symbiote," she said. "If his system can stand
the shock, I imagine there will be nothing left except a brainless hulk. This is one series
of experiments I don't care to witness. I rest secure in the knowledge that the Nyjorders will
find the most humane solution."

"I'm sure they will," Brion said.

"Now what about us?" she said disconcertingly, leaning back in his arms. "I must say you have
the highest body temperature of any one I have ever touched. It's positively exciting."

This jarred Brion even more. He didn't have her ability to put past horrors out of the mind
by substituting present pleasures. "Well, just what about us?" he said with masterful inappropriateness.

She smiled as she leaned against him. "You weren't as vague as that, the night in the hospital
room. I seem to remember a few other things you said. And did. You can't claim you're completely
indifferent to me, Brion Brandd. So I'm only asking you what any outspoken Anvharian girl would.
Where do we go from here? Get married?"

There was a definite pleasure in holding her slight body in his arms and feeling her hair against
his cheek. They both sensed it, and this awareness made his words sound that much more ugly.

"Lea--darling! You know how important you are to me--but you certainly realize that we could
never get married."

Her body stiffened and she tore herself away from him.

"Why, you great, fat, egotistical slab of meat! What do you mean by that? I like you, Lea,
we have plenty of fun and games together, but surely you realize that you aren't the kind of
girl one takes home to mother!"

"Lea, hold on," he said. "You know better than to say a thing like that. What I said has nothing
to do with how I feel towards you. But marriage means children, and you are biologist enough
to know about Earth's genes--"

"Intolerant yokel!" she cried, slapping his face. He didn't move or attempt to stop her. "I
expected better from you, with all your pretensions of understanding. Rich man passed by, whom the salary does not care about anything, and was
replacement is almost always to live in court to their liking. His awkward and abrupt manner as
those of an elephant, slurred word, intelligence appears to take dark: no However, after treatment
was understood that it was more crafty than dull: rarely looked Face the person you speak.

The
other was a gentleman of medium height and age, thin, pale, beautiful
eyes, to look gentle and humble, clean-shaven face entirely, like
clerics and comedians, face Spacious, bright augmented by a bald and
shy manners.

Called D. Facundo Ojeda and was the intimate friend and eternal sidekick Mr. de Rivera, not conceived
D. Bernardo walking through the Prado without removal or take your left to D. Facundo: he always
gave right or left him on the sidewalk as appropriate, recognizing the immense superiority of
the former. This superiority was shown since childhood, when both were attending school; not
that D. Bernardo was a most outstanding disciple, because although the two enjoyed opinion applied,
he drew Hojeda still some advantage in studying hard and writing lessons accounts with cleaning,
but D. Bernardo, his whole life had been a high and nosequé than that instilled respect. This
superiority was increasingly pointing to the course time, the roads that the two friends took
contributed mightily to it. While D. Bernardo, by virtue of inherited wealth from their parents, began
to appear very young in Madrid society and become an indispensable factor in the halls and
theaters, Ojeda could be seen needed to continue the modest career as a pharmacist and pharmacy
open, once completed, Fuencarral street. Although their friendship, thanks to these circumstances,
it seemed quite ready to warm up as he played the part of D. Bernardo's efforts Hojeda not consented.
All the times that the pharmacy he was free, aprovechábalos for run home of his friend and pay any
service that was within his reach was so good, so cariñosote, so respectful, that despite the
distance between them and the Apothecary is pleased to recognize, D. Bernardo condescended to
treat him magnanimously, to leave to accompany him on the ride and even occasionally take a
turn for the pharmacy and play there a triplet. You can not imagine the profound gratitude
to the good Hojeda his friend kept by these grants. Had remained celibate, and thanks to their
economies, be achieved in some years a little capital, the revenues should go to accrue to
him because the same thing today spent the day on which the pharmacy opened to the public.
 "If you think your little lecture
on the Origins of Man was a novelty, it wasn't. It just reminded me of a number of things my
glands had convinced me to forget. In a way, I envy you your weightlifter wife-to-be, and your
happy kiddies. But not very much. Very early in life I resigned myself to the fact that there
was no one on Earth I would care to marry. I always had these teen-age dreams of a hero from
space who would carry me off, and I guess I slipped you into the pattern without realizing
it. I'm old enough now to face the fact that I like my work more than a banal marriage, and
I'll probably end up a frigid and virtuous old maid, with more degrees and titles than you
have shot-putting records."

As they looked through the port Dis began slowly to contract. Their ship drew away from it,
heading towards Nyjord. They sat apart, without touching now. Leaving Dis meant leaving behind
something they had shared. They had been strangers together there, on a strange world. For
a brief time their lifelines had touched. That time was over now.

"Don't we look happy!" Hys said, shambling towards them.

"Fall dead and make me even happier then," Lea snapped bitterly.

Hys ignored the acid tone of her words and sat down on the couch next to them. Since leaving
command of his rebel Nyjord army he seemed much mellower. "Going to keep on working for the
Cultural Relationships Foundation, Brion?" he asked. "You're the kind of man we need."

Brion's eyes widened as the meaning of the last words penetrated. "Are you in the C.R.F.?"

"Field agent for Nyjord," he said. "I hope you don't think those helpless office types like
Faussel or Mervv really represented us there? They just took notes and acted as a front and
cover for the organization. Nyjord is a fine planet, but a gentle guiding hand behind the scenes
is needed, to help them find their place in the galaxy before they are pulverized."

"What's your dirty game, Hys?" Lea asked, scowling. "I've had enough hints to suspect for a
long time that there was more to the C.R.F. than the sweetness-and-light part I have seen.
Are you people egomaniacs, power hungry or what?"

"That's the first charge that would be leveled at us if our activities were publicly known,"
Hys told her. "That's why we do most of our work under cover. The best fact I can give you
to counter the charge is money. Just where do you think we get the funds for an operation this
size?" He smiled at their blank looks. "You'll see the records later so there won't be any
doubt. The truth is that all our funds are donated by planets we have helped. Even a tiny percentage
of a planetary income is large--add enough of them together and you have enough money to help
other planets. And voluntary gratitude is a perfect test, if you stop to think about it. You
can't talk people into liking what you have done. They have to be convinced. There have always
been people on C.R.F. worlds who knew about our work, and agreed with it enough to see that
we are kept in funds."

"Why are you telling me all this super-secret stuff," Lea asked.

"Isn't that obvious? We want you to keep on working for us. You can name whatever salary you
like--as I've said, there is no shortage of ready cash."

Hys glanced quickly at them both and delivered the clinching argument. "I hope Brion will go
on working with us too. He is the kind of field agent we desperately need, and it is almost
impossible to find."

"Just show me where to sign," Lea said, and there was life in her voice once again.

"I wouldn't exactly call it blackmail," Brion smiled, "but I suppose if you people can juggle
planetary psychologies, you must find that individuals can be pushed around like chessmen.
Though you should realize that very little pushing is required this time."

"Will you sign on?" Hys asked.

"I must go back to Anvhar," Brion said, "but there really is no pressing hurry."

"Earth," said Lea, "is overpopulated enough as it is."

       *       *       *       *       *

                        72
                       HOURS
                      IN HELL

          Dis was a harsh, inhospitable,
   dangerous place and the Magter made it worse.
            They might have been human
      once--but they were something else now. What new adventures Charlie has
got a friend? ...

The Rosary has been answering all these questions and satisfying my
curiosity.

- And Government, what government we have now? - Added.

-
Government?

I think we have it.

- Impossible, Rosario. His mission was to save Dis, but
        it looked as though he was going to
          preside over its annihilation.

               PLANET OF THE DAMNED

       *       *       *       *       *

                 HARRY HARRISON

