Columbus gave orders to the captains of the other two ships that, in case of separation, they
were to sail westward for 700 leagues-that being the distance at which he evidently expected
to find land--and there to lie-to from midnight until morning. At the same time it must be admitted
that a similar "simplicity"--the apparently easy explanation of complex phenomena--also constitutes
the charm of such matters as hydropathy and phrenology, in the eyes of the unlearned or half-educated
public. It is indeed the charm of all those seeming "short cuts" to knowledge, by which the labour
of mastering scientific details is spared to those who yet believe that {12} without such labour
they can attain all the most valuable results of scientific research.  In other words, he wished to have a margin
at the other end, for he did not want a mutiny when he was perhaps within a few leagues of
his destination.  On this day he notes that the raw and inexperienced seamen were giving trouble
in other ways, and steering very badly, continually letting the ship's head fall off to the
north; and many must have been the angry remonstrances from the captain to the man at the wheel.
Altogether rather a trying day for Christopher, who surely has about as much on his hands as
ever mortal had; but he knows how to handle ships and how to handle sailors, and so long as
this ten-knot breeze lasts, he can walk the high poop of the Santa Maria with serenity, and
snap his fingers at the dirty rabble below.

On Monday they made sixty leagues, the Admiral duly announcing forty-eight; on Tuesday twenty
leagues, published as sixteen; and on this day they saw a large piece of a mast which had evidently
belonged to a ship of at least 120 tons burden.  This was not an altogether cheerful sight
for the eighteen souls on board the little Nina, who wondered ruefully what was going to happen
to them of forty tons when ships three times their size had evidently been unable to live in
this abominable sea!

On Thursday, September 13th, when Columbus took his observations, he made a great scientific
discovery, although he did not know it at the time. He noticed that the needle of the compass
was declining to the west of north instead of having a slight declination to the east of north,
as all mariners knew it to have.  In other words, he had passed the line of true north and
of no variation, and must therefore have been in latitude 28 deg. N.  and longitude 29 deg.
37' W.  of Greenwich.  With his usual secrecy he said nothing about it; perhaps he was waiting
to see if the pilots on the other ships had noticed it, but apparently they were not so exact
in their observations as he was.  On the next day, Friday, the wind falling a little lighter,
they, made only twenty leagues.  "Here the persons on the caravel Nina said they had seen a
jay and a ringtail, and these birds never come more than twenty-five leagues from land at most."
--Unhappy "persons on the Nina"!  Nineteen souls, including the captain, afloat in a very small
boat, and arguing God knows what from the fact that a jay and a ringtail never went more than
twenty-five leagues from land!--The next day also was not without its incident; for on Saturday
evening they saw a meteor, or "marvellous branch of fire" falling from the serene violet of
the sky into the sea.

They were now well within the influence of the trade-wind, which in these months blows steadily
from the east, and maintains an exquisite and balmy climate.  Even the Admiral, never very
communicative about his sensations, deigns to mention them here, and is reported to have said
that "it was a great pleasure to enjoy the morning; that nothing was lacking except to hear
the nightingales, and that the weather was like April in Andalusia."  On this day they saw
some green grasses, which the Admiral considered must have floated off from some island; "not
the continent," says the Admiral, whose theories are not to be disturbed by a piece of grass,
"because I make the continental land farther onward." The crew, ready to take the most depressing
and pessimistic view of everything, considered that the lumps of grass belonged to rocks or
submerged lands, and murmured disparaging things about the Admiral. As a matter of fact these
grasses were masses of seaweed detached from the Sargasso Sea, which they were soon to enter.

On Monday, September 17th, four days after Columbus had noted it, the other pilots noted the
declination of the needle, which they had found on taking the position of the North star. 
They did not like it; and Columbus, whose knowledge of astronomy came to his aid, ordered them
to take the position of the North star at dawn again, which they did, and found that the needles
were true.  He evidently thought it useless to communicate to them his scientific speculations,
so he explained to them that it was the North star which was moving in its circle, and not
the compass.  One is compelled to admit that in these little matters of deceit the Admiral
always shone.  To-day, among the seaweed on the ship's side, he picked up a little crayfish,
which he kept for several days, presumably in a bottle in his cabin; and perhaps afterwards ate.

So for several days this calm and serene progress westward was maintained.  The trade-wind
blew steady and true, balmy and warm also; the sky was cloudless, except at morning and evening
dusk; and there were for scenery those dazzling expanses of sea and sky, and those gorgeous
hues of dawn and sunset, which are only to be found in the happy latitudes.  The things that
happened to them, the bits of seaweed and fishes that they saw in the water, the birds that
flew around them, were observed with a wondering attention and wistful yearning after their
meaning such as is known only to children and to sailors adventuring on uncharted seas. Every
individual has to endure a very severe struggle for existence, owing to the tendency to geometrical
increase of all kinds of animals and plants, while the total animal and vegetable population
(man and his agency excepted) remains almost stationary.  The little crayfish was a "sure indication of land"; a tunny fish, killed
by the company on the Nina, was taken to be an indication from the west, "where I hope in that
exalted God, in whose hands are all victories, that land will very soon appear"; they saw another
ringtail, "which is not accustomed to sleep on the sea"; two pelicans came to the ship, "which
was an indication that land was near"; a large dark cloud appeared to the north, "which is
a sign that land is near"; they saw one day a great deal of grass, "although the previous day
they had not seen any"; they took a bird with their hands which was like a jay; "it was a river
bird and not a sea bird"; they saw a whale, "which is an indication that they are near land,
because they always remain near it"; afterwards a pelican came from the west-north-west and
went to the south-east, "which was an indication that it left land to the west-north-west,
because these birds sleep on land and in the morning they come to the sea in search of food,
and do not go twenty leagues from land."  And "at dawn two or three small land birds came singing
to the ships; and afterwards disappeared before sunrise."

Such beautiful signs, interpreted by the light of their wishes, were the events of this part
of the voyage.  In the meantime, they have their little differences.  Martin Alonso Pinzon,
on Tuesday, September 18th, speaks from the Pinta to the Santa Maria, and says that he will
not wait for the others, but will go and make the land, since it is so near; but apparently
he does not get very far out of the way, the wind which wafts him wafting also the Santa Maria
and the Nina.

On September the 19th there was a comparison of dead-reckonings.  The Nina's pilot made it
440 leagues from the Canaries, the Pinta's 420 leagues, and the Admiral's pilot, doubtless
instructed by the Admiral, made it 400.  On Sunday the 23rd they were getting into the seaweed
and finding crayfish again; and there being no reasonable cause for complaint a scare was got
up among the crew on an exceedingly ingenious point.  The wind having blown steadily from the
east for a matter of three weeks, they said that it would never blow in any other direction,
and that they would never be able to get back to Spain; but later in the afternoon the sea
got up from the westward, as though in answer to their fears, and as if to prove that somewhere
or other ahead of them there was a west wind blowing; and the Admiral remarks that "the high
sea was very necessary to me, as it came to pass once before in the time when the Jews went
out of Egypt with Moses, who took them from captivity."  And indeed there was something of
Moses in this man, who thus led his little rabble from a Spanish seaport out across the salt
wilderness of the ocean, and interpreted the signs for them, and stood between them and the
powers of vengeance and terror that were set about their uncharted path. 

"But, it may be urged in opposition by the Pangenesists, your vital principle is an unknown and
irresolute x. This is true; but, on the other hand, let us see whether Pangenesis produces a
clearer formula, and one free from unknown elements.
The more the signs pointed to their nearness to land, the more they began to murmur and complain
because they did not see it.  They began to form together in little groups--always an ominous
sign at sea --and even at night those who were not on deck got together in murmuring companies.
Some, of the things that they said, indeed, were not very far from the truth; among others,
that it was "a great madness on their part to venture their lives in following out the madness
of a foreigner who to make himself a great lord had risked his life, and now saw himself and
all of them in great exigency and was deceiving so many people."  They remembered that his
proposition, or "dream" as they not inaptly call it, had been contradicted by many great and
lettered men; and then followed some very ominous words indeed. "Thus, in Pangenesis, everything proceeds by force of unknown elements,
and we may ask whether it is more logical to prefer a system which
assumes a multitude of unknown elements to a system which assumes
only a single one?"

     
     

Mr. Darwin appears, by "Natural Selection," to destroy the reality of species, and by Pangenesis
that of the individual. Mr. Lewes observes[227] of the individual that "This whole is only
a subjective conception which summarizes the parts, and that in point of fact it is the parts which
{217} are reproduced."  In short, the best thing would be to throw him into the sea some night, and make
a story that he had fallen, into the water while taking the position of a star with his astrolabe;
and no one would ask any questions, as he was a foreigner.  They carried this talk to the Pinzons,
who listened to them; after all, we have not had to wait long for trouble with the Pinzons!
"Of these Pinzons Christopher Columbus complains greatly, and of the trouble they had given him."

There is only one method of keeping down mutiny at sea, and of preserving discipline.  It is
hard enough where the mutineers are all on one ship and the commander's officers are loyal
to him; but when they are distributed over three ships, the captains of two of which are willing
to listen to them, the problem becomes grave indeed.  We have no details of how Columbus quieted
them; but it is probable that his strong personality awed them, while his clever and plausible
words persuaded them.  He was the best sailor of them all and they knew it; and in a matter
of this kind the best and strongest man always wins, and can only in a pass of this kind maintain
his authority by proving his absolute right to it. So he talked and persuaded and bullied and
encouraged and cheered them; "laughing with them," as Las Casas says, "while he was weeping
at heart." 

All this being supplemented by the intercalation of armies of enemies, multitudes of ancestors
of all kinds, and myriads of connecting forms, whose raison d'être may be simply their utility
or necessity {145} for the support of the theory of "Natural Selection."
  There were islands marked on the
chart in this region, possibly the islands reported by the shipwrecked pilot, possibly the
island of Antilla; and Pinzon said he thought that they were somewhere in the region of them,
and the Admiral said that he thought so too.  There was a deal of talk and pricking of positions
on charts; and then, just as the sun was setting, Martin Alonso, standing on the stern of the
Pinta, raised a shout and said that he saw land; asking (business-like Martin) at the same
time for the reward which had been promised to the first one who should see land: They all
saw it, a low cloud to the southwest, apparently about twenty-five leagues distant; and honest
Christopher, in the emotion of the moment, fell on his knees in gratitude to God.  The crimson
sunset of that evening saw the rigging of the three ships black with eager figures, and on
the quiet air were borne the sounds of the Gloria in Excelsis, which was repeated by each ship's
company.

The course was altered to the south-west, and they sailed in that direction seventeen leagues
during the night; but in the morning there was no land to be seen.  The sunset clouds that
had so often deceived the dwellers in the Canaries and the Azores, and that in some form or
other hover at times upon all eagerly scanned horizons, had also deceived Columbus and every
one of his people; but they created a diversion which was of help to the Admiral in getting
things quiet again, for which in his devout soul he thanked the merciful providence of God.

And so they sailed on again on a westward course.  They were still in the Sargasso Sea, and
could watch the beautiful golden floating mass of the gulf-weed, covered with berries and showing,
a little way under the clear water, bright green leaves. But even considering physical pain only,
all must admit that this depends greatly on the mental condition of the sufferer. Only during
consciousness does it exist, and only in the most highly-organized
men does it reach its acme.  On Monday, October
1st, there was a heavy shower of rain; and Juan de la Cosa, Columbus's pilot, came up to him
with the doleful information that they had run 578 leagues from the island of Ferro.  According
to Christopher's doctored reckoning the distance published was 584 leagues; but his true reckoning,
about which he said nothing to a soul, showed that they had gone 707 leagues.  On Saturday,
October 6th, the Admiral was signalled by Alonso Pinzon, who wanted to change the course to
the south-west.  It appears that, having failed to find the, islands of the shipwrecked pilot,
they were now making for the island of Cipango, and that this request of Pinzon had something
to do with some theory of his that they had better turn to the south to reach that island;
while Columbus's idea now evidently was--to push straight on to the mainland of Cathay.  Columbus
had his way; but the grumbling and murmuring in creased among the crew.

