AMONG MALAY PIRATES

A TALE OF ADVENTURE AND PERIL

by G. A. Henty.

AMONG MALAY PIRATES

CHAPTER I.

"I wish most heartily that something would happen," Harry Parkhurst, a midshipman of some sixteen
years of age, said to his chum, Dick Balderson, as they leaned on the rail of her majesty's
gunboat Serpent, and looked gloomily at the turbid stream that rolled past the ship as she
lay at anchor.

"One day is just like another--one is in a state of perspiration from morning till night, and
from night till morning. There seems to be always a mist upon the water; and if it were not
that we get up steam every three or four days and run out for twenty-four hours for a breath
of fresh air, I believe that we should be all eaten up with fever in no time. Of course, they
are always talking of Malay pirates up the river kicking up a row; but it never seems to come off."

"There is one thing, Harry--there is always something to look at, for there are canoes constantly
going up and down, and there is plenty of variety among them--from the sluggish dhows, laden
with up country produce, to the long canoes with a score of paddlers and some picturesque ruffian
sitting in the stern. It adds to the interest when you know that the crews are cutthroats to
a man, and would make but the shortest possible work of you if they had got you in their power."

"Yes, Dick. Look at that canoe coming up stream; what a good looking chap that is in the stern,
though by the way he scowls at us I can quite believe he would, as you say, cut our throats
if he had the chance. That is a pretty little child sitting by him, and what a gorgeous dress
she has! There, you see, he can look pleasant enough when he speaks to her. I fancy they must
have come from a long way up the river, for they look wilder than most of the fellows who pass
us. If that fool who is steering her does not mind what he is about, Dick, he will either run
into that canoe coming down or else get across our chain. There, I told you so."

The man at the tiller was in fact, looking, with mingled curiosity and hostility, at the gunboat
that he was passing but a few yards away, and did not notice a canoe, manned by six rowers,
that was coming down with the stream, taking an oblique course across the bows of the Serpent,
and was indeed hidden from his view by the hull of the vessel, until he had passed beyond her.
Then there was a sudden shout and a yell from a dozen throats, as the two canoes came into
collision, the one proceeding up the river being struck on the quarter with a force that almost
cut her in two, and in an instant her occupants were in the water. As the Malays were to a
man almost as much at home in the water as on land, the accident would have had little effect
beyond the loss of the boat and its contents, had it not been that the stern of the other craft
struck the Malay chief with such force as to completely disable him, and he would have sunk
at once had not two of the boatmen grasped him and kept his head above water.

"What has become of the child?" Harry Parkhurst exclaimed, and he and Dick Balderson both leaped
on to the rail, throwing off their jackets as they shouted to the men to lower a boat. Nothing
could be seen of the child until, after half a minute's suspense, a little face suddenly appeared
in the swirl of the muddy water some fifteen yards from the vessel's side. It was gone again
in an instant, but, as it disappeared, both lads sprang from the side and with a few strokes
reached the spot where they had seen the face disappear; then they dived under water and soon
grasped her. As soon as they came to the surface a sailor, who had seized a coil of rope, flung
it to them, and, grasping it, they were quickly by the side of the gunboat.

A minute later some sailors, who had at once tumbled into a boat on the alarm being given,
came up. The child was first handed into it, then the midshipmen scrambled in, and, by their
directions, two of the sailors, standing on the thwarts, lifted the child high above their
heads to the hands of the men leaning over the bulwark.

"Take the little thing to the doctor," Dick said. "Now, lads, row on; let's pick up some of
those Malay fellows."

A babel of shouts and sounds rose from the water; the bow of the second canoe had been stove
in, and she also had sunk to the water level; a fierce fight was going on between several of
the Malays; the chief, who was being supported by two of his crew, was shouting furiously;
and others of his men, in obedience to his orders, were diving under water. Harry turned to
the gunboat, and called to the men to bring Soh Hay, the interpreter, to the side. A minute
later the man was hustled to the rail.

"Tell that chief that we have got his child safely on board," Harry shouted.

Again and again the interpreter called out; but it was some time before he could make the chief
pay attention to him. As the latter caught the purport of his words his face changed at once,
and, after calling to his men to desist from their search, his head sank on to the shoulder
of one of the men supporting him, and he evidently lost consciousness.

"He is badly hurt, Dick; we had better get him on board, too. Old Horsley was wishing this
morning that he had something to do beyond administering doses of quinine to the men."

Taking the tiller, he brought the boat alongside the chief, and four of the sailors, directed
by Dick, gently raised him from the water and laid him on the bottom of the boat. Blood was
flowing freely from an ugly gash in his face, and it was evident from the manner in which his
left arm hung limp, as they lifted him up, that either the shoulder or the arm itself was broken.

"Get him alongside at once, lads," Dick said. "I expect he is more injured than we see. The
other fellows will be all right; they can all swim like fish."

In two or three minutes the injured man was laid down under an awning over the fore deck of
the cruiser, and the surgeon at once came up.

"How is the child, Doctor?"

"She is still insensible," he said, "but she will soon be all right. I can't discover any injury,
and I think it likely that it was the sudden shock, and perhaps a knock against the side of
the boat, that stunned her; for I have no doubt she could swim, small as she is. This is a
much more serious affair; he has an ugly gash in his temple, his collarbone is broken, and,"
he went on, as he passed his hands down the patient's side, "he has two, if not more ribs broken."

"Well, we will leave him to you, Doctor; there are a lot of these fellows in the water, and
I suppose they must be brought on board until we can get a boat to take them ashore."

In a few minutes eighteen Malays were brought to the side, and the two canoes, which were floating
level with the water, were towed up and fastened by a rope to the stern of the gunboat. Even
when safely on deck, the two parties were still so infuriated that they had to be separated
and placed under guards apart from each other. Three or four had been killed by the stabs of
the deadly krises, and their bodies could be seen floating astern. Several of those rescued
had wounds more or less severe.

"We should not have much chance with those fellows in the water, Mr. Parkhurst," an old sailor
said to Harry.

"No, indeed, Davis; they could swim round and round us, and our cutlasses would be very little
good against those ugly looking krises. If we were to leave them to themselves, they would
fight to the death; and, after all, it was no one's fault in particular. Mr. Balderson and
I were watching them; one was crossing the ship's bow just as the other came out from her side,
and they were into each other before either had time to hold their boat up."

"That chap the doctor is bandaging up was in a nice taking about his child, sir; it was a lucky
job that you and Mr. Balderson happened to catch sight of her."

"Yes, poor little thing! It was only just a glimpse we got of her face; but as we were looking
for her, and ready to dive, it was enough."

"Lucky we are inside the bar, Mr. Parkhurst, or the sharks would have had half the fellows."

"I did not think of it at the time, Davis, and it would not have made any difference if I had;
we were only in the water a couple of minutes, and the Malays were making noise enough to frighten
away any number of sharks. You will have the job of washing out our trousers again--we had
only put them on clean half an hour before."

"That aint no matter, sir, especially if you go down and change at once; the mud will come
out easy enough if I leave them in a bucket of fresh water for half an hour."

The two midshipmen joined the group of officers who were standing near the doctor; the latter
had, on closer examination, announced that four of the ribs were broken. He had finished his
work just as the lads came up. News had been brought up by the steward that the little girl
had opened her eyes; while he was speaking, the Malay conversed rapidly with the interpreter.

"What is he saying, Soh Hay?" the captain asked.

"He is asking why his daughter is not here, and if she is hurt, and how she came to be saved,"
the man replied. "Me tell him she come up to see him soon; the doctor say she no hurt."

Two minutes later the doctor reappeared, carrying the child in his arms. She looked round fearlessly
at the white faces until her eye fell upon her father, when she slipped out of the doctor's
arms like an eel and ran to him. The grim features of the Malay lit up with a pleasant smile
as he held out his right hand to her. She was a strange little figure, for the doctor had not
waited to obtain any suitable garments for her, but had wrapped her up in one of the signal
flags, which the child herself had wound round her waist and over her shoulder like a native
sarong.

"You tell him, Soh Hay, that he must not talk to her," the doctor said. "If he keeps quiet,
he will get well in short time: if he talk, he ill many days; but I will let him say a few
words to her now."

The Malay's eyes passed over the group of officers and rested on the two midshipmen, whose
wet clothes showed that they were the officers who had, as the interpreter had told him, dived
in and rescued the child. He said something to the interpreter.

"Malay man want to speak to you, young gentlemen," the man said; "he wish to thank you."

"Oh, tell him there is nothing to thank us for," Harry said hastily; "it was nothing more than
taking a bath."

"Yes, officer, but he wishes to speak to you."

Somewhat reluctantly, the two lads approached the side of the injured man; he took each of
them by the hand, and, as he did so, said something which Soh Hay interpreted:

"The chief says that you have given him back what he loved best in the world, and that his
life is yours whenever it may be of use to you; he may be of service to you, gentlemen, should
you ever go up the river--a Malay never forgives an injury or forgets a service."

"Tell him we are very glad to have brought his little girl out of the water," Harry said, "and
that if we ever go up the river, we will pay him a visit."

The chief was now laid in a cot which was swung from the stanchions of the awning, while the
little girl was carried away by the doctor, who laid her in a berth, gave her a cup of tea,
which she drank obediently to his orders, but evidently regarded as being extremely nasty,
and she was then told through the interpreter to go to sleep until her sarong was dried. A
couple of hours later she was on deck again in her native garb and ornaments. The interpreter
pointed out to her the two midshipmen who had rescued her, and she at once went up to them,
and, slipping her hands into theirs, began to prattle freely; they were unable to understand
what she said, but they took her round the ship, showing her the guns, and introduced her to
Ponto, the captain's great Newfoundland, who submitted gravely to be patted by her; to Jacko,
the monkey, who was by no means disposed to be friendly, but chattered and showed his teeth;
and to Julius Caesar, the negro cook, who grinned from ear to ear, and presented her with some
cakes from a batch which he had just made for the captain's table.

The rest of the Malays had already left the ship; two native boats had been hailed, and in
these the two parties of Malays had taken their places, and, with their boats towing behind,
had been rowed away, the captain giving strict instructions that they were to be landed on
opposite sides of the river. The little maid speedily became a general pet on board the Serpent,
and was soon the proud possessor of several models of ships, two patchwork quilts, several
carved tobacco boxes, and other specimens of sailors' handiwork. Small as she was, she had
evidently a strong idea of her own importance, and received these presents and attentions with
a pretty air of dignity which at once earned for her the title of the Princess.

On the second day after the accident, the chief's boat came off from the shore, the damage
having been speedily and neatly repaired. Little Bahi stood on the top of the accommodation
ladder as they approached, and addressed them with great asperity, using much gesticulation
with her arms.

"What is she saying, Soh Hay?" Dick Balderson asked.

"She is telling them that they are bad men to let the boat be run down; that she is very angry
with them, and they will all be punished."

'The men looked very crestfallen under their little mistress' reproaches, and held up their
hands in a deprecating manner; while the helmsman stood up and, after salaaming deeply, entered
upon a long explanation, which ended in his asking if he might come on board to see his chief.
Permission was at once granted by the captain, upon the request being interpreted to him. When
he mounted the steps, Bahi led him to the side of her father's cot. The doctor, however, interposed.

"Tell him he must not talk," he said to the interpreter; "the chief is ill and must not be
allowed to excite himself. But he can say a few words, if he wants to."

The cot had been lowered to within a few inches of the deck in order that the chief might watch
his daughter as she trotted about and romped with Ponto, who had now quite taken her into his
friendship. The chief's face expressed alarm when he first saw the great dog; but when he saw
how gentle the animal was, and how, when one of the sailors placed the child on his back, it
walked gravely up and down the deck, wagging its tail as if pleased with its novel burden,
he was satisfied that no harm could come to her from this formidable looking animal. He had
first spoken a few words sharply to the man in answer to his excuses, and, indeed, had the
helmsman been minding his business instead of looking at the ship, the collision might have
been prevented; but Hassan Jebash was at the present moment so well contented with the recovery
of his child that he accepted the man's excuses, and the latter went back to his boat evidently
greatly relieved.

In a few days the chief began to show signs of impatience, and through the interpreter constantly
demanded of the doctor when he would be well enough to leave.

"You ask him, Soh Hay, whether he wishes to be able to lead his tribe in battle again, or to
go through life unable to use a kris or hurl a spear. In another ten days, if he remains quiet,
he will be able to go, and in a couple of months will be as strong and active as ever, if he
will but keep quiet until the bones have knit. Surely a chief is not like an impatient child,
ready to risk everything for the sake of avoiding a little trouble."

The chief, on this being translated to him, scowled angrily.

"Tell him it is of no use his scowling at me, Soh Hay. I am not doctoring him for my own amusement,
but for his good, and because he is the father of that little child."

The chief, when this was translated to him, lay without speaking for two or three minutes,
and then said quietly, "Tell the doctor I am sorry; he is right, and I have been foolish. I
will stay till he says I may go."

CHAPTER II.

Four or five days later the chief was allowed to get up and to walk quietly up and down the
deck, and a week afterwards the doctor said, "You can go now, chief, if you desire it; but
you must be content to keep quiet for another couple of months, and not make any great exertions
or move quickly. How long will it take you to go up the river to your home?"

"Six days' easy paddling."

"Well, that is in your favor; but do not travel fast. Take it quietly, and be as long as you
can on the voyage--lying in a canoe is as good a rest as you can take."

"Thank you, Doctor, I will obey your instructions. You have all been very kind to me, and a
Malay chief never forgets benefits. I have been hostile to the white men, but now I see I have
been mistaken, and that you are good and kind. Is it true that your boat is going up the river?
Soh Hay tells me that it is so."

"Yes; one of the chiefs, Sehi Pandash, wishes to place himself under our protection, and he
has sent to ask that the ship might go up and fire her big guns, that the tribes round may
see that he has strong friends who can help him."

"It is two days' rowing up the river to my place from his, and when you are there I shall come
down to see you. Sehi is not a good chief; he quarrels with his neighbors, and shelters their
slaves who run away to him; he is not a good man."

"Well, we shall all be glad to see you, chief, and I hope that you will bring your daughter
with you. She has won all our hearts, and we shall miss her sadly."

"I will bring her if I can do so safely," the chief said gravely; "but I am no friends with
Sehi; he stops my trade as it comes down the river, and takes payment for all goods that pass
down. It is because he knows that many of us are angered that he wishes to put himself under
your protection. I think that you do not do well to aid so bad a fellow."

"We did not know that he was a bad fellow, chief. The best plan will be for you and the other
chiefs who are aggrieved to send down complaints against him, or to come down yourselves when
we are up there and talk it over with our Captain, who will doubtless impress upon Sehi the
necessity for abstaining from such practices, and that he cannot expect aid from us if he embroils
himself with his neighbors by interfering with their trade. Is he strong?"

"He has many war prahus, which sometimes come down to the sea and return with plunder, either
collected from the cultivators near the coast or from trading ships captured and burnt."

"I will mention what you tell me to the Captain, and it will prepare him to listen to any complaint
that may be made to him. But you must remember that he is only acting under the orders of the
Governor of the Straits Settlements, and must refer all important matters to him."

"I will come when you are there," Hassan said gravely. "If nothing is done, there will be war."

There was general regret on board the Serpent when the little princess said goodby to all her
friends and went down the accommodation ladder to the boat with her father. The chief had said
but little to the two young midshipmen, for he saw that they preferred that the matter should
not be alluded to, but he held their hands at parting, and said:

"I shall see you again before long; but if at any time you should want me, I will come, even
if your summons reach me in the middle of a battle."

"It is such nonsense, Doctor," Harry said, as the boat pushed off, "to have so much made of
such a thing as jumping into the water. If one had been alone, and had tried to save a man
or a woman, in such a state of funk that there was a good chance of their throwing their arms
round your neck and pulling you down with them, there might be something in it, though everyone
takes his chance of that when he jumps in to save anyone from drowning; but with a little child,
and two of us to do it, and the ship close at hand, it was not worth thinking of for a moment."

"No, Parkhurst, from your point of view the thing was not, as you say, worth giving a thought
to; but, you see, that is not the point of view of the chief. To him it is nothing whether
your exploit was a gallant one or not, or whether you ran any danger; the point simply is,
his child would have been drowned had you not seen her and fished her out, and that it is to
you that he owes her life. I think you have reason to congratulate yourselves on having made
a friend who may be very useful to you. It may be that there will be trouble up the river;
and if so, he might possibly be of real service to you. But in any case he may be able to give
you some good hunting and fishing, and show you things that you would never have had an opportunity
of seeing without his friendship and assistance."

"I did not think of that, Doctor; yes, that would certainly be a great thing."

"I can assure you I look at it in that light myself, Parkhurst, and I am looking forward to
paying him a visit, as, under his protection, I should get opportunities of collecting which
I could never have in the ordinary way; for, unless they are greatly maligned, one could not
trust one's self among the Malays without some special protection."

"But they are not savages, Doctor. Hassan is a perfect gentleman in manner, and in that silk
jacket of his and handsome sarong he really looks like a prince. I could not help thinking
that all of us looked poor creatures by his side."

"They certainly cannot be called savages, though from our point of view many of their customs
are of a very savage nature. Piracy is very general among those living on the seacoast or on
the great rivers; but it must be remembered that it is not so very many centuries ago that
a toll was demanded of all passersby by the barons having castles on the Rhine and other navigable
rivers; the crews of wrecked ships were plundered on every coast of Europe, our own included,
not so very long ago; and in the days of Elizabeth, Drake and Hawkins were regarded by the
Spaniards as pirates of the worst class, and I fear that there was a good deal of justice in
the accusation. But the Malays are people with a history; they believe themselves that they
were the original inhabitants of the island of Sumatra; however, it is certain that in the
twelfth century they had extended their rule over the whole of that island and many of its
neighbors, and in the thirteenth had established themselves on this peninsula and had founded
an empire extending over the greater part of the islands down to the coast of Australia. They
had by this time acquired the civilization of India, and their sultans were powerful monarchs.
They carried on a great trade with China, Hindoostan, and Siam, and their maritime code was
regulated and confirmed, as early as 1276, by Mohammed Shah."

"How is it that they have come to such grief, Doctor?"

"Principally by the fact that they had the feudal, or you may call it the tribal, system. Each
petty chief and his followers made war on his neighbors if he was strong enough; and as some
tribes conquered others, the empire became split up into an indefinite number of clans, whose
chiefs paid but a very nominal allegiance to the sultan. So islands broke off from the empire
until it had practically ceased to exist, and the Malays were a people united only by similar
customs and language, but in no other respect, and were, therefore, able to offer but slight
resistance on the arrival of the Dutch and Portuguese in these regions. Still, the upper classes
preserve the memory of their former greatness. The people are intelligent, and most of the
trade in this part of the world is carried on by them. They are enterprising, and ready to
emigrate if they see a chance of improving their fortunes. You know we saw many of them at
the Cape when we touched there. Nominally they are Mohammedans in religion; but they do not
strictly observe the ordinances of the Koran, and their Mohammedanism is mixed up with traces
of their original religion."

"Ah, that explains why the chief's name was Hassan. I wondered that a Malay should have a Mohammedan
name. They are not much like Arabs in figure. Of course, Hassan is a very fine looking man,
and some of the other chiefs we saw at Penang were so; but most of them are shorter than we
are, and very ugly."

"Yes, in figure and some other points they much resemble the Burmese, who are probably blood
relations of theirs. The chiefs are finer men, as you will always find in the case in savage
or semi savage peoples, for, of course, they have the pick of the women, and naturally choose
the best looking. Their food, too, is better and their work less rough than that of the people
at large.

"The sons and daughters of the chiefs naturally intermarry, and the result is that in most
cases you will find the upper classes taller, better formed, lighter in color, and of greater
intelligence than the rest of the people. This would be specially the case in a trading people
like the Malays; their ships would bring over girls purchased in India, just as the ruling
classes in Turkey used to obtain their wives from Circassia; and this, no doubt, has helped
to modify the original Malay type."

"Thank you, Doctor; I think I shall like the Malays now I know something about them. Is it
true that they are so treacherous?"

"I don't know, Parkhurst; doubtless they are treacherous in their wars; that is to say that
they consider any means fair to deceive an enemy; but I do not think that they are so, beyond
that. The Dutch have never had any very great difficulty with them, nor have we in the portion
of the peninsula where we have established our rule. Of course, I know little about them myself,
as I have only been out here a few months; but I am told that as traders they can be trusted,
and that the word of a Malay chief can be taken with absolute confidence. Of course, among
the majority of the people of the peninsula we are regarded with jealousy and hostility--they
dread that we should extend our dominion over them, and it is not surprising that they should
by every means in their power strive to prevent our coming far inland. The chiefs on the rivers
are, as a rule, specially hostile.

"In the first place, because their towns and villages are more accessible to us, and they know
more of our power than those dwelling in the hill country; and, secondly, because they depend
largely upon the revenue that they derive from taxing all goods passing up and down, and which
they not unreasonably think they might lose if we were to become paramount. No doubt there
is much that Hassan said of Sehi that is true and is applicable to other chiefs who have placed
themselves under our protection--namely, that they have so injured trade by their exactions
as to incur the hostility of their neighbors. Of course, I am not speaking of such men as the
Rajahs of Johore and Perac, who are enlightened men, and have seen the benefits to be derived
from intercourse with us. Their people are agriculturists, and they are really on a par with
the protected states in India.

"There is a great future before the country; gold is found in many of the rivers, tin is probably
more abundant than in any other part of the world, and the exports are now very large; there
are immense quantities of valuable timber, such as teak, sandalwood, and ebony. The climate
is, except on the low land near the rivers, very healthy; nutmegs, cloves, and other spices
can be grown there, and indigo, chocolate, pepper, opium, the sugarcane, coffee, and cotton,
are all successfully cultivated. Some day, probably, the whole peninsula will fall under our
protection, and when the constant tribal feuds are put a stop to, the forests cleared, and
the ground cultivated, as is the case in our own settlement of Malacca, it will be found one
of the most valuable of our possessions. Any amount of labor can be obtained from China, and
it is probable that the races who inhabit the mountainous districts, who are said to be industrious
and peaceable, will also readily adapt themselves to the changed conditions. They are not Malays
like the people of the lowlands, but are a black race with curly wool, like the natives of
Africa, and probably inhabited the whole peninsula before the arrival of the Malays."

"How funny that there should be niggers here," Harry said.

"They are not exactly negroes, but one of the races known as negritos, having, of course, many
negro characteristics, but differing from the African negroes in some important particulars.
To them our supremacy would be an unmixed blessing; their products would reach the coast untaxed,
and they would obtain all European goods at vastly cheaper rates. A minor benefit to be obtained
by our supremacy is that our sportsmen would certainly speedily diminish the number of wild
beasts that at 'present are a scourge to cultivators; the tigers would be killed down, the
elephants captured and utilized, and the poor people would not see their plantations ravaged,
but would be able to travel through their forests without the constant danger of being carried
off by tigers and panthers, and possibly be able to cross their rivers without the risk of
being snapped up by alligators; though, doubtless, it would take some time before this would
be brought about."

"And when do you think that we shall be going up the river, Doctor?"

"That I cannot say. The Captain has been expecting orders ever since we came here, six weeks
ago; but possibly something may have been learned of Sehi's characteristics, and there may
be doubts as to the expediency of taking under our protection a chief whose conduct appears
to be anything but satisfactory. On the other hand, it may be considered that by so doing we
may establish some sort of influence over the surrounding tribes, and so make a step towards
promoting trade and putting a stop to these tribal wars, that are the curse of the country."

"It would be an awful sell if they were to change their minds," Harry exclaimed.

"I should be sorry myself, Parkhurst, for you know I am a collector. But I can tell you that
you won't find it all sport and pleasure. You will have no cool sea breezes; there will be
occasion for continual watchfulness, and perhaps long boat expeditions up sluggish streams,
in an atmosphere laden with moisture and miasma."

"One expects some drawbacks, Doctor."

"You will find a good many, I can tell you, youngster. Still, I hope we shall go up; and I
think that we shall do so, for it will be the Captain's report that will help the authorities
to decide whether to appoint a Resident there or not."

A fortnight later a small dispatch boat steamed in and the news soon spread through the ship
that the Serpent was to ascend the river on the following day. All was at once bustle and animation.
Sailors like anything for a change, and all were impatient at the long delay that had occurred.

CHAPTER III.

The gunboat was a large one, and carried two midshipmen besides Parkhurst and Balderson, who
were, however, their seniors. The mess consisted of the four lads, a master's mate, the doctor's
assistant, and the paymaster's clerk. In the gun room were the three lieutenants, the doctor,
the lieutenant of the marines, and the chief engineer. The crew consisted of a hundred and
fifty seamen and forty marines; the Serpent having a somewhat strong complement. She had been
sent out specially for service in the rivers, being of lighter draught than usual, with unusually
airy and spacious decks, and so was well fitted for the work. The conversation in the junior
mess of the Serpent was very lively that evening. The vessel since her arrival on the station
had made two runs between Singapore and Penang, but those on board had seen but little of the
country, and were delighted at the thought of a possibility of active service, and the talk
was all of boat expeditions, attacks from piratical prahus, of the merits of the bayonet and
rifle opposed to kris and spear, and of sporting expeditions in which elephants, tigers, and
other wild beasts were to fall victims of their prowess.

"You will find that you won't get much of that," the mate, who was president of the mess, said,
after listening to their anticipations of sport. "I have been on the west coast of Africa and
know what it is poking about in muddy creeks in boats, tramping through the jungle, knee deep
in mud, half the crew down with fever, and the rest worn out with work and heat. I can tell
you it is not all fun, as you youngsters seem to think, but downright hard work."

"Ah, well! any amount of work is better than standing here doing nothing," Dick said cheerfully,
for the mate was known as a proverbial grumbler. He had been unfortunate, and, as is usually
the case, his misfortunes were in some degree due to himself, for he was fond of liquor, and
although, when on board, he took no more than his share, he was often somewhat unsteady in
his speech when he returned from a run ashore; and although the matter was not grave enough
for his captains to report altogether unfavorably of him, it was sufficiently so for them to
shrink from recommending him for promotion, and in consequence he had seen scores of younger
men raised over his head. He had been for some time unemployed before he had joined the Serpent,
and had been appointed to her only because Captain Forest, who was a friend of his family,
had used his interest on his behalf. He had, however, when he joined, spoken frankly to him.

"I have asked for you, Morrison," he said, "simply for the sake of your father; but I tell
you frankly, that unless my report is a thoroughly favorable one, you are not likely to be
again employed. I was told that there was nothing special against you, but that in no case
since you passed have you been warmly spoken of. It has been said that you know your duty well;
but they had privately learned that you were fond of liquor; and although no charge of absolute
drunkenness had been brought against you, it was considered that you would not make a desirable
officer in a higher rank. Now your future depends upon yourself; if you have the resolution
to give up the habit, you may yet retrieve yourself. If I find that you do so, I shall certainly
take the opportunity of giving you a chance to distinguish yourself, and shall strongly urge
your claim to promotion. If I am not able to do this, you must make up your mind to be permanently
put upon the shelf."

The admonition had not been in vain, and since joining the Serpent Morrison had made a successful
effort to break himself of the habit. He had very seldom gone ashore, and when he did so, never
went alone, and always returned at an early hour, and without having taken more than he would
have done in the ordinary way on board. He had not, however, given up his habit of grumbling,
and his messmates were so accustomed to his taking a somber view of everything that his prognostication
as to the nature of their work up the river had but little effect upon them.

"What do you think, Sandy?" Harry Parkhurst asked the Scotch assistant surgeon.

"I know nothing about it, except what I have read. They say that the country is healthy; but
it stands to reason that this cannot be so while you have got rivers with swamps and jungles
and such heat as this. However, we have a good supply of quinine on board, and with that and
our allowance of spirits, I hope that we shan't, as Morrison says, have half the ship's company
down with the fever. It is all in our favor that we have only just come out, for they say that
newcomers can resist the effects of these tropical rivers much better than those whose constitution
has been weakened by a residence in the country. As to the sport, I have no desire to kill
any animal that does not meddle with me. My business is all the other way, and if any of you
get mauled, I will do my best to help the doctor to pull you through; but I am very well on
board the ship, and have no desire to go tramping about among the swamps, whether it be to
hunt animals or fight Malays."

"You think that everyone should stick to his last, Sandy," Dick said with a laugh. "Well, I
only wish there were more on board of your opinion, for that would give more chances to us
who like to stretch our legs ashore for a change."

"I can stretch my legs here if I want to," the Scotchman said quietly, "and am not anxious
to do more. I suppose, if there are expeditions against the Malays, I shall have to go with
them; but the fewer of them there are the better I shall be pleased."

The talk was more serious aft, where the doctor and first lieutenant were dining with the captain.
It ended by the latter saying, "Well, Doctor, if what your friend Hassan said be true, we are
likely enough to have our hands pretty full, and shall have to watch this fellow Sehi as sharply
as we do his neighbors. He is not under our protection yet, and if he sends his prahus down
the river to plunder on the coast, as Hassan says, he is not the sort of character likely to
do us credit, and the position of a British Resident with him would be the reverse of a pleasant
one. However, we must hope that he is not as black as he is painted. He has evidently put the
other chiefs' backs up, and we must receive their reports of him with some doubt. However,
I have no doubt that, if he turns out badly, we shall be able to give him a lesson that will
be of benefit to him."

The first day's voyage up the river by no means came up to the anticipations of the midshipmen
as to the country through which they were to pass. The width of the river varied from a quarter
of a mile to three hundred yards; the banks on each side were lined with mangroves, presenting
a dreary and monotonous aspect. Progress was slow, the steam launch going ahead and sounding
the depth of water, the captain having but little faith in the assertion of the native pilot
that he was perfectly acquainted with every bank and shallow. Being now the dry season, the
tops of many of these shoals were dry, and numbers of alligators were lying half in and half
out of the water, basking in the sun.

Several of the officers who possessed rifles amused themselves by shooting at these creatures,
but it was very rarely that any attention was paid to their firing, the balls glancing off
the scaly armor without the alligators appearing to be conscious of anything unusual. There
was more amusement in watching how, when the swell of the steamer rushed through the shallow
water and broke on the shoals, the reptiles turned and scrambled back into the river, evidently
alarmed at this, to them, strange phenomenon.

"I should not care about bathing here, Davis," Harry Parkhurst remarked to the old sailor.

"You are right, sir; I would rather have a stand up fight with the Malays than trust myself
for two minutes in this muddy water. Why, they are worse than sharks, sir; a shark does hoist
his fin as a signal that he is cruising about, but these chaps come sneaking along underneath
the water, and the first you know about them is that they have got you by the leg."

"Which is the worse, Davis, a bite from an alligator or a shark?"

"Well, as far as the bite goes, Mr. Parkhurst, the shark is the worst. He will take your leg
off, or a big 'un will bite a man in two halves. The alligator don't go to work that way: he
gets hold of your leg, and no doubt he mangles it a bit; but he don't bite right through the
bone; he just takes hold of you and drags you down to the bottom of the river, and keeps you
there until you are drowned; then he polishes you off at his leisure."

"The brutes!" Harry exclaimed, with deep emphasis. "See, the first lieutenant has hit that
big fellow there in the eye or the soft skin behind the leg; anyhow, he has got it hard; look
how he is roaring and lashing his tail."

"What is the best way of killing them?" Dick asked.

"I have heard, sir, that in Africa the natives bait a big hook with a lump of pork, or something
of that sort; then, when an alligator has swallowed it, they haul him up, holus bolus. I should
say a good plan to kill them would be with 'tricity. The last ship I was in, we had an officer
of the Marine Artillery who knew about such things, and he put a big cartridge into a lump
of pork, with two wires, and as soon as the shark had swallowed it he would touch a spring
or something, and there would be an explosion. There was not as much fun in it as having a
hook, but it was quicker, and he did not do it for sport, but because he hated the sharks.
I heard say that he had had a young brother killed by one of them. He would sit there on the
taffrail for hours on the lookout for them, with three or four loaded lumps of pork. Why, I
have known him kill as many as a dozen in a day. I expect the best part of his pay must have
gone in dynamite.

"He had a narrow escape one day; somehow the thing went wrong, and in trying to set it right
he fell over the taffrail. The shark had bolted the bait, but this was not enough for his appetite,
and he went straight at the officer. He had had a young ensign sitting beside him, who had
often watched his work, and knew how the thing went. I was standing near at the time, and he
began twisting some screws and things as cool as a cucumber, though I could see as his hand
shook a bit. Well, he got it right just in time, for the shark was not half a length away from
the captain, and was turning himself over for a bite, when the thing went off, and there was
an end of the shark. The captain was a bit shaken up, but he made a grab at the rope, and held
on to it till we lowered a boat and picked him up. He had to be got up on deck in a chair,
and it was two or three days before he was himself again. When he got round he set to work
again more earnestly than ever; and I believe that if we had stopped in the West Indies long
enough, there would not have been a shark left in those waters."

"It was a capital plan, Davis, and if we ever take possession of these rivers, we shall have
to do something of that sort to get rid of the brutes. Are the Malays afraid of them?"

"I don't know, Mr. Parkhurst, but I think they are. I had a chat with a mate I met in the Myrtle,
which went home the day after we relieved them here. He had been up some of the rivers, and
told me that every village had a bathing place palisaded off so that the alligators could not
get at the bathers."

"Well, there is one thing--we shall have to be very careful when we are out in boats, for if
we were to run upon a sunken log and knock a hole in the boat's bottom, there would not be
much chance of our ever reaching the shore."

"You are about right there, sir. I aint afraid of Malays, but it gives me the creeps down my
back when I think of one of them chaps getting hold of me by the leg. Bob Pearson told me that
the only chance you have is to send your knife, or if you can't get at that, your thumbs, into
the creature's eyes. But it would require a mighty cool hand to find the eyes, with the brute's
teeth in one's leg, and the water so thick with mud that you could not see an inch beyond your
nose."

"Well, I will make a note of that, anyhow, Davis, and I will take a good look at the next alligator
I see dead, so as to know exactly where to feel for its eyes."

On the second day the scenery changed. In place of the mangroves a dense forest lined the river.
Birds of lovely plumage occasionally flew across it, and after they had anchored in the evening,
the air became full of strange noises; great beasts rose and snorted near the banks; sounds
of roaring and growling were heard in the wood; and the lads, who had been so eager before
to take part in a hunt on shore, listened with something like awe to the various strange and
often mysterious noises.

"What in the world does it all mean, Doctor?" Dick Balderson asked, as the surgeon came up
to the spot where the four midshipmen were leaning on the rail.

"It means that there is a good deal of life in the woods. That splashing sound you hear with
deep grunts and snorts, is probably made by a hippopotamus wallowing in shallow water; but
it may be a rhinoceros, or even a buffalo. That roar is either a tiger or a panther, and that
snarling sound on the other bank is, no doubt, made by smaller animals of the same family,
indulging in a domestic quarrel. Some of the other sounds are made by night birds of some kind
or other and perhaps by monkeys, and I fancy that distant vibrating sound that goes on without
intermission is a concert of a party of frogs."

"What is that?" as a shrill cry, as from a child, followed by a confused outburst of cries,
chattering, and, as it seemed to them, a barking sound, followed.

"I fancy that is the death cry of a monkey. Probably some python or other snake has seized
it in its sleep; and the other noise is the outcry of its companions heaping abuse upon the
snake, but unable to do anything to rescue their friend."

"I don't think, Doctor," Harry Parkhurst said, in a tone that was half in earnest, "that I
feel so anxious as I did for sport in the forest; and certainly I should decline to take part
in it after nightfall."

"I can quite understand that, lad. At night all the sounds of a tropical forest seem mysterious
and weird, but in the broad daylight the bush will be comparatively still. The nocturnal animals
will slink away to their lairs, and there will seem nothing strange to you in the songs and
calls of the birds. I should recommend you all to take a sound dose of quinine tonight; I have
a two and a half gallon keg of the stuff mixed, and any officer or man can go and take a glass
whenever he feels he wants it. It would be good for your nerves, as well as neutralize the
effect of the damp rising from the river. I should advise you who are not on the watch to turn
in early; it is of no use your exposing yourselves more than is necessary to the miasma."

The next day progress was more rapid, for the captain found that the assurance of the pilot
that there was amply sufficient water for the Serpent had been verified, and he therefore steamed
forward at half speed, without sending the launch on ahead to take soundings. Several villages
were passed by the way, but though the inhabitants assembled on the banks and watched the steamer,
no boats were put out, nor were any attempts made to barter their products with the strangers.

"It does not look as if we were popular, Mr. Ferguson," the captain said to the first lieutenant.
"It may be that they object to our presence altogether, or it may be because they believe that
we are going to the assistance of this Rajah Sehi. It certainly does not look well for the future."

"Not at all, sir. However, we shall be at the rajah's place tomorrow morning, and shall then
have a better opportunity of seeing how things are likely to go. At any rate, he is sure to
be civil for a time, and we shall be likely to procure fruit and vegetables, which, as the
doctor says, are absolute necessities if the men are to be kept in good health."

The next morning they anchored about ten o'clock opposite the campong of the rajah. It was
a good deal larger than any that they had passed on the way up, but the houses were mere huts,
with the exception of a large wooden structure, which they at once concluded was the residence
of the rajah. As soon as the Serpent turned the last bend of the river before reaching the
place, the sound of drums and gongs was heard, and a large boat, manned by eighteen rowers,
shot out from the bank as the anchor was dropped. The two officials on board at once mounted
the accommodation ladder, and on reaching the deck were received by the first lieutenant, behind
whom stood a guard of honor of the marines.

Upon stating that they came to express, on behalf of the rajah, the pleasure he felt at their
arrival, they were conducted to the captain's cabin. Compliments were exchanged through the
medium of the interpreter, and a bottle of champagne was opened, and its contents appeared
to gratify the visitors. They announced that the rajah would receive the captain that afternoon
at his palace.

CHAPTER IV.

Neither of the midshipmen was present at the interview between the captain and the rajah. The
second lieutenant, the captain of the marines, and the doctor alone accompanied him, with an
escort of twenty bluejackets and as many marines. A large crowd of people had collected to
see them pass along to the palace, which was a bare, barn-like structure, but they looked on
sullenly and silently as the party passed through them on their way. They were kept waiting
some little time outside the building, then entered through a doorway which led them into a
large, unfurnished room, at the end of which the rajah was seated. He rose when the officers
entered, and received them with an appearance of great cordiality, his chiefs standing behind him.

The conversation was wholly of a complimentary character; the subject of the business on which
the British ship had come was not even touched upon; refreshments, consisting of native sweets
and palm wine, were then passed round, and the captain, seeing that all business talk was to
be deferred, took his leave.

The doctor, who was fond of the two midshipmen, was always ready to chat freely with them.

"What did you think of our ally, Dr. Horsley?" Dick asked him, when, having changed his full
uniform for a suit of undress, he came up on deck.

"Between you and me, Balderson, I have seldom seen a more unmitigated looking ruffian in my
life; even for a Malay, he is ugly. Soh Hay tells me that in his young days he was a great
fighter, and his face and shoulders are seamed with scars. I asked how he came to be rajah;
for he does not look at all the type of the better class of people. Soh told me that, in the
first place, he took to the jungle, owing to his having krised in a quarrel the son of the
chief here. He was joined by other fugitives, set up as a pirate, and captured by surprise
one of the chief's prahus. His force grew rapidly, and he made a night attack on the chief's
campong, killed him and all the members of his family, and caused himself to be elected chief
of the tribe, which was then a small one. Gradually he swallowed up one after another of his
weaker neighbors, sometimes by force, sometimes by treachery. I believe he is now confronted
by more powerful chiefs, and that it is only because he is possessed of some six or eight piratical
prahus that he has been able to maintain his position. No doubt he has become alarmed by a
prospect of a combination against him, and has so invited us to support him. Such a step will,
of course, greatly add to his unpopularity, but doubtless he thinks that, with our help, he
could defy his enemies."

"But, he cannot suppose, Doctor," Harry said indignantly, "that we are going to fight for such
a rascal as he is against the men he has been plundering."

"I don't expect he does think that we are going to fight for him, unless he can show us that
it is to our interest to do so. I should imagine that he hopes that the effect of our appearance
here will be to either induce his neighbors to come to some arrangement with him, or that he
will endeavor to make peace with them by offering to throw us over, and to join with them against
us."

"Then, I should say, Doctor, that the best thing would be to hang the ruffian up at once."

"Well, yes, that might be a good plan, Parkhurst," the doctor said with a smile, "and might
save us a good deal of trouble; but, you see, we have come up here at his invitation; we have
just been eating his food and drinking his liquor, and it would scarcely place us in a favorable
position in the eyes of the natives in general were we to commence our alliance with him by
hanging him."

Harry laughed. "No, I suppose not, Doctor. Still, what are we to do?"

"We must wait, lad. We are here to ascertain the precise situation, and it will be some time
before that will be cleared up. Certainly for the present there will be nothing for us to do
but to keep quiet and see how matters turn out, and to get through the time as best we may.
We shall have fine opportunities for shooting and botanizing, for whatever the chief's designs
may be, it is certain that at present he will do all in his power to please us. The captain
today, at my suggestion, said that, in order to keep the men in good health, it would be desirable
that they should have every opportunity of going ashore, and that the officers should make
expeditions in search of game into the interior. He promised at once to afford us every facility,
and to provide us with guides and beaters."

The next day permission was granted to several of the officers and to twenty sailors and a
dozen marines to go on shore. Before starting, the whole ship's company were drawn up, and
the captain addressed them upon the absolute necessity for good behavior.

"The Malays," he said, "are a fierce race, very proud and independent, and quick to resent
the smallest insult. Each man carries a kris, and is ready to use it on the slightest provocation.
Every man who goes ashore must remember that not only his own life, but those of many others,
and the success of the mission on which we have come hither, may be forfeited by any careless
act of aggression. Many of you have served on the coast of Africa, but you must remember that
the Malays are not to be treated in the same free and easy manner that may go down with negroes.
You must comport yourselves with the same decency of behavior that you would were you in the
port of a friendly European Power. Any breach of these orders will be most severely punished;
and I appeal to every officer and man to use his utmost efforts to keep on good terms with
these people, and to behave as if the honor and credit of the ship depended upon him personally.
Any man who comes on board in the slightest degree the worse for liquor will not be allowed
to land again, even if we are stationed here for six months; and if there is any misbehavior
on shore, all leave will be stopped."

Two days later, the captain, with the second lieutenant and doctor, again paid a visit to the
rajah, and this time business matters were entered upon. The chief began by stating that he
rejoiced at the thought of being under the protection of the great English Queen. The captain
replied that her Majesty was anxious to be on good terms with all the Malay chiefs; that those
rajahs and sultans who had accepted her protection had greatly benefited by so doing, and by
listening to the advice of the officers whom she sent to reside at their seat of government;
but that, of course, before receiving his state under her protection it was necessary that
her representative, the Governor of the Straits Settlements, should be thoroughly satisfied
that the rajah intended to be guided by the advice so given.

He said that it was thoroughly necessary this should be understood, for that the allegiance
offered to the Queen could not be lightly thrown off. If a chief once owned her as his sovereign,
he could not change his mind afterwards; and should he disobey the advice and orders of the
Resident, he would be liable to be dethroned, and his government bestowed upon one better fitted
for it. He could not, for instance, be allowed to engage in hostilities against his neighbors
without the consent of the Resident, for it was clear that the English could not assist him
in wars in which they considered that he was in the wrong. In these matters there must be benefits
on both sides: the chief would obtain protection against warlike neighbors, would benefit by
the presence and advice of a British officer, and by the trade that would spring up; while,
in return for these benefits, he must acknowledge the Queen as his sovereign, and must obey
the orders of her officers just as her native born subjects would do.

The chief looked very serious at this. "Cannot," he asked at last, "a chief obtain the protection
of the British, and afterwards remain as an ally of theirs?"

"Not so," the captain said; "he cannot come to us when he is in danger and ask us to send ships
and men to aid him, and afterwards, when the danger has passed, wish us good morning, and give
us nothing in return for the benefits he had received."

"What orders would a Resident give?" the rajah asked, after a pause.

"He would give such orders as would be necessary for the good of the state; without interfering
in matters of home government, he would not allow acts of tyranny and cruelty that would imperil
the peace of the state, and perhaps bring about a rising. He would not suffer trade passing
through the dominions to be hampered and injured by heavy and unjust exactions; although, doubtless,
he would allow legitimate tolls to be taken. He would not permit expeditions to be fitted out
for attacks upon harmless neighbors. His interference would always be for the good of the state,
and, consequently, for the good of its prince. The incomes of the various rulers who have placed
themselves under British protection have always been largely augmented by the prosperity and
well doing of the state, the increase in its population, the extension of its trade and agriculture,
all of which enabled the people to pay a larger amount of taxation.

"You see, Rajah, we force no one to place himself under our protection; we war with no one
unless, by attack upon ourselves or upon princes under our protection, he compels us to punish
him, and, in extreme cases, to take possession of his dominions. I am explaining all this to
you because I wish you thoroughly to understand what your position will be if the Queen takes
you under her protection--which she certainly will not do unless it is found that you are likely,
on your part, to carry out faithfully the obligations you have assumed in return for that protection."

When this had been translated to the rajah by the interpreter, the chief sat for some time
silent. It was evident that he was ill pleased, and that he had reckoned upon obtaining the
British aid without undertaking any responsibilities whatever.

"And the officer who will come up," he said at last, "would he reside on shore?"

"Certainly he would. A portion of ground would be allotted for the Residency; on this a fort
would be erected, which would be manned by a small force for his protection; and he might either
reside in the fort or in a residence erected for him close to it, and under shelter of its
guns. The fort would, of course, be used for the protection of the town against enemies, as
well as for the protection of the officer against any rising on the part of your people; in
which case you, as well as himself, would find a refuge in it."

"Then I should no longer be a ruler," the rajah said angrily. "I should not be able to order
those who offended me to be punished."

"Not at all," the captain replied quietly. "Your powers as a ruler would not be interfered
with in any way, as long as they were properly exercised. You would have the power of executing
ill doers in accordance with the custom of your country; but the murder of a person who had
committed no crime whatever is not to be permitted, and anything like wholesale cruelty and
tyranny would be sternly repressed."

For some time the rajah sat without speaking; then he said, with an evident effort of self
control, "I must think all this over; it is all new to me."

"By all means do so," the captain replied. "The matter is an important one, and you will do
well to consider it in all lights before you take a step that, once taken, cannot be undone."

"I don't like the fellow's looks, Doctor," the captain said; "he intended to use us as a cat's
paw against his neighbors."

"I think that he is a thoroughly bad lot, sir; and if he accepted the terms, I should be very
sorry to be appointed Resident, for I should not feel that my life was worth a day's purchase."

"Well, there is nothing to do but to wait until we get a definite answer from him; and my instructions
are that, if I find that he is not a desirable man to have to deal with, I am to enter into
negotiations with other rajahs, and to endeavor to do something to open the trade of the river
and to render it safe for merchants who come up to trade. If Hassan's account of this man's
doings is correct, he is the main cause of the falling off in the trade, and, moreover, the
author of the piracies of which we have had so many complaints; indeed, it is possible that
when the Governor learns the true state of things, I may get an order to present an ultimatum
to this fellow and to sink his piratical craft. At any rate, we may make up our minds to be
here for some time."

On the following day a message was received from the rajah, saying that if any of the officers
wished to go on excursions for sport, guides would be placed at their disposal, and that all
who wished to do so could at any time travel through the country without the slightest fear
of molestation. For some time affairs remained in the same condition. The doctor went daily
on shore with butterfly and beetle nets, tin boxes, and other paraphernalia. He was generally
accompanied by a couple of bluejackets, and always took a native guide to prevent the risk
of being lost in the jungle, and also because the man was able to take him to places where
villages had stood, and it was in these clearings that insect life, especially among the lepidoptera,
was most abundant. The Malay he first engaged was a young fellow who proved so intelligent
and willing that he was permanently retained for the service as long as the Serpent remained
on the station.

The officers obtained no sport with big game; for although at night the forest was full of
sounds, showing the number of wild animals that abounded, these never were met with during
the daytime, and it would have been hopeless endeavoring to penetrate the thick jungle in search
of them. There was, however, an abundance of birds, for the most part of brilliant plumage,
and the doctor was delighted with the spoils they brought in, while the messes were kept well
supplied with jungle fowl and other edible birds. The natives, learning from the guide of the
doctor's passion for insects, brought in large numbers for sale, and he was able to purchase
a great many specimens altogether new to science.

The two midshipmen made excursions with their guns whenever they could get leave. Davis and
two other sailors always accompanied them, as the captain's orders were strict that no officer
or man should go outside the limits of the campong unless accompanied by two armed seamen.

Sometimes they took a native canoe and went up the river fishing; but as an abundance of fish
could be caught by lines from the ship's side, they only did this as a change, and often in
the cool of the evening they lay lazily in the canoe, while the fishermen were employed rowing
them up one or other of the numerous streams which flowed into the river. The doctor's prognostications
as to the health of the crew were only partially verified, for the precautions taken, if they
did not secure a perfect immunity against fever, at least greatly diminished the number of
those who suffered from it. The abundance of fish either caught from the ship or purchased
from the natives formed a wholesome diet, aided by the fruit, of which the natives brought
off a very large quantity. It was very varied, and much of it delicious; the mangosteens were
specially appreciated, and those who could overcome their repugnance to the disgusting odor
of the durians found them delicious eating. Besides these were custard apples, bananas, and
many other kinds of fruit; all were very cheap and, upon the doctor's suggestion, a supply
was purchased daily for the use of the ship's company, and the sailors, who had no other use
for their money, laid out no small portion of their pay on these luxuries.

The captain had taken every opportunity, when boats passed up the river, to send messages and
presents to the chiefs of the tribes higher up, with assurances that he had not come up as
an enemy, but that he desired to be on good terms with all, and would gladly see any of them
who would come down to pay him a visit, and would guarantee their safe return without molestation
on the part of Sehi. No answers had, however, been received to these overtures, and a proposal
he made to the rajah to send some of the ship's boats up the river to endeavor to bring about
an understanding between him and his neighbors was received with extreme disfavor.

CHAPTER V.

So far, nothing had been seen of the rajah's prahus. When questioned on the subject, he replied
that they were all down on the coast, trading with the natives; but it was so improbable that
they should have been sent away while the rajah was in fear of an attack by his neighbors that
no credence was given to the assertion. The ship's boats often went out for long rows on the
river, ostensibly--as the captain told the rajah, who inquired suspiciously as to the meaning
of these excursions--for the sake of giving the crews active exercise, but principally in order
to take soundings of the river, and to investigate the size and positions of the creeks running
into it. One day the gig and cutter had proceeded farther than usual; they had started at daybreak,
and had turned off into what seemed a very small creek, that had hitherto been unexplored,
as from the width of its mouth it was supposed to extend but a short distance into the forest.
The master's mate was in command of one boat, the second lieutenant of the other; Harry Parkhurst
accompanied the latter. After pushing through the screen of foliage that almost closed the
entrance to the creek, the boats rowed on for some distance. For half a mile the width was
but some fifteen yards, and the trees met in an arch overhead, then it widened considerably.

"This is just the sort of place," the lieutenant said to Harry, "where the rajah's prahus may
be hidden away. We had best go along as noiselessly as possible. If we were to come upon them
suddenly they might fire upon us, and that would bring on a general row. If we should catch
sight of them, it would be best to take the news to the captain, and let him act as he thinks fit."

He ordered the men to cease rowing until the gig came alongside.

"Mr. Morrison," he said, "it seems to me that this is a likely place for the prahus to be hidden.
We had better try and discover if this is the case, without being ourselves seen; therefore
have all the oars, except four, laid in, and let the men muffle those with their stockings,
and be most careful to dip them into the water without making a splash. Let absolute silence
be preserved in the boat. I will lead the way as before, and if I hold up my hand stop rowing
instantly."

"Aye, aye, sir!" the mate replied.

The same precautions were taken by the cutter, and the boats proceeded noiselessly. Presently
the stream narrowed again, until it seemed that they were approaching its termination, and
the boat stopped rowing.

"I fancy we have come to the end of it, Mr. Morrison," the lieutenant said in a low voice.

"I am afraid so too, sir; there is no room for the oars, and we shall either have to punt the
boats, or to drag them by the bushes."

The lieutenant was about to give the order to turn when Harry said, suddenly, "There is a current,
sir. I have had my eye upon that root, and we have drifted backwards a couple of feet since
we lost way, so there must be a stretch of water above us."

The lieutenant watched the root of the tree to which Harry had pointed, for a minute in silence,
then he said, "You are right, my lad, there is a current, and, as you say, there must be a
stretch of water above us. Lay in your oars, lads; stand up, and pull her along by the boughs
and bushes, but don't make the slightest sound."

Twenty yards farther the creek widened, and the oars were again got out.

"Take your place in the bow, Mr. Parkhurst, and hold up your hand the instant you see anything
unusual, and do you, men, be ready to hold her up the instant I give the order."

They proceeded for a quarter of a mile, the gig following close behind. Suddenly, at a bend
in the stream, a glare of light was seen ahead. Harry held up his hand, and passed the word
down in a whisper that just ahead the creek widened into a broad sheet of water. The lieutenant
stopped the gig by holding up his hand, passed the order for the men to lay in their oars noiselessly,
and told the coxswain to keep in well under the bushes on the left hand side; then he made
his way forward, and joined Harry, telling the men to pull the boat forward by means of the
branches overhead which were well within reach, but to avoid breaking even a twig.

In a minute or two the bow of the boat arrived at the end of the screen of bushes, and a low
exclamation broke from the lieutenant and Harry simultaneously; they were looking out on to
an almost circular pool some two hundred yards in diameter. In the center were moored six prahus.
Two of them lay broadside on to the creek, the other four were in a line behind these, and
it seemed that their broadsides were directed to the opposite side of the pool, for the other
two boats were in the way of their firing at the creek. They were long, low vessels, rowing
some twenty oars on each side. Each carried a number of small brass guns, and they were evidently
full of men, for numbers could be seen on deck, and boats were passing to and fro between them
and a small village at the edge of the pool. Having taken in all the details of the scene,
the lieutenant passed the word for the mate to leave his own boat and join him. When he did
so, he whispered to him: "I thought it was as well that you should have a view of these fellows'
position too, Morrison, as it would be of use to you if you have to take a boat in to attack them."

Two minutes later the boats were drawn back again to the open water in their rear, and rowed
as noiselessly as before down the creek, no word being spoken until they were half a mile away
from the pool.

"That is a snug hiding place, Mr. Morrison," the lieutenant said.

"It is indeed, sir. Who would have thought the scoundrels were so close to us, or that they
lay up this narrow creek, which I have passed half a dozen times and never thought worth examining?
I should not have dreamt that one of those craft could have passed through."

"I doubt whether they did pass through. They hardly could have done so without breaking down
a good many of these branches, and we must have seen signs of that. I think they must have
got into that pool by some creek coming in on the opposite side. You see four out of the six
boats were anchored in line so as to bring their broadsides to bear on some point opposite
to them, while the other two guarded them against any attack from this side. Naturally, they
thought it unlikely that any boat would come up here, and so directed their main attention
to the other opening. The next thing to find out will be where the other stream joins the river,
otherwise, as soon as we make our appearance, they will escape that way, and there is not the
least doubt that they could row away from our fastest boats. However, it is a great thing that
we have discovered their whereabouts without their having the least notion that we have done
so, and I am sure the captain will be very pleased when he hears that we have found them. It
will give him the whip hand over that lying rascal Sehi."

Captain Forest smiled grimly when the lieutenant made his report of the discovery that he had made.

"Thank you, Mr. Hopkins; that is a very valuable discovery. Just at present matters have not
come to a point when we can turn it to account. The next thing will be to find out where the
other passage comes out. It will be a serious business to attack them in the boats alone; these
prahus carry a tremendous lot of men, and the Malays will fight desperately. I do not say that
we might not succeed, but we should lose a lot of men in the attempt; it would be hot work
even with the ship, attacked by six of these fellows at once. If it was in the night, we might
fail to see any of them before they were upon us, and we should have hard work to beat back
four or five hundred of them if they all came swarming on deck together. However, we can wait,
and the first time the rajah shows any signs of treachery we can pounce upon his fleet. He
will not dream that we have discovered their hiding place, and will therefore let them hide
there without movement. However, we must try to find the ether end of the entrance to the creek.

"Please impress upon Mr. Morrison and young Parkhurst that it is of the highest importance
no words shall be spoken about it; and it might be advisable, also, to give notice to the men
who were in the boats, to keep their mouths shut. I have no reason to believe that the interpreter
is not faithful to our interests, but it is just as well not to trust anyone. Moreover, it
may be that some of these Malays who come on board with fruit may have been for a time at Singapore
or Penang, and picked up a little English, and a chance word might let them know that we have
discovered the prahus."

"I wonder why our friend Hassan has not turned up," Dick Balderson said to his chum one day,
after they had been lying for a month opposite the town.

"I expect something has occurred to keep him," Harry said. "I am quite convinced that he would
have come if he could. He may be in trouble himself with some of his neighbors, or he may have
tried to exert himself too soon and done himself damage. I am quite convinced that he meant
what he said. At any rate, till this business here comes to a head, we are not likely to be
able to go up and pay a visit to him."

"No, I am quite sure that the captain would not let us go now, and indeed, I would not ask
him, even if I were sure he would, for we may get to blows with the rajah any day; he cannot
put off giving a final answer much longer. I wonder the captain stood his shilly shallying
so long as he has."

It was but two evenings after this that, as the two midshipmen were leaning against the bulwarks,
watching the reflection of the stars in the sluggish stream, a native sampan stole silently
out from the shadow of the shore and dropped down alongside the Serpent. So noiseless was the
movement that the two men on the lookout in the bow did not notice it, and the midshipmen thought
it was a shadow of some dark object floating down stream, when it came alongside and a man
stood up.

"Hello!" Harry said, "you must not come alongside like this: what do you want?"

"Dick, Harry, Doctor; come from Hassan."

"Oh, that is it; all right, come on board," and, leaning over, he stretched out his hand to
the native, who seized it, and in a moment stood by his side on the deck, holding the head
rope of his sampan in his mouth.

"Davis," Harry said to the sailor who was standing two paces away, "just go down to the wardroom,
and tell the doctor, with my compliments, that I shall be obliged if he will come on deck at
once. Say that it is something particular."

A minute later the doctor appeared. "I was just in the middle of a rubber, Dick, and if you
have not an uncommonly good reason for calling me up I will make you smart for it, the first
time you get under my hands. Whom have we got here?"

"He is a messenger from Hassan; he mentioned our names and yours."

"Ah, I am glad of that," the doctor said, rubbing his hands together; "they have been chaffing
me in the wardroom about it, and prophesying that I should never hear of him again. Well, what
does he say?"

"He has not said anything except our names, Doctor, and that he comes from Hassan. I don't
suppose he knows any more English, and I thought we had better consult you, whether it would
be best to send for Soh Hay; he may have brought some message of importance."

"Right, lad. I think the most prudent thing will be to tell the captain first. It may only
be a message to say why he has not come, or it may be a matter of some importance. I will go
to him at once."

Two or three minutes later he returned. "You are to bring him to the captain's cabin. Here,
Davis, pass the word forward that the captain wants to see Soh Hay in his cabin."

Harry touched the native, who had been standing quietly by his side, and signed him to accompany
them, and with Dr. Horsley and Dick went direct to the cabin.

"So your friend has sent a message at last, lad?" Captain Forest said. "I am glad of that,
for I own that I had doubts whether we should hear any more of him."

"You come from the chief Hassan?" the captain, who had been working at the Malay language,
with the interpreter, since he had arrived at the mouth of the river, asked in that tongue.
The man's face brightened.

"Yes, my lord," he said.

"Is he well?"

"The chief is quite well."

"I wish I knew enough to question him without Soh Hay's interference, but I shall only make
a mess of it, and, perhaps, get a wrong idea altogether of his message. Now, Soh Hay," he broke
off as the interpreter entered, "you will ask this man the questions exactly as I put them,
and tell me his answer word for word. It may be of importance. Now ask him first what message
he brings from his chief to the officers." 

Truth and patriotism both obliged us to deny his conjecture; and when He intimated that he
would not have known us for Americans because we did not speak with the dreadful American accent,
I hazarded my belief that this dreadfulness was personal rather than national. But he would
not have it. Boston people, yes; they spoke very well, and he allowed other exceptions to the
general rule of our nasal twang, which his wife summoned English
enough to say was very ugly.

They had suffered from it too universally in the Americans they had met during the summer in Germany
to believe it was merely personal; and I suppose one may own to strictly
American readers that our speech is dreadful, that it is very ugly.

These amiable Spaniards had no reason and no wish to wound; and they could never know what
sweet and noble natures had been producing their voices through their noses there in Germany.
I for my part could not insist; who, indeed, can defend the American accent, which is not
so much an accent as a whiffle, a snuffle, a twang? It was mortifying, all the same, to have it
openly abhorred by a foreigner, and I willingly got away from the question to that of the weather.
We agreed admirably about the heat in England where this gentleman went every summer, and had never
found it so hot before. It was hot even in Denmark; but he warned me not to expect any warmth
in Spain now that the autumn rains had begun.

If this couple represented a cosmopolitan and modern Spain, it was
interesting to escape to something entirely native in the three young
girls who got in at the next station and shared our compartment with
us as far as we went.

They were tenderly kissed by their father in putting them on board, and held in lingering farewells
at the window till the train started. The eldest of the three then helped in arranging their baskets
in the rack, but the middle sister took motherly charge of the youngest, whom she at once explained
to us as enferma. She was the prettiest girl of the conventional Spanish type we Lad yet seen:
dark-eyed and dark-haired, regular, but a little overfull of the chin which she would presently
have double. She was very, very pale of face, with a pallor in which she had assisted nature
with powder, as all Spanish women, old and young, seem to do. But there was no red underglow
in the pallor, such as gives many lovely faces among them the complexion of whitewash over pink on
a stucco surface.

She wrapped up the youngest sister, who would by and by be beautiful,
and now being sick had only the flush of fever in her cheeks, and
propped her in the coziest corner of the car, where she tried to make
her keep still, but could not make her keep silent.

In fact, they all babbled together, over the basket of luncheon which the middle sister opened
after springing up the little table-leaf of the window, and spread with a substantial variety
including fowl and sausage and fruit, such as might tempt any sick appetite, or a well one, even.
As she brought out each of these victuals, together with a bottle
of wine and a large bottle of milk, she first offered it to us, and
when it was duly refused with thanks, she made the invalid eat and
drink, especially the milk which she made a wry face at.

When she had finished they all began to question whether her fever was rising for the day; the
good sister felt the girl's pulse, and got out a thermometer, which together they arranged under
her arm, and then duly inspected. It seemed that the fever was rising, as it might very well
be, but the middle sister was not moved from her notable calm, and the eldest did not fear. At
a place where a class of young men was to be seen before an ecclesiastical college the girls
looked out together, and joyfully decided that the brother (or possibly a cousin) whom they
expected to see, was really there among them. When we reached Burgos we felt that we had assisted
at a drama of family medicine and affection which was so sweet that
if the fever was not very wisely it was very winningly treated.

It was not perhaps a very serious case, and it meant a good deal of pleasant excitement for
all concerned.

III. BURGOS AND THE BITTER COLD OF BURGOS

It appears to be the use in most minor cities of Spain for the best hotel to send the worst omnibus
to the station, as who should say, "Good wine needs no bush." At Burgos we were almost alarmed
by the shabbiness of the omnibus for the hotel we had chosen through a consensus of praise in
the guide-books, and thought we must have got the wrong one.

It was indeed the wrong one, but because there is no right hotel
in Burgos when you arrive there on an afternoon of early October,
and feel the prophetic chill of that nine months of winter which is
said to contrast there with three months of hell.

I

The air of Burgos when it is not the breath of a furnace is so heavy and clammy through the
testimony of all comers that Burgos herself no longer attempts to deny it from her high perch
on the uplands of Old Castile. Just when she ceased to deny it, I do not know, but probably when
she ceased to be the sole capital and metropolis of Christian Spain
and shared her primacy with Toledo sometime in the fourteenth century.

Now, in the twentieth, we asked nothing of her but two rooms in which we could have fire, but the
best hotel in Burgos openly declared that it had not a fireplace
in its whole extent, though there must have been one in the kitchen.

The landlord pointed out that it was completely equipped with steam-heating apparatus, but
when I made him observe that there was no steam in the shining radiators,
he owned with a shrug that there was truth in what I said.

He showed us large, pleasant rooms to the south which would have been warm from the sun if the
sun which we left playing in San Sebastian had been working that
day at Burgos; he showed us his beautiful new dining-room, cold, with
the same sunny exposure.

I rashly declared that all would not do, and that I would look elsewhere for rooms with fireplaces.
I had first to find a cab in order to find the other hotels, but
I found instead that in a city of thirty-eight thousand inhabitants
there was not one cab standing for hire in the streets.

I tried to enlist the sympathies of some private carriages, but they remained indifferent, and
I went back foiled, but not crushed, to our hotel.

There it seemed that the only vehicle to be had was the omnibus which had brought us from the
station. The landlord calmly (I did not then perceive the irony of his calm) had the horses
put to and our baggage put on, and we drove away. But first we met our dear Chilians coming to our
hotel from the hotel they had chosen, and from a search for hearthstones in others; and we
drove to the only hotel they had left unvisited. There at our demand for fires the landlord
all but laughed us to scorn; he laid his hand on the cold radiator
in the hotel as if to ask what better we could wish than that.

We drove back, humbled, to our own hotel, where the landlord met
us with the Castilian cairn he had kept at our departure.

Then there was nothing for me but to declare myself the Prodigal Son returned to take the rooms
he had offered us. We were so perfectly in his power that he could magnanimously afford to
offer us other rooms equally cold, but we did not care to move. The Chilians had retired baffled
to their own hotel, and there was nothing for us but to accept the
long evening of gelid torpor which we foresaw must follow the effort
of the soup and wine to warm us at dinner.

That night we heard through our closed doors agonized voices which we knew to be the voices
of despairing American women wailing through the freezing corridors, "Can't she understand
that I want boiling water?" and, "Can't' we go down-stairs to a fire
somewhere?"

We knew the one meant the chambermaid and the other the kitchen,
but apparently neither prayer was answered.

II

As soon as we had accepted our fate, while as yet the sun had not set behind the clouds which had
kept it out of our rooms all day, we hurried out not only to escape the rigors of our hotel,
but to see as soon as we could, as much as we could of the famous
city.

We had got an excellent cup of tea in the glass-roofed pavilion of our beautiful cold dining-room,
and now our spirits rose level with the opportunities of the entrancing walk we took along the course
of the Arlanson. I say course, because that is the right word to
use of a river, but really there was no course in the Arlanzon.

Between the fine, wide Embankments and under the noble bridges there
were smooth expanses of water (naturally with women washing at them),
which reflected like an afterglow of the evening sky the splendid
masses of yarn hung red from the dyer's vats on the bank.

The expanses of water were bordered by wider spaces of grass which had grown during the rainless
summer, but which were no doubt soon to be submerged under the autumnal torrent the river would
become. The street which shaped itself to the stream was a rather modern avenue, leading to
a beautiful public garden, with the statues and fountains proper to a public garden, and densely
shaded against the three infernal months of the Burgos year. But the houses were glazed all
along their fronts with the sun-traps which we had noted in the Basque country, and which do not
wait for a certain date in the almanac to do the work of steam-heating. They gave a tempting
effect to the house-fronts, but they could not distract our admiration from the successive crowds
of small boys playing at bull-fighting in the streets below, and in the walks of the public
garden. The population of Burgos is above thirty-seven thousand and of the inhabitants at least
thirty-six thousand are small boys, as I was convinced by the computation
of the husband and brother of the Chilian ladies which agreed perfectly
with my own hasty conjecture; the rest are small girls.

In fact large families, and large families chiefly of boys, are the
rule in Spain everywhere; and they everywhere know how to play bull-fighting,
to flap any-colored old shawl, or breadth of cloth in the face of
the bull, to avoid his furious charges, and doubtless to deal him
his death-wound, though to this climax I could not bear to follow.

One or two of the bull-fighters offered to leave the national sport
and show us the House of Miranda, but it was the cathedral which was
dominating our desire, as it everywhere dominates the vision, in Burgos
and out of Burgos as far as the city can be seen.

The iron-gray bulk, all flattered or fretted by Gothic art, rears itself from the clustering
brown walls and roofs of the city, which it seems to gather into its mass below while it towers
so far above them. We needed no pointing of the way to it; rather we should have needed instruction
for shunning it; but we chose the way which led through the gate of Santa Maria where in an arch
once part of the city wall, the great Cid, hero above every other hero of Burgos, sits with half
a dozen more or less fabled or storied worthies of the renowned city.

Then with a minute's walk up a stony sloping little street we were in the beautiful and reverend
presence of one of the most august temples of the Christian faith. The avenue where the old
Castilian nobles once dwelt in their now empty palaces climbs along the hillside above the cathedral,
which on its lower side seems to elbow off the homes of meaner men, and in front to push them
away beyond a plaza not large enough for it. Even this the cathedral had not cleared of the horde
of small boys who followed us unbidden to its doors and almost expropriated
those authorized blind beggars who own the church doors in Spain.

When we declined the further company of these boys they left us with expressions which I am afraid
accused our judgment and our personal appearance; but in another moment we were safe from their
censure, and hidden as it were in the thick smell of immemorial incense.

It was not the moment for doing the cathedral in the wonted tiresome
and vulgar way; that was reserved for the next day; now we simply
wandered in the vast twilight spaces; and craned our necks to breaking
in trying to pierce the gathered gloom in the vaulting overhead.

It was a precious moment, but perhaps too weird, and we were glad to find a sacristan with
businesslike activity setting red candlesticks about a bier in the
area before the choir, which here, as in the other Spanish cathedrals,
is planted frankly in the middle of the edifice, a church by itself,
as if to emphasize the incomparable grandeur of the cathedral.

The sacristan willingly paused in his task and explained that he was preparing the bier for
the funeral of a church dignitary (as we learned later, the dean) which was to take place the
next day at noon; and if we would come at that hour we should hear some beautiful music. We
knew that he was establishing a claim on our future custom, but we thanked him and provisionally
feed him, and left him at his work, at which we might have all but fancied him whistling, so cheerfully
and briskly he went about it.

Outside we lingered a moment to give ourselves the solemn joy of the Chapel of the Constable which forms
the apse of the cathedral and is its chief glory. It mounted to the hard, gray sky, from which
a keen wind was sweeping the narrow street leading to it, and blustering round the corner of the
cathedral, so that the marble men holding up the Constable's coat-of-arms
in the rear of his chapel might well have ached from the cold which
searched the marrow of flesh-and-blood men below.

These hurried by in flat caps and corduroy coats and trousers, with sashes at their waists and
comforters round their necks; and they were picturesque quite in the measure of their misery.
Some whose tatters were the most conspicuous feature of their costume, I am sure would have
charmed me if I had been a painter; as a mere word-painter I find myself wishing I could give
the color of their wretchedness to my page.

III

In the absence of any specific record in my notebook I do not know just how it was between
this first glimpse of the cathedral and dinner, but it must have been on our return to our
hotel, that the little interpreter who had met us at the station,
and had been intermittently constituting himself our protector ever
since, convinced us that we ought to visit the City Hall, and see
the outside of the marble tomb containing the bones of the Cid and
his wife.

Such as the bones were we found they were not to be seen themselves, and I do not know that I should
have been the happier for their inspection.

In fact, I have no great opinion of the Cid as an historical character or a poetic fiction. His
epic, or his long ballad, formed no part of my young study in Spanish,
and when four or five years ago a friend gave me a copy of it, beautifully
printed in black letter, with the prayer that I should read it sometime
within the twelvemonth, I found the time far too short.

As a matter of fact I have never read the poem to this day, though. I have often tried, and
I doubt if its author ever intended it to be read. He intended it rather to be recited in
stirring episodes, with spaces for refreshing slumber in the connecting narrative. As for the
Cid in real life under his proper name of Rodrigo de Vivas, though
he made his king publicly swear that he had had no part in the murder
of his royal brother, and though he was the stoutest and bravest knight
in Castile, I cannot find it altogether admirable in him that when
his king banished him he should resolve to fight thereafter for any
master who paid him best.

That appears to me the part of a road-agent rather than a reformer, and it seems to me no
amend for his service under Moorish princes that he should make war against them on his personal
behalf or afterward under his own ungrateful king. He is friends now with the Arabian King of
Saragossa, and now he defeats the Aragonese under the Castilian sovereign,
and again he sends an insulting message by the Moslems to the Christian
Count of Barcelona, whom he takes prisoner with his followers, but
releases without ransom after a contemptuous audience.

Is it well, I ask, that he helps one Moor against another, always for what there is in it,
and when he takes Valencia from the infidels, keeps none of his promises
to them, but having tortured the governor to make him give up his
treasure, buries him to his waist and then burns him alive?

After that, to be sure, he enjoys his declining years by making forays in the neighboring country,
and dies "satisfied with having done his duty toward his God."

Our interpreter, who would not let us rest till he had shown us the box holding the Cid's bones,
had himself had a varied career. If you believed him he was born in Madrid and had passed, when
three years old, to New York, where he grew up to become a citizen
and be the driver of a delivery wagon for a large department-store.

He duly married an American woman who could speak not only French, German, and Italian, but
also Chinese, and was now living with him in Burgos. His own English had somewhat fallen by
the way, but what was left he used with great courage; and he was one of those government interpreters
whom you find at every large station throughout Spain in the number of the principal hotels
of the place. They pay the government a certain tax for their license, though it was our friend's
expressed belief that the government, on the contrary, paid him a salary of two dollars a
day; but perhaps this was no better founded than his belief in a German princess who, when he
went as her courier, paid him ten dollars a day and all his expenses. She wished him to come
and live near her in Germany, so as to be ready to go with her to
South America, but he had not yet made up his mind to leave Burgos,
though his poor eyes watered with such a cold as only Burgos can give
a man in the early autumn; when I urged him to look to the bad cough
he had, he pleaded that it was a very old cough.

He had a fascination of his own, which probably came from his imaginative habit of mind, so
that I could have wished more adoptive fellow-citizens were like him. He sympathized strongly
with us in our grief with the cold of the hotel, and when we said that a small oil-heater would
take the chill off a large room, he said that he had advised that very thing, but that our host
had replied, with proud finality, "I am the landlord." Whether this really happened or not,
I cannot say, but I have no doubt that our little guide had some faith in it as a real incident.
He apparently had faith in the landlord's boast that he was going to have a stately marble
staircase to the public entrance to his hotel, which was presently
of common stone, rather tipsy in its treads, and much in need of scrubbing.

There

is as little question in my mind that he believed the carriage we had engaged to take us next morning
to the Cartuja de Miraflores would be ready at a quarter before nine, and that he may have been
disappointed when it was not ready until a quarter after. But it was worth waiting for if to have
a team composed of a brown mule on the right hand and a gray horse
on the left was to be desired.

These animals which nature had so differenced were equalized by art through the lavish provision
of sleigh-bells, without some strands of which no team in Spain is
properly equipped.

Besides, as to his size the mule was quite as large as the horse, and as to his tail he was much
more decorative. About two inches after this member left his body it was closely shaved for
some six inches or more, and for that space it presented the effect of a rather large size
of garden-hose; below, it swept his thighs in a lordly switch. If anything could have added
distinction to our turnout it would have been the stiff side-whiskers of our driver: the only
pair I saw in real life after seeing them so long in pictures on boxes of raisins and cigars.
There they were associated with the look and dress of a torrero, and our coachman, though an
old Castilian of the austerest and most taciturn pattern, may have
been in his gay youth an Andalusian bull-fighter.

IV

Our pride in our equipage soon gave way to our interest in the market
for sheep, cattle, horses, and donkeys which we passed through just
outside the city.

The market folk were feeling the morning's cold; shepherds folded
in their heavy shawls leaned motionless on their long staves, as if
hating to stir; one ingenious boy wore a live lamb round his neck
which he held close by the legs for the greater comfort of it; under
the trees by the roadside some of the peasants were cooking their
breakfasts and warming themselves at the fires.

The sun was on duty in a cloudless sky; but all along the road to
the Cartuja we drove between rows of trees so thickly planted against
his summer rage that no ray of his friendly heat could now reach us.

At times it seemed as if from this remorselessly shaded avenue we should escape into the open;
the trees gave way and we caught glimpses of wide plains and distant hills; then they closed
upon us again, and in their chill shadow it was no comfort to know that in summer, when the townspeople
got through their work, they came out to these groves, men, women,
and children, and had supper under their hospitable boughs.

One comes to almost any Cartuja at last, and we found ours on a sunny top just when the cold
had pinched us almost beyond endurance, and joined a sparse group
before the closed gate of the convent.

The group was composed of poor people who had come for the dole of food daily distributed from
the convent, and better-to-do country-folk who had brought things to sell to the monks, or
were there on affairs not openly declared. But it seemed that it was a saint's day; the monks
were having service in the church solely for their own edification,
and they had shut us sinners out not only by locking the gate, but
by taking away the wire for ringing the bell, and leaving nothing
but a knocker of feeble note with which different members of our indignation
meeting vainly hammered.

Our guide assumed the virtue of the greatest indignation, though he ought to have known that
we could not get in on that saint's day; but it did not avail, and the little group dispersed,
led off by the brown peasant who was willing to share my pleasure in our excursion as a good
joke on us, and smiled with a show of teeth as white as the eggs
in his basket.

After all, it was not wholly a hardship; we could walk about in the sunny if somewhat muddy
open, and warm ourselves against the icily shaded drive back to town; besides, there was a little
girl crouching at the foot of a tree, and playing at a phase of the housekeeping which is the
game of little girls the world over. Her sad, still-faced mother standing near, with an interest
in her apparently renewed by my own, said that she was four years old, and joined me in watching
her as she built a pile of little sticks and boiled an imaginary little kettle over them. I was so
glad even of a make-believe fire that I dropped a copper coin beside it, and the mother smiled
pensively as if grateful but not very hopeful from this beneficence,
though after reflection I had made my gift a "big dog" instead of
a "small dog," as the Spanish call a ten and a five centimo piece.

The child bent her pretty head shyly on one side, and went on putting more sticks under her
supposititious pot.

I found the little spectacle reward enough in itself and in a sort compensation for our failure
to see the exquisite alabaster tomb of Juan II. and his wife Isabel which makes the Cartuja Church
so famous.

There are a great many beautiful tombs in Burgos, but none so beautiful
there (or in the whole world if the books say true) as this; though
we made what we could of some in the museum, where we saw for the
first time in the recumbent effigies of a husband and wife, with features
worn away by time and incapable of expressing the disappointment,
the surprise they may have felt in the vain effort to warm their feet
on the backs of the little marble angels put there to support them.



Noiselessly the boat was brought round, and its head directed to the right hand bank. They
had passed a sharp bend nearly half a mile back, and the lieutenant said, "Look out for a landing
place at the deepest point of the curve, Harris."

"Aye, aye, sir!" the coxswain said, standing up. A minute later he brought the boat alongside,
at a point which was free from bushes, and where the bank was but two feet above the water's edge.

CHAPTER VII.

"Now, Mr. Balderson, take Harper and Winthorpe, and make your way through the jungle as noiselessly
as possible. It is probable that the path runs within fifty yards of this point, possibly it
is only half a dozen. When you have found it, send Winthorpe back to me with the news. Take
that long coil of thin rope that is in the bow, and pay it out as you go along. You might get
lost even within two yards of the stream, and it would be dangerous to call or whistle. It
will enable me to join you. Leave your muskets behind, lads; they would only be in the way
in the jungle, and you have your pistols and cutlasses. You take the lantern, Winthorpe, and
Harper, do you take the rope. Fasten one end to the thwart before you start, or, without knowing
it, you might drag it after you."

Dick led the way, the others following close behind, but as soon as they were among the trees,
he was obliged to take the lantern, for the darkness was so intense that he could not see an
inch before him and would have been torn to pieces by the thorny creepers had he tried to penetrate
without a light.

As it was, he received several nasty scratches, and could hear muttered exclamations from the
men behind him. Creeping under some of the rattans, making detours to avoid others, and cutting
some of the smaller ones in two with his cutlass, he made his way forward, and was delighted
indeed when, after proceeding some twenty yards, he came upon the edge of what looked like
a ditch, but which was, he knew, the native path.

"Here we are, lads," he exclaimed in a low tone; "thank goodness we have not had to go farther."

"So say I, sir," one of the men grumbled; "if it had not been for your lantern I should have
been torn to pieces. As it is, I aint sure whether my eyes aint gone, and my nose and cheeks
are scratched as if I had been fighting with a mad cat."

"Here, Winthorpe, take the lantern and make your way back; darken it as soon as you get through
to the edge of the creek. You cannot go wrong with the cord to guide you."

Two or three minutes later Dick saw the light approaching again, and the lieutenant, the coxswain,
and two bluejackets joined him, Winthorpe and another having been left as boat keepers.

"Now, Harris, do you and one of the others go on ahead; we will follow fifty yards behind you.
If you hear anyone coming, give a low whistle; we will then turn off the light. You can walk
on confidently, for there is no chance of any of these prickly creepers running across the
path. When you see the trees are getting thinner, or that there is an opening before you, stop
and send back word to us, so that we can shut up the lantern before joining you."

The lieutenant headed the party now, followed by Dick. He held the lantern close to the ground;
the bottom was, like all jungle paths, worn perfectly smooth by the passage of the barefooted
natives.

"Nothing could be better," he said in a low voice to Dick. "We ought to be able to haul the
guns along here at a trot; and the opening is wide enough on each side for a gun carriage to
be carried along without any difficulty."

In ten minutes one of the men ahead came back.

"We have got to the end of the path, sir; it ends on the bank of that pool we saw ahead."

The lantern was now extinguished, and the party hurried forward. On reaching the bank they
found that the path ended, as they had expected, just opposite the village. The prahus lay
somewhat to the right.

"It could not be better," the lieutenant whispered. "Now let us see whether we can find a suitable
place for the guns."

This was much easier than they had expected, for the trees were cleared, probably to furnish
firewood, for a distance of some fifteen yards from the bank; between this cleared place and
the water was a fringe of thick bushes.

"This will do capitally, lads. Now we will be off at once; we have found out all that we wanted,
and nothing could be more satisfactory."

They retraced their steps rapidly till they came to the coil of cord looped on a low bough.
The coxswain took it down, and they were soon all on board the boat again. "Now, lads, row
as noiselessly as you can to the mouth of the pool again, then turn, and lay on your oars,
except bow and two, who are to paddle very slowly. Hand Mr. Balderson that twenty foot bamboo;
I want to sound the river as we come back."

As soon as the boat was again turned, Dick took the pole, and, standing up, thrust it down
into the water.

"Only about seven feet, sir," he whispered.

"That is bad. It is evident that the ship cannot get up here; still we may as well go on sounding."

"The water is gradually deepening," Dick said, thrusting the pole down again; "there are nearly
ten feet."

It was not long before he announced fifteen, and at that continued until they reached the entrance
to the creek, where it was only fourteen feet.

"It would be a touch and go there," the lieutenant said, "but I dare say she could be pushed
through. It is very unfortunate that there is that shallow bar this side of the pool. And now,
lads, you can lay out for ten minutes, and then we can fasten up to a bough and see what is
in the hamper. We have done our work earlier than I had expected, and can take it easy."

The steward had provided them with an ample store of food, and the men ate their hunks of cold
meat and bread, and passed round the pannikins of grog, with great contentment, while the officers
divided a cold chicken and a bottle of claret.

"Now, men," the lieutenant said, when they had finished, "you can have a quarter of an hour's
smoke. You must open the lantern in the bottom of the boat, and hold a jacket over it to prevent
the light falling on any of you."

When the men had lit their pipes the lantern was passed aft, and while the coxswain put his
jacket over it, the lieutenant lit a cigar.

"You smoke, don't you, Balderson?"

"Yes, sir, I began when we came up the river; the doctor said it is a good thing to keep off
miasma."

"Very well, then light up; I think that it is a good thing myself. We have done a very satisfactory
night's work, and I think we see our way now to getting rid of most of those piratical craft,
which will not only be a benefit to traders on the coast of the river, but will greatly please
all the other chiefs, and will enable them to hold their own against Sehi."

Five minutes were added to the promised quarter, and then the pipes were laid down, and the
boat proceeded at a steady stroke until they reached the spot where they had fished.

"Somewhere about here, lad?"

"Yes, sir, I think that this is just the place. I noticed that tall tree rising above the general
line just opposite where we were anchored."

"Then lower the grapnel; in oars."

Another bottle was produced from the hamper; the lieutenant filled a wine glass full and drank
it off, and then passed the glass over to Dick.

"What is it, sir?"

"It is some grog, with a large dose of quinine. The doctor begged me to give it an hour or
two before daylight. Now, lads, you are each to take a glass of this; it will protect you against
the effect of the mist on the river. You can show the lantern now; it is just as well that
they should see it if they are on the lookout."

Every man took his glass of the mixture.

"Now wrap yourselves in your blankets, lads, and lie down for a couple of hours' sleep."

After a minute or two's scuffling while each found a plank to suit him, all was quiet in the
boat. Dick, who felt far too excited over the events of the night to be sleepy, had volunteered
to keep watch, and, lighting another pipe at the lantern, smoked till it was broad daylight.
Then he roused the crew, and in less than two hours afterwards they rowed alongside the Serpent.
The captain was greatly pleased with Mr. Ferguson's report.

"It is unlucky about that bar in the creek, otherwise we might have taken the ship right into
the pool, and fought it out with them there. Still, it may be that this will be the best in
the end, for we could hardly have counted upon sinking the whole of them, and once past us
they would have been off like the wind; and though we might have followed some of them, the
others would have made off, some one way and some another, whereas, by laying the vessel across
the mouth of the creek, we have a good chance of catching them all as they come down. There
is no doubt a lot more fellows have arrived to help the rajah; we can see that there are a
great many more about on the shore than there have been before. I think things will come to
a crisis before many hours have passed. We have made out that men keep coming and going behind
that row of six huts facing the river, and I should not be surprised if they are not hard at
work establishing a battery there."

Presently two Malays, whom they recognized as belonging to the rajah's council, advanced to
the edge of the shore, which was but some fifty yards away. One of them held a pole to which
a white cloth was attached.

"I have a message from the rajah," he shouted out. The captain sent for the interpreter, and
went to the side of the quarterdeck.

"The rajah says that he does not want to have any more to say to you. You want to take his
country; he will not let you have it, and if you do not go away in an hour, he will sink your
ship."

"Tell him," the captain said, "that it will be the worse for him if he tries it. I came up
here at his invitation, and shall stay just as long as I please."

The two Malays retired, walking in a quiet and dignified way.

The news soon ran through the ship of the defiance that had been given, and excited the liveliest
satisfaction. The men were shaking hands, cutting capers, and indulging in much joking and
laughter. Half an hour later there was a sudden uproar in the town, drums were beaten, horns
sounded, and the Malays by the river bank speedily retired behind the huts. 

But we were determined to see the Peruvian and Mexican antiquities which we believed must be
treasured up in it; and that we might not fail of finding it, I gave
one of the custodians a special peseta to take us out on the balcony
and show us exactly how to get to it.

He was so precise and so full in his directions that we spent the next half-hour in wandering
fatuously round the whole region before we stumbled, almost violently,
upon it immediately back of the Modern Museum.

Will, it be credited that it was then hardly worth seeing for the things we meant to see? The
Peruvian and Mexican antiquities were so disappointing that we would hardly look at the Etruscan,
Greek, and Roman things which it was so much richer in. To be sure, we had seen and overseen the
like of these long before in Italy; but they were admirably arranged
in this museum, so that without the eager help of the custodians (which
two cents would buy at any turn) we could have found pleasure in them,
whereas the Aztec antiquities were mostly copies in plaster and the
Inca jewelry not striking.

Before finding the place we had had the help of two policemen and
one newsboy and a postman in losing ourselves in the Prado where we
mostly sought for it, and with difficulty kept ourselves from being
thrust into the gallery there.

In Spain a man, or even a boy, does not like to say he does not know where a place is; he is
either too proud or too polite to do it, and he will misdirect you without mercy. But the morning
was bright, and almost warm, and we should have looked forward to weeks of sunny weather if our
experience had not taught us that it would rain in the afternoon,
and if greater experience than ours had not instructed us that there
would be many days of thick fog now before the climate of Madrid settled
itself to the usual brightness of February.

We had time to note again in the Paseo Castellana, which is the fashionable
drive, that it consists of four rows of acacias and tamarisks and
a stretch of lawn, with seats beside it; the rest is bare grasslessness,
with a bridle-path on one side and a tram-line on the other.

If it had been late afternoon the Paseo would have been filled with the gay world, but being
the late forenoon we had to leave it well-nigh unpeopled and go back to our hotel, where the
excellent midday breakfast merited the best appetite one could bring to it.

In fact, all the meals of our hotel were good, and of course they
were only too superabundant.

They were pretty much what they were everywhere in Spain, and they were better everywhere than they
were in Granada where we paid most for them. They were appetizing, and not of the cooking
which the popular superstition attributes to Spain, where the hotel cooking is not rank with
garlic or fiery with pepper, as the untraveled believe. At luncheon in our Madrid hotel we
had a liberal choice of eggs in any form, the delicious arroz a la
Valencia, a kind of risotto, with saffron to savor and color it; veal
cutlets or beefsteak, salad, cheese, grapes, pears, and peaches, and
often melon; the ever-admirable melon of Spain, which I had learned
to like in England.

At dinner there were soup, fish, entree, roast beef, lamb, or poultry, vegetables, salad, sweet,
cheese, and fruit; and there was pretty poor wine ad libitum at both meals. For breakfast
there was good and true (or true enough) coffee with rich milk, which
if we sometimes doubted it to be goat's milk we were none the worse
if none the wiser for, as at dinner we were not either if we unwittingly
ate kid for lamb.

 Impress
upon them that it is better to fire too far than to risk hurting our own men."

The order was obeyed; soon flames were seen to rise beyond the spot where the fighting was
going on, the resistance to the advance speedily ceased, and a dropping fire took the place
of the sustained roll of musketry which, five minutes later, broke out again at the edge of
the town facing the wood, and the fire of the guns was now directed against the edge of the
forest, to which the Malays had evidently fled. In a few minutes smoke began to rise all round
the place, showing that the men with port fires were at work, and in a quarter of an hour the
bluejackets and marines were seen issuing from the houses and coming down to the shore. The
place was by this time a sheet of fire, the lightly built huts, dried in the heat of the sun,
catching like tinder, and blazing up in a fierce flame, that in a few minutes left no vestige
behind it.

The ship's fire had by this time ceased, and the sailors, as they looked out of the portholes,
cheered as the boats came up. Their appearance was far less orderly than it had been when they
put off from the ship, every man having carted off some sort of loot--sarongs, spears, krises,
and other articles, some obtained from the huts, others thrown away by the Malays in their
flight. There were, too, some articles of European manufacture, which had been carried off
from the palace before the flames had obtained entire possession. These were in themselves
strong proofs that the rajah's prahus had been engaged in piratical attacks upon European craft,
for they consisted of bales of silk, chronometers, watches, double barreled guns, mirrors,
and other articles which had evidently formed a portion of a ship's fittings.

"Any casualties, Mr. Ferguson?" the captain asked, as the lieutenant stepped on board.

"Half a dozen spear wounds, sir, but only one of a serious nature; our fire was too hot for
them to face."

"What do you suppose their loss has been?"

"As far as I can judge, sir, some eighty or ninety were killed by our fire, and at least as
many must have fallen in the battery; the place was choked up with dead. I have brought the
eight guns off; they are only four pounders."

"They may be useful for the boats. I see the men have brought off a good deal of rubbish. You
had better give orders that whatever there is is to be fairly divided among all hands. Any
articles more valuable than the rest had better be put up to auction, and whatever they fetch
also divided among the men. Were the Malays in force?"

"The place swarmed with them, sir, but they were evidently demoralized by the fire of the guns,
and their attacks were really feeble. The only trouble we had was that some would shut themselves
up in houses. It looked at first as if they really meant to fight, but directly the shells
began to fall behind them, and fire broke out, they lost heart altogether, and made a bolt
for the forest."

"Well, the work has been thoroughly done, Mr. Ferguson, and Sehi has had a lesson that he won't
forget. Now we have to tackle his fleet."

"Everything is ready, sir. We have got the sledges made for the two guns, and a store of long
bamboos for the carriages and anything else we may want to take with us."

"This will be a more serious business by a long way," the captain said. "The men had better
take a hundred rounds of ammunition with them, and it would be as well to take a few boxes
of spare cartridges; and the men not occupied in dragging the cannon and carrying the carriages,
must take up as many rounds of shell as possible, and eight or ten rounds of grape for each
gun. You have got the sacks ready for forming the battery; that will be absolutely necessary
for the protection of the men firing. Each of the prahus has probably got at least half a dozen
small guns, and it would be hardly possible to work our pieces unless the men were protected
from their concentrated fire. Tell the chief engineer that steam must be got up by six o'clock.
In the meantime, let a slow fire be kept up towards the edge of the forest, just a shot every
five minutes, which will be enough to show them we are still here, and have not done with them
yet. When the place cools down a bit, we will send a party on shore to keep up a dropping fire
against the forest, and so induce them to believe that we mean to attack them there."

CHAPTER VIII.

During the rest of the day preparations were actively carried on for the night's work. The
fifty marines and a hundred bluejackets were to take part in the landing expedition; the ammunition
to be carried was ranged along the deck, and the men told off for the various work there was
to be done, some being allotted to carry stretchers and surgical requirements for the wounded.
The first lieutenant was to command the party, having with him the third lieutenant, the master's
mate, and the two senior midshipmen; besides, of course, the marine officers. Dr. Horsley was
also to accompany them. Some cartridges were made up with powder and musket bullets for two
of the brass guns captured, in order that, if the Malays succeeded in landing, they might meet
with a hot reception. It was decided that no carriages should be taken for them, but that they
should be simply laid on the sandbags.

The party on shore had kept up a fire all day at the forest. The yells of defiance which at
times rose showed that the Malays were in great force all round its edge. Towards evening all
on shore returned to the ship. As soon as it became absolutely dark, the anchor chain was unshackled,
and a buoy being attached to the end, it was noiselessly lowered into the water. Then the screw
began to revolve, and the vessel gradually backed down the river. All lights had been extinguished,
and no sound from the forest showed that the movement had been observed. A mile lower down
the ship was turned, the screw began to revolve more rapidly, and at half speed she ran down
to the junction of the two branches of the river, and steamed up the other arm until within
half a mile or so of the village at the mouth of the creek. Then a light anchor was let go,
the boats were lowered, and the landing party took their places in them; the oars were all
muffled, and keeping close to the right bank of the river, they rowed up until past the village,
and then crossing, entered the mouth of the creek, and rowed up it until they reached the spot
where the landing had been effected on the previous night.

Half a dozen men provided with well greased saws first landed under Dick Balderson's command,
and cleared a passage six feet wide to the path; then the landing began in earnest. The guns
were first put on shore, and carried bodily to the path; the rest of the marines and the bluejackets
then landed, each carrying, in addition to his arms and ammunition, a gun cartridge, or a box
of rifle ammunition, and a couple of empty sacks. As fast as they landed they proceeded up
the path. Dick Balderson led the way, and the men were directed to step as closely as they
could to each other. As they arrived near the pool, each deposited his burden, and then went
back to assist to drag up the guns and carriages.

Scarcely a sound was heard during the operation. Their feet fell noiselessly on the soft earth
of the track, and no one a few yards away would have guessed that a hundred and fifty men were
engaged in laborious toil. There was far more noise than there had been the night before on
board the prahus, an incessant jabber being maintained, and voices rang high in excitement
as the men discussed the destruction of the town and the orders that had been received for
a portion of them to land on the following morning and take part in the annihilation of the
whites if they entered into the forest. As soon as the two heavy guns were placed upon their
carriages, just behind the screen of bushes, the greater portion of the men were sent back
as far as the point where they had landed, there to fill the sacks with earth from the bank
of the river, a number of shovels having been brought for the purpose.

Several large bundles of bamboos, cut into lengths six feet long, and sharpened at both ends,
had been among the articles taken up to the battery, and while most of the men were engaged
filling and carrying the sacks of earth, some were employed in constructing chevaux de frise,
ten paces on each side of the spot where the battery was being constructed. The bamboos were
set diagonally a foot and a half into the soft earth, and bound together by being lashed to
strong poles running along them. These fences extended from the edge of the bushes by the water
to the trees. The forest behind was so thick and entangled with creepers that there was little
fear of an attack being made from that quarter.

Accustomed to work in the darkness, the sailors had no difficulty in carrying out the operation,
and before morning broke the battery was complete. It was six feet high on the side facing
the water, with two embrasures for the guns, four feet high on the sides covered by the chevaux
de frise. The front face was twenty-five feet in length, the sides forty. Morning was breaking
as the work was finished, and bread and cold meat were served out, with a full ration of grog.
By the time these were consumed it was broad daylight; for there is little twilight so near
the equator.

"Now for it, Dick," Harry Parkhurst said, as the lieutenant gave the signal for all to rise
and take their places. Filing out of the battery, the marines lined the bank on one side, and
the sailors, other than those who were to work the guns, on the other. Some of the sailors
climbed over the front wall and with their jackknives cut away the boughs in front of the guns.
There was silence on board the prahus, where the Malays had dropped off to sleep a couple of
hours before daylight. Mr. Ferguson himself superintended the laying of the guns, seeing that
each was most carefully trained upon the waterline of a prahu. As the distance was some seventy
or eighty yards, he had little doubt that the two vessels aimed at would be sunk at once. When
he was thoroughly satisfied, he drew back and gave the order to fire.

The two reports sounded as if one, and were mingled with the explosion of shells as they struck
the prahus exactly on the waterline. There was a momentary silence, and then a wild hubbub
of yells of surprise and fury, while a loud cheer broke from the British, as they saw the success
of the shots. Almost instantly the two craft struck began to settle down, and in a minute disappeared,
the water being covered with the heads of the crew, who were swimming to the other prahus.
The guns of these had evidently been kept loaded, for before the two eighteen pounders were
again ready, a fire was opened by the four craft, one or two balls striking the sandbags, while
the rest went crashing into the forest behind. Every shot from the British guns struck the
prahus, but none effected such damage as the first two fired.

"They are taking to their boats, Ferguson," the doctor, who was standing beside him, said.

"Yes, but I fancy they have no thought of giving it up at present; they are going to make a
dash at us. They can still work their guns and spare any amount of men to attack us."

The next minute, indeed, a dozen boats, crammed with men, shot round from behind the prahus.

"Grape now," the lieutenant ordered, while, at the same moment, the marines and seamen, who
had hitherto been silent, opened fire from under the bushes, beneath which they were enabled
to obtain a view of what was going on.

Two of the boats were sunk by the discharge of the grape; but the others, without checking
their course, pushed on.

"Quick, lads, give them another round before it is too late."

The guns were loaded with incredible quickness, and two more of the boats were shattered, their
swarthy occupants striking out for the shore, making for the most part towards the battery,
as did the boats. Twenty of the sailors and as many marines were at once called in from the
bank to aid in the defense of the battery, and a desperate conflict was presently raging here
and along the bank, the Malays, swarming up, striving to force their way up through the embrasures,
or to climb the sandbags; but as fast as they did so, they were cut down or bayoneted by its
defenders. Those trying to land at other points were impeded by the bushes, and numbers were
killed; but they pressed on so furiously that at last Mr. Ferguson, who had been moving backwards
and forwards along the line, thought it best to call the men in, and in a minute or two the
whole party were collected in the little fort, and ranged along the sides.

With furious yells the Malays came on, and although swept by volleys of musketry reached the
bamboos, which they strove in vain to pluck up or climb. In the meantime the eighteen pounders
had never ceased their fire, the sailors working them steadily, regardless of the fight that
was going on on either flank. Here the little brass guns did good service; each time they were
fired the recoil sent them tumbling from the top of the sandbags, only, however, to be seized,
sponged, and loaded, by the four sailors in charge of each, and then lifted to their place
again, crammed with bullets to the muzzle, in readiness to check the next charge of the Malays.
Suddenly their yells redoubled, and were answered by similar shouts from the forest.

"The rajah's troops have come up," the first lieutenant said to the marine officer; "our position
is getting serious. Do you think that we could make our way back to the boats without great
loss? We have sunk two of their craft, have badly damaged the others, and inflicted very heavy
loss on them."

"It would be a very risky operation; but it might be done, Ferguson. Listen!"

There was a fresh outburst of shouts, this time on the path by which they had come. Evidently
a number of the newly arrived Malays had struck into it by some other track from the town.

"That settles it," the lieutenant said shortly; "we must fight it out here. It is lucky we
have a fair stock of ammunition, and can keep it up for some hours yet. You see, the sailors
have not had to use their pistols yet, and they will astonish those fellows if they do manage
to scale the sandbags."

For another half hour the fighting continued. Again and again the Malays fell back, but only
to return to the attack with fresh fury, and the defenders had been obliged to betake themselves
more than once to their pistols. The two heavy guns were now removed from their position to
the sides, for the attack by boats had ceased entirely, and the destruction of the prahus was
of less importance than the defense of the little fort from the attacks on its flanks. We went,
in this suspense of emotion, to the famous Convent of Las Huelgas, which invites noble ladies
to its cloistered repose a little beyond the town. We entered to the convent church through a
sort of slovenly court where a little girl begged severely, almost censoriously, of us, and presently
a cold-faced young priest came and opened the church door. Then we found the interior of that rank
Spanish baroque which escapes somehow the effeminate effusiveness
of the Italian; it does not affect you as decadent, but as something
vigorously perfect in its sort, somberly authentic, and ripe from
a root and not a graft.

In its sort, the high altar, a gigantic triune, with massive twisted
columns and swagger statues of saints and heroes in painted wood,
is a prodigy of inventive piety, and compositely has a noble exaltation
in its powerful lift to the roof.

The nuns came beautifully dressed to hear mass at the grilles giving
into the chapel adjoining the church; the tourist may have his glimpse
of them there on Sundays, and on week-days he may have his guess of
their cloistered life and his wonder how much it continues the tradition
of repose which the name of the old garden grounds implies.

These lady nuns must be of patrician lineage and of fortune enough to defray their expense
in the convent, which is of the courtliest origin, for it was founded eight hundred years ago
by Alfonso VIII. "to expiate his sins and to gratify his queen," who probably knew of them. I wish
now I had known, while I was there, that the abbess of Las Huelgas
had once had the power of life and death in the neighborhood, and
could hang people if she liked; I cannot think just what good it would
have done me, but one likes to realize such things on the spot.

She is still one of the greatest ladies of Spain, though perhaps not still "lady of ax and gibbet,"
and her nuns are of like dignity. In their chapel are the tombs of Alfonso and his queen, whose
figures are among those on the high altar of the church.

She was Eleanor Plantagenet, the daughter of our Henry II., and was very fond of Las Huelgas,
as if it were truly a rest for her in the far-off land of Spain;
I say our Henry II., for in the eleventh century we Americans were
still English, under the heel of the Normans, as not the fiercest
republican of us now need shame to own.

In a sense of this historical unity, at Las Huelgas we felt as much at home as if we had been
English tourists, and we had our feudal pride in the palaces where the Gastilian nobles used
to live in Burgos as we returned to the town. Their deserted seats are mostly to be seen after
you pass through the Moorish gate overarching the stony, dusty, weedy road hard by the place
where the house of the Cid is said to have stood.

The arch, so gracefully Saracenic, was the first monument of the Moslem obsession of the country
which has left its signs so abundantly in the south; here in the far north the thing seemed
almost prehistoric, almost preglacially old, the witness of a world utterly outdated. But perhaps
it was not more utterly outdated than the residences of the nobles who had once made the ancient
Castilian capital splendid, but were now as irrevocably merged in Madrid as the Arabs in Africa.

VI

Some
of the palaces looked down from the narrow street along the hillside
above the cathedral, but only one of them was kept up in the state
of other days; and I could not be sure at what point this street had
ceased to be the street where our guide said every one kept cows,
and the ladies took big pitchers of milk away to sell every morning.

 It is lucky he did so, for, though we might have beaten them off, they
were in such tremendous force that I fancy it would have gone hard with us in the long run.
I was beginning to think so myself, Harry."

Dr. Horsley had been busy enough from the time that the fighting began in earnest. Ten men
had been killed by balls that had passed through the embrasures, or by kris or lance wounds,
and twenty-eight others had been more or less severely wounded. A quarter of an hour after
the firing ceased, Captain Forrest himself, with the mate, rowed into the pool in one of the
cutters, and landed at the end of the path close to the battery.

"I congratulate you on your success, Mr. Ferguson," he said, shaking hands with the first lieutenant;
"it has been a very hot affair, and by Mr. Morrison's report it was just as well that I decided
to change my plan and come up to your aid, though it has resulted in two of the prahus getting
away."

"Then you sank two of them, sir?"

"No, indeed, we only sank one; the third went down just after we saw her come out from the
pool. Certainly we had not hit her, so that the honor of accounting for three out of six of
the craft falls to you and your party. Well, Doctor, what is your report? I am afraid it is
a bad one."

"Serious, indeed," he went on, after he had received the figures. "Still it is much less than
might have been expected from attacking such a host of pirates. I am glad to hear that none
of the officers are dangerously wounded."

"Parkhurst had his forearm laid open with a cut from a kris, and Balderson had one of their
spears through his ear. Dr. Horsley said if it had been half an inch more to the left, it would
probably have killed him. Lieutenant Somers of the marines is more badly hurt, a spear having
gone through the thigh. It cut an artery. Luckily the doctor was close to him at the moment,
and clapped on a tourniquet, and then cut down to the artery and tied it. As he says, 'A delay
of two minutes, and it would have been all up with the young fellow.' Are the boats safe, sir?"

"Yes, the boat keepers pushed off a little way when the firing began in the forest, and when
they heard the shouts of a large party of the enemy coming along the path, they went out almost
into the middle of the creek; and it was well they did, for many of the Malays came down through
the path you cut, and would have riddled them with their spears had they been within reach.
The boat keepers acted very wisely; all of them got into the gig and towed the other boats
astern, so that if the Malays came along, either in their prahus or in their boats, they could
have cut them adrift and made a race of it down to the ship.

"Well, I think that there is nothing more to be done here. The men may as well have a tot of
grog served out, and then the sailors can march down to the landing place and bring up the
boats and take the guns and what ammunition you have left, on board. Mr. Morrison will go back
with me to the ship; he has one of his arms broken by a ball from the prahus."

"I did not know that he was wounded, sir; he did not report it. I should not have sent him
if I had known it."

"It is just as well as it is, Ferguson; it will give me an opportunity of specially recommending
him for promotion in my report. The assistant surgeon temporarily bandaged his arm when he
reached the ship."

"Is she afloat, sir?"

"No; I want you back as soon as possible. We shall have to get out the anchors and heave on
them. We put on a full head of steam and drove her two or three hundred yards through the mud
before she finally brought up. I wanted to get as near to you as possible, in order to clear
the woods round you."

By two o'clock the whole ship's company were on board again, and set to work to get her off;
but it was not until after some hours' exertion that the Serpent was again afloat. She was
at once turned round, steamed down to the mouth of the creek, and cast anchor opposite the village.

CHAPTER IX.

The party landed at the village the next morning, but found it entirely deserted.

"It is most important that we should take a prisoner, Ferguson," the captain said, as he and
the first lieutenant paced up and down the quarterdeck; "we must catch the two prahus if we
can. At present we don't know whether they have gone up or down the river, and it would be
absolutely useless for us to wait until we get some clew to their whereabouts. After we have
finished with them, we will go up the other branch, and try to find the two we know to be up
there. I should not like to leave our work unfinished."

"Certainly not, sir. I am afraid, though, it is of no use landing to try to get hold of a prisoner.
No doubt the woods are full of them. There are the townspeople and those who came to help them;
and though many of those who tried to swim ashore from the sunken boats may have been taken
by the alligators, still the greater portion must have landed all right."

"I should think, Mr. Ferguson, that it would be a good plan to send a party of twenty men on
shore after nightfall and to distribute them, two Men to a hut. Possibly two or three of the
Malays may come down to the village before morning, either to fetch valuables they may have
left behind, or to see whether we are still here. They may come tonight, or they may come some
time tomorrow, crawling through the plantations behind the houses. At any rate, I will wait
here a day or two on the chance."

"Whom shall I send with the men, sir?"

"You had better send Parkhurst and Balderson; they will have more authority among the men than
the younger midshipmen. The men better take three days' cooked provisions on shore and ten
small kegs of water, one for each hut. I will give Parkhurst his instructions before he lands."

"Now, Mr. Parkhurst," he said, when the boat was lowered soon after dark, "you must bear in
mind that the greatest vigilance will be necessary. Choose ten huts close together. One man
in each hut must be always awake; there must be no talking above a whisper; and during the
daytime no one must leave his hut on any account whatever. After nightfall you and Mr. Balderson
will move from hut to hut, to see that a vigilant watch is kept. You must, of course, take
watch and watch, night and day. You must remember that not only is it most important that a
native should be captured, but you must be on your guard against an attack on yourselves. It
is quite conceivable that a party may come down to see if there are any of us in the village.

"In case of attack, you must gather in one hut, and fire three shots as a signal to us; a musket
shot will be fired in return. When you hear it, every man must throw himself down, for the
guns will be already loaded with grape, and I shall fire a broadside towards the spot where
I have heard your signal.

"As soon as the broadside is fired, make down to the shore, occupy a house close to the water,
and keep the Malays off till the boats come ashore to fetch you off. Your crew has been very
carefully picked. I have consulted the warrant officers, and they have selected the most taciturn
men in the ship. There is to be no smoking; of course the men can chew as much as they like;
but the smell of tobacco smoke would at once deter any native from entering a hut. If a Malay
should come in and try to escape, he must be fired on as he runs away; but the men are to aim
at his legs."

The instructions were carried out. A small hole was bored in the back of each of the huts,
so that a constant watch could be kept up unseen by the closest observer in the forest, a hundred
yards behind. The night passed off quietly, as did the next day. The men slept and watched
by turns. On the afternoon of the second day, a native was seen moving cautiously from tree
to tree along the edge of the forest. As soon as it was dark, Dick, whose watch it was, crawled
cautiously from hut to hut.

"That fellow we saw today may come at any moment," he said. "If one of you see him coming,
the other must place himself close to the door, and if he enters, throw himself upon him and
hold his arms tightly till the others come up to help. Keep your rope handy to twist round
him, and remember these fellows are as slippery as eels."

Having made the round, he returned to the hut in the center of the others that he and Harry
occupied. Half an hour later, they heard a sudden outcry from the hut next to them, and rushing
in, found the two men there struggling with a Malay. With their aid he was speedily bound;
then the men were called from the other huts, and the whole party ran down to the water's edge,
where Harry hailed the ship. A boat put off at once, and they were taken on board. The prisoner
was led to the captain's cabin, and there examined through the medium of the interpreter. He
refused to answer any questions until, by the captain's orders, he was taken on deck again
and a noose placed round his neck, and the interpreter told him that, unless he spoke, he was
to be hauled up to the yard's arm. The man was still silent.

"Tighten the strain very gradually," the captain said to the sailors holding the other end
of the rope. "Raise him two or three feet above the deck, and then, when the doctor holds up
his hand, lower him at once again."

This was done. The man, though half strangled, was still conscious, and on the noose being
loosened, and Soh Hay saying that, unless he spoke, he would be again run up, he said, as soon
as he got his breath, that he would answer any question. On being taken to the cabin, he said
that the prahus had gone down the river, and had ascended the other arm. They had only gone
a few miles above the town, for one had been so injured that there had been difficulty in keeping
her afloat, and it was necessary to run her into a creek in order to repair her before going
up farther.

Half an hour later steam was up, and before morning the Serpent lay off the mouth of the creek
which the Malay pointed out as the one that the prahu had entered. The second officer was this
time placed in command of the boats, he himself going in the launch, the third officer took
the first cutter, the two midshipmen the second. No time was lost in making preparations, for
it was desirable to capture the prahu before she was aware that the Serpent had left her position
in the other river. For a mile the boats rowed up the creek, which narrowed until they were
obliged to go in single file. It widened suddenly, and as the launch dashed through, a shower
of balls tore up the water round her; while at the same moment a great tree fell across the
creek, completely barring their retreat, and narrowly shaving the stern of the midshipmen's
boat, which was the last in the line. Fortunately the launch had escaped serious injury, and
with a shout of "Treachery," Lieutenant Hopkins drew his pistol to put a ball through the head
of their guide, but as he did so, the man sprang overboard and dived towards the shore.

"Row, men; we have all our work cut out for us. There are three prahus ahead; steer for the
center one, coxswain."

With a cheer the men bent to their oars, and dashed at the prahu which, as was evident by patches
of plank freshly fastened to her side, was one of those that had before escaped them.

"Follow me," the lieutenant shouted to the boat behind; "we must take them one by one." The
three boats dashed at the pirate craft, which was crowded with men, regardless of the fire
from the other two vessels. The launch steered for her stem, the first cutter for her bow,
while the midshipmen swept round her, and boarded her on the opposite side. A furious contest
took place on her deck, the Malays being so confused by being assailed at three points simultaneously
that the midshipmen's party were enabled to gain a footing with but very slight resistance.
The shouts of the Malays near them brought many running from the other points, and the parties
there gained a footing with comparatively little loss. Then a desperate struggle began; but
the Malays were unable to withstand the furious attack of the British, and ere long began to
leap overboard and swim to the other craft, which were both coming to their aid.

The launch's gun had not been fired, and, calling to Dick, Harry leaped down into the boat.
The two midshipmen trained the gun upon the nearest prahu, and aiming at the waterline, fired
it when the craft was within twenty feet of them. A moment later its impetus brought it against
the side of the launch, which was crushed like an eggshell between it and the captured prahu,
the two midshipmen springing on board just in time. It was the Malays' turn to board now, that
of the British to prevent them; the musketry of the sailors and marines for a time kept the
enemy off, but they strove desperately to gain a footing on board, until a loud cry was heard,
and the craft into which the midshipmen had fired sank suddenly, and a loud cheer broke from
the British.

The two midshipmen were engaged with the other pirate, from whom a cry of dismay arose at seeing
the disappearance of their friends.

"Now, lads, follow me," Harry shouted as the Malays strove to push their craft away. Followed
by a dozen sailors, they leaped on to her deck; but the efforts of the Malays succeeded in
thrusting the vessels apart. In vain the midshipmen and their followers fought desperately.
Harry was felled by a blow with a war club, Dick cut down with a kris; half the seamen were
killed, the others jumped overboard and swam back to their vessel. Lieutenant Hopkins shouted
to the men to take to the boats, and the two cutters were speedily manned. One, however, was
in a sinking condition; but Lieutenant Hopkins with the other started in pursuit of the prahu,
whose crew had already got their oars out, and in spite of the efforts of the sailors, soon
left them behind. Pursuit was evidently hopeless, and reluctantly the lieutenant ordered the
men to row back. On returning to the scene of combat, they saw sunk near the bank the fourth
of the prahus. "The spy was so far right," the second lieutenant muttered--"this fellow did
sink; now we must see that she does no more mischief." He brought the captured prahu alongside
the others, whose decks were but a foot or two below the water, and fired several shots through
their bottoms. Then he set the captured craft on fire and took to the boats, which with great
difficulty forced their way under the fallen tree and rowed back to the ship.

The third lieutenant had been shot dead, twelve men had been killed, ten of the midshipmen's
party were missing, and of the rest but few had escaped without wounds more or less serious.

Harry was the first to recover his senses, being roughly brought to by a bucket of water being
dashed over him. He looked round the deck. Of those who had sprung on board with him, none
were visible save Dick Balderson, who was lying near him, with a cloth tightly bound round
his shoulder.

As he rose into a sitting position a murmur of satisfaction broke from some Malays standing
near. It was some time before he could rally his senses.

"I suppose," he thought at last, "they are either keeping us for torture or as hostages. The
rajah may have given orders that any officers captured were to be spared and brought to him.
I don't know what his expectations are," he muttered to himself; "but if he expects to be reinstated
as rajah, and perhaps compensated for the loss of his palace, he is likely to be mistaken;
and in that case it will go mighty hard with us, for there is no shadow of doubt that he is
a savage and cruel brute."

He had now shaken off the numbness caused by the blow that he had received, and he managed
to stagger to where Dick was lying, and knelt beside him and begged the Malays to bring water.
They had evidently received orders to do all they could to revive the two young officers, and
one at once brought half a gourd full. Harry had already assured himself that his friend's
heart still beat. He began by pouring some water between his lips. It was not necessary to
pour any over his head, for he had already received the same treatment as himself.

"Dick, old chap," he said sharply and earnestly.

The sound was evidently heard and understood, for Dick started slightly, opened his eyes and
murmured, "It's not time to turn out yet?"

"You are not in your hammock, Dick; you have been wounded, and we are both prisoners in the
hands of these Malays. Try and pull yourself together, but don't move; they have put a sort
of bandage round your shoulder, and I am going to try and improve it."

"What is the matter with my shoulder?" Dick murmured.

"Chopped with a kris, old man. Now I am going to turn you on your side, and then cut the sleeve
off the jacket. Take another drink of water; then we will set about it."

Dick did as he was ordered, and was evidently coming back to consciousness, for he looked round,
and then said, "Where are the other fellows?"

"I don't know what has become of them. I think I went down before you did. However, here we
are alone. Now I am going to begin."

He cut off the sleeve of the jacket and shirt at the shoulder, ripped open the seam to the
neck, first taking off the rough bandage.

"It's a nasty cut, old man," he said, "but nothing dangerous, I should say. I fancy it has
gone clean through the shoulder bone, and there is no doubt that it will knit again, as Hassan's
did, if they do but give you time."

He rolled the shirt sleeve into a pad, saturated it with water, and laid it on the wound.

"You see I know all about it, Dick," he said cheerily, "from having watched the doctor at work
on Hassan. Now I will tear this cloth into strips."

He first placed a strip of the cloth over the shoulder, crossed it under the arm, and then
took the ends of the bandage across the chest and back, and tied them under his other arm.
He repeated this process with half a dozen other strips; then he placed Dick's hand upon his
chest, tied some of the other strips together, and bound them tightly round the arm and body,
so that no movement of the limb was possible. One of the Malay's knelt down and gave him his
assistance, and nodded approvingly when he had finished; then he helped Harry raise him into
a sitting position against the bulwark.

"That is better," Dick said, "as far as it goes. How was it these fellows did not kill us at once?"

"I expect the rajah has ordered that all officers who may fall into their hands are to be kept
as hostages, so that he can open negotiations with the skipper. If he gets what he wants, he
hands us back; if not, there is no manner of doubt that he will put us out of the way without
compunction."

The men were still working at the oars, and for four hours rowed without intermission through
a labyrinth of creeks. At last they stopped before a small village, tied the prahu up to a
tree, and then the man who seemed to be the captain went ashore with two or three others. The
lads heard a loud outburst of anger, and a voice which they recognized as that of the rajah
storming and raging for some time; then the hubbub ceased. An hour later the rajah himself
came on board with two or three attendants, and a man whom they recognized as speaking a certain
amount of English. The rajah scowled at them, and from the manner in which he kept fingering
his kris they saw that it needed a great effort on his part to abstain from killing them at
once. He spoke for some time in his own language, and the interpreter translated it.

"You are dogs--you and all your countrymen. The rajah is sending a message to your captain
to tell him that he must build up his palace again, pay him for the warships that he has destroyed,
and provide him with a guard against his enemies until a fresh fleet has been built. I did not
visit the palace, but the Royal Armory I had seen two days before
on a gay morning that had not yet sorrowed to the afternoon's rain.

At the gate of the palace I fell into the keeping of one of the authorized guides whom I wish
I could identify so that I could send the reader to pay him the tip I came short in. It is
a pang to think of the repressed disappointment in his face when in a moment of insensate sparing
I gave him the bare peseta to which he was officially entitled, instead
of the two or three due his zeal and intelligence; and I strongly
urge my readers to be on their guard against a mistaken meanness like
mine.

I can never repair that, for if I went back to the Royal Armory I should not know him by sight,
and if I sought among the guides saying I was the stranger who had behaved in that shabby sort,
how would that identify me among so many other shabby strangers? He had the intelligence to
leave me and the constant companion of these travels to ourselves as we went about that treasury
of wonders, but before we got to the armory he stayed us with a delicate gesture outside the
court of the palace till a troop for the guard-mounting had gone in.

Then he led us across the fine, beautiful quadrangle to the door of the museum, and waited
for us there till we came out. By this time the space was brilliant with the confronted bodies
of troops, those about to be relieved of guard duty, and those come
to relieve them, and our guide got us excellent places where we could
see everything and yet be out of the wind which was beginning to blow
cuttingly through the gates and colonnades.

There were all arms of the service--horse, foot, and artillery; and the ceremony, with its
pantomime and parley, was much more impressive than the changing of the colors which I had
once seen at Buckingham Palace. The Spanish privates took the business not less seriously than
the British, and however they felt the Spanish officers did not allow themselves to look bored.
The marching and countermarching was of a refined stateliness, as if the pace were not a goose
step but a peacock step; and the music was of an exquisitely plaintive
and tender note, which seemed to grieve rather than exult; I believe
it was the royal march which they were playing, but I am not versed
in such matters.

Nothing could have been fitter than the quiet beauty of the spectacle,
opening through the westward colonnade to the hills and woods of the
royal demesne, with yellowing and embrowning trees that billowed from
distance to distance.

Some day these groves and forests must be for the people's pleasure, as all royal belongings
seem finally to be; and in the mean time I did not grudge the landscape to the young king and
queen who probably would not have grudged it to me. Our guide valued himself upon our admiration
of it; without our special admiration he valued himself upon the impressive buildings of the
railway station in the middle distance. I forget whether he followed us out of the quadrangle
into the roadway where we had the advantage of some picturesque army wagons, and some wagoners
in red-faced jackets and red trousers, and top-boots with heavy fringes of leathern strings.
Yet it must have been he who made us aware of a high-walled inclosure
where soldiers found worthy of death by court martial could be conveniently
shot; though I think we discovered for ourselves the old woman curled
up out of the wind in a sentry-box, and sweetly asleep there while
the boys were playing marbles on the smooth ground before it.

I must not omit the peanut-boaster in front of the palace; it was
in the figure of an ocean steamer, nearly as large as the Lusitania,
and had smoke coming out of the funnel, with rudder and screw complete
and doll sailors climbing over the rigging.



"The worst of it is the alligators, Harry."

"Yes, but we must risk that. We shall have the krises, and if they seize either of us, the
other must go down and try and jab his kris into the beast's eyes. I know it is a frightfully
dangerous business, and the chances are one hundred to one against our succeeding; but there
is just a chance, and there is no chance at all if we leave it until tomorrow. Of course, if
we succeed in getting over to the other side, we must wait close to the water until daylight.
We should tear ourselves to pieces if we tried to make through the jungle in the dark."

"I tell you what would give us a better chance--we might take off two or three yards of that
bandage of yours, cut the strip in half, and twist it into a rope; then when those fellows
doze off a little, we might throw the things round their necks, and it would be all up with them."

"But you see I have only one arm, Harry."

"Bother it! I never thought of that. Well, I might do the securing, one fellow first, and then
the other. You could get close to him, and if he moves, catch up his kris and cut him down."

"Yes, I could do that. Well, anyhow, Harry, we can but try; anything is better than waiting
here hour after hour for the messenger to come back with what will be our death warrant."

They agreed to keep awake by turns, and accordingly lay down as soon as it became dark, the
Malays, as usual, squatting at a distance of a couple of paces each side of them. It was about
two o'clock in the morning when Dick, who was awake, saw, as he supposed, one of the crew standing
up a few yards away; he was not sure, for just at that moment the figure disappeared.

"What on earth could that fellow want to stand up for and lie down again? for I can swear he
was not there half a minute ago. There is another farther on." He pinched himself to make sure
that he was awake. Figure after figure seemed to flit along the deck and disappear. One of
the guard rose and stretched his arms; put a fresh bit of some herb that he was chewing into
his mouth; moved close to the prisoners to see if they were asleep; and then resumed his former
position. During the time that he was on his feet, Dick noticed that the phenomenon which had
so puzzled him ceased. A quarter of an hour later it began again. He touched Harry, keeping
his hand on his lips as a warning to be silent. Suddenly a wild yell broke on the still air,
and in an instant the deck was alive with men; and as the two Malay watchers rose to their
feet, both were cut down.

There were sounds of heavy blows, screams and yells, a short and confused struggle, and the
fall of heavy bodies, while from the little village there were also sounds of conflict. The
midshipmen had started to their feet, half bewildered at the sudden and desperate struggle,
when a hand was laid on each of their shoulders, and a voice said, "English friends, Hassan
has come."

The revulsion of feeling was so great that, for a minute, neither could speak; then Dick said,
"Chief, we thank you with all our hearts. Tomorrow we should have been killed."

The chief shook hands with them both warmly, having seen that mode of salutation on board ship.

"Hassan glad," he said. "Hassan watch all time; no let Sehi kill friends. Friends save Hassan's
child; he save them."

Torches were now lighted. The deck was thickly encumbered with dead; for every one of the crew
of the prahu had been killed.

"Sehi killed too," the chief said, "come and see." He swung himself on shore; the boys followed
his example, two of the Malays helping Dick down. They went to the village, where a number
of Malays were moving about; torches had been brought from the ship, and a score of these soon
lit up the scene. Two of the rajah's men had been killed outside their huts, but the majority
had fallen inside. The chief asked a question of one of his followers, who pointed to a hut.

This they entered, and by the light of the torches saw the rajah lying dead upon the ground.
Hassan said something to one of his men, who, with a single blow, chopped off the rajah's head. 

They were apparently nearly all working-men who had left nearly all their wives to keep on working
at home, though a few of these also had come.

On a small stage four gipsy girls, in unfashionably and untheatrically decent gowns of white, blue,
or red, with flowers in their hair, sat in a semicircle with one subtle, silent, darkling man
among them. One after another they got up and did the same twisting and posturing, without dancing,
and while one posed and contorted the rest unenviously joined the spectators in their clapping
and their hoarse cries of "Ole!" It was all perfectly proper except for one high moment of indecency
thrown in at the end of each turn, as if to give the house its money's worth. But the real, overflowing
compensation came when that little, lithe, hipless man in black jumped to his feet and stormed
the audience with a dance of hands and arms, feet and legs, head, neck, and the whole body, which
Mordkin in his finest frenzy could not have equaled or approached. Whatever was fiercest and wildest
in nature and boldest in art was there, and now the house went mad with its hand-clappings
and table-hammerings and deep-throated "Oles!"

Another night we went to the academy of the world-renowned Otero and saw the instruction of Sevillian
youth in native dances of the haute ecole. The academy used to be free to a select public,
but now the chosen, who are nearly always people from the hotels, must pay ten pesetas each
for their pleasure, and it is not too much for a pleasure so innocent
and charming.

The academy is on the ground floor of the maestro's unpretentious house, and in a waiting-room
beyond the shoemaker's shop which filled the vestibule sat, patient
in their black mantillas, the mothers and nurses of the pupils.

These were mostly quite small children in their every-day clothes, but there were two or three
older girls in the conventional dancing costume which a lady from one of the hotels had emulated.
Everything was very simple and friendly; Otero found good seats among the aficionados for the
guests presented to him, and then began calling his pupils to the floor of the long, narrow room
with quick commands of "Venga!" A piano was tucked away in a corner, but the dancers kept
time now with castanets and now by snapping their fingers. Two of the oldest girls, who were apparently
graduates, were "differently beautiful" in their darkness and fairness, but alike picturesquely
Spanish in their vivid dresses and the black veils fluttering from
their high combs.


Sehi killed, prahu taken. Must go home. Others angry because Hassan not join. May come and
fight Hassan. Ask captain bring ship up river; messenger show channel, tell how far can go,
then come in boats, hold great meeting, make peace."

The lads were well satisfied. They had a longing to see Hassan's home, and, perhaps, to do
some shooting; and they thought that a few days' holiday before rejoining would be by no means
unpleasant. They wished, however, that they had known that the sampan was leaving, so that
they could have written a line to the captain, saying what had taken place, and that they could
not rejoin. There was at first some splashing of the oars, for many of Hassan's men had had
no prior experience except with sampans and large canoes. However, it was not long before they
fell into the swing, and the boat proceeded at a rapid pace. Several times, as they went, natives
appeared on the bank in considerable numbers, and receiving no answer to their hails, sent
showers of lances. Harry, however, with the aid of two or three Malays, soon loaded the guns
of the prahu.

"No kill," Hassan said. "We want make friends. No good kill."

Accordingly the guns were fired far over the heads of the assailants, who at once took to the
bushes. After three hours' rowing they entered the river, and continued their course up it
until long into the night, for the rowers were as anxious as was Hassan himself to reach their
village. They were numerous enough to furnish relays at the oars, and the stroke never flagged
until, an hour before midnight, fires were seen burning ahead, as they turned a bend of the
river. The Malays raised a yell of triumph, which was answered from the village, and in a few
minutes the prahu was brought up to the bank. A crowd, composed mostly of women and children,
received them with shouts of welcome and gladness. Hassan at once led the midshipmen to a large
hut that had evidently been prepared in readiness for them. Piles of skins lay in two of the
corners, and the lads, who were utterly worn out, threw themselves down, and were almost instantly
asleep.

The sun was high when the mat at the entrance was drawn aside, and Hassan entered, followed
by four of his followers. One carried a great water jar and two calabashes, with some cotton
cloths and towels; the other brought fruit of several varieties, eggs, and sweetmeats, together
with a large gourd full of steaming coffee.

"Hassan come again," the chief said, and left the hut with his followers. The lads poured calabashes
of water over each other, and felt wonderfully refreshed by their wash, which was accomplished
without damage to the floor, which was of bamboos raised two feet above the ground. When they
were dressed they fell to at their breakfast, and then went out of doors. Hassan had evidently
been watching for them, for he came out of his house, which was next to that which they occupied,
holding his little girl's hand. She at once ran up to them, saluting them by their names.

"Bahi very glad to see you," she said, "very glad to see good, kind officers." The child had
picked up, during her month on board the ship, a great deal of English, from her constant communication
with the officers and crew.

"Bad men wound Dick," she went on pitifully. "Wicked men to hurt him."

"Bahi, will you tell your father how much we are obliged to him for having come to our rescue.
We should have been killed if he had not come."

The child translated the sentence. The chief smiled.

"Tell them," he said, "that Hassan is glad to have been able to pay back a little of the obligation
he was under to them. Besides, Sehi Pandash was my enemy. Good thing to help friends and kill
enemy at the same time. Tell them that Hassan does not want thanks; they did not like him to
thank them for saving you."

The child translated this with some difficulty. Then he led the midshipmen round the village,
and showed them the strong palisade which had evidently just been erected, and explained, through
the child, that it had only been built before he left, as but fifteen men were available for
guarding the place in his absence.

The next four days were spent in shooting expeditions, and although they met with no wild beasts,
they secured a large number of bird skins for the doctor. On the fifth day a native ran in
and said that boats with white men were coming. The midshipmen ran down to the bank, and saw
the ship's two cutters and a gig approaching. The captain himself was in the stern of the latter,
and the doctor was sitting beside him. A minute or two later they were shaking hands with the
officers, and saying a few words to the men, who were evidently delighted to see them again.
Just as the greetings were over, Hassan, in a rich silk sarong and jacket, came down towards
them. He was leading his little daughter, and six Malays followed them.

"Welcome, Captain," he said gravely. "Hassan very glad to see you. All come right now."

"Thank you, chief. We have learned from your messenger how gallantly you have rescued my two
officers, and put an end to our troubles by killing the Rajah Sehi, and capturing the last
of the piratical craft."

This was too much for Hassan, and had to be translated by Soh Hay. Since the chief's return,
a number of his men had been occupied in constructing bamboo huts for the use of the captain,
officers, and men, also a large hall to be used for councils and meetings; and to this he now
led the captain and his officers. When they were seated, he made a speech of welcome, saying
what gladness it was to him to see there those who had been so kind to him. Had he known when
they would arrive, food would have been ready for them; and he assured them that, however long
they might stay, they would be most heartily welcome, and that there should be no lack of provisions.
They had done an immense service to him, and to all the other chiefs on the river, by breaking
up the power of one who preyed upon all his neighbors, and was a scourge to trade. As there
were still several bottles of the rajah's wine left, champagne was now handed round.

"It makes my heart glad to see you, Doctor," the chief said. "See, I am as strong and as well
as ever. Had it not been for you, my arm might now have been useless, and my ribs have grown
through the flesh."

"I don't think it would have been as bad as that," the doctor replied: "but there is no doubt
that it was fortunate that you were able to receive surgical treatment so soon after the accident.
And it has been fortunate for us, too, especially for our young friends here."

Conversation became general now, and the interpreter was kept hard at work, and Bahi divided
her attention between the officers and the men, flitting in and out of the hall, and chattering
away to the sailors and marines who were breakfasting outside on the stores they had brought
up, supplemented by a bountiful supply of fruit, which grew in abundance round the village.
It was not long before a meal was served to the officers, fowl having been hastily killed as
soon as the boats were seen approaching; several jungle fowl had been brought in that morning;
plaintains and rice were boiled, and cakes baked. Tea was forthcoming from the boats' stores,
and a hearty meal was eaten.

CHAPTER XI.

After the meal was concluded, the captain said to the chief:

"Now, Hassan, we want to know how it was that you arrived at the nick of time to save my officers'
lives."

"I had been watching for some days," the chief said quietly. "When I heard that many chiefs
had joined Sehi Pandash, I said 'I must go and help my white brothers,' but I dared not take
many men away from here, and as I had to hide, the fewer there were with me the better; so
I came down into the forest near Sehi's town, and found the wood full of men. We had come down
in sampans, so that I could send off messengers as might be required. One of these I sent down
to you, to warn you to be prepared for an attack. Other messengers I had sent before from here;
but they must have been caught and killed, for I had been watched closely when they found that
I would not join against you.

"When my last messenger returned, I was glad; I knew that you would be on your guard, and would
not be caught treacherously. Two of my men were in the town when they began to fire on the
ship, and I saw the town destroyed, and followed Sehi to the place where the six prahus were
lying, and crossed the creek, and lay down in the woods near the village on the other side;
for I thought that something might happen. One of my men went down in the night, and brought
me news that the ship was gone. As my messenger had told me that you had questioned him as
to the other entrance to the creek, I felt sure that you had gone there; so I was not surprised
when, just before daybreak, two guns were fired. We saw the fight, the sinking of two of their
vessels, and the attack by the water pirates, and by the men of the rajah and the chiefs with
him, and I feared greatly that my friends would be overpowered.

"I sent one of my men down to the mouth of the creek, to tell you how much aid was wanted;
but he saw the ship steaming up as he went, and so came back to me. Then we heard the ship's
great guns begin to fire, and soon all was quiet where the fight had been going on. Then I
saw the other four boats start. One of them sank before she was out of sight, and I soon heard
that your ship had sunk another, and that two had got away. It was not for another two days
that I learned where they were, and then I heard that they had gone into a creek twenty miles
away; there one had sunk, and the other had been joined by the two prahus that had been far
up the river; and I also learned that one of Sehi's men had gone into the village and let himself
be captured, so that he might guide the ship's boats to the place where, as they thought, they
would find but one prahu, while three would be waiting for them. I was not sure where the exact
place was, for there are many creeks, but, with one of my men, I rowed in a sampan all night,
in hopes to arrive in time to warn the boats; but it was not till I heard the firing that I
knew exactly where they were.

"When I got there the fighting was over, and but one prahu had escaped, and I learned from
the men who had swum ashore from those that had been sunk that one of the English boats had
been destroyed, and many men killed, but that two boats had gone down the creek again. It was
also said that the white officers and sailors had boarded the boat that had escaped, and had
been all killed. I thought it best to follow the prahu, so that I could send word to you where
she was to be found. As there were many passages, it was difficult to find her, and I should
have lost her altogether had I not heard where Sehi was hiding, and guessed that she would
go there. It was late when I arrived at the village. There one of my men learned that two young
officers, who had been wounded, had been brought there, and that Sehi was sending word to you
that, unless you gave him the conditions he asked, they would be put to death.

"I did not know whether to send down to you, or to send up the river for help; but I thought
the last was best, for if you came in boats, then Sehi's men would hear you, and the officers
would be killed; so I sent off my man with the sampan. I told him that he must not stop until
he got here. He must tell them that all my men, except fifty old ones who were to guard the
village, were to start in their canoes, and paddle their hardest till they came within half
a mile of the village, and he was to come back with them to guide them, and I was to meet them.
As the prahus that had been up there were destroyed, the river was safe for them to descend.
I said that they must be at the point I named last evening. They were two hours late, though
they had paddled their hardest. As soon as they disembarked I led them to the spot, and the
rest was easy. I knew that the prisoners who had been taken were my two friends, for I saw
them on the deck of the prahu; and glad indeed I was to be able to pay my debt to them."

"You have paid it indeed most nobly, Hassan," the captain said, holding out his hand, and grasping
that of the chief, when, sentence by sentence, the story was translated to him. "Little did
we think, when you were brought on board the Serpent, that your friendship would turn out of
such value to us."

There was now some discussion as to the proposed meeting of chiefs; and half an hour after,
a dozen small canoes started with invitations to the various chiefs to meet the captain at
Hassan's campong, with assurances that he was ready to overlook their share in the attack on
the ship, and be on friendly terms with them, and that the safety of each who attended was
guaranteed, whether he was willing to be on good terms with the English or not. Four days later,
the meeting took place in the newly erected hall. Ten or twelve of the chiefs attended; others,
who had taken a leading part as Sehi's allies, did not venture to come themselves, but sent
messages with assurances of their desire to be on friendly terms. A good deal of ceremonial
was observed. The marines and bluejackets were drawn up in line before the hall, which was
decorated with green boughs; a Union jack waved from a pole in front of it.

The chiefs were introduced by Hassan to the captain. The former then addressed them, rehearsing
the service that the English had done to them by destroying the power of the tyrant who had
long been a scourge to his neighbors, and who intended, without doubt, to become master of
the whole district. As a proof of the good will of the English towards the Malays, he related
how the two English officers had leaped into the water to save his child, and how kindly he
himself had been treated. Then the captain addressed them through the interpreter. He told
them that he had only been sent up the river by the Governor in accordance with an invitation
from Sehi, of whose conduct he was ignorant, to undertake the protectorate of his district;
and that, on learning his true character, he at once reported to the Governor that the rajah
was not a proper person to receive protection, as not only did he prevent trade and harass
his neighbors, but was the owner of a number of piratical craft, that often descended the river
and plundered the coast. 

What could I do but answer, "Oh, for your Grace," and add another for the charity. She still
looked perplexed, but there was no way out of our misunderstanding, if it was one, and we left
her with her sweet, troubled face between the white wings of her cap, like angel's wings mounting
to it from her shoulders. Then we went to look at the statue of the founder bearing a hapless
stranger in his arms in a space of flowers before the hospital, where
a gardener kept watch that no visitor should escape without a bunch
worth at least a peseta.

He had no belief that the peseta could possibly be for the charity, and the poverty of the poor neighborhood
was so much relieved by the mere presence of the hospital that it begged of us very little
as we passed through.

IX

We had expected to go to Granada after a week in Seville, but man is always proposing beyond his disposing
in strange lands as well as at home, and we were fully a fortnight in the far lovelier capital.
In the mean time we had changed from our rooms in the rear of the
hotel to others in the front, where we entered intimately into the
life of the Plaza San Fernando as far as we might share it from our
windows.

It was not very active life; even the cabmen whose neat victorias bordered the place on three
sides were not eager for custom; they invited the stranger, but they did not urge; there was
a continual but not a rapid passing through the ample oblong; there was a good deal of still life
on the benches where leisure enjoyed the feathery shadow of the palms, for the sun was apt to
be too hot at the hour of noon, though later it conduced to the slumber which in Spain accompanies
the digestion of the midday meal in all classes. As the afternoon advanced numbers of little girls
came into the plaza and played children's games which seemed a translation
of games familiar to our own country.

One evening a small boy was playing with them, but after a while he seemed to be found unequal
to the sport; he was ejected from the group and went off gloomily to grieve apart with his little
thumb in his mouth. The sight of his dignified desolation was insupportable,
and we tried what a copper of the big-dog value would do to comfort
him.

"We know," one of them said, "that these wars do much harm; but if we quarrel, or if one ill
treats another, or encourages his slaves to leave him, or ravages his plantations, what are
we to do?"

"That I have thought of," the captain said. "I have spoken with the chief Hassan, and he has
agreed to remove with his people to the spot where Sehi's town stood. There, doubtless, he
will be joined by Sehi's former subjects, who cannot but be well pleased at being rid of a
tyrant who had forcibly taken them under his rule. He will retain the prahu that he has taken,
and will use it to keep the two rivers free of robbers, but in no other respect will he interfere
with his neighbors. His desire is to cultivate the land, clear away the forest, and encourage
his people to raise products that he can send down the river to trade with us. He will occupy
the territory only as far as the creek that runs between the two rivers. I propose that all
of you shall come to an agreement to submit any disputes that may arise between you to his
decision, swearing to accept his judgment, whichever way it may go. This is the way in which
the disputes are settled in our country. Both sides go before a judge, and he hears their statements
and those of their witnesses, and then decides the case; and even the government of the country
is bound by his decision. I don't wish you to give me any reply as to this. I make the suggestion
solely for your own good, and it is for you to talk it over among yourselves, and see if you
cannot all come to an agreement that will put a stop to the senseless wars, and enable your
people to cultivate the land in peace, and to obtain all the comforts that arise from trade."

A boat had been sent down to the ship, and this returned with a number of the articles that
had been put on board her as presents for Sehi and other chiefs. These were now distributed.
A feast was then held, and the next morning the chiefs started for their homes, highly gratified
with the result of the meeting. It is a delightful book, and not least delightful in the moments
of misgiving which it imparts to the reader, when he does not know whether to prize more the
author's observation or his invention, whichever it may be. Borrow reports a conversation
with an innkeeper and his wife of the Colonial German descent, who gave a good enough account of themselves,
and then adds the dark intimation of an Italian companion that they
could not be honestly keeping a hotel in that unfrequented place.
Dr. Horsley was gladdened by Hassan's promise that his people should be instructed to search
for specimens of birds, butterflies, and other insects, and that these should be treated according
to his instructions, and should be from time to time, as occasion offered, sent down to him
in large cases to Singapore. To the two midshipmen the chief gave krises of the finest temper.

"I have no presents to give you worthy of your acceptance," he said; "but you know that I shall
never forget you, and always regard you as brothers. I intend to send twelve of my young men
down to Penang, there to live for three years and learn useful trades from your people. The curtain
had scarcely fallen when the author of the play was called before it and applauded by the generous,
the madly generous, spectators. He stood bowing and bowing on tiptoe, as if the wings of his
rapture lifted him to them and would presently fly away with him. If you will write to me sometimes,
she will read the letters to me and write letters to you in return, so that, though we are
away from each other, we may know that neither of us has forgotten the other."

Bahi and twelve young Malays were taken to Penang in the Serpent, where the doctor found a
comfortable home for her with some friends of his, to whom payment for her board and schooling
was to be paid by Hassan in blocks of tin, which he would obtain from boats coming down from
the hills in exchange for other articles of trade. The Malays were placed with men of their
own race belonging to the protected States, and settled as carpenters, smiths, and other tradesmen
in Penang. Three years later, they and Bahi were all taken back in the Serpent to their home.

The river was acquiring considerable importance from the great increase of trade. They found
Hassan's town far more extensive and flourishing than it had been in the time of its predecessor.
The forest had been cleared for a considerable distance round it, the former inhabitants had
returned, tobacco, sugar canes, cotton, pepper, and other crops whose products were useful
for trade purposes, were largely cultivated, while orchards of fruit trees had been extensively
planted. We accepted his romantic theory of the case, and paid the bonus due the railroad agent
in the hotel for his offices in the matter; we would have given anything, we were so eager to
get out of Burgos before we were frozen up there.
 Hassan was delighted with the progress
Bahi had made, and ordered that three or four boys should at once be placed for instruction
under each of the men who had learned trades at Penang.

There was much regret on both sides when the Serpent again started down the river; for it was
known that she would not return, as in a few months she would be sent to a Chinese station,
and from there would go direct to England. The composition of her crew was already somewhat
changed. Lieutenant Ferguson had received his promotion for the fight with the prahus, and
had been appointed to the command of a gunboat whose captain had been invalided home. Lieutenant
Hopkins was now the Serpent's first lieutenant, and Morrison was second. If it is not very noble
as an effect of art, the inspiration of its founders is affirmed by their choice of an outlook
which commands one of the most magnificent panoramas in the whole
world. It would be useless to rehearse the proofs by name. Both have since
kept up a correspondence with Bahi, who has married a neighboring chief, and who tells them
that the river is prospering greatly, and that, although he assumes no authority, her father
is everywhere regarded as the paramount chief of the district. From time to time each receives
chests filled with spices, silks, and other Malay products, and sends back in return European
articles of utility to the rajah, for such is the rank that Hassan has now acquired on the
river. We had better house the topmast at once, and get two reefs in the mainsail. Even with
a cover a pipe would soon be out."

