Sunday, May 18th, a deputation of the Committee was delegated to call at the door of the jail
and request the Sheriff to deliver up the prisoner, Casey. Upon arriving at the door three
raps were made. Sheriff Scannell appeared. The delegation desired him to handcuff the prisoner
and deliver him at the door. Without hesitation, the Sheriff repaired to the cell of Casey
and informed him of the request of the Vigilantes. The Sheriff, after going through some preliminaries,
brought the prisoner to the front door of the jail and delivered him into the hands of the
Committee. My company was stationed directly across the street lined up on the sidewalk. Immediately
in front of us was a small brass cannon, which a detachment had shortly before secured from
the store of Macondray & Co. It was the field piece of the First California Guard. It was loaded,
and alongside was the lighted match, and all was in readiness should any resistance be offered.
Other companies were stationed so as to command the entire surroundings. We marched from the
general headquarters of the Committee at 41 Sacramento street (Fort Gunnybags), one block from
the water front, up that street to Montgomery, thence to Pacific and along Kearny to the jail,
which was situated on the north side of Broadway, between Kearny and Dupont streets. Other
companies came via Stockton and Dupont streets[2].

Casey was then ironed and escorted to a coach in waiting and, at his request, Mr. North took
a seat beside him; Wm. T. Coleman and Miers F. Truett also riding in the same conveyance. Another
conference was held with the Sheriff, requesting the prisoner, Charles Cora, who had murdered
General Richardson, to be turned over to the Committee. Scannell declined and asked time to
consider. The Committee gave the Sheriff one hour in which to decide. In less than half that
time the Sheriff appeared at the door of the jail and turned Cora over to the Committee. The
Committee reached the rooms on Sacramento street about 2 o'clock. Casey was placed under guard
in a room above headquarters. Cora was also removed to the Committee's rooms in the same manner
as Casey, the Committee having to go back to the jail for the second time. About three hundred
men remained on guard at the Committee rooms after their removal there.

Fort Gunnybags.

Our headquarters and committee rooms were at the wholesale liquor house of Truett & Jones,
No. 41 Sacramento street, about a block from the water front, and embraced the block bounded
by Sacramento, California, Front and Davis streets, and covered by brick buildings two stories
high. The name "Fort Gunnybags" was ascribed to it on account of the gunnybags filled with
sand which we piled up in a wall some six feet through and about ten feet high. This barricade
was about twenty feet from the building. Guards were stationed at the passageways through it
as well as at the stairs and Committee by the members of the Monumental Fire Engine Company
No. 6, stationed on the west side of Brenham Place, opposite the "Plaza." Our small field pieces
and arms were kept on the ground floor, and the cells, executive chamber and other departments
were on the second floor.

May 19th found Mr. King still suffering from his wound, but no great alarm was felt as to his
condition.

Death of James King, of William.

May 20th Mr. King's condition took a turn for the worse, and at 12 o'clock he was sinking rapidly,
being weakened from the probing and dressing of the wound. He passed away. Sorrow and grief
were shown by all. He left a widow and six children. He was born in Georgetown, D. C., and
was only 34 years old.

Trial of Casey and Cora.

Casey and Cora were held for trial May 20th, having been supplied with attorneys and given
every opportunity to plead their cases. The Committee sat all night and took no recess until
the next morning when the trials were ended. The verdict of "guilty of murder" was found in
each case and they were ordered to be executed Friday, May 23rd, at 12 o'clock noon. While
the trial was going on Mr. King passed away[3].

Hanging of Casey and Cora.

The Committee, for fear that an attempt might be made to rescue Casey and Cora, arranged their
companies, which numbered three thousand men and two field pieces, cleared the streets in the
immediate vicinity and had had constructed a platform from out of the two front windows. These
platforms were hinged, the outer ends being held up by cords which were fastened to a projecting
beam of the roof, to which a rope had been adjusted for the purpose of hanging.

Arabella Ryan or Belle Cora was united in marriage to Charles Cora just before the execution.

About one o'clock both Casey and Cora, who had their arms tied behind them, were brought to
the platform and with firm steps stepped out upon them. Casey addressed a few remarks, declaring
that he was no murderer, and weakened at the thought of his dear old mother. He almost fainted
as the noose was placed around his neck. Cora, to the contrary, said nothing, and stood unmoved
while Casey was talking, and apparently unconcerned. The signal was given at twenty minutes
past one o'clock and the cord cut, letting the bodies drop six feet. They hung for fifty-five
minutes and were cut down and turned over to the Coroner. We, the rank and file of the Vigilance
Committee, were immediately afterwards drawn up in a line on Sacramento street, reviewed and
dismissed after stacking our arms in the Committee room, taking up our pursuits again as private
citizens[4].

Yankee Sullivan.

James (or Yankee) Sullivan, whose real name was Francis Murray, had been taken by the Vigilance
Committee and was then (May 20th, 1856), in confinement in the rooms of the Committee. He was
very pugilistic and had taken an active part in ballot-box frauds in the several elections
just previous. He had been promised leniency by the Committee and assured a safe exit from
the country, but he was fearful of being murdered by the others to be exiled at the same time.
He experienced a horrible dream, going through the formality and execution of hanging. He called
for a glass of water, which was given him by the guard, who at the same time endeavored to
cheer him up, and when breakfast was taken him at 8 o'clock that morning he was found dead
in his bed, he having made an incision with a common table knife in his left arm near the elbow,
cutting to the bone and severing two large arteries[5].

"Law and Order" Party.

On the 2nd of June, 1856, Governor J. Neely Johnson having declared the city of San Francisco
to be in a state of insurrection, issued orders to Wm. T. Sherman to enroll as militia, companies
of 150 men of the highest standard and to have them report to him, Sherman, for duty. The response
was light and the order looked upon as a joke and little or no stock taken in it. So on the
7th Sherman tendered his resignation as Major General, claiming that no plan of action could
be determined upon between himself and the Governor. The action taken by the Governor in this
move was by virtue of the constitution of the State, his duty to enforce the execution of the
laws, he claiming that the Vigilance Committee had no right to arm and act without respect
to the State laws.

Terry and Hopkins Affair.

On the 2nd of June, 1856, the city was in great excitement at an attempt by David S. Terry
to stab Sterling A. Hopkins, a member of the Committee. Terry was one of the judges of the
Supreme Court. Hopkins and a posse were arresting one Rube Maloney when set upon by Terry.
Hopkins was taken to Engine House No. 12 where Dr. R. Beverley Cole examined and cared for
his wound which was four inches deep and caused considerable hemorrhage. The blade struck Hopkins
near the collar bone and severed parts of the left carotid artery and penetrated the gullet.
Terry and Maloney at once fled to the armory of the "Law and Order Party" on the corner of
Jackson and Dupont streets. The alarm was at once sounded on the bell at Fort Gunnybags and
in less than fifteen minutes armed details were dispatched to and surrounded the headquarters
of the "Law and Order Party" where Terry had taken refuge, and in less than half an hour had
complete control of the situation, and by 4:15 o'clock in the afternoon Terry and Maloney and
the others found there had been taken to the Committee rooms as well as the arms (a stand of
300, muskets) and ammunition. About 150 "Law and Order" men together with about 250 muskets
were also taken from the California Exchange. Several other places were raided and stripped
of their stands of arms.

Terry was held by the Vigilance Committee until August 7th and charged with attempt to murder.
Mr. Hopkins recovered and Terry, after a fair and impartial trial, was discharged from custody,
though many were dissatisfied at his dismissal and claimed that he should have been held. Terry
was requested to resign and resigned his position as judge of the Supreme Court.

Duel Between Terry and Broderick.

In 1859 Judge Terry had an altercation with United States Senator Daniel C. Broderick which
caused the former to challenge the latter to a duel. This duel which was with pistols was fought
September 13, 1859, near Lake Merced, near the present site of the Ocean House. It resulted
in Broderick's death, whose last words were, "They killed me because I was opposed to a corrupt
administration, and the extension of slavery." Terry was indicted for his duel with Broderick,
as it came in conflict with the State laws. The case was transferred to another county, Marin,
and there dismissed. During the Civil War Terry joined the Confederate forces, attained the
rank of Brigadier-General, and was wounded at the Battle of Chickamauga. At the close of the
conflict he repaired to California and in 1869 located at Stockton and resumed the practice
of the legal profession. Some years later he became advocate for a lady who was one of the
principals in a noted divorce suit. Subsequently she became his wife. Legal contention arising
from the first marriage caused her to appear before the Circuit Court held in Oakland, over
which Stephen J. Field, Associate justice of the United States Supreme Court, presided.

Terry and Field, Shooting of Terry.

In open court the justice proceeded to read the decision. As he continued, the tenor was manifestly
unfavorable to Mrs. Terry. She suddenly arose and interrupted the reading by violently upbraiding
Field. He ordered her removal from the judicial chamber. She resisted, and Terry coming to
his wife's assistance, drew a knife and assaulted the bailiffs. He was disarmed, and together
with his wife, overpowered and secured. The court of three judges sentenced Mrs. Terry to one
month, and her husband to six months imprisonment, which they served in full. Justice Field
returned to Washington, and the next year in fulfillment of his official requirements came
again to California. He had been informed that Terry uttered threats of violence against his
person, and therefore he was accompanied by a man employed by the Government to act in the
capacity of body-guard. On the journey from Los Angeles to San Francisco, Field and his companion,
with other passengers, left the train to lunch at Lathrop. Terry and his wife, who had boarded
the cars en route, also left the cars and shortly afterwards entered the same restaurant. A
few minutes later Terry arose from his seat, walked directly back of Field and slapped or struck
the venerable justice on the face, while he was seated. Nagle, the guard who attended Field,
leaped to his feet and shot Terry twice. Terry fell and died instantly. This event occurred
on the 15th day of August, 1889, not quite thirty years from the time he shot Broderick.

Hetherington and Randall.

On the evening of July 24, 1856, the Vigilance Committee had another case on their hands which
called for immediate action.

Joseph Hetherington, a well-known desperate character with a previous record, picked a quarrel
with Dr. Randal in the lobby of the Nicholas Hotel. They both drew their revolvers and shot:
after the second report the doctor dropped and Hetherington, stooping, shot again, striking
the prostrate form in the head, rendering the victim almost unconscious. He died the next morning.

The shooting was brought about through Randal's inability to repay money borrowed from Hetherington
on a mortgage on real estate.

Hetherington, who was captured by the police, had been turned over to the Committee by whom
he was tried, the Committee going into session immediately after the shooting, found him guilty
of murder and sentenced him to be hanged.

We were again called out on the 29th and were stationed so as to command the situation. This
time a gallows was erected on Davis street, between Sacramento and Commercial.

Another man, Philander Brace by name, was also to be hanged at the same time, and at about
5:30 in the afternoon of July 29th they were both conveyed in carriages, strongly guarded,
to the execution grounds. Hetherington had previously proclaimed his innocence, claiming that
the Doctor had shot first and he had simply shot in self-defense, but his previous record was
bad, he having killed a Doctor Baldwin in 1853 and had run a gambling joint on Long Wharf,
and eye witnesses claimed that he not only provoked but shot first.

Brace was of a different nature, he was a hardened criminal of a low type. The charge against
him being the killing of Captain J. B. West about a year previous, out in the Mission, and
of murdering his accomplice. He had also confessed to numerous other crimes.

Hanging of Hetherington and Brace.

Thousands of people were on the house-tops and in windows and on every available spot from
which a view of the gallows was to be had. The prisoners mounted the scaffold, being accompanied
by three Vigilance Committee officers who acted as executioners and a Rev. Mr. Thomas. After
the noose had been adjusted, Hetherington addressed the crowd, claiming to be innocent, and
ready to meet his Maker. Brace, every once in a while, interrupted him, using terrible and
vulgar language. The caps were adjusted, the ropes cut and the two dropped into eternity. They
were left hanging 40 minutes, after which the bodies were removed by the Committee to their
rooms and afterwards turned over to the Coroner. They were both young men--Hetherington 35,
a native of England, had been in California since 1850, while Brace was but 21, a native of
Onandaigua County, N. Y.

Ballot Box Stuffing.

The ballot boxes that had been used by Casey and his ilk were of a peculiar construction, having
false slides on the sides and bottoms that could be slipped out and thereby letting enough
spurious votes drop into the box to insure the election of their man or men. It was claimed
that nearly the entire set of municipal officers then holding office had secured their election
through this man. They were afterwards requested by the Vigilance Committee to resign their
offices, but at the first election that was held on November 4th, they were all displaced by
men selected by a new party (the People's party) that was the outcome of the efforts of the
Vigilance Committee.

Billy Mulligan.

William Mulligan was shipped out of the State on the steamer "Golden Age" on June 5th, 1856,
with instructions never to return under penalty of death. However, after three or four years
of absence he returned to San Francisco. He was often seen on the street, but was not molested
until sometime in the summer of 1862 when he got a crowd of boys around him on the crossing
of Prospect Place and Clay street, between Powell and Mason streets. It was not long before
he had trouble with them and shot into the crowd, injuring a boy, however, not seriously. The
police were soon on the ground, but Mulligan had made his way into the old St. Francis Hotel
on the corner of Clay and Dupont streets which was vacant at that time. The police came and
they were directed to the building where Billy could be found. When the police entered they
found they were half a story below the floor of a very large room in the second story. Billy
was called upon to surrender. He told them that the first one that put his head above the floor
would be a dead man, and knowing the desperate character they were dealing with, they thought
best to retire and get instruction from the City Attorney, who told them they had a right to
take him dead or alive, whereupon they proceeded to arm themselves with rifles and stationed
themselves on the second floor of a building on the opposite side of the street from the St.
Francis on Dupont street, and when Mulligan was passing one of the windows the police fired.
Mulligan dropped to the floor, dead as a door nail. He was turned over to the Coroner and has
not been seen on the streets since. Charles P. Duane is another one of twenty-seven men who
were shipped out of the State and returned. He shot a man named Ross on Merchant street, near
Kearny. I do not remember whether the man lived or died, or what became of Duane.

Black List.

From the book entitled "San Francisco Vigilance Committee of '56," by F. W. Smith, I quote
the following, with some corrections and alterations:

"I am informed by an ex-Vigilante that the Committee roll call of '56, just before its disbandment,
numbered between eight and nine thousand.

In concluding our history of this society, we will give the names and penalties inflicted on
those who came under its eye during the latter year; whose conduct was so irreparably bad that
it could not be excused.

Those who suffered the death penalty did so in expiation for lives they had taken. The names
of these culprits are familiar to the reader. We also give the names of those who were required
to leave the State; all of whom, in the archives of the Vigilantes, fall under the head of
the black list:"

