Nearer Rochester, at Frindsbury, there is the next illustration, still like a mask rather than
a death's head, but making its purpose clear by the two bones, such as are nearly always employed
in more recent productions.

FIG. 15.--AT FRINDSBURY.

  "To William David Jones, died 1721."

There is, however, another at Higham of about the same date, in which, supposing a skull to
be intended, the inspiration of the bones appears not to have caught the artist. The portrait
theory may possibly better fit this case.

FIG. 16.--AT HIGHAM.

  "To Mr Wm Boghurst, died 5th of April 1720,
  aged 65."

That some of the carvings were meant for portraits cannot be denied, and, in order to shew
them with unimpeachable accuracy, I have taken rubbings off a few and present an untouched
photograph of them just as I rubbed them off the stones (Fig. 17). The whole of the originals
are to be found in the neighbouring churchyards of Shorne and Chalk, two rural parishes on
the Rochester Road, and exhibit with all the fidelity possible the craftsmanship of the village
sculptors. They will doubtless also excite some speculation as to their meaning. My belief,
as already expressed, is that the uppermost four are the embodiment of the rustic yearning
for the ideal; in other words, attempts to represent the emblem of death--the skull. Nos. 1
and 2 are from Shorne; Nos. 3, 4, and 5 from the churchyard at Chalk.

In No. 1 we have, perhaps, the crudest conception extant of the skeleton head. The lower bars
are probably meant for teeth; what the radial lines on the crown are supposed to be is again
conjecture. Perhaps a nimbus, perhaps hair or a cap, or merely an ornamental finish. The inscription
states that the stone was erected to the memory of "Thomas Vdall," who died in 1704, aged 63 years.

No. 2 has the inscription buried, but it is of about the same date, judging by its general
appearance. The strange feature in this case is the zig-zag "toothing" which is employed to
represent the jaws. Doubtless the artist thought that anything he might have lost in accuracy
he regained in the picturesque.

No. 3, in which part of the inscription "Here lyeth" intrudes into the arch belonging by right
to the illustration, is equally primitive and artless. The eyebrows, cheeks--in fact all the
features--are evidently unassisted studies from the living, not the dead, frontispiece of humanity;
but what are the serifs, or projections, on either side? Wondrous as it is, there can be only
one answer. They must be meant for ears! This curious effigy commemorates Mary, wife of William
Greenhill, who died in 1717, aged 47 years.

No. 4 is one of the rude efforts to imitate the skull and crossbones of which we find many
examples. It is dedicated to one Grinhill (probably a kinsman of the Greenhills aforesaid),
who died in 1720, aged 56 years.

Most strange of all is No. 5, in which the mason leaps to the real from the emblematic, and
gives us something which is evidently meant for a portrait of the departed. The stone records
that Mary, wife of Thomas Jackson, died in 1730, aged 43 years. It is one of the double tombstones
frequently met with in Kent and some other counties. The second half, which is headed by a
picture of two united hearts, records that the widower Thomas Jackson followed his spouse in
1748, aged 55 years.

Upon a stone adjacent, to Mary London, who died in 1731, there has been another portrait of
a lady with braided hair, but time has almost obliterated it. I mention the circumstance to
shew that this special department of obituary masonry, as all others, was prone to imitations.
I may also remark that intelligent inhabitants and constant frequenters of these two churchyards
have informed me that in all the hundreds of times of passing these stones they never observed
any of their peculiarities. It ought, however, to be said that these primitive carvings or
scratchings are not often conspicuous, and generally require some seeking. They are always
on a small scale of drawing, in nearly every instance within the diminished curve of the most
antiquated form of headstone (such as is shewn in the Frontispiece), and as a rule they are
overgrown with lichen, which has to be rubbed off before the lines are visible. It may safely
be averred, on the other hand, that the majority of the old stones when found of this shape
contain or have contained these remarkable figures, and in some places, particularly in Kent,
they literally swarm. There is a numerous assortment of them at Meopham, a once remote hamlet,
now a station on the London, Chatham, and Dover Railway. I have copied only one--an early attempt
apparently to produce a cherub resting with outstretched wings upon a cloud, but there are
a good many of the same order to keep it in countenance.

FIG. 18.--AT MEOPHAM.

  "To Sarah Edmeades, died 1728, aged 35 years."

In the churchyards of Hawkhurst, Benenden, Bodiam, Cranbrook, Goudhurst, and all through the
Great Weald these incised stones are to be discovered by hundreds, very much of one type perhaps,
but displaying nevertheless some extraordinary variations. I know of no district so fruitful
of these examples as the Weald of Kent.

Even when the rude system of cutting into the stone ceased to be practised and relief carving
became general, grossness of idea seems to have survived in many rural parishes. One specimen
is to be seen in the churchyard of Stanstead in Kent, and is, for relief work, childish.

FIG. 19.--AT STANSTEAD.

  "To William Lock, died 1751, aged 16 years."

However, the vast number of gravestones carved in relief are, on the whole, creditable, especially
if we consider the difficulty which met the workmen in having to avoid giving to their crossbones
and other ornaments the appearance of horns growing out of their skulls.

FIG. 20.--AT OLD ROMNEY.

  "To William Dowll, died 1710, aged 40 years."

The winged skull probably typifies flight above.

FIG. 21.--AT CRAYFORD.

  "To John Farrington, died Dec. 8, 1717, aged
            above fourty years."

In the appropriate design from Shoreham the same idea is better conveyed both by the winged
head and by the torch, which when elevated signifies the rising sun, and when depressed the
setting sun. The trumpet in this case would seem to mean the summons. The two little coffins
are eloquent without words.

FIG. 22.--AT SHOREHAM.

  "The children of Thomas and Jane Stringer,
      died Sept'r 1754, aged 10 and 7 years."

In Lewisham Churchyard is one of the death's head series almost sui generis.

FIG. 23.--AT LEWISHAM.

  "To Richard Evens, died May 18, 1707, aged
            67 years."

The chaplet of bay-leaves or laurel doubtless indicates "Victory." Not only is this an early
and well-accomplished effort, but it is remarkable for the presence of a lower jaw, which is
seldom seen on a gravestone. The skull turned up by the sexton is usually the typical object,
and to that we may presume the nether jaw is not often attached. It is found, however, on a
headstone of a somewhat weak design in Old Hornsey Churchyard.

FIG. 24.--AT HORNSEY.

  "To Mr John Gibson, whipmaker, died Oct.
      30, 1766, aged 44 years."

The hand seems to be pointing to the record of a well-spent life which has won the crown of glory.

There is another of the lower jaw series at Teddington, which is also, in all probability,
the only instance of a man's nightcap figuring in such gruesome circumstances.

FIG. 25.--AT TEDDINGTON.

  "To Sarah Lewis, died June 11, 1766, aged
            63 years."

The emblem of Death was quite early crowned with laurel to signify glory, and associated with
foliage and flowers in token of the Resurrection. One at Finchley is, for its years, well preserved.

FIG. 26.--AT FINCHLEY.

  "To Richard Scarlett, died July 23, 1725."

Another at Farnborough is, considering the date, of exceptional merit.

FIG. 27.--AT FARNBOROUGH.

  "To Elizabeth Stow, died 1744, aged 75 years."

A few others of the skull pattern with various additaments may conclude this chapter. The cup
in the Chiselhurst case is somewhat uncommon.

FIG. 28.--AT CHISELHURST.

  Name obliterated; date Nov. 1786.

The conventional symbols in the next example are clearly to be read.

FIG. 29.--AT HARTLEY.

  "To Eliza Andersen, died 1771, aged 70 years."

The West Wickham specimen has its prototype in the old churchyard at Hackney, and in other places.

FIG. 30.--AT WEST WICKHAM.

  "To Richard Whiffen, died 1732, aged
            3 years."

In Fig. 31, from Hornsey, the two skulls present the appearance of having been pitched up from
the grave.

FIG. 31.--AT HORNSEY.

  "To William Fleetwood, died Jan. 30, 1750,
            aged 15 months."

CHAPTER III.

ARTISTIC GRAVESTONES.

In the later half of the eighteenth century greater pains and finer workmanship appear to have
been bestowed upon the symbolic figurement of the gravestone, and the more elaborate allegorical
representations of which a few sketches have been given came into vogue and grew in popular
favour until the century's end. Nor did the opening of a new century altogether abolish the
fashion; perhaps it can hardly be said to have been abolished even now at the century's close,
but the evidences extant combine to shew that the flourishing period of the pictorial headstone
lay well within the twenty-five years preceding Anno Domini 1800. For the sake of comparison
one with another, I have taken, in addition to the sketch at page 1 (Fig. 1), three examples
of the device which seems most frequently to typify the resurrection of the dead. In two of
these the illustration is accompanied by a quotation explanatory of its subject, but the words
are not the same in both cases. The stone at Horton Kirby, near Dartford, depicted in Fig.
32, shews the inscription clearly.

FIG. 32.--AT HORTON KIRBY.

  "To John Davidge. died April 22, 1775, aged
            75 years."

In the second instance, at Cliffe, the inscription has been in great part obliterated by time,
but the words written were evidently those of the chapter from Corinthians which is part of
the Burial Service: "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" They are,
however, almost illegible, and I have made no attempt to reproduce them in the picture.

FIG. 33.--AT CLIFFE.

  "To Mary Jackson, died March 26, 1768."

There is a second stone of similar pattern in Cliffe Churchyard, dated 1790. It differs from
the foregoing only in having the spear broken. The sculptor of another specimen at Darenth,
near Dartford, thought the subject worthy of broader treatment, and transferred it to a stone
about double the ordinary width, but did not vary the idea to any great extent. Indeed, Horton
Kirby and Darenth, being next-door neighbours, have most features in common; the falling tower,
which symbolizes the Day of Judgment, appearing in both, while it is absent from the more distant
examples at Cliffe and Newhaven. The introduction of the omniscient eye in the Cliffe case
is, however, a stroke of genius compared with the conventional palm branches at Horton Kirby,
or the flight through mid-air of the tower-tops both at Horton Kirby and at Darenth.

FIG. 34.--AT DARENTH.

  "To John Millen, died June 11th, 1786, aged
            82 years."

Outside the county of Kent I have met with nothing of this pattern, and pictorial art on a
similar scale is seldom seen on the gravestones anywhere. Specimens from Lee, Cheshunt, Stapleford
Tawney, and elsewhere, will, however, be seen in subsequent pages.

The day of joyful resurrection is prefigured possibly in more acceptable shape in the next
instance, no imitation of which I have seen in any of my rambles.

FIG. 35.--AT KINGSDOWN.

  "To Ann Charman, died 1793, aged 54 years."

No one to whom I have shewn this sketch has given a satisfactory interpretation of it, but
it will be allowed that the design is as graceful as it is uncommon. That it also in all likelihood
refers to the Day of Judgment may perhaps be regarded as a natural supposition.

Even the open or half-open coffin, shewing the skeleton within, may possibly have some reference
to the rising at the Last Day. We have this figure employed in a comparatively recent case
at Fawkham in Kent, being one example of nineteenth-century sculpture.

FIG. 36.--AT FAWKHAM.

  "Thomas Killick, died 1809, aged 1 month
            1 day."

A crown is usually the emblem of Victory, but held in the hand, as in this instance, it indicates,
I am told, an innocent life.

Other coffins displaying wholly or partly the corpse or skeleton within are perhaps not intended
to convey any such pious or poetic thought as do the two foregoing, but simply to pourtray
the ghastliness of death, a kind of imagery much fancied by the old stonemasons.

FIG. 37.--AT SWANSCOMBE.

  "To Elizabeth Hall, died 1779, aged 76 years."

FIG. 38.--AT ASHFORD.

  "To Stephen Kennedy, died Sept. 1791, aged
            61 years."

In the latter illustration there are three stars to which I can give no signification. The
snake-ring is, of course, eternity, and the book, as before surmised, may stand for the record
of a good life.

More ingenious, more didactic, and altogether more meritorious than these is another series
of designs belonging to the same period of time. They are not only as a rule conceived in better
taste, but are, almost consequently, better in their execution. The following example from
Cooling, a small village in the Medway Marshes, is an excellent specimen of its class, and
a very exceptional "find" for a spot so remote.

FIG. 39.--AT COOLING.

  "To M'r Richard Prebble of Cliffe, died April
            1775."

One of later date at Hendon, Middlesex, is also to be commended. The lyre, cornet, and tambourine
speak of music, and the figures of Fame and Hope are hardly to be misunderstood, but the large
box in the background is not quite certain of correct interpretation.

FIG. 40.--AT HENDON.

  "To Ludwig August Leakfield, Esq., died
      Nov. 22, 1810, aged 48 years."

The following is rougher in form, but seems to have suffered from the weather. It needs no
explanation.

FIG. 41.--AT EAST WICKHAM.

  "To Thomas Vere of Woolwich, shipwright,
      died 10th August, 1789."

The two next subjects are to be found in many variations. The angel with the cross in each
case may represent salvation proclaimed.

FIG. 42.--AT SNARGATE.

  "To Edward Wood, died Sept. 1779, aged
  50 years."

FIG. 43.--AT EAST HAM.

  "To Mr Richard Wright, died July 28, 1781,
  aged 39 years."

The winged scroll in Fig. 44 is unfolded to display, we may suppose, a register of good and
holy deeds done in an extended life. The scythes and the reversed torches may be taken at their
usual significance, which is death. This is copied from a stone in the churchyard of Wilmington
by Dartford Heath.

FIG. 44.--AT WILMINGTON.

  "To Richard Barman, died 1793, aged 71 years."

More elegant testimony is paid by the figure of a winged urn in Wanstead Old Churchyard, the
flame which burns above indicating, it would seem, that though the body be reduced to ashes,
the soul survives.

FIG. 45.--AT WANSTEAD.

  "To William Cleverly, died 1780, aged
            40 years."

Eternity is usually, as we have seen, represented by an endless ring--often as a serpent. It
is so in the Southfleet sketch, in which appear the two horns of the archangels, and the living
torch, with some other objects which are not quite clearly defined.

FIG. 46.--AT SOUTHFLEET.

  "To John Palmer, died 1781, aged 61 years."

In another selection from Wilmington the winged hour-glass may be read as the flight of time,
the cloud is probably the future life, and the bones below convey their customary moral.

FIG. 47.--AT WILMINGTON.

  "To Ann Parsons, died Nov. 3, 1777, aged
            60 years."

Sometimes, but not often, will be found engraved on a stone the suggestive fancy of an axe
laid at the foot of a tree, or some metaphorical figure to the same intent. An instance occurs
at Lewisham in which the idea is conveyed by the pick and shovel under a flourishing palm.

FIG. 48.--AT LEWISHAM.

  "To Thomas Lambert, died Nov. 25, 1781,
            aged 59 years."

A symbol so simple and yet so significant as this is scarcely to be surpassed. One almost in
the same category is the following, a small anaglyph in Bunhill Fields Burial-ground, London.

FIG. 49.--AT BUNHILL FIELDS, LONDON.

  "To Elizabeth Sharp, who died Oct. 20, 1752,
            aged 31 years."

It is easy to read in this illustration the parable of death destroying a fruitful vine, and
as a picture it is not inelegant. It is more remarkable as being, so far as I can find, the
one solitary instance of an allegorical gravestone among the thousands of gravestones in the
vast and carefully guarded burial-place in the City Road. Strictly speaking, death's heads
and crossbones are allegorical, but these must be excepted for their very abundance and their
lack of novelty. Possibly, also, the lichen, damp, and London climate, which have obliterated
many of the inscriptions in this old cemetery, may have been fatal to the low relief which
is requisite for figure work of the kind under consideration. But Bunhill Fields and similar
places in and near London and other great towns have taught me the law to which I have already
referred--the law that the picture-tombstone was country bred, and could never have endured
under the modern conditions of life in or near the centres of civilization.

There are exceptions, perhaps many, to this ruling, as there are exceptions to every other.
For instance, a stone at the grave of a Royal Artillery Officer in Woolwich Churchyard combines
the emblems of his earthly calling with those of his celestial aspirations in a medley arrangement
not unusual in rural scenes, but hardly to be reconciled with the education and refinement
of a large garrison and school of military science which Woolwich was in 1760. This must be
set down as one of the exceptions which prove the rule.

FIG. 50.--AT WOOLWICH.

  "To Lieut. Thomas Sanders, late of the Royal
      Regiment of Artillery, who died March
      1760, aged 60 (?) years."

There is a more recent case in which the same idea is pourtrayed in somewhat different fashion
on a headstone in the obsolete graveyard of St. Oswald, near the Barracks at York. It is dedicated
to John Kay, a private in the Royal Scots Greys, who died July 9, 1833, aged 34 years.

But, on the whole, it may be accepted as an axiom that originality has shunned the town churchyards,
and the absence of curious varieties of the gravestone among the well-sown acres of Bunhill
Fields and such-like places of the period at which they were by comparison so abundant in less
considered localities admits of a simple explanation.

In the eighteenth century town and country were much more divided than they are now. London
and the rural districts were not on their present level. Taste in art and in the ordinary affairs
of life was being cultivated in town; it was not even encouraged in the country. Education
and refinement were not thought to be desirable accomplishments in a rustic population, but
dwellers in cities had been for generations improving their manners, and thus it was that no
such provincial vulgarity as a decorated tombstone could be tolerated in the choice metropolis.

The clergy were always the masters in such matters, and their influence is seen in many places,
even in the villages, in keeping the churchyard free from ridicule; but, broadly speaking,
there is no doubt that the rectors and vicars in London and other large cities began quite
a hundred years earlier than those of the villages that control and supervision over the carving
and inscriptions on the tombstone which is now the almost universal rule. It was unquestionably
the adoption of this practice by the country parson, late in the eighteenth century or early
in the nineteenth century, that put an end in rural places to the "period" of illustrated epitaphs
which had long gone out of fashion, or, more likely, had never come into being, among the busier
hives of humanity.

A rare variety of the cloud-and-angel series, which are so frequent, is seen in Longfield Churchyard
on the Maidstone Road. Trumpets of the speaking or musical order are frequently introduced
to typify the summons to resurrection, but here we have the listener pourtrayed by the introduction
of an ear-trumpet.

FIG. 51.--AT LONGFIELD.

  "To Mary Davidge, died 1772, aged 69 years."

Allegorical gravestones of recent date, that is of the time which we call the present day,
are very seldom seen, and such as there are do not come within the scope of this work. There
is one in West Wickham Churchyard devoted to a chorister, and sculptured with a representation
of the church organ-pipes. Memorials to deceased Freemasons are perhaps the most frequent of
late carvings, as in the sketch from Lydd in the Romney Marsh district.

FIG. 52.--AT LYDD.

  "To John Finn, died June 9th, 1813, aged 30 years."

Occasionally, too, some plain device appears on even a modern headstone, such as the following,
which is one of the few I have from the London area. The graves of the same half-century may
be searched without finding many carvings more ambitious than this.

FIG. 53.--AT ST. JAMES'S, BERMONDSEY.

  "To Charles Thomas Henry Evans, died 1849."

Churchyards beside the Upper Thames are nearly all prolific in old gravestones, the riparian
settlements having been well populated during the favourable period. This is especially the
case at Richmond and Twickenham, but of the great number of eighteenth-century stones in both
churchyards there are few very remarkable. Richmond has a rare specimen of the full-relief
skull. The death's head has on either side of it the head of an angel in half-relief. The stone
is a double one, and I have never met its fellow.

FIG. 54.--AT RICHMOND.

  "To Annie Smedley (?), died 1711, aged
            90 years."

As companions to this I present a pair of dwarf stones with full-relief heads of seraphs and
cherubs--an agreeable change--from the same county.

FIG. 55.--AT RIPLEY.

  "To Sarah wife of Henry Bower, died 1741.
      To Henry Bower, died March 23rd, 1758."

The Rector of the parish passed as I was sketching these interesting objects, and was surprised
to find that he had anything so unusual in his churchyard.

CHAPTER IV.

PROFESSIONAL GRAVESTONES.

It is more than likely that somewhere will be found a pictorial accompaniment to the verse
which has been often used as an epitaph for a village blacksmith.

There are many instances in which the implements of his craft are depicted upon an artizan's
tomb; these also for the most part being of the eighteenth century. In the churchyard at Cobham,
a village made famous by the Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club, is a gravestone recording
the death of a carpenter, having at the head a shield bearing three compasses to serve as his
crest, and under it the usual tools of his trade--square, mallet, compasses, wedge, saw, chisel,
hammer, gimlet, plane, and two-foot rule.

FIG. 56.--AT COBHAM, KENT.

  "To Richard Gransden, carpenter, died 13th
            March, 1760."

This one may serve as a fair sample of all the trade memorials to which carpenters have been,
before all classes of mechanics, the most prone. The carvings bear the same strong resemblance
to each other that we find in other series of gravestones, but have occasional variations,
as in the following specimen, which mixes up somewhat grotesquely the emblems of death and
eternity with the mundane instruments of skill and labour, including therein a coffin lid to
shew maybe that the man, besides being a carpenter, was also an undertaker.

FIG. 57.--AT BARNES.

  "To Henry Mitchell, died 1724, aged 72 years."

It was only to be expected that the prominent agriculturists of rural districts would be figuratively
represented on their gravestones, and this will be found to be the case in a number of instances.
The following illustration is from the churchyard of Frindsbury, a short distance out of Rochester
and on the edge of the Medway meadows.

FIG. 58.--AT FRINDSBURY.

  The inscription is effaced, but the date appears
            to be 1751.

The overturned sheaf presumably refers metaphorically to the fate of the farmer whom the stone
was set up to commemorate. The old-fashioned plough is cut only in single profile, but is not
an ineffective emblem. I imagine that the ribbon above the plough bore at one time some inscribed
words which time has obliterated.

The design invented by the sculptor at Sutton at Hone, near Dartford, is less original and
also less striking.

FIG. 59.--AT SUTTON AT HONE.

  "To Richard Northfield, died Oct. 19, 1767,
            aged 71 years."

In the case of John Bone, bricklayer, of Bromley, Kent, it would probably be wrong to associate
with his calling the tools engraved on his headstone. They were probably meant with the rest
of the picture to represent the emblems of mortality.

FIG. 60.--AT BROMLEY.

  "To John Bone, Bricklayer, died Dec. 14,
      1794, aged 48 years."

There is, however, one stone which may be included in the category of trade memorials, though
its subject was not a mechanic. Mr. John Cade was a schoolmaster at Beckenham, and appears
to have been well liked by his pupils, who, when he prematurely died, placed a complimentary
epitaph over his grave. The means by which he had imparted knowledge are displayed upon the
stone, and below are the lines hereinafter set forth.

FIG. 61.--AT BECKENHAM.

  "To the memory of John Cade, of this parish,
      schoolmaster. One skilled in his profession
      and of extensive ingenuity. As
      he lived universally beloved, so he died
      as much lamented, August 28th, 1750, aged
      35 years. Several of his scholars, moved
      by affection and gratitude, at their own
      expense erected this in remembrance of
      his worth and merit.

        "Virtue, good nature, learning, all combined
        To render him belov'd of human kind."

Greenford, near Harrow-on-the-Hill, had quite recently a worthy inhabitant who was a gardener
and presumably a beekeeper also. Accordingly a beehive appropriately decorates his gravestone.

FIG. 62.--AT GREENFORD.

  "To William King, upwards of 60 years
      gardener of this parish, died Dec. 16th,
      1863, aged 84 years."

The next problem is rather more doubtful, and in considering the possibility of the memorial
indicated being "professional," we must remember that the parish of West Ham, now a populous
place, was quite out of town and almost undiscovered until a comparatively recent time. Its
eighteenth-century gravestones are consequently for the most part rustic and primitive. The
skull and other bones here depicted, decked with wheat-ears and other vegetation, probably
have some literal reference to the agricultural pursuits of the deceased, although of course
they may be only poetical allusions to the life to come.

FIG. 63.--AT WEST HAM.

  "To Andrew James, died 1754, aged 68 years."

CHAPTER V.

A TYPICAL TRAMP IN KENT.

This unpretentious work makes no claim to deal with the whole subject which it has presumed
to open. Its aim is rather to promote in others the desire which actuates the author to follow
up and develop the new field of antiquarian research which it has attempted to introduce. As
old Weever says, in his quaint style:--"I have gained as much as I have looke for if I shall
draw others into this argument whose inquisitive diligence and learning may finde out more
and amende mine."

This book, then, is not a treatise, but simply a first collection of churchyard curiosities,
the greater number of which have been gathered within a comparatively small radius. It is only
the hoard of one collector and the contents of one sketch-book, all gleaned in about a hundred
parishes. Many collectors may multiply by thousands these results, bring out fresh features,
and possibly points of high importance.

Two chief purposes therefore animate my desire to publish this work. One is to supply such
little information as I have gleaned on a subject which has by some singular chance escaped
especial recognition from all the multitude of authors, antiquarians, and literary men. I have
searched the Museum libraries, and consulted book-collectors, well-read archaeologists, and
others likely to know if there is any work descriptive of old gravestones in existence, and
nothing with the remotest relation thereto can I discover.[1] There are, of course, hundreds
of books of epitaphs, more or less apocryphal, but not one book, apocryphal or otherwise, regarding
the allegories of the churchyard. Can it be that the subject is bereft of interest? If so,
I have made my venture in vain. But I trust that it is not so.

[Footnote 1: The Rev. Charles Boutell published, in 1849, parts 1 and 2 of a periodical work
entitled "Christian Monuments in England and Wales," proposing to complete the same in five
sections; the fifth to treat of headstones and other churchyard memorials, with some general
observations on modern monuments. The two parts brought the subject down to the fifteenth century,
and were so ably written and beautifully illustrated as to intensify our regret at the incompletion
of the task.]

The second object is to recommend to others a new and delightful hobby, and possibly bring
to bear upon my theme an accumulation of knowledge and combination of light. Gravestone hunting
implies long walks in rural scenes, with all the expectations, none of the risks, and few of
the disappointments of other pursuits. From ten to fifteen miles may be mapped out for a fair
day's trudge, and will probably embrace from three to six parish churchyards, allowing time
to inspect the church as well as its surroundings. Saturdays are best for these excursions,
for then the pew-openers are dusting out the church, and the sexton is usually about, sweeping
the paths or cutting the grass. The church door will in most cases be open, and you can get
the guidance you want from the best possible sources. A chat with the village sexton is seldom
uninviting, and he can generally point out everything worth your observation. But the faculty
of finding that of which you are in search will soon come to you. In the first place, the new
portion of a churchyard--there is nearly always a new portion--may be left on one side. You
will certainly find no ancient memorials there. In the next place, you may by a little observation
pick out the eighteenth-century stones by their shape, which is as a rule much more ornamented
and curvilinear than those of later date. They may also be detected very often by the roughness
of their backs as well as by their weather-beaten complexions, and with a little experience
and practice the student may guess correctly within a few years the age of any particular one
seen even in the distance.

