The forenoon wore slowly away, and five bells had just sounded, when the cry of "Sail, ho!"
from the masthead put every one on the qui vive, the excitement growing rapidly more and more
intense as bit by bit the description of the stranger became more accurate and minute. She
is a steamer--and a large one! That sounded well, and the hopes of the sanguine rose higher
and higher. Brigantine rigged--and a side-wheel steamer!--so far so good. This answers exactly
to the description of the Californian steamers. A few minutes will decide it now; the Alabama's
canvas has some time since been snugly furled, the fires spread and well supplied with fresh
fuel, the propeller lowered, and the ship's head turned in a direction to intercept the approaching
vessel. Rapidly the chase looms larger and larger, as the two swift steamers approach each
other at almost top speed. And now the huge walking-beam can be plainly distinguished, see-sawing
up and down between the lofty paddle-boxes, and the decks appear crowded with hundreds of passengers,
conspicuous among whom are to be seen the gay dresses of numerous ladies; and--yes, surely
that is the glimmer of bayonets, and that military-looking array drawn up on the hurricane-deck
is a strong detachment of United States marines!

Swiftly, and in grim silence, the Alabama approached her huge but defenceless prey. From her
open ports grinned the black muzzles of her six 32 pounders, each with its crew standing round,
eager for the word. High above them towered the huge, black pivot-gun, while from the mizzen-peak
floated the delusive Stars and Stripes, the sight of which was to tempt the stranger into a
confession of his own nationality.

The ruse was, as usual, successful, and as the two vessels crossed, the Alabama passing a short
distance astern of the stranger, the latter also hoisted United States colours, and expectation
gave way to certainty among the delighted crew of the Confederate steamer. Down came the Yankee
colours from her gaff, and in its stead the white ensign of the Confederacy fluttered gaily
in the breeze, while a blank shot from the Alabama's lee bow-chaser summoned the chase to surrender.
Surrendering, however, seemed to be the last thing in the chase's thoughts. Already she was
ahead of the Confederate cruiser, and trusting to her own well-known speed, appeared determined
to make at least one effort to escape. She held steadily on her course, at top speed, without
noticing the pursuer's summons; the black smoke that poured in volumes from her funnel, showing
no less plainly than the rapid revolutions of her paddles the strenuous exertions she was making
to escape.

This state of things, however, could not last long. For a few minutes the chase was permitted
to try her speed against that of her pursuer; but the latter soon found that with the highest
pressure of steam she had been able to raise during the short period that had elapsed since
the enemy first hove in sight, she was by no means overhauling the chase as rapidly as could
be desired. So the friendly warning having been disregarded, the adoption of more peremptory
measures was decided on, and a shotted gun was ordered to be fired over her.

Boom! went the Alabama's bow-chaser, as she yawed for a moment to permit the gunner to take
aim--and boom! at almost the same instant went one of her broadside guns, the enthusiastic
captain of which could not contain himself until the order to fire was given, but must needs
bring down upon himself a reprimand from the authorities of the quarter-deck for his precipitation.
Fortunately, however, this irregular shot did no harm--not improbably, perhaps, from the very
fact of its having been launched so totally without consideration. The first, however, did
its errand most effectively, and the shower of white splinters that flew from the chase's foremast
as the shell, after grazing the funnel, struck full against it, afforded most satisfactory
evidence of the accuracy of the line. Happily, the shell contented itself with cutting the
foremast very nearly in two, and did not explode until it had passed safely overboard, otherwise
the havoc created by it on the crowded deck of the steamer must have been fearful.

The hint, however, was sufficient. The paddles of the chase ceased to revolve, the huge walking-beam
remained poised in midair, and the steamer rounding to, submitted herself to her captors. A
boat was now lowered and, sent on board of the prize, which proved to be, as anticipated, the
mail steamer Ariel, from New York to Aspinwall, having on board one hundred and forty marines
on their way to join the enemy's Pacific squadron; several military and naval officers, among
the latter of whom was Commander Sartori, on his way to take command of the St. Mary's; and
about five hundred other passengers, a large proportion of whom were women and children.

The Alabama had "bought an elephant," and now the question arose--what was to be done with
her valuable but most unwieldy acquisition? The first step, of course, was to send a prize
crew on board. The second to transfer to the Alabama sundry important matters, such as the
ship's papers, three large boxes of specie, a 24 pounder rifled gun, 125 new rifles, 16 swords,
and about 1,000 rounds of ammunition. The marines and officers were then put on parole, the
former being disarmed, and all pledged not to fight again against the Confederate States until
they should be regularly exchanged.

But this done, Captain Semmes' task was not half accomplished. There was still the ship herself
to be disposed of, and with her the remaining five hundred and odd passengers, including among
their number a large proportion of women and children. What was to be done? It was clear he
could not fire the ship until all these were safely out of her. It was at least equally clear
that, squeeze and contrive how he would, he could not possibly transfer such a host of prisoners
to his own already sufficiently crowded decks. His only choice, then, was either to release
the captured vessel at once, upon a ransom bond, or to keep her by him for a time in the hope
that something might turn up to obviate the necessity of so unsatisfactory a step. Captain
Semmes decided upon the latter course, and detaining the captain of the Ariel on board his
own ship, sent a prize crew to take charge of the Ariel, with orders to keep company with the
Alabama through the night.

This done, the Alabama returned under easy sail to her station off the Cape, still anxiously
looking out for the homeward-bound steamer, which would of course prove a very far richer prize
than the one home-bound vessel he had captured. The following afternoon the precaution was
taken of disabling the captured vessel, by removing from her engines the "bonnet of the steam
chest and a steam valve," which were sent into safe custody on board the Alabama; care being
also taken to prevent the Ariel from availing herself of her sails as a means of escape should-the
Alabama have to start off in pursuit of her homeward-bound consort.

No homeward-bound steamer, however, appeared, and it was now determined to convey the Ariel
into Kingston, Jamaica, where it was proposed to land the passengers, and after providing the
Alabama, from the prize, with coal, provisions, and other matters of which she stood in need,
to take her out again to sea and burn her. With this view the portions of the machinery which
had been removed during the night were restored to their places, and the two vessels made sail
towards Jamaica, on or about the line which it was supposed would be taken by the Californian
steamer.

The next morning was fine, and, with the prize in company, the island of Navaza was made at
about 9.30 A.M., on the port bow; and five hours afterwards the two steamers were in sight
of the east end of Jamaica. By half-past seven that evening, the Alabama was within about nine
miles of Point Morant Light, and checked her speed to enable the prize to come up with her.

And now a catastrophe occurred which, but for the most careful and excellent management, might
have had most serious results. At about eight o'clock in the evening chase was given to an
hermaphrodite brig, on coming up with which a blank cartridge was fired, and a boat despatched
to board her and examine her papers. At this moment, up came the engineer to report that the
engine had suddenly become entirely useless from the giving way of some of the valve castings,
and that twenty-four hours, at least, would be required before the damage could be repaired.
At this untoward intelligence, the captain's first thought was of the chase, and, casting a
rapid glance in that direction, to his equal amazement and disgust, he perceived that she had
not obeyed the signal to heave to, but was still standing quietly upon her course!

Here was, indeed, a pleasant predicament. Not a step could he stir in pursuit, nor did he dare
fire a shot after the departing vessel, for fear, in the darkness of the night, of sending
to the bottom his own boat, which was now in full pursuit of her. What if the boat should be
led away too far in the ardour of the chase, and of course taking for granted that as soon
as the brigantine's contumacy was discovered, the Alabama herself would at once be after her?
What, too, if the Ariel should get scent of her captor's predicament, and take this favourable
opportunity of showing her a clean pair of heels, carrying off the unlucky prize crew as a
running horse might carry off the unskilful rider who had imprudently bestridden it?

The moment was an anxious one, and great was the relief to the minds of all who were in the
secret, when the welcome sound of oars working regularly backwards and forwards in their rowlocks
was again heard, and the boat returned, having managed to overhaul the stranger; the wind having
fortunately fallen too light for her to escape.

The chase proved to hail from one of the German States, and was just out of Kingston. According
to her statement, this latter port was now suffering from a severe visitation of yellow-fever.
This intelligence caused an entire change in the Alabama's plans. It had been Captain Semmes'
intention to run into Kingston, and endeavour, at all events, to obtain permission to discharge
his numerous prisoners; this being, apparently, the only way in which he could hope to disencumber
himself of them, except by releasing the ship at the same time. To turn some seven hundred
prisoners, however, many of them delicate women and children, adrift in a place known to be
suffering from the fearful scourge of yellow-fever, would have been an act of inhumanity of
which the Confederate captain was quite incapable. Sorely to his disappointment, therefore,
he felt himself compelled to abandon the Kingston scheme, and forego the pleasure of making
a bonfire of the splendid steamer that had fallen into his hands. It is an ill wind that blows
nobody any good, and to the yellow-fever were the passengers by the Ariel indebted for an uninterrupted
voyage, and her owners for the preservation of their valuable vessel.

The question once decided in favour of the Ariel's release, it was, of course, under existing
circumstances, an object of no small importance to get the matter concluded as speedily as
possible. Had she only known her captor's crippled condition she would have had nothing to
do but just to have steamed quietly away, taking the prize-crew with her as compensation for
the inconvenience to which she had been put by her detention. And any moment might reveal the
all-important secret; so without delay, a boat was again sent on board for the master, who
was evidently not a little relieved on being told that the vessel was to be released.

Some little discussion now arose as to the amount of ransom to be exacted, but both parties
were equally, though not as openly, anxious to conclude the transaction; and the amount was
finally fixed at 261,000 dollars--a handsome sum, indeed, but one by no means exorbitant, when
the value of the vessel to be ransomed is taken into consideration.

The bond duly signed, and safely deposited among the other securities of the kind, Captain
Semmes breathed more freely, and a feeling of satisfaction at having steered safely through
a situation of such difficulty, offered some slight compensation for the disappointment arising
from the enforced release of the prize. The two vessels now parted company; all parties, both
civil, naval, and military, on board of the Ariel, uniting their testimony in eulogy of the
quiet, orderly, and respectful conduct of their unwelcome guests. So with mutual amenities
the two courteous enemies parted, the Ariel steering a course to the S.S.W., the Alabama still
hard at work in the repairs of her machinery, standing off and on within easy distance of the
Jamaica coast, and keeping as far as possible from the track of vessels until the untoward
disaster should be repaired.

CHAPTER XXII.

Again ready--Gloomy weather--A Norther--The Arcas--The second Christmas at sea--The war--Plymouth
rock leaven--On the lonely island--"Splicing the main-brace"--Searching for shells--Tired of
hard service--In irons--Well disciplined--A phenomenon--The new year--In memoriam--To sea again.

The exciting episode of the Ariel was followed by a period altogether devoid of incident, though
by no means destitute either of interest or anxiety for those on board the Alabama. From daybreak
to dusk the click of the hammer, and the shrill screaming of the file, arose incessantly from
the engine room, as the engineer and his staff laboured without a pause to repair the damage
to the machinery. The task proved even longer than had been anticipated, and it was not until
the afternoon of the third day that the mischief had been finally remedied, and the Alabama
was pronounced in a condition to resume with safety her destructive career.

Meanwhile, a brighter look-out than ever was kept from her mastheads. There was still a possibility--though
but a slight one--of falling in with the homeward-bound Californian, for which they had been
waiting so long and so anxiously; whilst it was more than ever necessary to care against surprise
from any of the enemy's cruisers, who might fairly be expected to be in considerable force
somewhere in the neighbourhood.

The northern shores of Jamaica, however, off which the Alabama was now lying, standing along
the coast, under easy sail during the day, and at night laying her maintopsail to the mast,
appeared to be but little frequented by vessels of any kind, and the cruiser was permitted
to carry on her repairs without a single interruption in the way of either a chase, or a call
to quarters. And it was perhaps as well that such an interval of rest should have been afforded
after the severe strain of the previous few days. For Captain Semmes, at all events, it was
a great boon, for on that officer's never very robust constitution, the continued anxiety and
constant night-calls on deck, in wind and rain, had had a very serious effect, and he was fairly
laid up with cold and fever.

The evening of Friday, December the 12th, saw the repairs of the machinery of the vessel completed,
the Alabama being at, nightfall about opposite to the little town of St. Anne's. That evening
the crew were exercised at quarters; and the next day, after a thorough cleaning of the decks,
&c., the vessel ran away to the westward of the Island of Jamaica, en route for another point
of rendezvous, at which to take in fresh coal, and other needful supplies.

       *       *       *       *       *

Saturday, December 13th.--... Nothing in sight, and I intend to see nothing--unless it be a
homeward-bound Californian steamer--at present, as it is important I should make the run I
contemplate without being traced. I should have much liked to touch at the Caymans for fruit
and vegetables for the crew, but forbear on this account.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monday, December 15th.--Fresh trade, ship rolling along under topsails. This running down,
down, the ever-constant trade wind--to run up against it, by and by, under steam--is not very
pleasant. Still, God willing, I hope to strike a blow of some importance, and make my way safely
out of the Gulf.

Wednesday, December 17th.--The wind blew quite fresh during the night from about N.E. by N.
To-day it is blowing a moderate gale from about N.N.E. This is probably a norther from the
American coast, modified by its contact with the N.E. trade wind. The clouds look hard and
wintry. Close-reefed at nightfall.... The gale has continued all day, with a rough sea, in
which the ship is rolling and tumbling about. Weather cloudy and gloomy-looking, and the wind
moaning and whistling through the rigging--enough to give one the blues. These are some of
the comforts of sea-going, and we have had our share of them in the Alabama.

Thursday, December 18th.--The gale continues, with dense clouds in every direction obscuring
the heavens so that we get no meridian altitude. I got a glimpse of the sun at about nine minutes
past noon. When one's ship is in a doubtful position, how eagerly and nervously one watches
the shifting clouds near noon, and how remorsely they sometimes close up their dense masses
just at the critical moment, shutting out from us the narrowly-watched face of the sun! One
is foolish enough sometimes almost to feel a momentary resentment against inanimate nature--weak
mortals that we are!

The gale has drifted us so far to leeward that the wind from its present quarter will no longer
permit us to "lay through" the Yucatan passage, so at 2 P.M. we tacked to the southward and
eastward. Weather still thick in the afternoon, with light rain at intervals. We had a very
ugly sea lashing us this morning--the ship rolling so heavily as to awaken me frequently, though
I sleep in a swinging cot; and the water swashing over the decks, and rushing by bucketsful
down the companion-way, which we are obliged to keep open to avoid being smothered.

Friday, December 19th.--The gale continues with the tenacity of a norther, this being the third
day. This is but a foretaste of the weather we may expect in the Gulf of Mexico. Being now
in the Gulf of Honduras, there is but a small strip of land between us and it.

Saturday, December 20th.--As ugly a day as one often sees, with a great variety of wind and
weather. In the morning the wind was fresh from the N.E., with flying clouds, and a bright
sun, now and then obscured. At about 9 A.M. a cloud bank in the north began to rise, and by
11.30 we had a densely overcast sky, with heavy rain-squalls. I was running for Cape Catoche,
and was greatly disappointed at not getting a meridian altitude, especially after the promise
of the morning. At about 11.30 made the land--two islands, as described by the man at the masthead.
At 4 P.M. sounded in twenty-eight fathoms. Weather threatening a gale. At six, double-reefed
the topsails, and sounded in twenty-five fathoms. I shall endeavour to feel my way around the
Cape, and gradually bear up for the westward. The bank is apparently clean and safe, but still
groping one's way in the dark in strange waters is a somewhat nervous operation.

Sunday, December 21st.--We doubled Cape Catoche very successfully last night, hauling around
it gradually in from twenty-five to thirty fathoms, and ran along in the latter depth all night,
course W. and W. by S., sounding every hour. The wind blew half a gale, and the weather looked
threatening. This morning the wind hauled more to the eastward, and moderated somewhat. The
sky still looks wintry, and the sun sheds a lurid light through a semi-transparent stratum
of dull grey clouds. At 11 A.M. mustered the crews and at meridian passed a large steamer (hull
down) steering to the eastward, probably a French ship of war from Vera Cruz.

Monday, December 22nd.--Ran on during the night in a very regular line of soundings of twenty
fathoms, on a W.S.W. course. At 9 P.M., having run within about twenty miles of the Areas,
anchored for the night in twenty fathoms.

Tuesday, December 23rd.--At 9 A.M. called all hands up anchor; and at ten we were under way,
steering W.S.W.; at meridian observed six miles to the northward of the Areas, and altered
course to S.W. At 1.30 P.M. made the Areas half a point on the starboard-bow, distant about
twelve miles; and at sunset came to anchor in eleven fathoms of water, with the south Area
bearing N.W. by N. In the course of the afternoon our coal-ship, which I had ordered to rendezvous
here, hove in sight, and joined us at the anchorage a few minutes after we came to.

Wednesday, December 24th.--In the forenoon went out of the harbour, and examined the entrances
and anchorage. The dangers are all visible, and it is only necessary to give a berth to the
reefs that make off from the points. There is an inner reef making off to the westward from
the northern island; but it, like the other, is visible, and there is no danger whatever in
approaching it. The Areas are three low keys, lying in a triangle; the northern key being the
largest. We found a hut on this latter key, a boat hauled up on the island, a net inside the
hut, a boiler or two for trying out oil, and other evidences of the inhabitancy of fishermen
or turtlers; but this not being the season for these pursuits, everything had apparently been
abandoned for some time. Numerous birds of the gull species were the only living things found
in the island, and of these there were varieties of old birds and their fledglings, and some
of the former were still laying and sitting. They seemed to have no fear of our men, and suffered
themselves to be caught by the hand, and knocked on the head with sticks. The vegetation found
was on the larger island, and on that it consisted of a dense carpeting of sea-kale--not a
shrub of any kind. In the transparent waters on the inner reef, a great variety of the living
coral was found in all its beauty, imitating the growth of the forest on a small scale. At
P.M. we got under way, and stood in and anchored under the south side of the larger island
in nine fathoms, and moored ship with an open hawse to the north.

We entered by the S.E. passage between the south and the north islands. The barque followed
us, coming in by the S.W. passage between the south and the west islands, and anchored a little
to the S.E. of us. Our anchorage is open to the S.E., but at this season it does not blow from
that quarter, and probably would not bring in much sea if it did. We feel very comfortable
to-night in snug berth.

Thursday, December 25th.--Christmas-day!--the second Christmas since we left our homes in the
Sumter. Last year we were buffeting the storms of the North Atlantic, near the Azores; now
we are snugly anchored, in the Arcas: and how many eventful periods have passed in the interval!
Our poor people have been terribly pressed in this wicked and ruthless war, and they have borne
privations and sufferings which nothing but an intense patriotism could have sustained. They
will live in history as a people worthy to be free; and future generations will be astonished
at the folly and fanaticism, wickedness and want of principle, developed by this war among
the Puritan population of the North. And in this class may nine-tenths of the native population
of the Northern States be placed, to such an extent has the "Plymouth Rock" leaven "leavened
the whole lump." A people so devoid of Christian charity, and wanting in so many of the essentials
of honesty, cannot but be abandoned to their own folly by a just and benevolent God.

Our crew is keeping Christmas by a run on shore, which they all seem to enjoy exceedingly.
It is, indeed, very grateful to the senses to ramble about over even so confined a space as
the Arcas, after tossing about at sea in a continued state of excitement for months. Yesterday
was the first time I touched the shore since I left Liverpool on the 18th August last, and
I was only one week in Liverpool after a voyage of three weeks from the Bahamas; so that I
have in fact been but one week on shore in five months. My thoughts naturally turn on this
quiet Christmas-day, in this lonely island, to my dear family. I can only hope, and trust them
to the protection of a merciful Providence. The only sign of a holiday on board to-night is
the usual "splicing of the main-brace"--Anglicè, giving Jack an extra allowance of grog.

Friday, December 26th.--* * * Weather fine, but the barometer has gone down the tenth of an
inch to day, and is now (7 P.M.) 29.96. I shall begin to look for a norther in about twenty-four
hours. We commenced caulking our leaky decks to-day, and despatched the launch to assist in
ballasting the barque. I strolled on the islands to-day, and amused myself searching for shells
along the beach. There are some very pretty diminutive shells to be found, similar to those
on the Florida coast; but none of a larger size than the common "conch," of which there are
a few. We have made free with the turtle nets of the fishermen found in the huts, and have
set them. As yet, we have only caught two or three small turtle. I landed on the south island
to-day, where they are getting off ballast. This islet is occupied exclusively by the black
man-of-war bird; whilst the north islet seems to be divided between the white gannet (with
the lower edges of its wings black) and the black warrior; the colonies being quite distinct.
The birds are still laying and incubating.

Saturday, December 27th.--The barometer has risen again, and the weather still continues fine.
Ballasting the barque, and overhauling and setting up our topmast and lower rigging, and caulking
decks. Took a stroll in the north island towards sunset. It is dull recreation after the novelty
has worn off, with the somewhat tough walking through the sand, and the smell and filth of
the clouds of gannet.

Sunday, December 28th.--Weather cloudy, with the wind from the N.E. At 8.30 descried a schooner
from aloft in the N.W., the first sail we have seen, and quite an unexpected sight at this
season of the year. After we had armed and manned the cutter, to board the sail when it should
heave in sight from the deck, it was ascertained that the look out had been deceived, and that
the supposed sail was probably a cloud in the horizon, it having suddenly disappeared.

At 11 A.M. mustered the crew and inspected the ship. A quiet Sabbath. Strolled on the island
towards sunset, with the gannets for companions, the surf for music, and the heavy sand for
a promenade. The weather cleared at nightfall, with the breeze fresh from the N.N.E. Some of
the men are getting tired of their hard service; the chief boatswain's-mate having applied
to return to England in the barque. Refused him permission, of course. Constant cruising, vigilance
against being surprised by the enemy, salt provisions, and a deprivation of the pleasures of
port, so dear to the heart of a seaman, are probably what most of them did not expect. A tight
rein and plenty of work will cure the evil.

Monday, December 29th.--Weather clear and fine. At daylight hauled the barque alongside, and
commenced coaling. Another seaman got drunk to-day, and seized his bag to go on board the barque
to return to England. Confined him in double irons. Many of my fellows no doubt thought they
were shipping in a sort of privateer, where they would have a jolly good time and plenty of
license. They have been wofully disappointed, for I have jerked them down with a strong hand,
and now have a well-disciplined ship of war, punishment invariably follows immediately on the
heels of the offence. It has taken me three or four months to accomplish this, but when it
is considered that my little kingdom consisted of one hundred and ten of the most reckless
from the groggeries of Liverpool, this is not much.

Tuesday, December 30th.--The weather still continues remarkably fine, with a moderate breeze
from the E.S.E. We finished coaling to-day, and hauled the barque off in the afternoon. Getting
ready generally for our dash at the enemy's coasts; or rather, at the enemy on our own coasts,
of which he is in possession. A brig hove in sight to-day to the S. and E., approaching the
islands on the starboard tack, until she became visible from the bridge, and then tacking--probably
a Frenchman, making way from Vera Cruz to the eastward on the banks. Took my usual afternoon
stroll on shore. About nightfall, the sky assumes a peculiarly lurid aspect, becoming dark
overhead, whilst the western horizon is lighted up with the rays of the setting sun, although
there is not a cloud visible. One witnessing such a scene elsewhere would fancy himself on
the eve of a storm; I attribute it to the reflection from the green waters of the bank. We
have cleared away all the old eggs from the gannets' nests, and these prolific layers are now
supplying us with fresh. Of fish we can catch none, except by trolling. We have no better success
with our turtle nets.

Wednesday, December 31st.--The weather has been good all day, though we have had a heavy surf
on all the reefs, indicating that there is a gale somewhere in our vicinity--probably a norther,
along the Mexican coast to the west of us. The wind is at N.N.E. and moderate, and the barometer
has been rising all day, though it has not been a tenth below 30.21; it is now (4 P.M.) 30.15,
so we shall probably not feel the gale here.

Thursday, January 1st.--The first day of the new year. What will it bring forth? The Almighty
for a wise purpose hides future events from the eyes of mortals, and all we can do is to perform
well our parts, and trust the rest to His guidance. Success, as a general rule, attends him
who is vigilant and active. It is useful to look back on the first day of the new year and
see how we have spent the past; what errors we have committed, and of what faults we have been
guilty, that we may in the future avoid the one and reform the other.

Although the wind blew pretty fresh during the past night, we did not feel the gale in any
force; and to-day it has moderated, and the weather become fine again. Still caulking and painting.
The former seems to be an interminable job with our small gang of caulkers. In the afternoon
a brig approached the island, near enough to be seen, hull up, from the deck. She was beating
up the bank to the eastward probably from Vera Cruz.

Friday, January 2nd.--The wind has been fresh all day from the eastward, bringing in some sea,
and as we have been riding across the tide, the ship has had some motion. Caulking and painting,
tarring down and squaring ratlines, &c. Commenced condensing water to supply the barque for
her return voyage to England. I must get to sea on Tuesday, though I fear we shall not have
finished caulking; but Banks' expedition must be assembling off Galveston, and time is of importance
to us if we would strike a blow at it before it is all landed. My men will rebel a little yet.
I was obliged to-day to trice one of them up for a little insolent behaviour.

Saturday, January 3d.--A gale opened after all from the S.E., which I had hoped to escape,
so rare is it to have blows from this quarter at this season of the year. We have veered to
forty-five fathoms on each chain, and are in six fathoms water astern (there being nine where
the anchors are), and are tailing directly on the surf, with a few hundred feet only between
us and it, which of course makes me feel a little solicitude. We are open to the S.E. winds,
though these blow over the bank from landwards. Still the water is deep and the land distant,
and a considerable sea comes in. I have ordered the fires to be lighted under another boiler
to guard against accidents. The Arcas are a dirty little anchorage for large ships, being but
an open roadstead, affording good shelter only from the north. There is a very small basin
between the two reefs, running off from the northern island, fit for very small vessels, where
they could be made secure against northerly and southerly winds; but everywhere they would
be exposed more or less to wind from the westward.

Sunday, January 4th.--Weather clear, with the wind fresh from the S.E., dying away in the afternoon.
Having determined to get to sea this evening, we commenced getting our coal-bags on board from
the barque, omitting the usual Sunday muster. Busy with the seamen, as usual on such occasions,
sending home their allotments, &c. The weather begins to portend a norther, so I have directed
the engineer to hold on with his steam for the present.

Monday, January 5th.--It did not blow last night as I expected. This morning the wind has gone
round again. I cannot wait longer for the norther,[10] so I must get under way. At 11 A.M.
got under way, and stood out from the anchorage under steam. Let the steam go down, hoisted
the propeller, and put the ship under sail.

[Footnote 10: One of the officers of the Alabama enters in his journal that on this day, in
anticipation of news being received of Lincoln's proclamation, a tombstone, consisting of a
board about four feet in length and two in breadth, was sent on shore and placed in the most
prominent position the largest island afforded. Inscribed on the tombstone, in black letters
on a white ground, was the following:--"In memory of Abraham Lincoln, President of the late
United States, who died of nigger on the brain, 1st January, 1863."--"No. 290." Upon a piece
of paper, protected from the weather, was written in Spanish--"Will the finder kindly favour
me by forwarding this tablet to the United States Consul, at the first point he touches at?"
This affair originated with, and was executed by, the steerage officers.]

CHAPTER XXIII.

Another mission--General Banks' expedition--To Galveston--Sunday the 11th of January--A small
mistake--Preparing for action --The Hatteras--A fight in the dark--Sharp and decisive--Surrender
--Rescue of the crew--Sunk!--Casualties--Out of the hornet's nest.

Contrary to her usual aspirations, the principal wish of the Alabama, as she started on this
fresh cruise, was to reach her destination without having seen a single vessel. She was now
in fact on a service of a kind altogether different from that which had yet occupied her. In
his address to the crew, upon taking command off Terceira, Captain Semmes had promised that
the first moment they were in a condition of training and discipline, to enable them to encounter
the enemy, they should have an opportunity of doing so. That time had come, and laying aside
for a short period her more especial rôle of annihilating as rapidly as possible the enemy's
commerce, the Alabama set steadily out in search of a fight.

The grand expedition of General Banks, which had been the subject of so much speculation in
the United States, and of which their newspapers had long before duly informed the Confederate
cruiser, seemed to offer the most favourable opportunity possible for such an enterprise. The
expedition would, of course, be accompanied by one or more armed vessels, but the principal
portion of it would be composed of troop-ships, crowded with the enemy's soldiers; and should
the Alabama but prove victorious in the fight, these transports would be a prize of more practical
importance than all the grain and all the oil ever carried in a merchantman's hold.

It was a daring adventure certainly. To steer, with a solitary light-armed sloop, close upon
a coast, blockaded from north to south, by hundreds of armed vessels, in deliberate quest of
a squadron, not improbably four or five times stronger than herself, was an act of almost reckless
hardihood, fully in keeping with the rest of the Alabama's career. The event indeed proved
the full danger of the adventure; whilst, at the same time, nothing could have more clearly
showed how utterly groundless were the dastardly imputations upon the courage and prowess of
her crew, poured out daily from the foul-mouthed organs of the Northern press. There could
be no question of the fighting qualities, or disposition, of the Confederate cruiser, after
such a test as this.

For five days the Alabama kept steadily on her course for Galveston, where she expected to
find the fleet of which she was in search. At length, on Sunday, the 11th January--her "lucky
day"--the moment so anxiously looked for came.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our position at noon--writes Captain Semmes--put us just within thirty miles of Galveston,
and I stood on, intending either just to sight the shipping at a great distance, without being
seen myself, or else to anchor just out of sight until the moon should rise the following night,
which would be about half-past eleven, and then run in, and attack, as I hoped, "Banks' expedition."
Owing, however, to a little carelessness in the look-out at "masthead," we were permitted to
approach the ships anchored off the bar in such plain sight, before they were announced, that
we were discovered, although we tacked immediately and stood off, in the hopes of eluding the
vigilance of the enemy.

There were three ships found lying off the bar--one heavily-sparred ship, which our look-out
took for a sail frigate, but which afterwards proved to be the Brooklyn steamer, our old friend
that chased us in the Sumter, and two steamers supposed to be propellers. Very soon one of
the steamers was seen to be getting up steam, and in about an hour and a half afterwards she
was reported to be under weigh, standing out for us.

I lowered the propeller, and directed steam to be got in readiness, and awaited the approach
of the stranger, who overhauled us very slowly, and seemed to reconnoitre us, as he came along,
with great caution.

All this time we were standing on under topsails away from the bar, and the stranger was approaching
us stern on. I gave my ship a little motion with the engine occasionally, both to draw the
enemy--for I, of course, supposed him to be such--away from his consorts, so that in case of
a conflict the latter might not hear our guns, and to prolong the time until dark to enable
me to take in my topsails, and close with him in so short a time that the movement should not
be noticed by him until too late to escape, which I feared he might attempt, if he saw me turn
upon him with the intention of pursuing him.

Accordingly, soon after dark--the enemy in the meantime having approached us so near as not
to endanger our losing sight of him--I clewed up, and furled the topsails, beat to quarters,
and doubled suddenly upon the stranger. He came in quite boldly, and when within hailing distance
of us, hailed us, and inquired--

"What ship is that?"

"Her Majesty's ship Petrel. What ship's that?"

To this inquiry there was no reply, and although we repeated it several times there was no
rejoinder.

During the colloquy, I endeavoured to place myself in a raking position astern of him, which
he as carefully avoided by keeping his broadside to me. From this manoeuvre I knew him pretty
certainly to be an enemy, and having approached to within about two hundred yards, I directed
my First Lieutenant to repeat the question. "What ship's that?" was accordingly again shouted,
and this time there was a reply.

We distinctly heard that he was an United States something or other, but the name we could
not make out. I then directed the First Lieutenant to tell him that this was the Confederate
States steamer Alabama, and to open fire on him immediately, which we did from our starboard
battery. He returned our fire in a minute or two, and the action was thus commenced.

We continued to run side by side at a distance ranging from two to five hundred yards, both
of us keeping up a rapid fire of both artillery and rifles, when, after the lapse of thirteen
minutes, the enemy fired two guns from his off, or starboard side, and showed a light above
his deck in token of his being whipped.

At once we ceased firing, and approaching him still nearer, asked him if he surrendered and
needed assistance. To both of these questions he replied in the affirmative, and we immediately
despatched our quarter boats to him; these, with his own four boats, were busily employed in
transporting the crew on board, which had only been accomplished when the ship went down.[11]

[Footnote 11: United States Consulate, Kingston,

Jamaica, Jan., 21, 1868.

SIR,--It is my painful duty to inform the Department of the destruction of the United States
steamer Hatteras, recently under my command, by the rebel steamer Alabama, on the night of
the 11th instant, off the coast of Texas. The circumstances of the disaster are as follows:--

Upon the afternoon of the 11th inst., at 2.30 P.M., while at anchor in company with the fleet
under Commodore Bell, off Galveston, Texas, I was ordered by signal from the United States
flag-ship Brooklyn to chase a sail to the southward and eastward. I got under weigh immediately,
and steamed with all speed in the direction indicated. After some time, the strange sail could
be seen from the Hatteras, and was ascertained to be a steamer, which fact I communicated to
the flag-ship by signal. I continued the chase, and rapidly gained upon the suspicious vessel.
Knowing the slow rate of speed of the Hatteras, I at once suspected that deception was being
practised, and hence ordered the ship to be cleared for action, with everything in readiness
for a determined attack and a vigorous defence.

When within about four miles of the vessel, I observed that she had ceased to steam, and was
lying broadside and awaiting us. It was nearly seven o'clock, and quite dark; but notwithstanding
the obscurity of the night, I felt assured, from the general character of the vessel and her
manoeuvres, that I should soon encounter the rebel steamer Alabama. Being able to work but
four guns on the side of the Hatteras--two short 32 pounders, one 30 pounder rifled Parrot
gun, and one 20 pounder rifled gun,--I concluded to close with her that my guns might be effective,
if necessary.

I came within easy speaking range--about seventy-five yards--and upon asking "What steamer
is that?" received the answer, "Her Britannic Majesty's ship Petrel." I replied that I would
send a boat aboard, and immediately gave the order. In the meantime the vessels were changing
positions, the stranger endeavouring to gain a desirable position for a raking fire. Almost
simultaneously with the piping away of the boat the strange craft again replied, "We are the
Confederate steamer Alabama," which was accompanied with a broadside. I at the same moment
returned the fire. Being well aware of the many vulnerable points of the Hatteras, I hoped,
by closing with the Alabama, to be able to board her, and thus rid the seas of the piratical
craft. I steamed directly for the Alabama, but she was enabled by her great speed and the foulness
of the bottom of the Hatteras, and consequently her diminished speed, to thwart my attempt
when I had gained a distance of but thirty yards from her. At this range musket and pistol
shots were exchanged. The firing continued with great vigour on both sides. At length a shell
entered amidships in the hold, setting fire to it, and at the same instant --as I can hardly
divide the time--a shell passed through the sick bay, exploding in an adjoining compartment,
also producing fire. Another entered the cylinder, filling the engine-room and deck with steam,
and depriving me of my power to manoeuvre the vessel, or to work the pumps, upon which the
reduction of the fire depended.

With the vessel on fire in two places, and beyond human power, a hopeless wreck upon the waters,
with her walking-beam shot away, and her engine rendered useless, I still maintained an active
five, with the double hope of disabling the Alabama and attracting the attention of the fleet
off Galveston, which was only twenty-eight miles distant.

It was soon reported to me that the shells had entered the Hatteras at the water-line, tearing
off entire sheets of iron, and that the water was rushing in, utterly defying every attempt
to remedy the evil, and that she was rapidly sinking. Learning the melancholy truth, and observing
that the Alabama was on my port bow, entirely beyond the range of my guns, doubtless preparing
for a raking fire of the deck, I felt I had no light to sacrifice uselessly, and without any
desirable result, the lives of all under my command.

To prevent the blowing up of the Hatteras from the fire, which was making much progress, I
ordered the magazine to be flooded, and afterwards a lee gun was fired. The Alabama then asked
if assistance was desired, to which an affirmative answer was given.

The Hatteras was then going down, and in order to save the lives of my officers and men, I
caused the armament on the port side to be thrown overboard. Had I not done so, I am confident
the vessel would have gone down with many brave hearts and valuable lives. After considerable
delay, caused by the report that a steamer was seen coming from Galveston, the Alabama sent
us assistance; and I have the pleasure of informing the Department that every living being
was conveyed safely from the Hatteras to the Alabama.

Two minutes after leaving the Hatteras, she went down, bow first, with her pennant at the masthead,
with all her muskets and stores of every description, the enemy not being able, owing to her
rapid sinking, to obtain a single weapon.

The battery upon the Alabama brought into action against the Hatteras numbered nine guns, consisting
of six long 32 pounders, one 100 pounder, one 68 pounder, and one 24 pounder rifled gun. The
great superiority of the Alabama, with her powerful battery, and her machinery under the water-line,
must be at once recognized by the Department, who are familiar with the construction of the
Hatteras, and her total unfitness for a conflict with a regular built vessel of war.

The distance between the Hatteras and the Alabama during the action varied from twenty-five
to one hundred yards. Nearly fifty shots were fired from the Hatteras, and I presume a greater
number from the Alabama.

I desire to refer to the efficient and active manner in which Acting-master Porter, executive
officer, performed his duty. The conduct of the Assistant-surgeon, Edward S. Matthews, both
during the action and afterwards, in attending to the wounded, demands my unqualified commendation.
I would also bring to the favourable notice of the Department Acting-master's mate McGrath,
temporarily performing duty as gunner. Owing to the darkness of the night and the peculiar
construction of the Hatteras, I am only able to refer to the conduct of those officers who
came under my especial attention; but from the character of the contest, and the amount of
damage done to the Alabama, I have personally no reason to believe that any officer failed
in his duty.

To the men of the Hatteras I cannot give too much praise. Their enthusiasm and bravery were
of the highest order.

I enclose the report of Assistant-surgeon E.S. Matthews, by which you will observe that five
men were wounded and two killed. The missing, it is hoped, reached the fleet at Galveston.

I shall communicate to the Department, in a separate report, the movements of myself and my
command from the time of our transfer to the Alabama until the departure of the earliest mail
from this place to the United States.

I am, very respectfully, your obedient servant,

   H.C. BLAKE,
   Lieutenant Commanding.

Hon. Gideon Welles, Secretary of the Navy, Washington.

For a further account of this action from the journal of one of the junior officers, see Appendix.]

The prize proved to be the United States gunboat Hatteras, Lieut.-Commanding H.C. Blake, which
officer came on board after his crew had been transported, and delivered up his sword. I said
to him:--

"I am glad to see you on board the Alabama, and we will endeavour to make your time as comfortable
as possible."

The Hatteras had the following armament, viz.:--32 pounders of 27 cwt., 4; 30 pounders, rifled,
2; 20 pounders, rifled, 1; 12 pounders, howitzer, 1: total, 8.

The armament of the Alabama was:--32 pounders of 52 cwt., 6; 100 pounders, rifled, 1; 24 pounders,
rifled, 1; 8-inch shell gun, 1: total, 9.

A great disparity in weight of metal in our power; but we equalized this to a considerable
extent by the fair fight which we showed the enemy in approaching him so very close as to render
his small guns almost as efficient as larger ones.

The tonnage of the Hatteras was eleven hundred tons; material, iron, with watertight compartments;
age, eighteen months. Her crew numbered a hundred and eight men, and eighteen officers; our
own numbering a hundred and eleven men, and twenty-six officers.

The casualties on both sides were slight. On board the enemy two were missing (firemen), supposed
to have been killed in the fire-room, and three wounded, one of them severely, and two slightly.
On board ourselves, only two slightly wounded.

After the action had been over an hour or more, and whilst I was steaming off on my course,
it was reported to me that a boat of the enemy, containing an acting master and five men, which
had been lowered before we opened fire upon him, to board "Her Majesty's steamer Petrel," had
escaped. As the sea was smooth and the wind blowing gently towards the shore, distant only
about nineteen miles, this boat probably reached the shore in safety in five or six hours.
The night was clear and starlit, and it would have no difficulty in shaping its course. But
for these circumstances, I should have turned back to look for it, hopeless as this task must
have proved in the dark. The weather continued moderate all night, and the wind to blow on shore.

It was ascertained that Galveston had been retaken by us, and that the Brooklyn and four of
the enemy's steam-sloops were off the port, awaiting a reinforcement of three other ships from
New Orleans to cannonade the place. So there was no "Banks' expedition," with its transports,
heavily laden with troops, &c., to be attacked, and but for the bad look-out of our man at
the masthead, we should have got instead into a hornet's nest.

CHAPTER XXIV.

Crowded with prisoners--Chasing a friend--At Jamaica--Enthusiastic reception--Rest on shore--Speech
making--Up anchor!--A prize--Case of the Golden Rule--Reinstating the discipline--Capture of
the Chastelain--San Domingo--The Palmetto--Men of the day in the United States.

The Alabama's little fighting holiday was over, and she returned to her appointed task of annoying
the enemy's commerce. Her course lay towards Jamaica, the captain being anxious to relieve
himself as soon as possible of the nest of prisoners that crowded his decks, and were necessarily
the occasion of considerable inconvenience to both men and officers. The latter especially
were most uncomfortably crowded, the captain setting the example of self-sacrifice, by giving
up his state-room for the benefit of Lieutenant Blake, Commander of the sunken Hatteras.

It may be supposed that, under these circumstances, the Alabama was not very anxious to increase
the number of her involuntary passengers. Still duty was duty, and when, on the day following
the engagement, a sail was reported from aloft, chase was at once given, and expectation again
on tiptoe at the thought of a prize. No prize, however, was to be taken that day. At about
half-past two, the Alabama came within signal-distance of the chase, and was already busy exchanging
the usual information, when the "stranger" barque was discovered to be no other than their
old friend and faithful tender the Agrippina; and the Alabama continued her course, not a little
amused at her own blunder in thus chasing her most particular friend.

Another week passed by with no event of interest, the Alabama working her way towards Jamaica,
through a succession of more or less heavy gales, which, in the crowded state of the ship,
were anything but comfortable. On the 20th January, she sighted land a little before daybreak,
passing Portland at about 3 P.M., and arriving off the lighthouse on Plum Point at half-past
four. Here French colours were displayed in case of accident, and a gun fired for a pilot.
At about halt-past six, that important individual made his appearance, and in about three-quarters
of an hour more the Alabama was safely at anchor in Port Royal harbour.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wednesday, January 21st.--Found here several English men-of-war--the Jason, the Challenger,
the Greyhound, &c., the Commanders of all of which called on us. I saw the Commodore (Dunlop)
this morning, and requested of the Governor through him permission to land my prisoners, &c.,
which was readily granted. Made arrangements for coaling and provisioning the ship, and for
repairing damages; and in the afternoon ran up to Kingston, and thence proceeded to the mountains
with Mr. Fyfe.

Thursday, January 22nd.--Had a delightful ride over a fine, natural McAdamized road, for about
ten miles, and thence by horse and bridle-path through the most picturesque of mountainous
regions, with its lovely valleys, abrupt precipices, streams of water, luxuriant foliage, &c.,
to Flamstead, the residence of the Rev. Mr. Fyfe, who soon returned from town and received
me most hospitably.[12] Spent a delightful, quiet day, riding to Flamstead, and walking in
the afternoon along the winding mountain paths. Jamaica--that is, the south side--is a wilderness,
and the town of Kingston a ruin. The negro population idle, thriftless, and greatly subject
to diseases of an inflammatory kind. No morals--gross superstition, &c.

[Footnote 12: As soon as our arrival became known the most intense excitement prevailed. It
is impossible to describe the hospitable welcome we received, every one placing their houses
at our disposal. Up to 9 P.M. visitors were constantly received, all expressing a most hearty,
encouraging sympathy for our cause, and speaking hopefully for our prospects. Still the same
enthusiasm prevails: visitors of each sex and every class coming on board, officers and men
going on shore, and receiving the most flattering attentions.]

Friday, January 23rd.--Rode over to, and spent a day and night at, Blocksburgh, visiting en
route the English-looking cottage of Captain Kent, now absent in England. Had some lady-visitors
at Blocksburgh in the evening.

Saturday, January 24th.--Returned to town to-day by the way of Mr. Mais' fairy little cottage,
kept in the nicest of order, and in a perfect picture of a country. Upon my arrival in town
I found that my friends had kindly put a notice in the papers, informing the good people that
I would be at the Exchange at noon, &c. &c. Was obliged to go, and made a speech to the people,
which was well received. Returned on board in the evening.

Sunday, January 25th.--Workmen still engaged trying to get the ship ready for sea to-night.
Returned my visits to the English Captains, all of whom I found very agreeable. Settling the
ship's bills, and getting the drunken portion of my crew on board by aid of the police. Three
of them in broad daylight jumped into a shore boat and tried to escape; but we pursued and
captured them. Work all done, and fires lighted at 5 P.M., and at half-past eight we steamed
out of the harbour.

Monday, January 26th.--At 10.30 A.M. descried a sail, which we came up with at 1.20 P.M. She
proved to be the Golden Rule, from New York for Aspinwall. Captured and burned her, there being
no certificate on board of the neutrality of the cargo. This vessel had on board masts, spars,
and a complete set of rigging, for the United States brig Bainbridge, lately obliged to cut
away her masts in a gale at Aspinwall. Nine prisoners. At about 6 P.M., the prize being well
on fire, steamed on our course.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE GOLDEN RULE.

No certificate of the neutral ownership of any portion of the cargo. The only bills of lading
found on board are the following:--

Marcial and Co. to Gregorio Miro and Co., 2069.28 dollars; insured against war risk.

Keeler and Vonhiss to John Wilson, 724.20 dollars. Consigned to order, and for account and
risk of "whom it may concern."

Woolsey, consigned to order. Amount not stated, and no letter of advice.

Berner to Field. Amount not stated, and no letter of advice.

Herques and Maseras to Juan Melendez, 41.58 dollars.

F. Hernias to Gillas. Amount not stated, and no letter.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Golden Rule furnished a supply of papers containing an abundance of welcome news. From
them the Alabama learned of the safe escape of her sister cruiser, the Florida, from Mobile,
as well as of the foundering of the United States gunboat Monitor in a gale, during her passage
down the coast. The good news was also received of the entire failure of an attack on Vicksburg.

The time was now pretty much taken up in reinstating the discipline which had been somewhat
shaken by the brief stay at Port Royal, and in awarding due punishment for the various offences
there committed. On the whole, however, considering the hard service the men had undergone,
and the length of the confinement they had sustained without a single "spell" on shore, the
offences could not be considered very numerous. A few of the petty officers were disrated,
and various minor penalties inflicted, and on the 31st of January the court-martial, which
had been employed on this unpleasant but necessary service, terminated its sittings and was
dissolved.

Meanwhile another prize had fallen into the Alabama's hands, in the shape of the United States
brig Chastelain, of Boston, from Martinique and Guadaloupe for Cienfuegos; and the following
day, after duly committing her prize to the flames, the Alabama arrived at San Domingo, dropping
anchor off the town at 6 P.M.

In the harbour were two other vessels: one a New York brig, under English colours. The anchor
had not been long down when a visit was received from the Captain of the Port, who proved to
be an old acquaintance of Captain Semmes, he having piloted the brig Porpoise about the island
at the time when the latter officer was First Lieutenant of that vessel. He seemed much pleased
to renew the acquaintance, and volunteered to take on shore, to the Governor, Captain Semmes'
request for permission to land his prisoners.

Soon he returned, bringing with him a commander of the Spanish navy with the required permission.
The prisoners were accordingly sent on shore, from whence they shortly returned, somewhat crestfallen,
with the intelligence that no one was allowed to land after dark. The Captain, however, being
anxious to depart, application was made to the authorities, who courteously permitted the prisoners
to be sent for the night to the government vessel, undertaking to send them on shore in the
morning.

This matter was settled, the Alabama again stood out, having thus displayed for the first time,
in San Domingo, the flag of the young republic.

The only excitement of the next few days was an alarm of fire, which, on the 2nd of February,
occasioned for a short time very considerable anxiety. It came from the carelessness of the
captain of the hold, who, in direct violation of the written rules of the ship, took a naked
light into the spirit-room to pump off liquor by. The moment he commenced operations, the fumes
of the spirit took fire, placing the ship for a few minutes in imminent peril. The danger,
however, was brief, for the captain happened to be on deck at the time, and at once gave the
order to beat to quarters; before it could be obeyed the fire was extinguished, and the ship's
company quitte pour la peur. Not so, however, the delinquent captain of the hold, who was at
once sent to expiate his fault in the durance vile of a suit of double irons.

The 3rd February brought a small prize in the United States schooner Palmetto, from New York
for St. John's, Porto Rico, with a mixed cargo of provisions. She, too, laid claim to immunity
on the ground of neutrality of cargo; but inquiry soon led to condemnation, and after taking
from her a large quantity of biscuit, cheese, &c., the crew were removed on board the Alabama,
and the schooner burned.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE PALMETTO.

The schooner was U.S., per register and flag. The cargo was shipped by Herques and Maseras,
of New York, to Vincente Brothers, in San Juan, Porto Rico. There was no affidavit or certificate
of neutral property on board, and the cargo would have been condemnable on this ground alone.
It being in an enemy's ship, it is presumed to be enemy's property until the contrary be shown
by proper evidence under oath. The Master, upon examination, testified that he had no knowledge
of the ownership of the cargo; and this, though he was the agent and charterer of the ship,
as well as Master. The correspondence found on board--that is to say, a letter from the shippers
to the consignee--states that the cargo is shipped, two thirds on account of the consignee,
and one third on account of the shippers--the parties being the joint owners of the undivided
cargo in these proportions. Therefore, whatever may be the general business-relations of the
parties, they are, quoad this shipment, partners; and the house in the enemy's country having
shipped the goods, the other partner's share is condemnable, notwithstanding his residence
in a neutral country. See 3rd Phillimore, 605; and the Vigilantia, 1 Rob., pp. 1-14, 19; the
Susa, ib., p. 255.

       *       *       *       *       *

Several days now passed without adventure of any kind, the monotony of alternate gales and
calms being only varied by the receipt of a few old newspapers from the schooner Hero, of Yarmouth,
N.S., giving news of the angry "resolutions" passed by the New York Chamber of Commerce with
reference to the Alabama; and also--which was of considerably more importance--the information
that the Vanderbilt and Sacramento were both to sail towards the end of January, in pursuit
of the Confederate cruiser.

Sunday, the 15th February, dawned dark and gloomy, the wind blowing nearly a whole gale from
the north, and the Alabama dashing along, with the wind well abeam, under reefed topsails.

This boisterous Sabbath, writes Captain Semmes, is the second anniversary of my resignation
from the United States navy, and of course it has called up many reminiscences. I have more
and more reason, as time rolls on, to be gratified at my prompt determination to quit the service
of a corrupt and fanatical majority, which even then had overridden the constitution, and shown
itself in so aggressive and unscrupulous a form as to give us just cause of alarm.

But what shall we say of its course since? If the historian perform his duty faithfully, posterity
will be amazed at the wickedness and corruption of the Northern and Western peoples, and will
wonder by what process such a depth of infamy was reached in so short a time.

The secret lies here. The politicians had become political stock-jobbers, and the seekers of
wealth had become usurers and swindlers; and into these two classes may be divided nearly the
whole Yankee population. Such is "Plymouth Rock" in our day, with its Beechers in the pulpit,
and its Lincoln in the chair of Washington! With its Sumners and its Lovejoys in Congress,
and its Simmonses et id genus omne in the contract market!

CHAPTER XXV.

Not easily baffled--Two prizes--The Olive Jane--The Golden Eagle--The white ensign saluted--In
trepidation--Obstinacy--The Washington--The William Edward--Patience Rewarded--Case of the
John S. Parks.

More than a week passed without the occurrence of any event worthy of record. Saturday, the
21st February, however, brought an exciting chase. By 8 A.M. four vessels had been reported
in sight. The first seen proved too far ahead and to windward, to be worth chasing, and sail
was then made in the direction of two others, which were observed to be exchanging signals
with considerable diligence. Their conversation ended, they parted company and sailed off in
different directions, evidently with the object of distracting the attention of the Alabama
which was now in full chase.

But the Alabama was not so easily to be baffled. Devoting her attention first to the vessel
which appeared by her slower rate of sailing to offer the promise of an easier capture, she
got up steam as she went along, and the black smoke was already poured from her funnel and
the propeller beginning to revolve as she came within hail of the chase. A blank cartridge
was fired as usual; but the stranger kept doggedly upon his way, evidently determined, if he
could not escape himself, at all events to do his best to increase the chances of his consort.

Even this chivalrous determination, however, was of no avail. A second gun from the pursuer
quickly followed upon the first, and this time the command was pointed by the emphatic accompaniment
of a round shot which went whizzing through the rigging of the chase. Finding his enemy in
earnest, the ship now gave up the game, and hove to with the United States colours at her peak.
Putting a prize crew on board, the Alabama wore round, and started at full speed in the direction
of the second vessel, which was making the best of her way off, and was by this time some fifteen
miles distant. The Alabama was now, however, under a full head of steam, flying through the
water at the rate of three to one of the chase, and by the end of a couple of hours, she also
was brought to, with the Stars and Stripes flying, and her maintopsail to the mast.

A rapid investigation of papers resulted in the decision that the claim of neutral ownership
of the cargo was totally unsustained by evidence, and the crew of the Olive Jane[13] were transferred
to the Alabama, and the barque set on fire, whilst her captor again came round and ran down
to meet his other prize. On communicating with the prize-master in charge she proved to be
the United States ship Golden Eagle, from Howland's Island in the Pacific Ocean to Cork for orders.

[Footnote 13: Of Boston, from Bordeaux to New York, with a partial cargo of French wines and
"knickknackeries."]

The following particulars relating to these two vessels, are given in Captain Semmes' journal:--

CASE OF THE OLIVE JANE.

Under United States colours and register--from Bordeaux for New York--cargo consigned generally
to houses in New York, with the exception of five of the shipments which are consigned to order;
but there is no claim among the papers of French property, even in these latter shipments,
and non constat but that the property is American, and that the consignment on the face of
the papers was made in this manner to give a semblance of French ownership, until the property
should reach its destination, when the real owner would claim it under a duly-indorsed bill
of lading, forwarded to him by steamer. At all events, the presumption of law is, that all
property found on board an enemy is enemy's property, until the contrary be shown by proper
evidence; and no evidence has been presented in this case at all. The master, though quarter
owner of the barque, and who, consequently, should be well informed as to her cargo, &c., knows
nothing, except that one of the shippers--a Frenchman--told him that forty casks of wine, worth,
perhaps, twenty dollars per cask, belonged to him. Vessel and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE GOLDEN EAGLE.

Ship under United States colours and register. From San Francisco, via Howland's Island, for
Cork, laden with guano by the American Guano Company. Cargo consigned to "orders." There is
no question, therefore, of property. Ship and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the morning of the 23rd February four vessels were in sight; but on overhauling them they
one and all proved to be under the protection of neutral flags. One of them, however--a Frenchman
from Buenos Ayres to Havre--relieved the Alabama of two French prisoners, an artist and his
son, captured on board one of the late prizes. One of the other vessels--the Prince of Wales,
from Melbourne to England--dipped her ensign to the Yankee colours displayed from the Alabama,
on which the latter, unwilling to appropriate a compliment intended for another, lowered the
Stars and Stripes and hoisted her own ensign. Hardly had the change been effected when a bustle
was observed on board the English vessel, and passengers and crew crowded on deck to have a
look at the renowned Confederate. The formal compliment accorded to the flag first displayed
was renewed with hearty good-will, and this time accompanied by the most enthusiastic demonstrations
from all on board, the men cheering and the ladies waving their handkerchiefs in honour of
the gallant little cruiser of which they had heard so much.

The next day, the Alabama being in the vicinity of the crossing of the 30th parallel by the
San Roque and India-bound United States ships, sail was shortened, and a bright look-out kept,
but until nearly sunset nothing was seen; and when, at length, "Sail, ho!" was cried, and the
Confederate cruiser on nearing the stranger showed the Yankee colours, it was replied to by
the tricolour of France. Again, at 9.30 P.M., when another vessel was descried, there was still
no prize, although it required two cartridges, a chase of three-quarters of an hour, and vociferous
demands in both English and French to compel the vessel to heave to. When, at last, the Master
obeyed the command, it was discovered that the brig was a Portuguese, bound from Pernambuco
to Lisbon. The officer despatched to overhaul the chase found, on stepping on board, everything
in the wildest confusion, and everybody so alarmed, that neither skipper, mates, nor seamen
seemed to know what they were about. So great, indeed, was their trepidation, that upon an
explanation being asked of their strange conduct, the excuse given was that they were too frightened
to heave to!

The 25th February was a blank, only two sail being seen; the one a Dutchman, the other English.
The master of the latter coolly asked the Alabama to take to England a discharged British seaman,
and on the following morning another master of an English ship made a similar request--both
being met with a refusal. On the 26th, no less than thirteen sail were sighted by the Alabama,
but not one of them displayed the Yankee flag. The only excitement of the day was an obstinate
Hamburgh barque, which refused to show colours until the Confederate cruiser was nearly upon
her, and even then a blank cartridge was required to bring her to.

After the large number of neutrals that the Alabama had overhauled, came a prize. On the morning
of the 27th February, the United States ship Washington was captured. The vessel was the property
of the enemy, but as she carried a cargo of guano from the Chincha Islands, on account of the
Peruvian government, consigned to their agents at Antwerp, the Washington was released on giving
a ransom bond for 50,000 dollars. The prisoners on board the Alabama having been transferred
to the capture, the two vessels parted company; the United States ship going on its course,
rejoicing that the neutral cargo she carried had saved her from a fiery end. Two days after,
another prize was taken. On the 1st March, the Bethia Thayer, of Rockland, Maine, was overhauled,
and like the Washington, having on board guano the property of the Peruvian government, was
released on a bond of 50,000 dollars.

Shortly after, a suspicious barque, with the English flag at the peak, hove in sight. Immediately
the Alabama set every stitch of canvas, the stranger did the same, and away the two dashed
before the fresh south-wester that was blowing. The chase was most exciting, and lasted seven
hours; but gradually the Alabama overhauled the suspicious craft, and at 4.30 P.M. was enabled
to signal it. The Confederate hoisted the United States flag, and announced herself by an assumed
name. The barque replied that she was the William Edward, from Bahia, for Liverpool. After
some further communication, which convinced the Alabama that the barque was English, the cruiser
announced her real name, and permitted the William Edward to proceed on her course. At nightfall
another ship was chased, which, upon being brought to, also proved to be English, the Nile,
bound from Akyab to London. The master of this vessel informed the boarding-officer that a
United States man-of-war, supposed to be the Ino, was in the South Atlantic, in eager search
of the Alabama!

At daybreak, on the 2d March, a sail was made out through the hazy atmosphere, slowly steering
towards the cruiser. Patiently the Confederate waited, as the light wind from the south bore
the stranger towards them; their patience, too, was rewarded, for at 6 A.M., a boarding-officer
stepped on board the ship John S. Parks, of Hallowall, Maine. The skipper, his wife, and crew,
were transferred to the cruiser, together with sundry stores and provisions; and then, after
Captain Semmes had carefully examined the papers of the capture, the prize was set fire to,
making number thirty-five on the list of the Alabama's successes. With respect to the cargo
of the Parks, there was a plea of neutrality set up, to which, as the following extracts will
show, Captain Semmes gave the fullest consideration:--

CASE OF THE SHIP JOHN S. PARKS.

Ship under U.S. colours and register. Cargo, white pine lumber, laden on board at the port
of New York. The cargo was shipped by Edward F. Davidson, who appears, from the statement of
the master, to be a large lumber dealer, and is consigned to Messrs. Zimmerman, Faris, and
Co., at Monte Video, or Buenos Ayres. Annexed to the bill of lading is what purports to be
an affidavit sworn to before "Pierrepont Edwards," who signs himself as "vice-consul." Above
his name are the words, "by the consul," from which it appears he professes to act for the
consul, and not for himself as "vice-consul."[14] The affiant is Joseph H. Snyder, who describes
himself as of "128, Pearl Street, New York." He states that the cargo was shipped by Edward
F. Davidson, "for and on account of John Fair and Co., of London, &c." First, as to the form
of this affidavit. A vice-consul is one who acts in place of a consul when the latter is absent
from his post; and when this is the case, he signs himself as vice-consul, and his acts take
effect proprio vigore, and not as the acts of the consul--which this act purports to do. Further,
the Master was unable to verify this document, which, to give it validity, he should have been
able to do--he declaring that he could not say whether it was a forgery or not. "Although,
as has been said, the ship's papers found on board are proper evidence, yet they are so only
when properly verified; for papers by themselves prove nothing, and are a mere dead letter
if they are not supported by the oaths of persons in a situation to give them validity." 3rd
Phillimore, 394. Further, "Valin sur l'Ordonnance" says, "Il y a plus, et parceque les pièces
en forme trouvées abord, peuvent encore avoir été concertées en fraude, il a été ordonné par
arrêt de conseil du 26 Octobre, 1692, que les dépositions contraires des gens de l'équipage
prís, prévaudrojent à ces pièces." The latter authority is express to the point, that papers
found on board a ship are not to be credited, if contradicted by the oath of any of the crew,
and I take it that an inability to verify amounts to the same thing. For if this had been a
bona fide transaction, it was the duty of the party interested to take the master before the
consul to witness the taking of the deposition, so that he might verify "the paper," if captured.
But why should Mr. Snyder be the party to make this affidavit? He was not the shipper, but
Davidson, a lumber dealer; and Davidson, who, if he sold the lumber at all, must have known
to whom he sold it, was the proper person to testify to the fact. Further: the master says
that Snyder bought the lumber from Davidson, as he was informed by his (the master's) brother,
who was the owner of the ship. If so, then Snyder being the owner of the lumber (whether on
his own or foreign account, it matters not) was the real shipper, and not Davidson, and the
proper person to consign it to the consignees, either in his own name, or in the name of his
principal, if he were an agent. But the bill of lading, and Davidson's letter to the consignees,
show that Davidson was both the shipper and the consignor. The ship was also chartered by Davidson,
and 13,000,000 dollars freight-money paid in advance, for which Davidson required the owner
of the ship to secure him by a policy of insurance against both marine and war risk--the policy
made payable to him (Davidson) in case of loss. Two questions arise upon that policy: 1st--why,
if the property were bonâ fide neutral (the cargo itself was also insured in London) the war
clause should be inserted? and, 2nd--why Davidson should make the policy payable to himself?
If he advanced this freight money on the credit of the London house, he had no insurable interest
in it; and if the lumber really belonged to the London house, and was going to their partners
or agents at the port of delivery, why should Davidson pay the freight in advance at all? And
if Snyder purchased the lumber of Davidson, why should Snyder not have made the advance for
his principal instead of Davidson? The conclusion would seem to be, that Davidson was shipping
this lumber on his own account to agents, in whose hands he had no funds or credit, and as
the lumber might not be sold readily, the ship could not be paid her freight unless it were
paid in advance? Further: the ship had a contingent destination. She was either to go to Monte
Video or Buenos Ayres, as the consignees might find most advantageous. This looks very much
like hunting for a market. But further still. Although Davidson prepared a formal letter of
consignment to Zimmerman, Faris, and Co., to accompany the consular certificate, he at the
same time writes another letter, in which he says, "The cargo of John S. Parks I shall have
certified to by the British Consul as the property of British subjects. You will find it a
very good cargo, and should command the highest prices." How is Davidson interested in the
price which this cargo will bring, if it belongs, as pretended, to the house in London? And
if Davidson sold to Snyder, and Snyder was the agent of the house in London, Davidson should
have still less concern with it. In that same letter in which a general account of recent lumber
shipments is given, the following remarks occur:--"Messrs. Harbeck and Co. have a new barque,
Anne Sherwood, in Portland, for which they have picked up in small lots a cargo of lumber costing
20,000 dollars. I have tried to make an arrangement for it to go to you (on account of John
Fair and Co., of London?); but they as yet only propose to do so, you taking half-interest
at twenty-five dollars, and freight at eighteen dollars, payable at yours (port?), which is
too much. If I can arrange it on any fair terms, I will do so for the sake of keeping up your
correspondence with H. and Co."

[Footnote 14: Extract from a letter, captured on the barque Amazonian, from Mr. Edward F. Davidson
to Messrs. Zimmerman, Faris, and Co., of Monte Video:--

"You will learn from London of the loss of the ship John S. Parks, and collection there of
insurance on her cargo: the freight is insured here, at the Great Western Company. They have
thirty days, after receipt of the captain's protest, to pay the loss in. Captain Cooper has
arrived in Portland, and gone to his home at Hallowall; and the company require a copy of the
protest made in London, certified by the Consul, which I have sent for. In the meantime, I
have requested the captain to come to this, and trust not to have to wait receipt of the document
from London."]

This letter would seem to show that Zimmerman, Faris, and Co. are favourite consignees with
Davidson, and that he not only consigns his own lumber to them (for it must be remembered that
he is a lumber dealer) but endeavours to befriend them by getting them other consignments.
It may be that Davidson in New York, John Fair and Co., in London, and Zimmerman, Faris, and
Co., in Buenos Ayres, are all connected in this lumber business, and that the trade is attempted
to be covered under the name of the London house; or it may be that Davidson is the sole owner,
or a joint owner with Zimmerman, Faris, and Co. In either case the property is condemnable,
being shipped by the house of trade in the enemy's country. Ship and cargo condemned.

CHAPTER XXVI.

Discomforts of life at sea--A stern chase--Seized--The Punjaub ransomed--Rain-squalls--A luxury--The
Morning Star--Neutral cargo--The Fairhaven--The Ino on the look-out--The Charles Hill--The
Nora--Fire-water--Commercial morality--The Louisa Hatch--Black Diamonds--Coaling at sea under
difficulties--Fernando de Noronna.

Captain Cooper, of the John Parks, and his wife and two nephews, were fortunate in not being
condemned to a long period of captivity. The burning remains of his unlucky vessel were still
within sight, when an English barque ranged up alongside of the Alabama, and an arrangement
was soon effected with her captain to convey the whole party to England.

A long interval now, with nothing but the Englishman's excitement--the weather--to break the
weary monotony of an eventless voyage. So far, however, as gales of wind could offer a distraction,
the Alabama had little of which to complain, and the vessel rolled and tumbled about in the
heavy seas in a manner which sorely tried the endurance of, at all events, her unfortunate captain.

The gale still continues, writes Captain Semmes, on the 11th March. Wind E.N.E. For four days
now we have been rolling and tumbling about, with the wind roaring day and night through the
rigging, and rest more or less disturbed by the motion of the ship. Sea-life is becoming more
and more distasteful to me. The fact is, I am reaching an age when men long for quiet and repose.
During the war my services belong to my country, and ease must not be thought of; but I trust
that the end is not afar off. The enemy, from many signs, is on the point of final discomfiture.
Nay, a just Providence will doubtless punish the wicked fanatics who have waged this cruel
and unjust war upon us, in a way to warn and astonish the nations upon earth. Infidelity and
wickedness in every shape let loose upon themselves, must end in total destruction. The Yankee
States have yet to go through an ordeal they little dreamed of in the beginning of their unholy
crusade against the Southern people.

On the 12th, the vessel was within fourteen degrees of the equator, but so cool did the weather
still continue that all hands were still wearing woollen clothing, and sleeping under a couple
of blankets. The sky continued grey and overcast, with an occasional slight sprinkle of rain,
and a stiff breeze. The barometer falling steadily until, on the 14th March, it had reached
as low as 29.96, about the usual standard of the trade winds.

That night brought, however, a slight relief from the long dullness. It was just midnight when
the startling cry of "Sail, ho! close aboard!" was heard from the look-out; and in less than
five minutes the Alabama was within hailing distance of a large ship standing close on a wind
towards the northward and westward.

"Ship ahoy!--what ship's that?" rang hoarsely through the speaking-trumpet from the deck of
the Alabama. But no answer came, and the hail was repeated. Still no answer, the strange sail
keeping steadily on her course, regardless of every thing, her huge hull towering up high and
dark as she passed almost within harpooning distance of the Alabama, and shot away again into
the darkness, like a phantom that on being spoken to, had vanished away.

But the Alabama could have brought-to the Flying Dutchman himself, if he had attempted to pass
by without answering a hail. "Hands, wear ship!" was the order before the sound of the second
summons had well died away. Up went the helm, round came the Alabama's head in the direction
in which the stranger had disappeared; and with the reefs shaken out of her topsails, away
she went in chase like a greyhound after a hare.

By the time sail was made, and headway got on the ship, the chase was some three miles in advance,
and gliding swiftly along with a strong breeze. But though a stern chase is proverbially a
long chase, the splendid sailing qualities of the Alabama soon made themselves felt, and within
three hours after her helm was put up, she was within a few hundred yards of the stranger,
who now hove to at the first summons from the cruiser's bow-guns.

She proved to be the United States ship Punjaub, of Boston, from Calcutta for London, and having
an English cargo on board, as appeared from sworn affidavits among the papers, from the nature
of the voyage--from one British port to another--and from the cargo of jute and linseed, she
was released on a ransom bond for 55,000 dollars, the remaining prisoners from the John Parks
being transferred to her for passage home.

The 21st March brought a change of weather, with heavy squalls of rain. The variety was greatly
enjoyed by all on board, Captain Semmes recording in his journal his own pleasure at once more
hearing the roll of the thunder, for the first time for many months, and the delight with which
both officers and men paddled about on the deck with their bare feet, enjoying, "like young
ducks," the first heavy rain they had experienced for a considerable time.

On the morning of Monday, March 23rd, a sail hove in sight, which, being overhauled about noon,
was found to be the United States ship Morning Star, from Calcutta to London. This ship also
had a neutral cargo, duly vouched as such by the proper legal certificates; so she, too, was
released on ransom bond. A second prize, however, which fell into the Alabama's hands the same
day, was less fortunate. This was the United States schooner Kingfisher, of Fairhaven, Massachusetts,
some months out on a whaling voyage. It was well for her that she but very recently discharged
into another vessel her second cargo of oil, and could only, at present, boast of some twenty
barrels, all of which were at once consigned to the flames, together with the unlucky vessel.

The Kingfisher brought a piece of intelligence which afforded immense satisfaction to all on
board, being of no less a fact than the presence of the United States sloop of war, Ino, at
Ascension, where the Kingfisher had left her but a fortnight before. This was the identical
vessel that had assisted in the piratical capture of Messrs. Myers and Tunstall, on neutral
ground, scarcely fourteen months before; and all hands were rejoicing in the prospect of an
early brush with her, when the outrage then perpetrated might be avenged. Anxious as all were
for a fight on any terms, there was possibly not a vessel in the United States navy they would
have more gladly encountered.

It was a curious circumstance connected with this schooner, that her master was, according
to his account, one of the only three persons in his native place, Fairhaven, who, in the last
fatal election of a President for the United States, had voted for the Southern candidate,
Breckinridge.

Two more captures were made on the following day--one, the ship Charles Hill, of Boston, from
Liverpool to Monte Video; the other, the ship Nora, also of Boston, from Liverpool for Calcutta.
In both cases the usual claim was set up to a neutral ownership of cargo, and as usual on investigation
proved to be altogether unsupported by anything like real evidence.

The following are the cases:--

CASE OF THE CHARLES HILL.

Ship under U.S. flag and register, laden with salt (value in Liverpool six shillings per ton),
under charter party with H.E. Falk to proceed from Liverpool to Monte Video or Buenos Ayres.
No claim of neutral property in the cargo. Ship and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE NORA.

Ship under the U.S. flag; laden with salt, under charter party with W.N. de Mattos, of London,
to proceed to Calcutta. In the bill of lading the cargo is consigned to "order;" and on the
back of the bill is this endorsement:--"I hereby certify that the salt shipped on board the
Nora is the property of W.N. de Mattos, of London, and that the said W.N. de Mattos is a British
subject, and was so at the time of shipment.

"(Signed) H.E. FALK, Agent for W.N. de Mattos."

At the bottom of the signature is "R.C. Gardner, Mayor," presumed to be intended for the signature
of the Mayor of Liverpool. As this statement is not under oath, and as there is no seal attached
to it, it does not even amount to an ex parte affidavit. Vessel and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some valuable supplies were extracted from these two ships, and the prisoners--one of them
a female--having been transferred to the Alabama, the vessels were fired on the evening of
the day after their capture. As was but too frequently the case in boarding prizes, access
was by some means obtained to their strong liquor, and that evening saw a good deal of drunkenness
on board the Alabama. Unfortunately, the delinquents were but too often some of the best men
in the ship. They could be trusted with anything in the world but rum or whisky; but against
temptation of this kind they were not proof, and the duty of boarding offered only too easy
an opportunity of indulging this true sailor's taste. However, if the prizes had their little
bit of revenge in thus creating a temporary disorder among their captors, they in this case,
at all events, more than made up for it, by contributing an accession of half-a-dozen seamen
to the crew, which, notwithstanding the discharge of the men sent home in the----, was now
fast growing very strong.

The following extract from a letter found on board the Charles Hill may throw some light on
the pretensions of that vessel at all events, to the protection of neutrality:--

CAPTAIN F. PERCIVAL.

DEAR SIR,--I have read your several letters from Philadelphia. As a rebel privateer has burned
several American ships, it may be well if you can have your bills of lading endorsed as English
property, and have your cargo certified to by the English Consul, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

After crossing the equator during the night of the 29th-30th March, the Alabama experienced
a succession of calms and wet weather; at one time chasing a vessel in so thick a mist that,
though not more than a mile or two ahead, she was more than once lost sight of for an hour
at a time. She was still involved in this misty, uncomfortable weather, when, on the night
of the 4th April, she again fell in with an United States ship, the Louisa Hatch, deeply laden
with that, to the Alabama, most invaluable article--coal. An investigation of her papers gave
the following result:--

CASE OF THE LOUISA HATCH.

Ship, under U.S. colours. Among the papers is a charter party, dated London, 1st January, 1863,
executed between John Pirie and Co., and William Grant, the Master, by which the ship was chartered
to take coal to Point de Galle, Ceylon, or Singapore, as ordered, &c. Without any assignment
of this contract, as far as appears, the ship seems to have been loaded by entirely new parties,
to wit, by one J.R. Smith, who describes himself as the agent of H. Worms, of Cardiff. By the
bill of lading, the ship is to proceed to the. Point de Galle, and there deliver the coal to
the company of Messageries Imperiales. On the back of the bill of lading is the following certificate:--"I
certify that the within-mentioned cargo is French property, having been shipped by order, for
the account of the Messageries Imperiales." This certificate is signed by Mr. Smith, but is
not sworn to, nor is the order, nor any copy of the order to ship this cargo to an account
of the Messageries Imperiales, found among the papers. As the ship was not chartered by any
agent of this company, and as the coal was not shipped by any such agent, Smith being the agent
of Worms, and Worms not being described as the agent of the company, the presumption is that,
if there was any such order at all in the case, it was a mere general understanding that the
company would pay so much per ton for coal delivered for them at their depots, the property
remaining in the shippers until delivery. The presumption, in the absence of proof, is, that
the cargo being on board an American ship is American; shipped on speculation to the far east,
by the owner, or his agent, in Cardiff; and we have seen that there is no legal evidence in
the case; the unsworn certificate of Mr. Smith not even amounting to an ex parte affidavit.
Ship and cargo condemned. Probable value of cargo in Cardiff, 2500 dollars. Cost of coal in
Brazil, 15 to 17 dollars per ton.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Alabama now stood away in the direction of Fernando de Noronha, with her prize in company,
with the intention of there taking on board a fresh supply of coal. The run was not a little
protracted by the light and baffling winds that still prevailed, and as though this was not
enough, fortune must needs play her a trick, by sending her off on a chase of fourteen miles
after a supposed Yankee whaler, which, when at last overhauled, turned out to be nothing but
a poor little green-painted "Portiguee."

Rain--rain--rain, the sun sometimes showing himself for an hour or two, just a few minutes
too early, or a few minutes too late, for any purposes of observation, and then again retiring
behind the dense masses of cloud that hid the whole horizon in one drenching down-pour. And
all this while every mile of latitude of the last importance, as the Alabama groped her way
slowly to the southward and eastward in search of the little island at which she was to take
in her supplies, and which she might at any moment run past in the darkness altogether! Trying
work, indeed, for the patience of men cooped up in their narrow floating prison, and longing
to be at work again.

Too trying, at last, to be borne any longer without an effort at action; so a bold attempt
was made at coaling while under way upon the open sea! Steam was got up, and the prize taken
in tow, and then two boats were lowered, and set to work. But the scheme, bold and ingenious
as it was, was soon found to be impracticable. The boats managed to get loaded from the captured
collier, but they had then to be warped up alongside the Alabama, and the lowest speed that
could be given her was too great for them to be hauled up against it. So each time, as they
were filled, it was necessary to stop the engine, and thus occasion another difficulty.

We now--says Captain Semmes--began to part our tow lines by these stoppages and startings,
and it took a long time to get the line fast again; so after a sleepless night, during which,
as I lay in my cot trying to sleep, it seemed as if a dozen stentors on deck were rivaling
each other in making the night hideous, I sent word to get the boats run up again, and to continue
our course to Fernando de Noronha without interruption.

At daylight we made the peak of the island a long way off, some thirty-eight or forty miles,
and in the afternoon at 2.30 came to, with the peak bearing S.W. 1/2 S. and the N.E. end of
the Rat Island N.E. by E. 1/2 E., depth of water thirteen and a half fathoms. Anchored the
prize near us. But for our steam we should have been still drifting to the S.W., as the day
has been nearly calm throughout. Fernando de Noronha, in the wayside of the commerce of all
the world, is sighted by more ships, and visited by fewer, than any other spot of earth. It
is a broken, picturesque, volcanic rock, in mid ocean, covered with a pleasing coat of verdure,
including trees of some size, and the top of the main island is cultivated in small farms,
&c. Awfully hot when the sun shines, and indeed, when he does not shine. Just after dark hauled
the prize alongside, and commenced coaling.

CHAPTER XXVII.

An official "in trouble"--On shore again--A breakfast party--On horseback--Blowing hard--Taken
in the net--Easy captures--The Kate Cory--The Lafayette--A polite Governor--The Louisa Hatch
burned, and Kate Cory burned--Landing prisoners--Tired of waiting--A scramble--Out of harbour
again.

April 11th.--Light and variable airs; misty from the southward and eastward, and oppressive;
ther. 83°. Last night the two vessels lay alongside of each other so roughly, and we received
so much damage (our forechannels being crushed in, and our topsail mainyard being carried away)
that we were compelled to haul the prize off, and continue coaling by means of our boats.

The authorities on shore having hoisted no colours, we have not set ours to-day. We were visited
this morning by a couple of gentlemen from the shore, bearing a letter from the Governor in
reply to an inquiry I had caused the Paymaster to address to him on the subject of supplies.
Their interpreter very naively informed me that he was a German, who had been sentenced to
banishment here from Rio, and that he had a year and a-half to serve. This was said while my
servant was drawing the cork of a champagne bottle. The forger (for such was his offence) taking
his glass of wine with the rest! The Governor informed me that I could procure supplies of
beef, fresh pork, fowls, &c., and that he would be glad to exchange these articles with me
for flour, wine, sugar, coffee, &c. I was glad to find that he raised no question of neutrality,
though he had, no doubt, been informed by a boat's crew from the shore that got the information
on board, of the ship in my company being a prize. He kindly invited me to visit the shore.
During the night (one o'clock) we had a surprise in the way of a strange steamer making her
appearance, coming round the point of Rat Island. I had all hands called to quarters, and the
battery made ready, fires extinguished, and chains got right for slipping. Although she came
within a mile of us, with the intention, as we thought, of coming to anchor, she kept on her
course to the southward and we piped down, the men, much fagged from coaling, not having lost
more than half an hour's rest by the operation.

Sunday, April 12th.--The exigencies of war compel me to work to-day in coaling ship. Weather
clear and very hot during morning, clouding about noon and raining for several hours.

I visited the island this morning in company with the Surgeon, and called on the Governor.
The surf was too heavy to land, but we found a bolsa moored at some distance from the shore,
and transferring ourselves to this we were very skillfully put through the surf by three or
four naked fellows, two of them not having even a breech-cloth about their loins. Fine, well-made
fellows they were too. We found horses in waiting, and rode about a mile to the village and
residence of the Governor--a Major in the Brazilian army; passing an immense sand-drift, which
we had not expected to find on this volcanic rock.

We found the Governor at breakfast, and he insisted on our seating ourselves, and making a
second breakfast with him in company with his wife--a sprightly, bright mulatto--and a pretty
girl, quite white, of about sixteen, and the padre. After breakfast we were introduced to a
number of what appeared to be the gentry of the island, and who had assembled thus early to
meet us. Having smoked and chatted awhile, we remounted for a ride over the island.

We were not in the saddle more than twenty minutes when one of those showers, so sudden in
this climate, overtook us, and gave us a complete drenching; we had other showers during the
day, but were compensated by the sun hiding himself during the entire ride. We passed under
the shadow of the gigantic peak, and soon reached the summit of the island, which spreads out
into a most beautiful and productive plain of some two or three hundred acres. The soil is
a ferruginous clay of the richest description, and covered with the choicest vegetation of
wild grapes, Indian corn, the cotton plant, the castor bean, &c., &c. We stopped a few minutes
to examine a manioc manufactory. Continuing our ride, we passed through a small but dense forest,
to a cocoa-nut plantation on the south-west part of the island, where we found the water-melon
growing in its choice soil--sand. Here we took shelter again from another heavy rain, and got
some fine grapes. Whilst waiting for the shower to pass, I had quite a talk with the Governor
on various topics; among others, on the state of the mixed races in the Brazils, &c., &c. The
island, at the season at which we visited it, was a gem of picturesque beauty--exceedingly
broken and diversified with dells and rocks, and small streams, &c., &c. It was the middle
of the rainy season. The little mountain paths as we returned became small brooks that hummed
and purled in their rapid course. I took occasion to inform his Excellency that my tender was
a prize, so that he might be under no apprehension. Number of convicts 1000. Whole number of
population, 2000. The Governor expressed himself our very good friend, &c., &c. Got on board
at 5 P.M.

Monday, April 13th.--Another rainy day. Showers very heavy, but still we continue our coaling.
Wind from northward and westward, and though light, there is considerable sea on. The bad weather
continued all day, and the night having set in with threatening appearances, I caused everybody
to be brought on board from the prize, to guard against the possibility of her being driven
on shore, and endangering life. I had the steam got up, and the chain ready for slipping, and
was fearful that I should be obliged to slip; but we held on during the night. Night very dark,
with heavy rain, and much sea on.

Tuesday, April 14th.--Wind this morning from about W.S.W.; weather still louring. Our friends
came off from the shore again this morning, bringing the fresh provisions ordered for the crew.
Every thing is very dear here. Meat forty cents per pound; but still my crew has been so long
on salt diet that flesh is an anti-scorbutic necessity for them. I have arranged to sell forty
or more tons of coal for a Brazilian schooner there is in the harbour, and had a proposition
for purchasing the prize, which I offered to sell as low as 20,000 dollars; but this sum seemed
to alarm them, they saying there was not so much money in Fernando de Noronha. Continued our
coaling.

Wednesday, April 15th.--Weather clear, and light wind from the eastward. Finished coaling ship
this morning. At about 11 A.M. a couple of whale-boats from two vessels in the offing pulled
into the harbour; went on board our prize, and thence to the shore. Although the two masters
were told that we were the Iroquois, they seemed at once to have comprehended the true state
of the case, and to make haste to put themselves out of harm's way. We were an hour and more
getting up steam and weighing our anchor for the chase; and if in the meantime these whaling
captains had pulled out to their ships, and run into shore so as to get within the league,
they might have saved them. We gave chase, and came up with both of them on the south side
of the island, about half-past 3 P.M., and captured them--both of them being without the league.
One the hermaphrodite brig Kate Cory, of Westport, and the other the barque Lafayette, of New
Bedford; the barque we burned, and the brig we brought into the anchorage, arriving after dark,
about 7 A.M. We sounded in thirteen fathoms on a bank on the south side, on the southern extremity
of which there is a breaker lying out from two and a half to three miles. There is also a reef
off Tobacco Point running out half a mile. We saw no other dangers.

       *       *       *       *       *

With reference to these captures, the following amusing account is extracted from the private
journal of the officer of the Alabama who was prize-master on board the Louisa Hatch:--

'At noon, on the 15th of April, two vessels were descried to the south, standing off and on,
under reduced sail. At 12:30 two boats were observed pulling towards us, asking my ship's name,
the port I hailed from, &c. I answered correctly. The person in charge of the other boat then
inquired if the war-steamer was the Alabama. I replied, 'Certainly not, she was the Iroquois
U.S. steamer.' 'Have you any news of the Alabama?' 'Yes, we had heard of her being in the West
Indies, at Jamaica or Costa Rica, &c.' A conversation ensued, by which I learned that the boats
belonged to the two vessels in the distance, that they were both whalers put in for supplies,
and that seeing the steamer they were rather dubious as to her nationality, and had therefore
spoke me, to gain the required information. A brisk conversation was then kept up; my object
in engaging them in it was to enable the Alabama to get under way ere the whalers took the
alarm, feeling certain that the preparations were being made to go after them.

'I then invited the masters to come on board my ship, which they cheerfully consented to do,
and were within a boat's length, when a cry of alarm broke from the steersman in the foremost
boat. Shouting to his crew to 'Give way, men; give way for your lives!' he with a few well-directed,
vigorous strokes, turned his boat's head round, and made for the shore, the other boat following,
blank astonishment being depicted on the face of each member of the crews. To the frantic inquiries
of the person in charge of the other boat as to the cause of his (the steersman's) extraordinary
conduct, his only reply was, 'There!' pointing to a small Confederate flag of about fifteen
inches long and six inches broad, which I had inadvertently left flying at the gaff; the gaff
being lowered down, the little flag having been used as a dog-vane, in order to tell the direction
of the wind, &c. No sooner did the men perceive it than they redoubled their exertions to gain
the shore; one of the masters calling out that they had spoken a ship a week ago, from whom
they had obtained news of peace. No credence, however, could be, or was placed in this statement.

'Immediately after they left I despatched a boat to the Alabama informing them of the character
of my visitors. At 9.15 the Alabama was observed to get under way, steaming out of the anchorage
after the two vessels.

'The larger island being between the scene of the Alabama's operations and the Louisa Hatch,
I was not, of course, an eye witness of the captures. But at 5.30 I observed a dense column
of smoke, which, as it grew later, turned into a ruddy glare, leaving no doubt in our minds
as to the fate of the whalers. At 7 P.M. observed the Alabama coming round the northern part
of the island with a vessel in tow, both anchoring at 7.30. The next morning I learnt that
the captures were the barque Lafayette, of New Bedford, and the brig Kate Cory, of Westport.
The barque was burnt and the brig kept, it being our intention to send off all the prisoners
we had on board, consisting of 140, including the women stewardesses, in her; but on communicating
with the authorities, it was resolved to land them on the island, a Brazilian schooner engaging
to convey them to Pernambuco. For this purpose provisions for twenty-one days were sent ashore,
the prisoners, after being paroled, following.

The remainder of the day was spent in transferring provisions, &c., for ship's use. The next
evening the prizes, the Louisa Hatch and Kate Cory, slipped cables, and stood seaward. When
about five miles from land both vessels were set fire to; Mr. Evans, the officer in charge
of the brig, returning on board long before me, the strong westerly current rendering it extremely
difficult to stem it.

'We remained painting and cleaning ship until the 22nd. At 9.30 A.M. we got under way, steering
and cruising towards Bahia, at which place we arrived on the 11th of May, having captured and
burnt four vessels between Fernando and Bahia.

'The news of our doings off the islands had preceded us, of course with additions and manipulations
ad lib., the schooner having left Noronha the day previous to our departure. The Governor of
Pernambuco had sent three war vessels to the islands to enforce the neutrality of the place,
which, according to Yankee representations, had been infringed. Not content with this, the
American representatives had succeeded in procuring the recall of the Governor, whose only
crime was that he had let us anchor off the place--a crime of which he was necessarily guiltless,
because he had no power to prevent our anchoring if we insisted on it.

'Whilst at Bahia I was shown a letter from the master of one of the whaling barques to an agent,
in which he wrote that he would spare no money or time to follow to the uttermost ends of the
earth, and bring to justice, the man who had so cruelly deceived him. This sentence had reference
to my denial of the Alabama and the substitution of the U.S. steamer Iroquois for that of C.S.
steamer Alabama. The ingratitude of some people!!'

On the 16th April Captain Semmes resumes his diary as follows:--Weather clear; wind light from
the southward and eastward. Our banner, last night a lurid flame, is a tall column of smoke
advertising us for twenty-five or thirty miles round. My first intention was to ship all my
prisoners, amounting to about one hundred and ten, in the prize brig, but the Governor having
consented to my landing them, I am busy to-day getting them on shore, with their baggage and
provisions, and receiving prisoners from the Louisa Hatch. Sun very warm. The Governor paid
me a visit this morning, and requested that I would write him on the subject of the captures
yesterday, stating the fact (with which he was satisfied, or at least, to which he made no
objection) that they were captured beyond the league from the land, and requesting leave to
land the prisoners, in order that our understanding should assume an official shape, which I did.

Friday, April 17th.--The weather still continues very warm; wind light from the S.E., and cloudy.
Busy receiving and stowing away provisions, replacing the coal consumed, and getting ready
for sea generally. The landing of so many prisoners amid so small a population has created
a very great stir, and the excitable Brazilians are discussing among themselves and with the
Yankee captains the question of the American war with great vehemence. Several sail have been
reported as usual. The afternoon set in rainy, and the rain continued all night. Towards nightfall
sent the prizes, Louisa Hatch and Kate Cory, a league outside the island, and burned them.
Received four recruits from the Louisa Hatch, and more volunteered, but I am full.

Saturday, April 18th.--Morning cloudy, with wind light from the S.E. Loosed sails to-day. I
am anxiously expecting the arrival of the Agrippina, my store ship, from England, which was
ordered to rendezvous here--not so anxiously, however, as if my coal-bunkers were empty. But
she has a couple of additional guns on board, that would make an important addition to my battery.

Sunday, April 19th.--Rain in the morning, with light airs. Our steam-tubes leak badly, and
I am afraid the leaks will increase so as to give us trouble. Every time we get up steam, even
a few pounds for condensing water, we find that large quantities of hot water flow into the
hold; eight inches escaped in about twelve hours yesterday. Unfortunately, too, this tubing
is laid so low in the bottom of the ship, as to be out of reach for examination or repairs
without being taken up. The Governor sent me off a fine turkey and some fruit, and his lady
a bouquet of roses. The roses were very sweet, and made me home-sick for a while.

Monday, April 20th.--A dull, heavy, rainy day--the rain coming down at intervals in torrents,
as it is wont to do in these regions. Still laying at our anchors, waiting for the Agrippina.
She should be out thirty-five days, to-day, from Cardiff. In the afternoon the rain ceased,
except an occasional light sprinkle, but the dull canopy of clouds did not break, and we had
a strong breeze from the S.E. for four or five hours, indicating the approach of the trades
to this latitude.

Tuesday, April 21st.--Morning clear, wind light from S.E. The Island after the rain is blooming
in freshness and verdure, and as my eye roams over its green slopes I long for repose and the
quiet of peace in my own land: I do not think it can be far off. Fresh "trade" in the afternoon.
Towards night the Brazilian steamer sailed with a load of our prisoners.

Wednesday, April 22nd.--Cloudy, with squalls for rain. At 9.30 got under way under steam, and
stood to the eastward. Cut away four whale-boats that the islanders might have a scramble for
them. They soon started in chase! Steamed due east, about forty-five miles, let the steam go
down, and put the ship under sail. No sail seen.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

A curious prize--The Nye--The Dorcas Prince--An anniversary--The Union Jack and-the Sea Lark--In
the harbour of Bahia--Explanations--Unexpected meeting--The Georgia--A little holiday--Diplomacy--More
neutrality--Home-sick.

A curious prize was the next that fell into the clutches of the all-devouring Alabama. A whaling
barque, the Nye, of New Bedford, eleven months out, without having once put into port! Three
whole months before the launching of the Alabama, had that patient little vessel been ploughing
the seas, gathering, as it turned out, only additional fuel for her own funeral pyre. A weary
voyage to have so sad a termination!

Among her crew, transferred as prisoners to her captor, was a Lieutenant of Marines from the
Quaker State, serving on board the whaler in the capacity of steward!

Next came the Dorcas Prince, of and from New York, for Shanghai. Cargo chiefly coal, probably
intended for United States ships of war in the East Indies--a supposition that undoubtedly
gave additional zest to the bonfire, which--no claim to neutrality being found among her papers--in
due course followed on her capture.

Saturday, May 2nd.--An anniversary with me--writes Captain Semmes--my marriage-day. Alas! this
is the third anniversary since I was separated from my family by this Yankee war! And the destruction
of fifty of their ships has been but a small revenge for this great privation.

On that day two more were added to the long list, and the barque Union Jack, of Boston, and
ship Sea Lark, of New York, shared the fate of their fifty predecessors. The former of these
two vessels added three women and two infants to the already far too numerous colony of the
weaker sex, by which the Alabama was now encumbered.

There was no claim of neutral property among the papers of either of these ships, except in
the case of one Allen Hay, who was the shipper of five cases of crackers, and ten barrels of
butter, on board the Union Jack. In this case, a Thomas W. Lielie made oath before the British
Consul at New York, that the said articles were shipped "for and on account of Her Britannic
Majesty." This certificate was of no force or effect, for its indefiniteness, as decided in
other cases. A claim of property must point out the owner or owners, and not aver that it belongs
to the subjects of a nation generally. There must be some one designated who has a right to
the possession of the property under the bill of lading. The certificate was accordingly set
aside, and the ship and cargo condemned.

Besides the women and children, the Union Jack furnished also another prisoner of a somewhat
unusual character, in the person of the Rev. Franklin Wright, late editor of a religious paper,
and newly-appointed consul at Foo Chow. The worthy clergyman's entry, however, upon his new
duties was for the time indefinitely postponed by the confiscation of his appointment, along
with the other public papers in his charge. So, for a time, Foo Chow had to exist without the
advantages arising from the presence of a functionary from the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monday, May 11th.--Showed the United States colours to a Spanish brig. In the afternoon ran
in and anchored in the harbour of Bahia. A Portuguese steamer, the only vessel of war found
here. No Yankee man-of-war had been here for some months. The health officer came on board,
just at nightfall. The Agrippina not here, and I begin to fear that some disaster has befallen her.

Tuesday, May 12th.--This morning the President sent a messenger to me with a copy of the Diario
de Bahia of the 8th May, in which appears a sort of proclamation or request, addressed to me
by the President of Pernambuco, desiring that I should leave Fernando de Noronha in twenty-four
hours after the receipt of the same. This paper seems to be based on certain false statements
carried to Pernambuco by the Yankee prisoners whom I had sent to this place. It is alleged
that I violated the neutrality of the island, &c. I replied to the President, that there was
no truth in this statement; but that, on the contrary, I had paid respect to the neutrality
of Brazil. In reply to my communication, the President informed me that I should be admitted
to the usual hospitalities of the port; but the bearer of his despatch took occasion to say
that he hoped I would not stop more than three or four days, as the President was afraid of
being compromised in some way. The master of an English barque came on board and informed me
that he had coal and provisions for the Confederate steamer Japan, which was to meet him here
on the 6th instant.

Wednesday, May 13th.--Early this morning a strange steamer was discovered at anchor about half
a mile from us; and at 8 A.M., when we hoisted our colours, to our great surprise and delight,
she too hoisted the Confederate flag. We then exchanged the established signals; and on sending
a boat on board of her, we ascertained that she was the Georgia, Lieut. Commanding Maury. Chapman
and Evans, two of my Sumter Lieutenants, were on board of her. The Georgia sailed from England
about the 2nd of April, and armed off Ushant. Our ship has been crowded with visitors ever
since we came in.

Thursday, May 14th.--At 12.15 P.M. with a party of officers from the Georgia and my own ship,
I took a steam-tug and proceeded up the harbour to the railroad depot, at the invitation of
the manager of the road, for an excursion into the country, which proved to be very pleasant.
We passed along the whole port of Bahia, the lower town skirting the water, and the upper town
the crests of a semicircular height, the intermediate space being filled with trees and shrubbery.
The houses are mostly white, and many of them very picturesque. The terminus of the road is
a beautiful and spacious iron building, situated in the middle of a great square; and the road
itself is a very substantial job. We rode out twenty-four miles through a picturesque country,
the road bordered for most of the way by the bay and lagoons, with beautiful little valleys
occasionally opening on either hand, with their patches of sugar-cane and cotton. On our return
we sat down to a beautiful lunch, with champagne. Our hosts were attentive and agreeable, and
we returned on board at dusk, after a very pleasant day. The English residents here have been
very attentive to us. Our tug-man, who was a Thames waterman, dodged in and out among the launches
and vessels in a way that only a Thames man can do. The French mail came in to-day, and brought
us news that the Florida was at Pernambuco.

Friday, May 15th.--This morning a person in citizen's dress came on board and said that the
President had requested him to ask me to show him my commission. I replied that I could have
no objection to show my commission, but it must be to an officer of my own rank, and that this
officer must come on board in his uniform for the purpose; that I could not show my commission
to any person who might come on board in citizen's dress, bringing me a mere verbal message,
and without any credentials of his rank, &c. I remarked, however, that it would give me very
great pleasure to call on the President myself and exhibit it. To this he readily assented;
and having appointed an hour for the interview, I went on shore, accompanied by my aide, and
had a long and agreeable chat with his Excellency, who was a man of about thirty-five years
of age, tall and delicate-looking, with black eyes and hair.

We discussed various points relating to the subject of neutral and belligerent rights, &c.;
and I took occasion to repeat the assurances I had previously given him in my letter, that
I had paid due attention to the neutral rights of Brazil during my visit to Fernando de Noronha,
&c. I told him I only desired him to extend to me and to the Georgia the same hospitality as
he would extend to a Federal cruiser; but that I might say to him as an individual, that we
were entitled to the warm sympathies of Brazil, &c.

I arranged about coaling the Georgia and this ship by means of launches, as there were port
objections to the ship being hauled alongside. He seemed anxious that our stay should be as
short as possible, lest our delay might compromise his neutrality in some way. He said my sailors
had been behaving very badly on shore, and indeed I knew they had. I told him he would oblige
me by securing the rioters and putting them in prison. This evening we were entertained very
handsomely at the residence of Mr. Ogilvie, where we met all the English society of the place.

Saturday, May 16th.--This day the ship (Castor), from which the Georgia was coaling, was ordered
to be hauled off, and the operation suspended, the Yankee Consul having alleged to the Government
that she had munitions of war on board.

Sunday, May 17th.--In the morning an officer came on board and read me a despatch from the
President, expressing displeasure at my remaining so long in the port, and directing me to
proceed to sea in twenty-four hours. The same paper was read on board the Georgia. I replied
that the Government itself had caused our delay, by prohibiting us from coaling from the ship
from which we had purchased our coal; and that I could go to sea in twenty-four hours after
this prohibition was removed, &c., &c. A party of English ladies and gentlemen visited the
ship this afternoon. We were crowded all day, besides, with miscellaneous visitors.

Tuesday, May 19th.--This morning, at the request of the President, I went on shore to see him,
and we had a long and animated discussion, in which he stated he had certain proofs, adduced
by the United States Consul, to the effect that the coal-ship Castor had been sent here to
meet us, &c.; and that under these circumstances (the ship being charged, besides, with having
munitions of war on board), he felt it his duty to prevent us from coaling from her, but that
we might have free access to the market, &c. The Consul, too, had told him that I had shipped
one of the prisoners after landing him: the fact being that, although many of them volunteered,
I refused to receive any of them, having already a full crew on board. In the afternoon addressed
a letter to the President, insisting upon the right to coal from the Castor.

Wednesday, May 20th.--We were promised lighters with coal from the shore this morning; but
not one has yet come off--half-past twelve. Just at nightfall a lighter came alongside, and
during the night we filled up. The next day we got under way and steamed out of the harbour.

Sunday, May 24th.--I am quite home-sick this quiet Sunday morning. I am now two long, long
years away from my family, and there are no signs of an abatement of the war; on the contrary,
the Yankees seem to become more and more infuriated, and nothing short of a war of invasion
is likely to bring them to terms, unless indeed it be the destruction of their commerce; and
for this, I fear, we are as yet too weak. If we can get and hold Kentucky, the case may be
different. Well, we must sacrifice our natural yearnings on the altar of our country, for without
a country we can have no home.

CHAPTER XXIX.

Two more!--The Gildersliene and Justina--Case of the Jabez Snow--The barque Amazonian--Relieved
of prisoners--A hint--The Talisman--Under false colours--The Conrad--A nobler fate--Re-christened--The
Tuscaloosa commissioned--Short of provisions.

The 25th May witnessed the capture of the ship Gildersliene and the barque Justina. The latter
having a neutral cargo, was ransomed on a bond for 7000 dollars; the former condemned and burned,
after an investigation terminating in the following decision:--

CASE OF THE GILDERSLIENE.

Ship under the United States colours and register. Charter-party with Messrs. Halliday, Fox,
and Co., of London, who describe themselves as merchants and freighters, to make a voyage to
Calcutta and back to London or Liverpool. Cargo taken in at Sunderland, and consisting of coal,
said to be shipped for the "service of the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company,"
but not even averred to be on "their account and risk." No certificate or other evidence of
property; ship and cargo condemned. Master knows nothing of property except what appears by
the papers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Friday, May 29th.--We had another chase last night from about 2 A.M., but with better success
than the two previous nights, since at 7.30 A.M. we came up with and captured the ship Jabez
Snow, of Rockport, Maine. Just at daylight, being within about four miles of her, we hoisted
our own colours, and fired a gun. She did not show any colours in return, and stood a second
gun before heaving to; she finally showed her colours. Got on board from the prize a quantity
of provisions and cordage; transhipped the crew, and about sunset set her on fire. Found a
letter on board, the writer of which referred to American ships being under a cloud "owing
to dangers from pirates, more politely styled privateers," which our kind friends in England
are so willing "should slip out of their ports to prey on our commerce." This letter was dated
Boston, November 25th, 1862.

CASE OF THE JABEZ SNOW.

Ship under United States colours, cargo coals, from Cardiff for Monte Video. On the face of
the bill of lading is the following: "We certify that the cargo of coals per Jabez Snow, for
which this is the bill of lading, is the bonâ fide property of Messrs. Wilson, Holt, Lane,
& Co., and that the same are British subjects and merchants; And also that the coals are for
their own use.

"JNO. POWELL & SONS."

As this certificate was not sworn to, it added no force to the bill of lading, as every bill
of lading is an unsworn certificate of the facts it recites. There being no legal proof among
the papers to contradict the presumption that all property found under the enemy's flag is
enemy's property, and as the Master, who was the charterer and agent of the ship, and whose
duty it was to know about all the transactions in which he was engaged, swore that he had no
personal knowledge of the owner of the cargo, except such as he derived from the ship's papers,
the cargo, as well as the ship, is condemned as prize of war. The following significant extract
from a letter of the Master to his owners, dated Penrith Roads, April 19th, 1863, was found
on board, though not produced by the Master:--

"I have my bills of lading certified by the Mayor, that the cargo is bonâ fide English property.
Whether this will be of any service to me in the event of my being overhauled by a Southern
pirate, remains to be proved."

The certificate above recited seems, therefore, to have been procured by the Master to protect
his ship from capture, and not to have been a spontaneous act of the pretended neutral owners
to protect the cargo. The cargo and advance freight were insured against war-risk, the ship
paying the premium. No effort was made by Wilson, Holt, Lane, & Co., to protect the cargo,
and they were the proper parties to make the oath. The agent who shipped the coal for this
firm, and who wrote the above-quoted certificate, could only know, of course, that he had shipped
them by order of his principal. Why, then, did Wilson, Holt, Lane, & Co., decline to make the
necessary oath to protect the cargo? They should have taken the necessary steps to protect
either themselves or the insurers, but they did no such thing. It would seem, probably, that
they were the agents of some American house, and that they could not, in conscience, take the
oath required by law.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next prize was the Amazonian, of Boston, from New York to Monte Video, captured, after
a long chase, on the 2d of June, but not until two blank shots had failed to bring her to,
and the stronger hint of a round from the rifled gun had convinced her of the impossibility
of escape.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE BARQUE AMAZONIAN.

Ship under United States colours; has an assorted cargo on board, and is bound from New York
to Monte Video. There are two claims of neutral property--one for twenty cases of varnish and
fifty casks of oil, claimed as shipped on "account of Messrs. Galli & Co., French subjects."
This claim is sworn to by a Mr. Craig, before a notary. It does not aver that the property
is in Messrs. Galli & Co., but simply that it was shipped "on their account." There is no outside
evidence of the truth of this transaction, as the master knows nothing about it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Right glad was the Alabama to fall in, on the day after this last capture, with an English
brigantine, the master of which proved willing, in consideration of a gift from Captain Semmes
of one of his noble collection of captured chronometers, to relieve him of the crowd of prisoners
with which he was encumbered. To the number of forty-one they were forthwith transferred, along
with a stock of provisions sufficient for a fortnight's consumption; and the Alabama breathed
freely again, relieved of her disagreeable charge.

It may not be an uninstructive, and it is most assuredly an amusing comment, upon the claims
of neutrality so loudly insisted upon, to quote the following extract from a New York letter,
captured on board one of the recent prizes. It is dated April 7th, and addressed to a correspondent
in Buenos Ayres:--

"When you ship in American vessels, it would be as well to have the British Consul's certificate
of English property attached to the bill of lading and invoices; as in the event of falling
in with the numerous privateers, it would save both cargo and vessel, in all probability. An
American ship, recently fallen in with, was released by the Alabama on account of a British
Consul's certificate showing the greater part of the cargo to be English property. If you ship
in a neutral vessel, we save five per cent, war insurances."

Another prize. The Talisman, a fine ship of 1100 tons, under United States colours and register,
with no claim of neutral property in cargo; and before the glare of her funeral pyre had faded
from the horizon, another hove in sight, so evidently American, that notwithstanding the English
ensign flying at her peak, she was at once brought to and boarded. And American she proved
to be in her origin; but her owners had been wise, and, so far as her papers went, she had
been regularly transferred to the protection of the British flag--humiliating, perhaps, to
the proud "Yankee nation," but effective as a precaution against capture; though, had the Confederate
cruiser been able to send her into port for adjudication, the transfer might very possibly,
when the evidence came to be sifted, have proved but a "bogus transaction" after all.

So the "Englishman" had to be released, consenting, however, to relieve the Alabama of a prisoner
and his wife, recently captured on board the Talisman. A week passed away, and then came another
instance of a similar transfer under the strong pressure of fear, the whilom Yankee barque
Joseph Hall, of Portland, Maine, now seeking a humiliating safety as the "British" Azzopadi,
of Port Lewis, Isle of France!

Alas! for the Stars and Stripes, the Azzopadi was not hull down on the horizon ere the once-renowned
Yankee clipper Challenger lay humbly, with her maintopsail to the mast, in the very place in
which her countryman had just been performing a similar penance, claiming, as the British-owned
Queen of Beauty, a similar immunity.

At last, however, as the impatient crew of the Alabama were beginning to think that their enemy's
flag had finally vanished from the face of the ocean, an adventurous barque hove in sight,
with the old familiar bunting at her peak. She proved to be the Conrad, of Philadelphia, from
Buenos Ayres for New York, partly laden with wool, the ownership of which was, as usual, claimed
as neutral. On investigation, the claim proved an evident-fabrication, the facts of the case
being as follows:--

CASE OF THE CONRAD.

Ship under American colours and register. A Mr. Thomas Armstrong, who describes himself as
a British subject doing business at Buenos Ayres, makes oath before the British Consul that
a part of this wool belongs to him and a part to Don Frederico Elortando, a subject of the
Argentine Republic. This may or may not be true, but the master is unable to verify the document,
he not having been present when it was prepared, and not knowing any thing about it. There
is, besides, so strong a current of American trade with Buenos Ayres, that the presumption
is, from the very fact that this wool was going to New York in an American barque, under the
imminency of capture, which our presence in these seas--well known at Buenos Ayres when the
barque sailed--must have shown, that the property is American, and that the certificate is
an attempt to cover it; Mr. Armstrong probably being a brother or a partner in the transaction
with some American house. Ship and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

FURTHER EXAMINATION OF CASE OF CONRAD.

From an examination of the correspondence in this case, brought on board after the ship's papers
had been examined, it appeared that Mr. Armstrong, the party shipping a part of the cargo,
swears before his consul that he and one Don Frederico Elortando, are the owners of the property,
and swears before the United States Consul that he is the sole owner of the property. Both
of these oaths cannot be true. It further appears that, whilst the property in the bill of
lading is consigned to Simon de Visser, Esq., in the letters of Messrs. Kirkland and Von Sachs
it is spoken of as consigned to them. The letters make no mention of any joint-ownership with
Armstrong, but treat the consignment as his sole property. But though, like so many of her
countrymen, condemned, the Conrad was not to die. A nobler fate was in store for her--no less
a destiny than that of carrying the proud young flag to which she had succumbed, and taking
the sea, under a new name, as the consort of her captor. Accordingly, Acting-Lieutenant Low
was appointed to the command, assisted by Acting-Master Sinclair and two master's mates. The
two rifled pounders captured in the Talisman were mounted on board, a due complement of rifles,
revolvers, ammunition, &c., supplied, and then the transformed barque fired her first gun,
ran up the Confederate ensign to her peak, and amid a burst of cheering from her own crew and
that of her consort, made a fresh start in life as the Confederate States sloop-of-war Tuscaloosa.

The Alabama was now bound for the Cape of Good Hope, where her faithful tender, the Agrippina,
was again to meet her. On the 27th of June, however, when in lat. 20.01 S., long. 28.29 W.,
it was discovered that a great portion of the supposed month's supply of bread had been destroyed
by weevils, and that there was not enough left for the run. A visit to some port nearer at
hand thus became inevitable, and the ship's course was accordingly shaped for Rio Janeiro.

CHAPTER XXX.

An insult to the Yankee flag--Fine weather--The Anna F. Schmidt--"What ship's that?"--The Express--A
supply of bread--Saldanha Bay--Visitors from the country--A funeral--The Tuscaloosa's prize--The
capture off Cape Town--The Sea Bride won--Ship crowded--Sympathy.

Sunday, June 28th.--At 4.30 this evening brought-to a heavy ship with a blank cartridge; or
rather she seemed to come-to of her own accord, as she was evidently outsailing us, and was,
when we fired, at very long range. Soon after heaving-to she burned a blue light, and whilst
our boat, with a light in it, was pulling towards her, she burned another. She afterwards said
she would not have hove-to but that she thought we might be in distress. The boarding officer
reported us as the United States ship Dacotah, and demanded to see the ship's papers, which
were refused, the Master stating that we had no right to see his papers. The boarding officer
having been informed of her name (the Vernon), and that she was from Melbourne, for London,
and being satisfied, from observation, that she was really an English ship, she being one of
the well-known frigate-built Melbourne packets, returned on board, and the ship filled away;
and she was already at considerable distance from us when I received the boarding officer's
report. Under all these circumstances, I did not chase him afresh to enforce my belligerent
right of search. Cui bono, the vessel being really English? Although, indeed, the resistance
to search by a neutral is good cause of capture, I could only capture to destroy; and I would
not burn an English ship (being satisfied of her nationality) if the Master persisted to the
law in not showing his papers. Nor did I feel that the Confederate States flag had any insult
to revenge, as the insult, if any, was intended for the Yankee flag. Most probably, however,
the ship being a packet-ship, and a mail-packet, the Master erred from ignorance.

Lat. 26.35, long. 32.59.30, current S.E. thirty miles; ship rolling and tumbling about, to
my great discomfort. The fact is, I am getting too old to relish the rough usage of the sea.
Youth sometimes loves to be rocked by the gale, but when we have passed the middle stage of
life, we love quiet and repose.

Tuesday, June 30th.--The bad weather of the past week seems at length to have blown itself
out; and this morning we have the genial sunshine again, and a clear, bracing atmosphere. With
a solitary exception, the Cape pigeons, true to their natures, have departed. There is still
some roughness of the sea left, however, and the ship is rolling and creaking her bulk-heads,
as usual. Wind moderate from about East.

Another prize on the 2nd of July, the Anna, F. Schmidt, of Maine, from Boston for San Francisco;
and another cautious Yankee transformed into an Englishman; and then came a large ship flying
before the wind, with all sail set to her royals, and answering the Alabama's challenge with
a gun from her own bow port.

A man-of-war this, from her fashion of replying, even had the fact not been sufficiently apparent
from the cut of her heavy yards and lofty spars. An enemy, perhaps! And wild with the hope
of a fight, though it be with an enemy not much less than double her size, away flies the Alabama,
at top speed of sail and steam, in chase. The sea was smooth, though with a strong breeze;
and ere long the saucy little cruiser ranged up alongside of the fine frigate, with ten black
muzzles grinning through his ports on either side.

"This is the Confederate States ship Alabama!" rang out from the quarter-deck, as the two ships
flew through the water, side by side:--"What ship's that?"

But there was to be no fight that day. The chase contented herself with the laconic reply,
"Her Britannic Majesty's ship Diomede;" and went tearing along upon her course under the tremendous
press of canvas, beneath which her spars were bending like a whip, and was soon out of sight,
evidently bound on some errand that would not brook delay.

Some small compensation for this disappointment was found two days afterwards in the capture
of the fine ship Express, of Boston, from Callao for Antwerp, loaded with guano, the particulars
of which are recorded as follows:--

CASE OF THE SHIP EXPRESS.

Ship under United States colours and register; cargo guano, shipped by Senan, Valdeavellano
and Co., at Callao, and consigned to J. Sescau and Co., at Antwerp. On the back of this bill
of lading is the following endorsement: "Nous soussignés chargé d'affaires et consul général
de France à Lima, certifions que la chargement de mille soixante douze de register de Huano
spécifié au présent connaissement, est propriété neutre."

Fait à Lima, le 27 Janvier, 1863.

(Signed and impressed with the Consular seal.)

This certificate fails to be of any value as proof, for two reasons: first, it is not sworn
to; and secondly, it simply avers the property to be neutral (the greater part of it, for it
does not touch the guano in sacks), instead of pointing out the owner or owners. A Consul may
authenticate evidence by his seal, but when he departs from the usual functions of a Consul,
and becomes a witness, he must give his testimony under oath, like other witnesses. This certificate,
therefore, does not even amount to an ex parte affidavit. If the property had been in the shipper's
or consignee's name, it would have been quite as easy to say so as to put the certificate in
its present shape. Why, then, was the simple declaration that the property was neutral made
use of?--the law with which every Consul, and more especially a chargé d'affaires, is supposed
to be acquainted with, declaring them to be insufficient? The conclusion from these two facts--viz.,
that there was no oath taken, and that there was no owner named--seemed to be that the Consul
gave a sort of matter-of-course certificate, upon the application of some one who declared
the property to be neutral, perhaps with a knowledge to the fact, or contrary to the fact,
neither party taking any oath. Now, the presumption of law being, that goods found in an enemy's
ship belong to the enemy, unless a distinct neutral character be given to them, by pointing
out the real owner, by proper documentary proof, as neither the bill of lading nor the certificate,
which is a mere statement of a fact, like the bill of lading, not under oath, nor the Master's
testimony, who knows nothing (see his deposition) except as he has been told by the shipper,
amounts to proper documentary proof, the ship and cargo are both condemned. It must be admitted
that this is a case in which, perhaps, a prize court would grant "further proof;" but as I
cannot do this, and as a distinct neutral character is not impressed upon the property by former
evidence, I must act under the presumption of law. Sect. 3rd, Phillimore, 596. The charter-party
in this case describes the charterers, J. Sescau and Co., of Antwerp, as agents of the supreme
Peruvian Government. But if so, why was it not certificated by the government, as was done
in the case of the Washington, captured and released on bond by this ship? And then the master
swears that the shippers told him that the cargo belonged to them; and if the Peruvian Government
must resort to a French official for a certificate, why not, then, on oath made before him?
and why did he not state the fact that it so belonged, which would have protected it?

       *       *       *       *       *

The Alabama was now again heading for the Cape, the Anna Schmidt having yielded a supply of
bread sufficient, with strict economy, to last out the passage. There she arrived on the 29th
July, anchoring in Saldanha Bay, at about 1.45 P.M.

Thursday, July 30th.--Last night the sky and atmosphere were singularly brilliant. Landed this
morning at eight, to get sight for my chronometers, this being the first time that I ever set
foot on the Continent of Africa. Saldanha is a gloomy, desert-looking place, the shore comprised
of sand and rock, without trees, but with green patches here and there. There are three or
four farm-houses in sight, scattered over the hills. The farmers here are mostly graziers.
The cattle are fine and good; a great number of goats graze on the hills, and sheep-raising
is extensive, the mutton being particularly fine. Small deer are abundant. We had a venison
steak for breakfast. The little islands in the bay abound in rabbits, and there is good pheasant-shooting
in the valleys. Already a party of officers has gone out to stretch their limbs, and enjoy
the luxury of shooting.

July 31st.--Took a stroll on shore, and walked round some fine oat-fields. The soil resembles
our hummock land in Florida, and produces finely. Engaged caulking, painting, &c. An abundance
of wild-flowers in bloom. Huge blocks of granite lie about the sand, and from the tops of projections,
&c.

Saturday, Aug. 1st.--I returned on board, after a stroll on shore, at 2 P.M. During my walk
I met some farmers in a four-horse waggon coming to see the ship. They brought me a wild peacock--not
quite so large as our wild turkey. It was without the gorgeous plumage of the domestic bird.
The schooner Atlas came in this afternoon, with letters for me from some merchants at Cape
Town, offering their services to supply me with coal, &c., and expressing their good-will,
&c., &c. I took occasion by this vessel, which returned immediately, to write to the Governor,
Sir Philip B. Wodehouse, informing him of my presence here.

Sunday, Aug. 2nd.--The inhabitants say that this winter has been remarkable for its general
good weather, and for the few gales they have had. Crowds of country people, from far and near,
came on board to look at the ship to-day.

Monday, Aug. 3rd.--Another crowd of visitors to-day, who came in their country waggons and
on horseback. They all speak Dutch, and it is rare to find one among them who speaks English.
Although it is nearly half a century since England took final possession of the colony, the
English language has made but little progress, the children being taught by a Dutch schoolmaster,
and the papers being, many of them, printed in Dutch. There was an intelligent young boer (about
twenty-three) among them, who had never been on board a ship before. He was quite excited by
the novelty of everything he saw. Some of the female visitors were plump, ruddy, Dutch girls,
whose large rough hands, and awkward bows and curtsies, showed them to be honest lasses from
the neighboring farms, accustomed to milking the cows and churning the butter. I found the
geranium growing wild in my rambles to-day. Just as we were going to sun-down quarters, a boat
came alongside with the body of Third Assistant-engineer Cummings, who accidentally shot himself
with his gun.

Tuesday, Aug. 4th.--In the afternoon, at three, the funeral procession started from shore with
the body of the deceased engineer. He was taken to a private cemetery about a mile and a half
distant, and interred with the honours due to his grade, the First Lieutenant reading the funeral
service. This is the first burial we have had from the ship.

Wednesday, Aug. 5th.--At 6 A.M. got up the anchor, and getting under way, steamed out of the
bay and shaped our course for Cape Town. At 9.30 descried a sail a point on the starboard bow,
and at 10.30 came up with and sent a boat on board of the Confederate barque Tuscaloosa, and
brought Lieutenant Lowe on board. He reported having captured, on the 31st July the American
ship Santee, from the eastward, laden with rice, certificated as British property, and bound
for Falmouth. He released her on ransom for 150,000 dollars. I directed Lieutenant Lowe to
proceed to Simons Bay for supplies. Steamed in for the town. At 12.30 made a barque, two points
on starboard bow; gave chase, and at about 2 P.M. came up with and hove the chase, she having
up United States colours. This was a close pursuit, as the barque was not more than five or
six miles from the shore when we came up with her. The Master might have saved himself if he
had stood directly in for the land; but we ran down upon him under English colours, and he
had no suspicion of our character until it was too late. The United States consul at once protested
against our violation of British waters (!). The Governor telegraphed to the Admiral (Walker),
at Simon's Bay, to send a man-of-war round; and about 10 P.M. her Majesty's steamship Valorous,
Captain Forsyth, came in and anchored. Some correspondence has passed between the Governor
and myself on the subject of the capture, and I believe he is satisfied as to distance, &c.
Put a prize crew on board the prize (Sea Bride), and directed her to stand off and on until
further orders. The moment our anchor was dropped we were crowded with visitors.

Thursday, Aug. 6th.--Notwithstanding the bad weather, the ship has been crowded with visitors
all the morning, and my cabin has been constantly filled with people pressing to shake hands
with me, and to express sympathy for my cause. During the night we had some thunder and lightning,
first from the S.E., and then from the N.W.; and the wind springing up, very gently at first,
freshened to a gale by morning, with showers of rain and hail. Communicated with the prize,
and directed the Prizemaster, in case he should be blown off by a gale, to rendezvous at Saldanha
Bay by the fifteenth of the month. Captain Forsyth, of the Valorous, came on board. Returned
his visit.

Friday, Aug. 7th.--I should have been under way for Simons Bay this morning but for the gale.
The wind is blowing very fresh from northward and westward, with dense clouds climbing up and
over the Table, Lion's head, &c.--presenting a very fine spectacle, with the rough waters,
the ships with struck upper yards, and the town half enveloped with flying mists, &c. The bold
watermen in all the gale are cruising about the bay under reefed sails, some of them with anchors
and cables, ready to assist any ships that may require it. Last night, in the first watch,
a sail was reported to be on the shore near the lighthouse and firing signal guns. Very soon
we saw two or three boats put out to her assistance. In the morning we heard that it was a
Brazilian brig, and that the crew was saved. The brig is fast breaking up in the gale.

CHAPTER XXXI.

Wrecked!--A narrow escape--Respect for neutral waters--The Martha Wenzell--At the Cape--Dense
fogs--Heavy weather--"Are you a vessel of war?"---Firmness and obstinacy--Simon's Town--Misrepresentations--A
little rest--Land-sharks--A night scene--To the Indian Ocean--The barque Amanda.

Saturday, August 8th, 1863.--The gale broke last night, but there is still some breeze blowing,
and the sea is quite rough. Last night a Bremen brig was wrecked off Point Monille. We heard
her firing guns, and I feared at first it was our prize; and yet I could not conceive how my
Prizemaster, who was acquainted with the soundings, could have made such a mistake. The weather
has checked the throng of visitors, and yet a few get off to us, asking for autographs, and
looking curiously at the ship. We are finishing our repairs, and getting supplies on board.
Our prize has not made her appearance to-day. She will rendezvous at Saldanha Bay on the 15th inst.

Sunday, August 9th, 1863.--Weather has again become fine. At 6 A.M. precisely, we moved out
of the bay, and steamed along the coast towards the Cape. We gave chase to two sail off the
mouth of False Bay, and overhauling them, one proved to be an English, and the other an American
barque. The latter we boarded; but when I came to get bearings and plot my position, it unfortunately
turned out that I was within a mile, or a mile and a quarter, of a line drawn from the Cape
Lighthouse to the opposite headland of the bay, and therefore within the prescribed limit of
jurisdiction. The master of the barque, in the meantime, having come on board, I informed him
of those facts, and told him to return to, and take possession of his ship, as I had no authority
to exercise any control over him; which he did, and in a few minutes more, we were under steam
standing up the bay. What a scene for the grim old Cape to look down upon. The vessel boarded
was the Martha Wenzell, of Boston, from Akyab for Falmouth. At 2 P.M. anchored in Simon's Bay,
and was boarded by a Lieutenant from the flag-ship of Admiral Walker.

Monday, August 10th.--Weather fine. I called on Admiral Walker at his residence, and was presented
by him to his family, and spent an agreeable half hour with them, giving them a brief outline
of our quarrel and war. Dined on board the Chinese gunboat Kwang-Tung, Commander Young. This
is one of Laird's side-wheel steamers, built for Captain Sherrard Osborne's fleet. Capt. Bickford,
of the Narcissus, and Lieut. Wood, flag Lieutenant, dined with us.

Tuesday, August 11th.--Weather fine. Visited the flag-ship of Rear-Admiral Sir Baldwin W. Walker
and the Kwang-Tung. Employed caulking and refitting ship. Many visitors on board.

Wednesday, August 12th.--Wind fresh from the southward and eastward. Photographers and visitors
on board. The Kwang-Tung made a trial trip of her engines, after having repaired them, with
the Admiral's family on board. Wind freshened to a gale towards night.

Thursday, August 13th.---Weather cloudy; blowing a moderate gale from the S.E. The Tuscaloosa
is ready for sea, but is detained by the weather. Dined with Rear-Admiral Walker; Governor
Sir Philip Wodehouse and lady were of the party. My sailors are playing the devil as usual.
They manage to get liquor on board the ship, and then become insubordinate and unruly. We have
to force some of them into irons. The man Weir, whom I made a Quartermaster, has run off; also
two of the Stewards, and two dingy boys; the latter were apprehended and brought on board.

Friday, August 14th.--We have a dense fog to-day and calm. The Tuscaloosa, which went out at
daylight, anchored some four or five miles outside the harbour. The mail steamer from England
arrived at Cape Town to-day, bringing us news of Lee's invasion of Maryland and Pennsylvania.
Finished our repairs this evening.

Saturday, August 15th.--We were ready to get under way at daylight this morning, but were delayed
by the dense fog until eleven o'clock, when we moved out of the harbour. As we neared the Cape
another fog bank rolled over and enveloped us for a couple of hours. At 2.30, boarded an English
barque. At 3, let the steam go down, and raised the propeller. Weather threatening. Barometer
29.80. Took single reefs in the topsails. At 11 P.M. a steamer passed close, to leeward of us.

Light winds and thick weather now for rather more than a week, varied by a stiff northwester
on the 22nd August, lasting over the greater part of two days.

Tuesday, August 25th.--Dense, cloudy morning. Got a glimpse of the sun and latitude at twelve
o'clock. Our freshwater condenser is about giving out, the last supply of water being so salt
as to be scarcely drinkable. This will be a serious disaster for us if we cannot remedy it
at Cape Town, for we have no tank room for more than eight days' supply, and no place to store
casks except on deck, where they would interfere with the guns. And so I have borne up to run
for Angra Pequena, where I expect to pick up my prize-crew that I may return to Simon's Bay
to see what can be done, without further delay. I am quite knocked up with cold and fever,
but sick as I may be, I can never lie by and be quiet, the demands of duty being inexorable
and incessant.

Thursday, August 27th.--Morning fine; made all sail at early daylight and stood in for the
land, having every promise of getting latitude at meridian for position, and running in to
an anchor early in the afternoon. But an ominous fog-bank, that we had noticed hanging over
the land for a short time before, suddenly enveloped us at eight, and shut us in so completely
as to render it difficult to see a hundred yards in any direction; the wind the while blowing
fresh from the south; weather cool and uncomfortable, and the rigging dripping rain. Hove to,
and awaited anxiously the disappearance of the fog; but hour after hour passed, and still no
change--six, seven bells struck, and the fog appeared to grow more dense, and the wind to increase;
wore ship, and put her head off shore; went below, and turned in, in supreme disgust. At 1.30
aroused by the report that there was a topsail schooner close aboard. She ran down for us,
when we backed main topsail, and sent a boat and brought the Master on board. Being like ourselves
bound for Angra, he consented to pilot us in. Filled away, and made sail. We were to-day, at
noon, by computation, W.S.W. from Pedestal Point (Angra); distance about ten miles. The fog
continued most relentlessly until 4 P.M., when it disappeared, and we wore ship for the land,
and were probably on the point of making it just at sunset, when the fog came on again, and
enveloped everything in impenetrable darkness. Wore ship seaward, and stood off and on during
the night: the weather blustering.

Friday, August 28th.--Morning cloudy, wind blowing half a gale. At 8.50 took a single reef
in the topsail--the schooner in sight to leeward. At 9.30 made the land, and soon came in full
view of it. My would-be pilot could not recognise it, until the schooner, having run in ahead
of us, ran down, to leeward, by which we knew that she had made out our position. I followed
her, and ran in, and anchored in Sheerwater Bay; my pilot being of no sort of assistance to
me, he seeming to have a very imperfect knowledge of the locality. Soon after anchoring, a
boat came out of the lagoon to us, and we recognised some of our prize-crew of the Sea Bride
in her.

In effect the Tuscaloosa and the prize had both been three days in the harbour of Angra Pequena.
In the afternoon we got up our anchor again, and ran into the lagoon, and anchored near the
Sea Bride in seven fathoms of water. A number of the officers are off this evening to visit
the Tuscaloosa--no doubt to get a good drink of fresh water. I have sent my pitcher for some,
being nearly parched up with the salt-water we have been drinking for the last three days.
We are lying in smooth water, in a snug harbour, and I hope to get what I have not had for
several nights--a good night's rest. A more bleak and comfortless prospect, in the way of landscape,
could scarcely present itself to the eye. Nothing but land and rock--not a sprig of vegetation
of any kind to be seen. In fact it never rains here, and this is consequently a guano region.
We passed a bank of guano in Halifax island, a shanty, a few labourers, and a large army of
penguins spread out with much solemnity on the island.

Saturday, August 29th.--Getting on board flour, &c., from the Sea Bride, and water from the
schooner--1500 gallons, which will enable us to cruise some twenty days. Hauled a borrowed
sieve in the afternoon, and caught a fine lot of fish.

Sunday, August 30th.--At 10.30 mustered the crew, and landed James Adams, O.S., discharged
by sentence of court-martial, with forfeiture of pay and prize-money.

Monday, August 31st,--At 7 A.M. got under way, and stood out of the harbour.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Alabama was now visited by a succession of the heavy gales prevalent during winter time
in the neighbourhood of the Cape. On the 7th Sept.--Captain Semmes writes--we had a rough,
ugly night of it, with a continuance, and even increase of the gale, and a short and abrupt
sea, in which the ship occasionally rolled and pitched with violence, frequently thumping my
cot against the beams overhead and awaking me. Shipped large quantities of water through the
propeller well; cabin-deck leaking.

Tuesday, September 8th.--Weather cloudy, the sun shining faintly through the grey mass. Gale
continues; the wind (E.S.E.) not having varied a hair for the last sixteen hours. Barometer
gradually falling; ship rolling and pitching in the sea, and all things dreary-looking and
uncomfortable. I am supremely disgusted with the sea and all its belongings; the fact is, I
am past the age when men ought to be subjected to the hardships and discomforts of the sea.
Seagoing is one of those constant strifes which none but the vigorous, the hardy, and the hopeful--in
short, the youthful, or at most, the middle-aged--should be engaged in. The very roar of the
wind through the rigging, with its accompaniments of rolling and tumbling, hard, overcast skies,
gives me the blues. This is a double anniversary with me. It was on the 8th of September that
I received my first order for sea-service (1826); and it was on the 8th of September that Norton's
Division fought the battle of Moline del Ray (1847). What a history of the United States has
to be written since the last event! How much of human weakness and wickedness and folly has
been developed in these years! But the North will receive their reward, under the inevitable
and rigorous laws of a just government of the world.

Another week passed with a solitary excitement in the shape of an obstinate English skipper,
who stoutly refused to heave to. The following account of this affair is extracted from the
journal of one of the Alabama's officers:--

Towards evening of the 10th of September the wind fell considerably. At 8.30 P.M. a sail in
sight on weather bow. Immediately we turned to windward, and stood in chase. At 9.45 fired
a gun to heave chase to. Chase, however, still kept on her course. At 10.35 we ran up alongside,
and the officer of the deck hailed her--"Ship ahoy!" "Halloa! heave to, and I will send a boat
on board." "What do you want me to heave to for?" "That's my business." "Are you a vessel of
war?" Captain Semmes then waxing wroth, replied, "I'll give you five minutes to heave to in."
"You have no right to heave me to unless you tell me who you are." "I'll let you know who I
am." To officer of the deck--"Load that gun with shot, sir, and rain on that fellow--he's stupid
enough to be a foreigner." "Tell me who you are," yelled out the master of the ship. "If you
are not hove to in five minutes I'll fire into you." Addressing the officer of the watch, Captain
Semmes asked, "Is that gun ready for firing, sir?" "All ready, sir." "Then stand by to fire."

The Captain of the ship beginning to realize the fact that we were in earnest, rolled out a
volley of oaths, not only loud, but deep also. That little ebullition being finished, he hauled
his mainsail up and lay to. Captain Semmes then gave me orders to board and ascertain who the
vessel was, as the reluctance to heave to was suspicious in itself.

On boarding, the Mate met me at the gangway and introduced me to a tall, burly man, who proved
to be the Master. With the utmost suavity I inquired, "What ship is this?" "Who are you?" he
blurted out. "What ship is this, captain?" I repeated. "I sha'n't tell you," was the polite
reply. "Captain, what vessel is this?" "Are you a man-of-war?" asked he. "Of course we are,"
replied I. "Who are you?" queried he.

With the greatest distinctness possible, and with the utmost sternness, I said, "We are--we
are the United States steamer Iroquois, Captain Palmer, on a cruise; and now, having told you
this, I have something more to tell you--namely, that I am come on board to ask questions,
not to answer them; further, I have asked you three times who you are, and have not yet received
an answer. So just step down into the cabin, and produce the ship's papers."

With a very ill grace he descended into the cabin, I following, and I had just removed my cap
when he roared out, "Who are you? Are you English? Say you are an English man-of-war, and I
will let you look at my papers." Said I, "Captain, either you are crazy or else you think I
am. Here we fire a gun, and any man with a grain of sense would have understood that it was
meant for a ship to heave to, more especially when a nation is at war. You are told to heave
to, are boarded, and asked a question. Instead of replying, you ask, perfectly savagely, 'Who
are you?' I tell you we are the United States ship Iroquois, and then you ask, 'Are you English?
Tell me you are an English man-of-war!' It's absurd, I tell you."

"Mr. Officer," yelled he, "'crazy!' 'sense!' 'absurd!' By G--d, sir, if an English man-of-war
were here, no Yankee dare set foot on this deck, sir. Who are you?" "Captain," I said to the
man, "it is time this piece of folly were ended. Now understand me. Look at that clock: it
wants twelve minutes to eleven; I want to see your papers; I give you two minutes to produce
them in. If, at ten minutes to eleven, the papers are not forthcoming, I shall adopt measures
to place them in my possession."

I then sat down. Question after question did the worthy skipper ask, but no reply did I deign
to give. At length it wanted but a few seconds to the time specified, when with a bad grace
the irate Master produced his key, unlocked his safe, and brought forth his papers. Upon examination
I found it was the ship Flora, of and to Liverpool, from Manilla, with a general cargo.

While looking over his papers, a ceaseless string of interrogations was kept up by the Master,
to which I returned no answer, merely returning the papers, and remarking that he had given
himself and us also, some really causeless detention. "Have you any news, captain?" I asked.
"Yes, I have some news; news that some three or four of you would like to be acquainted with,
but news that one of you would rather not know. But I'd see you Yankees sunk forty fathoms
deep before I would tell you it." "Come, captain, don't be uncharitable; you know what is written
in the Bible."

He then went on to state what a bad passage he had made so far, having met with a succession
of baffling winds ever since he had left Manilla; that he had made all sail for a fair wind,
and which had only lasted for a few hours, the wind coming ahead again; and it looking threatening,
he had reduced sail considerably, and was making but slow progress when he was stopped by us.

"Stopped by a Yankee, too! That's something I won't forget in a hurry," said he.

I could not help laughing at the "offended majesty" air he assumed, and wishing him a speedy
passage, returned on board. From one of my boat's crew I learnt that the Flora had either seen
or been boarded a couple of days ago by a two-masted long-funnelled steamer, supposed by the
Master to have been a Confederate, though showing Yankee colours.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wednesday, September 16th.--At 3 P.M. doubled the Cape of Good Hope and steamed into the anchorage
at Simon's Town, which we reached at about 4.30 P.M. The Vanderbilt had left on Friday last,
and was reported to have hovered near the Cape for a day or two. Greatly disarranged by the
news from home--Vicksburg and Port Hudson fallen; Rosecrans' army marching southwards; and
Lee having recrossed the Potomac. Our poor people seem to be terribly pressed by the Northern
hordes.

But we shall fight it out to the end, and the end will be what an all-wise Providence shall decree.

Thursday, September 17th.--Called on the Admiral, and received a visit from the Captain of
the Narcissus.

Various misrepresentations had been made to the Admiral as to my proceedings since I left,
&c., by the United States Consul, which I explained away. Spent an agreeable half-hour with
the Admiral and his lady. There being no coal here--the Vanderbilt having taken it all--I made
arrangements for it to be sent to me from Cape Town.

Saturday, September 19.--The steamer Kadie arrived with coals for me from Cape Town. Hauled
her alongside, and commenced coaling. Walked on shore, and lunched with Captain Bickford. Dispatched
letters for the mail-steamer for England. Liberty-men drunk, and few returning. Dined with
the Admiral. A very pleasant party, composed entirely of naval officers, including the Captains
of the ships present, the Captain-superintendent of the dockyard, &c. After dinner the young
ladies made their appearance in the drawing-room, and we had some music.

Sunday, September 20th.--Hauled the ship over to get at the copper around the blow-pipe, which
was worn off. Visited the shore at half-past nine, took a long walk, dropped in upon the Post-captain,
and went to church--Father Kiernan saying mass. He is an earnest, simple-minded Irish priest,
with a picturesque little church on the hill-side, and a small congregation composed chiefly
of soldiers and sailors--a seaman serving mass. Captain Coxon and a couple of the Lieutenants
of the squadron being present. Liberty-men returning in greater numbers to-day--the money is
giving out.

Monday, September 21st.--At daylight, hauled the steamer alongside again, and recommenced coaling.
Called to see the ladies at the Admiral's after dinner, and walked through their quite extensive
garden, winding up a ravine with a rapid little stream of water passing through it.

Tuesday, September 22nd.--A large number of liberty-men on shore yet. The Yankee Consul, with
his usual unscrupulousness, is trying to persuade them to desert. With one or two exceptions,
the whole crew have broken their liberty--petty officers and all. With many improvements in
the character of the seaman of the present day, in regard to intelligence, he is, in some respects,
as bad as ever. Finished coaling this evening.

Wednesday, September 23rd.--Refitting the fore-topmasts. Some twenty men still absent. A few
are picked up by the Simon's Town police for the sake of the reward. And the sailor-landlords,
those pests of all sea-ports, are coming on board and presenting bills for board, &c. Of course
these claims are not listened to. It is a common contrivance with Jack and these sharks, to
endeavor to extort money out of their ships.

The process is simple enough. The landlord gives Jack a glass or two of bad liquor, and it
may be, a meal or two, and it is agreed between them that a bill of twenty times the value
received shall be acknowledged. The land-shark charges in this exorbitant way for the risk
he runs of not being able to get anything, so he has nothing to complain of when he happens
to come across a captain who is disposed to protect his seamen from such extortion. Knowing
the villains well, I did not permit them to impose upon me.

Thursday, September 24th.--Waiting for the chance of getting over my deserters from Cape Town.
Informed by telegraph, in the afternoon, that it was useless to wait longer, as the police
declined to act. It thus appears that the authorities declined to enable me to recover my men--fourteen
in number, enough to cripple my crew. This is another of those remarkable interpretations of
neutrality in which John Bull seems to be so particularly fertile. Informed by telegrams from
Cape Town that vessels had arrived reporting the Vanderbilt on two successive days off Cape
Aguthas and Point Danger. The moon being near its full, I preferred not to have her blockade
me in Simon's Bay, as it might detain me until I should have a "dark moon," and being all ready
for sea, this would have been irksome; so the gale having lulled somewhat, towards 9 P.M.,
I ordered steam to be got up, and at half-past eleven, we moved out from our anchors.

The lull only deceived us, as we had scarcely gotten under way, before the gale raged with
increased violence, and we were obliged to buffet it with all the force of our four boilers.
The wind blew fiercely; but still we drove her between five and six knots per hour in the very
teeth of it.

Nothing could exceed the peculiar weird-like aspect of the scene, as we struggled under the
full moonlight with the midnight gale. The surrounding mountains and high lands, seemingly
at a great distance in the hazy atmosphere, had their tops piled with banks of fleecy clouds,
remaining as motionless as snow-banks, which they very much resembled--the cold south wind
assisting the illusion; the angry waters of the bay breaking in every direction, occasionally
dashing on board of us; the perfectly clear sky, with no sign of a cloud anywhere to be seen,
except those piled on the mountains already mentioned;--the bright full moon, shedding her
mysterious rays on all surrounding objects--illuminating, yet distancing them--all these were
things to be remembered. And last, the revolving light on the Cape, at regular intervals, lighting
up the renowned old headland.

We passed the Cape at about 3 A.M., and bearing away gave her the trysails reduced by their
bonnets, and close-reefed topsails; and I turned in to snatch a brief repose, before the trials
of another day should begin.

Friday, September 25th.--Delivered the jail, as usual, upon getting to sea. It will take several
days, I am afraid, to work the grog out of the crew, before they are likely to settle down
into good habits and cheerfulness.

The next fortnight's run through the heavy gales that prevail almost incessantly in the higher
latitudes of the Indian Ocean, brought the Alabama some 2400 miles upon her course. Two days
more brought her off the Island of St. Paul's, a distance of 2840 miles. Another couple of
days, and she had made about sufficient easting, and began to shape her course towards the
north--the "sunny north."

A few short extracts from the journal will give sufficient idea of the period thus passed through:--

October 16th.--Lat. 35.23; Long. 89.55; no observations for current; distance some 135 miles.
The gale in which we lay-to ten hours, having broken in upon our day's work. Bar. 29.57, and
on a stand; running before the wind, under close-reef and reefed foresail. Afternoon gale increased,
and between twelve and one it blew furiously, the whole sea being a sheet of foam, the air
rendered misty by the spray, and the heavy seas threatening to jump on board of us, although
we were scudding at the rate of very little less than fifteen knots--the whole accompanied
by an occasional snow-squall from dark, threatening-looking clouds. It is not often that a
wilder scene is beheld: in the meantime the Cape pigeons are whirling around us, occasionally
poising themselves against the stern, as serenely, apparently, as if the elements were at rest.
The barometer has remained perfectly stationary at 29.57 during this blow for seven hours (from
morning to 7 P.M.), without varying a single hair's breadth, during all of which time the gale
was raging with unmitigated violence from about S.W. by W. to S.W. During this period, we were
travelling about on an average speed of eleven knots; and of course this must have been the
rate of speed of the vortex--distant from us probably 150 to 200 miles. At 7 P.M. the mercury
began to rise slowly, and at 8 was at 27.60, the weather looking less angry, and the squalls
not so frequent or violent. Verily, our good ship, as she is darted ahead on the top of one
of those huge, long Indian Ocean waves that pursue her, seems like a mere cock-boat.

It is remarkable that this is the anniversary of the cyclone we took off the banks of Newfoundland.

October 18th--Observing has been particularly vexatious during the past week. What with the
heavy seas constantly rising between the observer and the horizon, preventing him from producing
a contact at the very instant, it may be, that he is ready for it, the passage of a flying
cloud under the sun when his horizon is all right, and the heavy rolling of the ship requiring
him to pay the utmost care to the preservation of his balance, and sometimes even to "lose
his sight"--from the necessity of withdrawing one hand suddenly from his instrument to grasp
the rail or the rigging to prevent himself from falling--what with all these things, the patience
of even as patient a man as myself is sorely tried. Perhaps this stormy tumbling about at sea
is the reason why seamen are so calm and quiet on shore. We come to hate all sorts of commotion,
whether physical or moral.

At last the region of endless gales was passed, and escaping entirely the southern belt of
calms, the Alabama dashed along in the S.E. trade. On the 26th October, as she was nearing
the Line, news reached her from an English barque, that the United States sloop Wyoming was
on guard in the Sunda Straits, accompanied by a three-masted schooner. This sloop being about
the Alabama's own size, hopes of a fight were again rife among both officers and men; and great
was their impatience when the trade at length parted from them, and light, variable winds again
began to baffle the eager ship.

Drawing slowly nearer to the Straits, news still came from passing ships of the enemy's presence
there, reports going at length so far as to state, that she had been specially dispatched thither
by the United States consul at Batavia, in search of the Alabama herself.

At last, on the 6th November, came another prize, the first since leaving the Cape of Good
Hope, nearly six weeks before. She proved to be the barque Amanda, from Manilla to Queenstown
for orders, the following being the particulars of her case:--

CASE OF THE BARQUE AMANDA.

Ship under U.S. colours and register. Cargo, sugar and hemp. Charter-party to proceed to Europe
or the United States. On the face of each of the three bills of lading appears the following
certificate for the British Vice-consul at Manilla:--

"I hereby certify that Messrs. Ker and Co., the shippers of the merchandize specified in this
bill of lading, are British subjects established in Manilla, and that according to invoices
produced, the said merchandize is shipped by order, and for account of Messrs. Halliday, Fox,
and Co., British subjects of London, in Great Britain."

As nobody swears to anything, of course this certificate is valueless, and the presumption
of law prevails, viz., "that all property found under the enemy's flag is enemy's property,"
until the contrary be shown by competent and credible testimony under oath, duly certified
to by a Consul or another officer. Ship and cargo condemned.

CHAPTER XXXII.

New cruising-ground--Case of the Winged Racer--A good chase--The Contest--On the look-out--Not
to be deceived--No prizes--Condore--A French settlement--Kindly greetings--Monkey Island--Far
from home--Whistling Locusts--Instinct--Why no one sees a dead monkey--Homewards--Yankee ships
scarce.

The 8th of November saw the Alabama again in sight of land, and after anchoring for a night
off Flat Point, and sending a boat ashore, in the vain hope of finding in the Malay villages
a supply of some sort of fresh provision, she again lifted her anchor and proceeded to sea
under steam.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tuesday, November 10th.--Passed between the islands of Beezee and Sonbooko, both high and picturesque,
the channel about a mile wide, some villages under the groves of cocoa-nut trees on the former.
The naked natives coming down to the beach to gaze at us. We ran through the Strait of Sunda
about 2 P.M., passing to the westward of Thwart-the-Way.

Soon after passing out of the Strait and shaping our course, we discovered a clipper-looking
ship, under topsails, standing towards North Island. Gave chase, although we were in the midst
of a rain squall, and in the course of fifteen or twenty minutes we were near enough to him
to make him show his colours. They were United States, and upon being boarded he proved to
be the Winged Racer, a vessel for which we had been hunting outside the Strait. We captured
him and sent him to anchor about three miles from North Island (the Island bearing about W.S.W.),
and ran up and anchored near him ourselves. By working hard we were enabled to get everything
we wanted out of him by 2 o'clock A.M.; and having despatched her crew, together with the crew
of the Amanda, in the boats of the prize, at their own request, we got under way at 4 A.M.,
and steamed out of sight of the coast by daylight. We were fortunate enough to get some fowls,
fruits, and vegetables from a bum-boat of Malays, who made a business of supplying ships. The
boat reported that, when she left Angra about two days before, the Wyoming was there. Fired
the ship.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE WINGED RACER.

Ship under United States colours and register, and no claim of the neutrality of the cargo
among the papers; ship bound to New York. Ship and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Wednesday, November 11th.--Made the North Watcher soon after daylight, and finding that if
I continued on at the same speed, I should be up with Gasper Strait early in the night, and
should be obliged to anchor until daylight, I ordered the steam to be let down, and we were
about making arrangements for getting up the propeller, when a sail was descried on the port
bow, close hauled on the starboard tack. She soon proved to be a rakish-looking ship, evidently
United States. Kept away from her from time to time as she passed towards our bow, and when
we came near enough we showed her the United States colours. She replied with the same. I then
fired a gun and hoisted our own colours (new flag). Instead of obeying this signal to heave
to, she made sail and ran. We at once started the fires afresh, the steam having gone entirely
down, and made all sail in pursuit. The chase at this time was about four miles from us, and
for a long time we gained scarcely any thing upon her. We threw a rifleshot astern him, but
he disregarded this also. Finally, after an exciting chase of one hour and a half (shifting
guns, and sending men aft to trim ship, and giving her a full head of steam), we came near
enough to him to throw a 32 pound shot between his masts, when he shortened sail, came to the
wind, and hove to. If the wind had been very fresh (it was blowing a good breeze) he would
probably have ran away from us. He proved to be the clipper ship Contest, from Yokohama (Japan)
for New York Captured him, and anchored in the open sea in fourteen fathoms of water, and took
from the prize such supplies as we wanted. All our people having returned on board about nightfall,
it was discovered soon after that the prize was dragging her anchor, which she did so fast
in the freshened breeze that a boat which was sent to board and fire her sculled until the
officer nearly lost sight of us, and fearing that if he continued he might lose sight of us
altogether in a rain squall, returned. Got up steam immediately and weighed anchor, and ran
down to the prize, sent a boat crew on board of her and burned her.

       *       *       *       *       *

CASE OF THE CONTEST.

Ship under United States colours and register, and no claim for cargo; ship and cargo condemned.

       *       *       *       *       *

Concluding, that on receiving intelligence of the Alabama's arrival, the Wyoming, if, in truth,
she was near the Strait, would run at once for Gaspar Passage in search of her, Captain Semmes
now determined to double upon his enemy, and gave her the start of him, holding himself for
a few days in the Java Sea, a little east of the Strait. A week passed by without any incident
worthy of record. At length a change came.

Thursday, November 19th.--At 3.30 P.M. boarded the English ship Avalanche (transferred) two
or three days from Singapore, with newspapers from England of the 10th of October--only forty
days! Gratified at the general good aspect of the news, and particularly at our victory at
Chicamauga. Reports several American ships laid up at Singapore, and a general stagnation of
American trade. This ship came to anchor some two miles astern of us, and we sent off the prisoners
of the Contest by her, the Master consenting to take them for a chronometer which I sent him.
He will probably put them on shore at Angra Point. We first hoisted the Dutch flag, and sent
a German, Master's Mate we had, on board of him; but the Master, when told that we were a Dutch
ship of war, said, "Oh! that won't do; I was on board of her in Liverpool, when she was launched!"

Friday, November 20th.--Lowered and rigged the cutter, and sent her to board a couple of barques,
which reported four American ships at Bankok; there about to lay up, lest they should fall
in with us, and one American ship at Manilla.

Saturday, November 21st.--At 3 P.M. got under way under sail, with the wind from the south-west.

Sunday, Nov. 22nd.--At 3 A.M. lowered the propeller, and went ahead under steam. Passed within
about four miles of Direction Island at 5.15 P.M.

Monday, Nov. 23rd.--At 8 A.M. made Seraia.

Thursday, Nov. 26th.--Lat. 5.36; Long. 111.42, or within fifty miles of dangerous ground, towards
which the current is setting us. No anchoring ground. 47 fathoms. After noon, the calm still
continuing, let go a kedge in 50 fathoms of water--mud--and veered to 150 fathoms.

Friday, Nov. 27th.--Noon. The struggle against the current is hopeless in the death-like calm
that prevails, and so we have come-to again with the kedge.

Sunday, Nov. 29th.--After five days of dead calm, we took the monsoon this morning at daylight,
settling in lightly, and at 9 A.M. we got under way, and stood to the northward and westward.

