After the worms have shed their skins four times and then eaten as much as they possibly can
for eight or ten days, they begin to feel as if they had had enough. They now eat very little
and really become smaller. They are restless and wander about. Now and then they throw out
threads of silk as fine as a spider's web. They know exactly what they want; each little worm
wants to make a cocoon, and all they ask of you is to give them the right sort of place to
make it in. When they live out of doors in freedom, they fasten their cocoons to twigs; and
if you wish to give them what they like best, get plenty of dry twigs and weave them together
in arches standing over the shelves. Pretty soon you will see one worm after another climb
up the twigs and select a place for its cocoon. Before long it throws out threads from its
spinneret, a tiny opening near the mouth, and makes a kind of net to support the cocoon which
it is about to weave.

The silkworm may have seemed greedy, but he did not eat one leaf too much for the task that
lies before him. There is nothing lazy about him; and now he works with all his might, making
his cocoon. He begins at the outside and shapes it like a particularly plump peanut of a clear,
pale yellow. The silk is stiffened with a sort of gum as it comes out of the spinneret. The
busy little worm works away, laying its threads in place in the form of a figure eight. For
some time the cocoon is so thin that one can watch him. It is calculated that his tiny head
makes sixty-nine movements every minute.

The covering grows thicker and the room for the silkworm grows smaller. After about seventy-two
hours, put your ear to the cocoon, and if all is quiet within, it is completed and the worm
is shut up within it. Strange things happen to him while he sleeps in the quiet of his silken
bed, for he becomes a dry brown chrysalis without head or feet. Then other things even more
marvelous come to pass, for in about three weeks the little creature pushes the threads apart
at one end of the cocoon and comes out, not a silkworm at all, but a moth with head and wings
and legs and eyes. This moth lays hundreds of eggs, and in less than three weeks it dies.

This is what the silkworm will do if it is left alone; but it is the business of the silk-raiser
to see that it is not left alone. About eight days after the cocoon is begun, it is steamed
or baked to kill the chrysalis so that it cannot make its way out and so spoil the silk. The
quarter of an ounce of eggs will make about thirty pounds of cocoons. Now is the time to be
specially watchful, for there is nothing in which rats and mice so delight as a plump, sweet
chrysalis; and they care nothing whatever for the three or four thousand yards of silk that
is wound about each one.

To take this silk off is a delicate piece of work. A single fiber is not much larger than the
thread of a cobweb, and before the silk can be used, several threads must be united in one.
First, the cocoon is soaked in warm water to loosen the gum that the worm used to stick its
threads together. Ends of silk from half a dozen or more cocoons are brought together, run
through a little hole in a guide, and wound on a reel as one thread. This needs skill and practice,
for the reeled silk must be kept of the same size. The cocoon thread is so slender that, of
course, it breaks very easily; and when this happens, another thread must be pieced on. Then,
too, the inner silk of the cocoon is finer than the outer; so unless care is taken to add threads,
the reeled silk will be irregular. The water must also be kept just warm enough to soften the
gum, but not too hot.

The silk is taken off the reel, and the skeins are packed up in bales as if it were of no more
value than cotton. Indeed, it does not look nearly so pretty and attractive as a lap of pure
white cotton, for it is stiff and gummy and has hardly any luster. Now it is sent to the manufacturer.
It is soaked in hot soapy water for several hours, and it is drawn between plates so close
together that, while they allow the silk to go through, they will not permit the least bit
of roughness or dirt to pass. If the thread breaks, a tiny "faller," such as are used in cotton
mills, falls down and stops the machine. The silk must now be twisted, subjected to two or
three processes to increase its luster, and dyed,--and if you would like to feel as if you
were paying a visit to a rainbow, go into a mill and watch the looms with their smooth, brilliant
silks of all the colors that can be imagined. After the silk is woven, it is polished on lustering
machines, singed to destroy all bits of free fibers or lint, freed of all threads that may
project, and scoured if it is of a light color; then sold.

The moth whose cocoon provides most of our silk is called the "bombyx mori." There are others,
however, and from some of these tussah silk, Yamamai, and Shantung pongee are woven. These
wild moths produce a stronger thread, but it is much less smooth than that of the bombyx.

There is also a great amount of "wood silk," or artificial silk, on the market. To make this,
wood pulp is dissolved in ether and squirted through fine jets into water. It is soon hard
enough to be twisted into threads and woven. It makes an imitation of silk, bright and lustrous,
but not wearing so well as the silk of the silkworm. Nevertheless, for many purposes it is
used as a substitute for silk, and many braids and passementeries are made of it. Then, too,
there are the "mercerized" goods, which often closely resemble real silk, although there is
not a thread of silk in them. It was discovered many years ago that if a piece of cotton cloth
was boiled in caustic soda, it would become soft and thick and better able to receive delicate
dyes. Unfortunately, it also shrank badly. At length it occurred to some one that the cloth
might be kept from shrinking by being stretched out during the boiling in soda. He was delighted
to find that this process made it more brilliant than many silks.

The threads that fasten the cocoon to the bush and those in the heart of the cocoon are often
used, together with the fiber from any cocoons through which the worms have made their way
out. This is real silk, of course, but it is made of short fibers which cannot be wound. It
is carded and spun and made into fabric called "spun silk," which is used extensively for the
heavier classes of goods. Then, too, silks are often "weighted"; that is, just before they
are dyed, salts of iron or tin are added. One pound of silk will absorb two or three pounds
of these chemicals, and will apparently be a heavy silk, while it is really thin and poor.
Moreover, this metallic weighting rubs against the silk fiber and mysterious holes soon begin
to appear. A wise "dry cleaner" will have nothing to do with such silks, lest he should be
held responsible for these holes. It is this weighting which produces the peculiar rustle of
taffeta; and if women would be satisfied with a taffeta that was soft and thin, the manufacturers
would gladly leave out the salts of iron, and the silks would wear much better. Cotton is seldom
mixed with the silk warp thread; but it is used as "filling" in a large class of goods with
silk warp. The custom has arisen of advertising such goods as "silk," which of course is not
a fair description of them. Advertisements sometimes give notice of amazing sales of "Shantung
pongee," which has been made in American looms and is a very different article from the imported
"wild silk" pongee.

With so many shams in the market, how is a woman to know what she is buying and whether it
will wear? There are a few simple tests that are helpful. Ravel a piece of silk and examine
the warp and woof. If they are of nearly the same size, the silk is not so likely to split.
See how strong the thread is. Burn a thread. If it burns with a little flame, it is cotton.
If it curls up and smells like burning wool, it is probably silk. Another test by fire is to
burn a piece of the goods. If it is silk, it will curl up; if it is heavily weighted, it will
keep its shape. If you boil a sample in caustic potash, all the silk in it will dissolve, but
the cotton will remain. If the whole sample disappears, you may be sure that it was all silk.
Soft, finely woven silks are safest because they will not hold so much weighting. Crêpe de
chine is made of a hard twisted thread and therefore wears well. Taffeta can carry a large
amount of weighting, and is always doubtful; it may wear well, and it may not. There is always
a reason for a bargain sale of silks. The store may wish to clear out a collection of remnants
or to get rid of a line of goods which are no longer to be carried; but aside from this, there
is usually some defect in the goods themselves or else they have failed to please the fashionable
whim of the moment. Silk is always silk, and if you want it, you must pay for it.

Some illustrations have been moved from their original locations to paragraph breaks, so as
to be nearer to their corresponding text, or for ease of document navigation.