THE $30,000 BEQUEST

and Other Stories

by Mark Twain

(Samuel L. Clemens)

Contents: The $30,000 Bequest
 A Dog's Tale
 Was It Heaven? Or Hell?
 A Cure for the Blues
 The Enemy Conquered; or, Love Triumphant
 The Californian's Tale
 A Helpless Situation
 A Telephonic Conversation
 Edward Mills and George Benton:  A Tale
 The Five Boons of Life
 The First Writing-machines
 Italian without a Master
 Italian with Grammar
 A Burlesque Biography
 How to Tell a Story
 General Washington's Negro Body-servant
 Wit Inspirations of the "Two-year-olds"
 An Entertaining Article
 A Letter to the Secretary of the Treasury
 Amended Obituaries
 A Monument to Adam
 A Humane Word from Satan
 Introduction to "The New Guide of the
   Conversation in Portuguese and English"
 Advice to Little Girls
 Post-mortem Poetry
 The Danger of Lying in Bed
 Portrait of King William III
 Does the Race of Man Love a Lord?
 Extracts from Adam's Diary
 Eve's Diary

THE $30,000 BEQUEST

CHAPTER I

Lakeside was a pleasant little town of five or six thousand inhabitants, and a rather pretty
one, too, as towns go in the Far West. It had church accommodations for thirty-five thousand,
which is the way of the Far West and the South, where everybody is religious, and where each
of the Protestant sects is represented and has a plant of its own. Rank was unknown in Lakeside--unconfessed,
anyway; everybody knew everybody and his dog, and a sociable friendliness was the prevailing
atmosphere.

Saladin Foster was book-keeper in the principal store, and the only high-salaried man of his
profession in Lakeside. He was thirty-five years old, now; he had served that store for fourteen
years; he had begun in his marriage-week at four hundred dollars a year, and had climbed steadily
up, a hundred dollars a year, for four years; from that time forth his wage had remained eight
hundred--a handsome figure indeed, and everybody conceded that he was worth it.

His wife, Electra, was a capable helpmeet, although--like himself--a dreamer of dreams and
a private dabbler in romance. The first thing she did, after her marriage--child as she was,
aged only nineteen--was to buy an acre of ground on the edge of the town, and pay down the
cash for it--twenty-five dollars, all her fortune. Saladin had less, by fifteen. She instituted
a vegetable garden there, got it farmed on shares by the nearest neighbor, and made it pay
her a hundred per cent. a year. Out of Saladin's first year's wage she put thirty dollars in
the savings-bank, sixty out of his second, a hundred out of his third, a hundred and fifty
out of his fourth. His wage went to eight hundred a year, then, and meantime two children had
arrived and increased the expenses, but she banked two hundred a year from the salary, nevertheless,
thenceforth. When she had been married seven years she built and furnished a pretty and comfortable
two-thousand-dollar house in the midst of her garden-acre, paid half of the money down and
moved her family in. Seven years later she was out of debt and had several hundred dollars
out earning its living.

Earning it by the rise in landed estate; for she had long ago bought another acre or two and
sold the most of it at a profit to pleasant people who were willing to build, and would be
good neighbors and furnish a general comradeship for herself and her growing family. She had
an independent income from safe investments of about a hundred dollars a year; her children
were growing in years and grace; and she was a pleased and happy woman. Happy in her husband,
happy in her children, and the husband and the children were happy in her. It is at this point
that this history begins.

The youngest girl, Clytemnestra--called Clytie for short--was eleven; her sister, Gwendolen--called
Gwen for short--was thirteen; nice girls, and comely. The names betray the latent romance-tinge
in the parental blood, the parents' names indicate that the tinge was an inheritance. It was
an affectionate family, hence all four of its members had pet names, Saladin's was a curious
and unsexing one--Sally; and so was Electra's--Aleck. All day long Sally was a good and diligent
book-keeper and salesman; all day long Aleck was a good and faithful mother and housewife,
and thoughtful and calculating business woman; but in the cozy living-room at night they put
the plodding world away, and lived in another and a fairer, reading romances to each other,
dreaming dreams, comrading with kings and princes and stately lords and ladies in the flash
and stir and splendor of noble palaces and grim and ancient castles.

CHAPTER II

Now came great news! Stunning news--joyous news, in fact. It came from a neighboring state,
where the family's only surviving relative lived. It was Sally's relative--a sort of vague
and indefinite uncle or second or third cousin by the name of Tilbury Foster, seventy and a
bachelor, reputed well off and corresponding sour and crusty. Sally had tried to make up to
him once, by letter, in a bygone time, and had not made that mistake again. Tilbury now wrote
to Sally, saying he should shortly die, and should leave him thirty thousand dollars, cash;
not for love, but because money had given him most of his troubles and exasperations, and he
wished to place it where there was good hope that it would continue its malignant work. The
bequest would be found in his will, and would be paid over. PROVIDED, that Sally should be
able to prove to the executors that he had TAKEN NO NOTICE OF THE GIFT BY SPOKEN WORD OR BY
LETTER, HAD MADE NO INQUIRIES CONCERNING THE MORIBUND'S PROGRESS TOWARD THE EVERLASTING TROPICS,
AND HAD NOT ATTENDED THE FUNERAL.

As soon as Aleck had partially recovered from the tremendous emotions created by the letter,
she sent to the relative's habitat and subscribed for the local paper.

Man and wife entered into a solemn compact, now, to never mention the great news to any one
while the relative lived, lest some ignorant person carry the fact to the death-bed and distort
it and make it appear that they were disobediently thankful for the bequest, and just the same
as confessing it and publishing it, right in the face of the prohibition.

For the rest of the day Sally made havoc and confusion with his books, and Aleck could not
keep her mind on her affairs, not even take up a flower-pot or book or a stick of wood without
forgetting what she had intended to do with it. For both were dreaming.

"Thir-ty thousand dollars!"

All day long the music of those inspiring words sang through those people's heads.

From his marriage-day forth, Aleck's grip had been upon the purse, and Sally had seldom known
what it was to be privileged to squander a dime on non-necessities.

"Thir-ty thousand dollars!" the song went on and on. A vast sum, an unthinkable sum!

All day long Aleck was absorbed in planning how to invest it, Sally in planning how to spend it.

There was no romance-reading that night. The children took themselves away early, for their
parents were silent, distraught, and strangely unentertaining. The good-night kisses might
as well have been impressed upon vacancy, for all the response they got; the parents were not
aware of the kisses, and the children had been gone an hour before their absence was noticed.
Two pencils had been busy during that hour--note-making; in the way of plans. It was Sally
who broke the stillness at last. He said, with exultation:

"Ah, it'll be grand, Aleck! Out of the first thousand we'll have a horse and a buggy for summer,
and a cutter and a skin lap-robe for winter."

Aleck responded with decision and composure--

"Out of the CAPITAL? Nothing of the kind. Not if it was a million!"

Sally was deeply disappointed; the glow went out of his face.

"Oh, Aleck!" he said, reproachfully. "We've always worked so hard and been so scrimped: and
now that we are rich, it does seem--"

He did not finish, for he saw her eye soften; his supplication had touched her. She said, with
gentle persuasiveness:

"We must not spend the capital, dear, it would not be wise. Out of the income from it--"

"That will answer, that will answer, Aleck! How dear and good you are! There will be a noble
income and if we can spend that--"

"Not ALL of it, dear, not all of it, but you can spend a part of it. That is, a reasonable
part. But the whole of the capital--every penny of it--must be put right to work, and kept
at it. You see the reasonableness of that, don't you?"

"Why, ye-s. Yes, of course. But we'll have to wait so long. Six months before the first interest
falls due."

"Yes--maybe longer."

"Longer, Aleck? Why? Don't they pay half-yearly?"

"THAT kind of an investment--yes; but I sha'n't invest in that way."

"What way, then?"

"For big returns."

"Big. That's good. Go on, Aleck. What is it?"

"Coal. The new mines. Cannel. I mean to put in ten thousand. Ground floor. When we organize,
we'll get three shares for one."

"By George, but it sounds good, Aleck! Then the shares will be worth--how much? And when?"

"About a year. They'll pay ten per cent. half yearly, and be worth thirty thousand. I know
all about it; the advertisement is in the Cincinnati paper here."

"Land, thirty thousand for ten--in a year! Let's jam in the whole capital and pull out ninety!
I'll write and subscribe right now--tomorrow it maybe too late."

He was flying to the writing-desk, but Aleck stopped him and put him back in his chair. She said:

"Don't lose your head so. WE mustn't subscribe till we've got the money; don't you know that?"

Sally's excitement went down a degree or two, but he was not wholly appeased.

"Why, Aleck, we'll HAVE it, you know--and so soon, too. He's probably out of his troubles before
this; it's a hundred to nothing he's selecting his brimstone-shovel this very minute. Now,
I think--"

Aleck shuddered, and said:

"How CAN you, Sally! Don't talk in that way, it is perfectly scandalous."

"Oh, well, make it a halo, if you like, I don't care for his outfit, I was only just talking.
Can't you let a person talk?"

"But why should you WANT to talk in that dreadful way? How would you like to have people talk
so about YOU, and you not cold yet?"

"Not likely to be, for ONE while, I reckon, if my last act was giving away money for the sake
of doing somebody a harm with it. But never mind about Tilbury, Aleck, let's talk about something
worldly. It does seem to me that that mine is the place for the whole thirty. What's the objection?"

"All the eggs in one basket--that's the objection."

"All right, if you say so. What about the other twenty? What do you mean to do with that?"

"There is no hurry; I am going to look around before I do anything with it."

"All right, if your mind's made up," signed Sally. He was deep in thought awhile, then he said:

"There'll be twenty thousand profit coming from the ten a year from now. We can spend that,
can we, Aleck?"

Aleck shook her head.

"No, dear," she said, "it won't sell high till we've had the first semi-annual dividend. You
can spend part of that."

"Shucks, only THAT--and a whole year to wait! Confound it, I--"

"Oh, do be patient! It might even be declared in three months--it's quite within the possibilities."

"Oh, jolly! oh, thanks!" and Sally jumped up and kissed his wife in gratitude. "It'll be three
thousand--three whole thousand! how much of it can we spend, Aleck? Make it liberal!--do, dear,
that's a good fellow."

Aleck was pleased; so pleased that she yielded to the pressure and conceded a sum which her
judgment told her was a foolish extravagance--a thousand dollars. Sally kissed her half a dozen
times and even in that way could not express all his joy and thankfulness. This new access
of gratitude and affection carried Aleck quite beyond the bounds of prudence, and before she
could restrain herself she had made her darling another grant--a couple of thousand out of
the fifty or sixty which she meant to clear within a year of the twenty which still remained
of the bequest. The happy tears sprang to Sally's eyes, and he said:

"Oh, I want to hug you!" And he did it. Then he got his notes and sat down and began to check
off, for first purchase, the luxuries which he should earliest wish to secure. "Horse--buggy--cutter--lap-robe--patent-leathers--dog--plug-hat--
church-pew--stem-winder--new teeth--SAY, Aleck!"

"Well?"

"Ciphering away, aren't you? That's right. Have you got the twenty thousand invested yet?"

"No, there's no hurry about that; I must look around first, and think."

"But you are ciphering; what's it about?"

"Why, I have to find work for the thirty thousand that comes out of the coal, haven't I?"

"Scott, what a head! I never thought of that. How are you getting along? Where have you arrived?"

"Not very far--two years or three. I've turned it over twice; once in oil and once in wheat."

"Why, Aleck, it's splendid! How does it aggregate?"

"I think--well, to be on the safe side, about a hundred and eighty thousand clear, though it
will probably be more."

"My! isn't it wonderful? By gracious! luck has come our way at last, after all the hard sledding,
Aleck!"

"Well?"

"I'm going to cash in a whole three hundred on the missionaries--what real right have we care
for expenses!"

"You couldn't do a nobler thing, dear; and it's just like your generous nature, you unselfish boy."

The praise made Sally poignantly happy, but he was fair and just enough to say it was rightfully
due to Aleck rather than to himself, since but for her he should never have had the money.

Then they went up to bed, and in their delirium of bliss they forgot and left the candle burning
in the parlor. They did not remember until they were undressed; then Sally was for letting
it burn; he said they could afford it, if it was a thousand. But Aleck went down and put it out.

A good job, too; for on her way back she hit on a scheme that would turn the hundred and eighty
thousand into half a million before it had had time to get cold.

CHAPTER III

The little newspaper which Aleck had subscribed for was a Thursday sheet; it would make the
trip of five hundred miles from Tilbury's village and arrive on Saturday. Tilbury's letter
had started on Friday, more than a day too late for the benefactor to die and get into that
week's issue, but in plenty of time to make connection for the next output. Thus the Fosters
had to wait almost a complete week to find out whether anything of a satisfactory nature had
happened to him or not. It was a long, long week, and the strain was a heavy one. The pair
could hardly have borne it if their minds had not had the relief of wholesome diversion. We
have seen that they had that. The woman was piling up fortunes right along, the man was spending
them--spending all his wife would give him a chance at, at any rate.

At last the Saturday came, and the WEEKLY SAGAMORE arrived. Mrs. Eversly Bennett was present.
She was the Presbyterian parson's wife, and was working the Fosters for a charity. Talk now
died a sudden death--on the Foster side. Mrs. Bennett presently discovered that her hosts were
not hearing a word she was saying; so she got up, wondering and indignant, and went away. The
moment she was out of the house, Aleck eagerly tore the wrapper from the paper, and her eyes
and Sally's swept the columns for the death-notices. Disappointment! Tilbury was not anywhere
mentioned. Aleck was a Christian from the cradle, and duty and the force of habit required
her to go through the motions. She pulled herself together and said, with a pious two-per-cent.
trade joyousness:

"Let us be humbly thankful that he has been spared; and--"

"Damn his treacherous hide, I wish--"

"Sally! For shame!"

"I don't care!" retorted the angry man. "It's the way YOU feel, and if you weren't so immorally
pious you'd be honest and say so."

Aleck said, with wounded dignity:

"I do not see how you can say such unkind and unjust things. There is no such thing as immoral
piety."

Sally felt a pang, but tried to conceal it under a shuffling attempt to save his case by changing
the form of it--as if changing the form while retaining the juice could deceive the expert
he was trying to placate. He said:

"I didn't mean so bad as that, Aleck; I didn't really mean immoral piety, I only meant--meant--well,
conventional piety, you know; er--shop piety; the--the--why, YOU know what I mean. Aleck--the--well,
where you put up that plated article and play it for solid, you know, without intending anything
improper, but just out of trade habit, ancient policy, petrified custom, loyalty to--to--hang
it, I can't find the right words, but YOU know what I mean, Aleck, and that there isn't any
harm in it. I'll try again. You see, it's this way. If a person--"

"You have said quite enough," said Aleck, coldly; "let the subject be dropped."

"I'M willing," fervently responded Sally, wiping the sweat from his forehead and looking the
thankfulness he had no words for. Then, musingly, he apologized to himself. "I certainly held
threes--I KNOW it--but I drew and didn't fill. That's where I'm so often weak in the game.
If I had stood pat--but I didn't. I never do. I don't know enough."

Confessedly defeated, he was properly tame now and subdued. Aleck forgave him with her eyes.

The grand interest, the supreme interest, came instantly to the front again; nothing could
keep it in the background many minutes on a stretch. The couple took up the puzzle of the absence
of Tilbury's death-notice. They discussed it every which way, more or less hopefully, but they
had to finish where they began, and concede that the only really sane explanation of the absence
of the notice must be--and without doubt was--that Tilbury was not dead. There was something
sad about it, something even a little unfair, maybe, but there it was, and had to be put up
with. They were agreed as to that. To Sally it seemed a strangely inscrutable dispensation;
more inscrutable than usual, he thought; one of the most unnecessary inscrutable he could call
to mind, in fact--and said so, with some feeling; but if he was hoping to draw Aleck he failed;
she reserved her opinion, if she had one; she had not the habit of taking injudicious risks
in any market, worldly or other.

The pair must wait for next week's paper--Tilbury had evidently postponed. That was their thought
and their decision. So they put the subject away and went about their affairs again with as
good heart as they could.

Now, if they had but known it, they had been wronging Tilbury all the time. Tilbury had kept
faith, kept it to the letter; he was dead, he had died to schedule. He was dead more than four
days now and used to it; entirely dead, perfectly dead, as dead as any other new person in
the cemetery; dead in abundant time to get into that week's SAGAMORE, too, and only shut out
by an accident; an accident which could not happen to a metropolitan journal, but which happens
easily to a poor little village rag like the SAGAMORE. On this occasion, just as the editorial
page was being locked up, a gratis quart of strawberry ice-water arrived from Hostetter's Ladies
and Gents Ice-Cream Parlors, and the stickful of rather chilly regret over Tilbury's translation
got crowded out to make room for the editor's frantic gratitude.

On its way to the standing-galley Tilbury's notice got pied. Otherwise it would have gone into
some future edition, for WEEKLY SAGAMORES do not waste "live" matter, and in their galleys
"live" matter is immortal, unless a pi accident intervenes. But a thing that gets pied is dead,
and for such there is no resurrection; its chance of seeing print is gone, forever and ever.
And so, let Tilbury like it or not, let him rave in his grave to his fill, no matter--no mention
of his death would ever see the light in the WEEKLY SAGAMORE.

CHAPTER IV

Five weeks drifted tediously along. The SAGAMORE arrived regularly on the Saturdays, but never
once contained a mention of Tilbury Foster. Sally's patience broke down at this point, and
he said, resentfully:

"Damn his livers, he's immortal!"

Aleck give him a very severe rebuke, and added with icy solemnity:

"How would you feel if you were suddenly cut out just after such an awful remark had escaped
out of you?"

Without sufficient reflection Sally responded:

"I'd feel I was lucky I hadn't got caught with it IN me."

Pride had forced him to say something, and as he could not think of any rational thing to say
he flung that out. Then he stole a base--as he called it--that is, slipped from the presence,
to keep from being brayed in his wife's discussion-mortar.

Six months came and went. The SAGAMORE was still silent about Tilbury. Meantime, Sally had
several times thrown out a feeler--that is, a hint that he would like to know. Aleck had ignored
the hints. Sally now resolved to brace up and risk a frontal attack. So he squarely proposed
to disguise himself and go to Tilbury's village and surreptitiously find out as to the prospects.
Aleck put her foot on the dangerous project with energy and decision. She said:

"What can you be thinking of? You do keep my hands full! You have to be watched all the time,
like a little child, to keep you from walking into the fire. You'll stay right where you are!"

"Why, Aleck, I could do it and not be found out--I'm certain of it."

"Sally Foster, don't you know you would have to inquire around?"

"Of course, but what of it? Nobody would suspect who I was."

"Oh, listen to the man! Some day you've got to prove to the executors that you never inquired.
What then?"

He had forgotten that detail. He didn't reply; there wasn't anything to say. Aleck added:

"Now then, drop that notion out of your mind, and don't ever meddle with it again. Tilbury
set that trap for you. Don't you know it's a trap? He is on the watch, and fully expecting
you to blunder into it. Well, he is going to be disappointed--at least while I am on deck. Sally!"

"Well?"

"As long as you live, if it's a hundred years, don't you ever make an inquiry. Promise!"

"All right," with a sigh and reluctantly.

Then Aleck softened and said:

"Don't be impatient. We are prospering; we can wait; there is no hurry. Our small dead-certain
income increases all the time; and as to futures, I have not made a mistake yet--they are piling
up by the thousands and tens of thousands. There is not another family in the state with such
prospects as ours. Already we are beginning to roll in eventual wealth. You know that, don't you?"

"Yes, Aleck, it's certainly so."

"Then be grateful for what God is doing for us and stop worrying. You do not believe we could
have achieved these prodigious results without His special help and guidance, do you?"

Hesitatingly, "N-no, I suppose not." Then, with feeling and admiration, "And yet, when it comes
to judiciousness in watering a stock or putting up a hand to skin Wall Street I don't give
in that YOU need any outside amateur help, if I do wish I--"

"Oh, DO shut up! I know you do not mean any harm or any irreverence, poor boy, but you can't
seem to open your mouth without letting out things to make a person shudder. You keep me in
constant dread. For you and for all of us. Once I had no fear of the thunder, but now when
I hear it I--"

Her voice broke, and she began to cry, and could not finish. The sight of this smote Sally
to the heart and he took her in his arms and petted her and comforted her and promised better
conduct, and upbraided himself and remorsefully pleaded for forgiveness. And he was in earnest,
and sorry for what he had done and ready for any sacrifice that could make up for it.

And so, in privacy, he thought long and deeply over the matter, resolving to do what should
seem best. It was easy to PROMISE reform; indeed he had already promised it. But would that
do any real good, any permanent good? No, it would be but temporary--he knew his weakness,
and confessed it to himself with sorrow--he could not keep the promise. Something surer and
better must be devised; and he devised it. At cost of precious money which he had long been
saving up, shilling by shilling, he put a lightning-rod on the house.

At a subsequent time he relapsed.

What miracles habit can do! and how quickly and how easily habits are acquired--both trifling
habits and habits which profoundly change us. If by accident we wake at two in the morning
a couple of nights in succession, we have need to be uneasy, for another repetition can turn
the accident into a habit; and a month's dallying with whiskey--but we all know these commonplace
facts.

The castle-building habit, the day-dreaming habit--how it grows! what a luxury it becomes;
how we fly to its enchantments at every idle moment, how we revel in them, steep our souls
in them, intoxicate ourselves with their beguiling fantasies--oh yes, and how soon and how
easily our dream life and our material life become so intermingled and so fused together that
we can't quite tell which is which, any more.

By and by Aleck subscribed to a Chicago daily and for the WALL STREET POINTER. With an eye
single to finance she studied these as diligently all the week as she studied her Bible Sundays.
Sally was lost in admiration, to note with what swift and sure strides her genius and judgment
developed and expanded in the forecasting and handling of the securities of both the material
and spiritual markets. He was proud of her nerve and daring in exploiting worldly stocks, and
just as proud of her conservative caution in working her spiritual deals. He noted that she
never lost her head in either case; that with a splendid courage she often went short on worldly
futures, but heedfully drew the line there--she was always long on the others. Her policy was
quite sane and simple, as she explained it to him: what she put into earthly futures was for
speculation, what she put into spiritual futures was for investment; she was willing to go
into the one on a margin, and take chances, but in the case of the other, "margin her no margins"--she
wanted to cash in a hundred cents per dollar's worth, and have the stock transferred on the books.

It took but a very few months to educate Aleck's imagination and Sally's. Each day's training
added something to the spread and effectiveness of the two machines. As a consequence, Aleck
made imaginary money much faster than at first she had dreamed of making it, and Sally's competency
in spending the overflow of it kept pace with the strain put upon it, right along. In the beginning,
Aleck had given the coal speculation a twelvemonth in which to materialize, and had been loath
to grant that this term might possibly be shortened by nine months. But that was the feeble
work, the nursery work, of a financial fancy that had had no teaching, no experience, no practice.
These aids soon came, then that nine months vanished, and the imaginary ten-thousand-dollar
investment came marching home with three hundred per cent. profit on its back!

It was a great day for the pair of Fosters. They were speechless for joy. Also speechless for
another reason: after much watching of the market, Aleck had lately, with fear and trembling,
made her first flyer on a "margin," using the remaining twenty thousand of the bequest in this
risk. In her mind's eye she had seen it climb, point by point--always with a chance that the
market would break--until at last her anxieties were too great for further endurance--she being
new to the margin business and unhardened, as yet--and she gave her imaginary broker an imaginary
order by imaginary telegraph to sell. She said forty thousand dollars' profit was enough. The
sale was made on the very day that the coal venture had returned with its rich freight. As
I have said, the couple were speechless, they sat dazed and blissful that night, trying to
realize that they were actually worth a hundred thousand dollars in clean, imaginary cash.
Yet so it was.

It was the last time that ever Aleck was afraid of a margin; at least afraid enough to let
it break her sleep and pale her cheek to the extent that this first experience in that line
had done.

Indeed it was a memorable night. Gradually the realization that they were rich sank securely
home into the souls of the pair, then they began to place the money. If we could have looked
out through the eyes of these dreamers, we should have seen their tidy little wooden house
disappear, and two-story brick with a cast-iron fence in front of it take its place; we should
have seen a three-globed gas-chandelier grow down from the parlor ceiling; we should have seen
the homely rag carpet turn to noble Brussels, a dollar and a half a yard; we should have seen
the plebeian fireplace vanish away and a recherche, big base-burner with isinglass windows
take position and spread awe around. And we should have seen other things, too; among them
the buggy, the lap-robe, the stove-pipe hat, and so on.

From that time forth, although the daughters and the neighbors saw only the same old wooden
house there, it was a two-story brick to Aleck and Sally and not a night went by that Aleck
did not worry about the imaginary gas-bills, and get for all comfort Sally's reckless retort:
"What of it? We can afford it."

Before the couple went to bed, that first night that they were rich, they had decided that
they must celebrate. They must give a party--that was the idea. But how to explain it--to the
daughters and the neighbors? They could not expose the fact that they were rich. Sally was
willing, even anxious, to do it; but Aleck kept her head and would not allow it. She said that
although the money was as good as in, it would be as well to wait until it was actually in.
On that policy she took her stand, and would not budge. The great secret must be kept, she
said--kept from the daughters and everybody else.

The pair were puzzled. They must celebrate, they were determined to celebrate, but since the
secret must be kept, what could they celebrate? No birthdays were due for three months. Tilbury
wasn't available, evidently he was going to live forever; what the nation COULD they celebrate?
That was Sally's way of putting it; and he was getting impatient, too, and harassed. But at
last he hit it--just by sheer inspiration, as it seemed to him--and all their troubles were
gone in a moment; they would celebrate the Discovery of America. A splendid idea!

Aleck was almost too proud of Sally for words--she said SHE never would have thought of it.
But Sally, although he was bursting with delight in the compliment and with wonder at himself,
tried not to let on, and said it wasn't really anything, anybody could have done it. Whereat
Aleck, with a prideful toss of her happy head, said:

"Oh, certainly! Anybody could--oh, anybody! Hosannah Dilkins, for instance! Or maybe Adelbert
Peanut--oh, DEAR--yes! Well, I'd like to see them try it, that's all. Dear-me-suz, if they
could think of the discovery of a forty-acre island it's more than I believe they could; and
as for the whole continent, why, Sally Foster, you know perfectly well it would strain the
livers and lights out of them and THEN they couldn't!"

The dear woman, she knew he had talent; and if affection made her over-estimate the size of
it a little, surely it was a sweet and gentle crime, and forgivable for its source's sake.

CHAPTER V

The celebration went off well. The friends were all present, both the young and the old. Among
the young were Flossie and Gracie Peanut and their brother Adelbert, who was a rising young
journeyman tinner, also Hosannah Dilkins, Jr., journeyman plasterer, just out of his apprenticeship.
For many months Adelbert and Hosannah had been showing interest in Gwendolen and Clytemnestra
Foster, and the parents of the girls had noticed this with private satisfaction. But they suddenly
realized now that that feeling had passed. They recognized that the changed financial conditions
had raised up a social bar between their daughters and the young mechanics. The daughters could
now look higher--and must. Yes, must. They need marry nothing below the grade of lawyer or
merchant; poppa and momma would take care of this; there must be no mesalliances.

However, these thinkings and projects of their were private, and did not show on the surface,
and therefore threw no shadow upon the celebration. What showed upon the surface was a serene
and lofty contentment and a dignity of carriage and gravity of deportment which compelled the
admiration and likewise the wonder of the company. All noticed it and all commented upon it,
but none was able to divine the secret of it. It was a marvel and a mystery. Three several
persons remarked, without suspecting what clever shots they were making:

"It's as if they'd come into property."

That was just it, indeed.

Most mothers would have taken hold of the matrimonial matter in the old regulation way; they
would have given the girls a talking to, of a solemn sort and untactful--a lecture calculated
to defeat its own purpose, by producing tears and secret rebellion; and the said mothers would
have further damaged the business by requesting the young mechanics to discontinue their attentions.
But this mother was different. She was practical. She said nothing to any of the young people
concerned, nor to any one else except Sally. He listened to her and understood; understood
and admired. He said:

"I get the idea. Instead of finding fault with the samples on view, thus hurting feelings and
obstructing trade without occasion, you merely offer a higher class of goods for the money,
and leave nature to take her course. It's wisdom, Aleck, solid wisdom, and sound as a nut.
Who's your fish? Have you nominated him yet?"

No, she hadn't. They must look the market over--which they did. To start with, they considered
and discussed Brandish, rising young lawyer, and Fulton, rising young dentist. Sally must invite
them to dinner. But not right away; there was no hurry, Aleck said. Keep an eye on the pair,
and wait; nothing would be lost by going slowly in so important a matter.

It turned out that this was wisdom, too; for inside of three weeks Aleck made a wonderful strike
which swelled her imaginary hundred thousand to four hundred thousand of the same quality.
She and Sally were in the clouds that evening. For the first time they introduced champagne
at dinner. Not real champagne, but plenty real enough for the amount of imagination expended
on it. It was Sally that did it, and Aleck weakly submitted. At bottom both were troubled and
ashamed, for he was a high-up Son of Temperance, and at funerals wore an apron which no dog
could look upon and retain his reason and his opinion; and she was a W. C. T. U., with all
that that implies of boiler-iron virtue and unendurable holiness. But there is was; the pride
of riches was beginning its disintegrating work. They had lived to prove, once more, a sad
truth which had been proven many times before in the world: that whereas principle is a great
and noble protection against showy and degrading vanities and vices, poverty is worth six of
it. More than four hundred thousand dollars to the good. They took up the matrimonial matter
again. Neither the dentist nor the lawyer was mentioned; there was no occasion, they were out
of the running. Disqualified. They discussed the son of the pork-packer and the son of the
village banker. But finally, as in the previous case, they concluded to wait and think, and
go cautiously and sure.

Luck came their way again. Aleck, ever watchful saw a great and risky chance, and took a daring
flyer. A time of trembling, of doubt, of awful uneasiness followed, for non-success meant absolute
ruin and nothing short of it. Then came the result, and Aleck, faint with joy, could hardly
control her voice when she said:

"The suspense is over, Sally--and we are worth a cold million!"

Sally wept for gratitude, and said:

"Oh, Electra, jewel of women, darling of my heart, we are free at last, we roll in wealth,
we need never scrimp again. It's a case for Veuve Cliquot!" and he got out a pint of spruce-beer
and made sacrifice, he saying "Damn the expense," and she rebuking him gently with reproachful
but humid and happy eyes.

They shelved the pork-packer's son and the banker's son, and sat down to consider the Governor's
son and the son of the Congressman.

CHAPTER VI

It were a weariness to follow in detail the leaps and bounds the Foster fictitious finances
took from this time forth. It was marvelous, it was dizzying, it was dazzling. Everything Aleck
touched turned to fairy gold, and heaped itself glittering toward the firmament. Millions upon
millions poured in, and still the mighty stream flowed thundering along, still its vast volume
increased. Five millions--ten millions--twenty--thirty--was there never to be an end?

Two years swept by in a splendid delirium, the intoxicated Fosters scarcely noticing the flight
of time. They were now worth three hundred million dollars; they were in every board of directors
of every prodigious combine in the country; and still as time drifted along, the millions went
on piling up, five at a time, ten at a time, as fast as they could tally them off, almost.
The three hundred double itself--then doubled again--and yet again--and yet once more.

Twenty-four hundred millions!

The business was getting a little confused. It was necessary to take an account of stock, and
straighten it out. The Fosters knew it, they felt it, they realized that it was imperative;
but they also knew that to do it properly and perfectly the task must be carried to a finish
without a break when once it was begun. A ten-hours' job; and where could THEY find ten leisure
hours in a bunch? Sally was selling pins and sugar and calico all day and every day; Aleck
was cooking and washing dishes and sweeping and making beds all day and every day, with none
to help, for the daughters were being saved up for high society. The Fosters knew there was
one way to get the ten hours, and only one. Both were ashamed to name it; each waited for the
other to do it. Finally Sally said:

"Somebody's got to give in. It's up to me. Consider that I've named it--never mind pronouncing
it out aloud."

Aleck colored, but was grateful. Without further remark, they fell. Fell, and--broke the Sabbath.
For that was their only free ten-hour stretch. It was but another step in the downward path.
Others would follow. Vast wealth has temptations which fatally and surely undermine the moral
structure of persons not habituated to its possession.

