A NEW ENGLAND GIRLHOOD

OUTLINED FROM MEMORY

By

LUCY LARCOM

  I dedicated this sketch
  To my girlfriends in general;
  And in particular
  To my namesake-niece,
  Lucy Larcom Spaulding.

My audience is understood to be composed of girls of all ages, and of women who have not forgotten
their girlhood. Such as have a friendly appreciation of girls--and of those who write for them--are
also welcome to listen to as much of my narrative as they choose. All others are eavesdroppers,
and, of course, have no right to criticise.

To many, the word "autobiography" implies nothing but conceit and egotism. But these are not
necessarily its characteristics. If an apple blossom or a ripe apple could tell its own story,
it would be, still more than its own, the story of the sunshine that smiled upon it, of the
winds that whispered to it, of the birds that sang around it, of the storms that visited it,
and of the motherly tree that held it and fed it until its petals were unfolded and its form
developed.

A complete autobiography would indeed be a picture of the outer and inner universe photographed
upon one little life's consciousness. For does not the whole world, seen and unseen go to the
making up of every human being? The commonest personal history has its value when it is looked
at as a part of the One Infinite Life. Our life--which is the very best thing we have--is ours
only that we may share it with Our Father's family, at their need. If we have anything, within
us worth giving away, to withhold it is ungenerous; and we cannot look honestly into ourselves
without acknowledging with humility our debt to the lives around us for whatever of power or
beauty has been poured into ours.

None of us can think of ourselves as entirely separate beings. Even an autobiographer has to
say "we" much oftener than "I." Indeed, there may be more egotism in withdrawing mysteriously
into one's self, than in frankly unfolding one's life--story, for better or worse. There may
be more vanity in covering, one's face with a veil, to be wondered at and guessed about, than
in drawing it aside, and saying by that act, "There! you see that I am nothing remarkable."

However, I do not know that I altogether approve of autobiography myself, when the subject
is a person of so little importance as in the present instance.  Still, it may have a reason
for being, even in a case like this.

Every one whose name is before the public at all must be aware of a common annoyance in the
frequent requests which are made for personal facts, data for biographical paragraphs, and
the like. To answer such requests and furnish the material asked for, were it desirable, would
interfere seriously with the necessary work of almost any writer. (He hated the curls of heart and tried to niederzubürsten on the head; for he considered it
effeminate curls, and she filled his life with bitterness.) Then there was Mary with a suit he
had worn for two years only on Sundays and the generally was referred to only as the, other clothes
"- from which, on the state of his wardrobe can close. The girl pushed him even manage a bit,
after he had independently had attracted. It gave him a certain (very unusual) appearance of delicacy,
pulled down his shirt collar, brushed him off and crowned him with his colored straw hat. So
He looked very meek and made comfortable. And he felt that way. His reluctance against all the
clean clothes and was indestructible. He hoped that Mary would be at least the boots forgotten, but
that hope was dashed. She rubbed, as is proper, with tallow and she brought him. Now he lost patience
and told him to always do what he does not wants. But Mary said, persuasively:,, Na, come on,
Tom, was a good fellow "Then he went grumbling in his boots. Mary was soon ready, and the three
children went to Sunday school, a Place that Tom hated thoroughly. But Sid and Mary went away very
happy.

The time was the Sunday School 9:00 to 21:30 clock, then came the worship service. Two the children
were always with pleasure as the sermon, the third was also - yes, but from other reasons. The
high-backed, handsome pews were about three hundred people hold and the building itself was
small, cluttered - as a kind of spruce box tower it.

At the door, Tom was back a bit and stopped for a Sunday-dressed comrade: , Say, Bill, you have
a yellow ticket? "

,, M - yes!

"What do you want for it?"

"What type do you want?"

, A piece of candy cane and a fish hook. "

, Show me. "

Tom showed his bargaining chips. They were satisfactory, and the deal was made. Then Tom bartered
some blue and red paper against similar small items. He introduced the other Boys, as they
came his way, and sold by list of the different colors however, bought it. Then he went to church,
surrounded by a swarm of cleaned, noisy boys and girls, winds its way to his seat and began to
quarrel with the first best. The Teacher, a dignified, elderly man stepped in between. Then he
turned for a moment order, and Tom pulled a boy in the front bench by the hair and was engrossed
in his book, spun around as the boy. He then stabbed another with a needle, it cried out, and
Tom was once again a reference. Tom's whole class was a master class - after his Pattern - restless,
noisy and impertinent. When it came to reciting the lesson did not know, only its verses thoroughly,
and all stümperte was uncertain.

However - they came through, and each received his confirmation in the form of a blue slip, each with
a Bible verse fact, each such note was up for two verses said. Ten blue piece of paper were
the same a red and could be exchanged for such; made a ten red yellow , and this gave the superintendent
a very easy-bound Bible (now certainly forty cents worth).

Like many of my readers would have enough diligence and attention, two thousand verses by heart to learn,
and acted it is a Doréesche Bible? And yet Mary had in this way acquired two Bibles, and it was the
work of two years, a boy of German descent had a hard placed on four or five. He had once recited
three thousand verses without faltering. But the mental strain was too great, and he was better
from that day on not much as an idiot - a bad misfortune for the school, because before this
event had the Superintendent on special occasions the boy forward and, swell can be "(as Tom called
it). Only the more sedate students gave themselves the trouble to keep their notes, and its
boring Continue work until they were entitled to a Bible. Such was the achievement of a such
a price, a rare and remarkable event, the winner was in its glory
days such a great, great person, that holy ambition fulfilled the
breast of every student and often lasted several weeks.

It is possible that Tom's desire to never be such a Price was addressed, no doubt, however,
his whole being yearned for glory and attention, that such an event brought with them.

The clergyman was now before the meeting, a closed Psalter in the hand and the fourth finger between
the leaves inserted. He ordered silence.

Namely, when a Sunday school teacher will have his usual little speech from the deck, is a Psalterbuch
in his hand so necessary as the sheet music into the hands of a singer who perform in the concert
from the podium of a solo is - who knows why? For never Psalterbuch sheet music or open when
you talk.

The Superintendent was a slight man of thirty-five years, with sand-yellow goats beard and short-cropped
sandy yellow hair. He wore a stiff collar, the upper edge of its Ears touched and whose sharp
corners to the corners of his mouth jutted - a plank which forced him to advance his head and always to
turn the whole body when the side wanted to look. His chin was forced into a huge tie, which was
wide and long, like a bank note and had pointed ends.

Mr. Walter was very serious in appearance and very good natured and honest by nature. And he kept
his spiritual matters and matters so in honor and they did so strictly to separate from all worldly
things, that his Sunday-school voice he himself had unconsciously adopted a certain tone in which it
completely on weekdays was free.

He thus began: "Now, children, once seated as calm and orderly, as if you only possible , and
fits even a few minutes on hard, because that is what matters most!

This should all the good boys and girls always do! I see a little girl who looks out the window
- I fear she imagines that I was out there somewhere, perhaps in
a tree held the birds my speech?

(Stifled chuckle.) I want to tell you that I am happy, so many fresh, bright faces of children
makes this place can be seen gathered, to learn to do right and be good. "

In this style, it went on and on. There is no need to impose here the rest of the speech. She
was all by a known pattern - we all have heard it once.

The last third of the speech was the resumption of fighting between certain evil Boys and disturbed
by restlessness and gossip here and there, the waves on even the basics Such a rock of obedience
and good behavior, like Sid and Mary gnawed. But with the weakening of Mr. Walter's voice was
weaker and the overall totals, and the conclusion of the speech was greeted with quiet serenity.

The
good part was the lack of attention brought on by a fairly rare occurrence: the appearance of visitors:
Judge Thatcher, accompanied by a very weak, old man, an elegant, medieval gentleman with iron-gray
hair and a dignified lady certainly the wife of the latter. The lady led a child by the hand.
Tom was previously anxious and guilty have been - he could not stand the sight of Amy Lawrence's
eye - There's too much love expressed this view! But when he saw this small new-comer, was his
anxiety to a halt.

The next moment he was back playing his tricks - He poked another boy pulled her by the hair, cut
faces, in short, did everything which can only arouse any girl's attention and win their approval.
But his exaltation was quickly dampened, he recalled his experiences in the garden this Engels,
but that memory was rapidly through the happiness of which his heart suddenly met, was washed
away.

The visitors were shown the highest honors, and after termination of Mr. Walters Salutation, he led
her around in school. The medieval man seemed an important Man. He was the chief judge of the district
- certainly the most exalted personality, these children had seen so far, and she mused about
the material from which could be well made, and then they were eager
for his voice and then she shook re about to hear.

He was from Constantinople - twelve miles away - he was so get through
the whole world and had seen everything, those eyes had seen the State
House, of whom it said it had a real tin roof!

The shy reverence which these ideas aroused, was of the absolute silence and the rigid clear
to him looking eyes to read.

So that was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of their mayor.

Jeff Thatcher once said, he was related to the great man, and housed to school! It would have
been music to his ears Jeffs, he would have heard what people whispered about him.

, Look, Jim, he has acted really! Damn it, he will give him a hand. He has given him a hand. In Jingo,
probably also want to be Jeff, eh? "

Mr. Walter is now looking to bring in force through possible business, gave Commands, precipitated
judgments were hints here and there and everywhere, and showed that on the right Place was.
Fact, showed "the administrator of the books, ran around with piles of books, Books rattling
the boards and did a show that for every manager had to be a true pleasure. The young teachers,
were "also, did well with children, they had just beaten lifted a warning finger against her
cute bad boys and fondled brave little girl. The young teacher, showed "with little exhortations
and other Evidence of their authority and their care. And made all the teachers of both sexes
to do with liking the class podium, and it seemed to be business that continuously had to be repeated
(and how annoying they were there!). The little girl showed " in different ways, and the boys
showed "with such emphasis that the Air with paper balls and half-suppressed
bickering was filled.

And all that sat in the great man there had a raised judge's smile for the whole school, and
warmed himself in the glow its own size, because he showed "a fortiori. But one thing was missing,
which Mr. Walters Luck would have filled up, that was the opportunity to hand out a Bible and one
of his prize Prodigies show. Several students had had a number of smaller labels, but no one
enough. He would have given the world about his little wiederzuhaben Germans for one hour.

Da
- stepped in front of Tom Sawyer, nine yellow slips, nine and ten
red, blue, and requested a Bible!

That worked like a bolt from the blue! Walter would not have expected such a thing - in the next
ten years, not sure. But there was nothing wrong - there lay the necessary Notes together,
and took pretty enough. So Tom got his place with the judge and the other elect, and the incredible
news was out in every trumpeted.

It was undoubtedly the most amazing fact of the decade, and so deep was the emotion that they lifted
the new hero on the level of the district judge and the school two
wonders of the world centimeters from its once had.

The boys were met by the Bank of envy. But the most deeply offended were those who einsahen too late
that they themselves to this unprecedented Gloss had helped by selling tickets for the Tom treasures
which he carried acquired transfer of the painting-prerogative. They despised themselves, as they
by a cunning impostor who can be cited.

The award was presented to Tom, with so much unction, as the superintendent in such circumstances
could muster. But it was not the right swing in it, for his instinct told him, this must exercise
a secret that probably not tolerated very well the light of the sun would. It was simply incredible
that the boy two thousand Bible verses in his head should have been stored - a dozen would have
undoubtedly exceeded his powers.

Amy Lawrence was red with pride and tried to show it to Tom, but he did not see. She wondered,
she fretted a bit, finally got a faint suspicion in it, and vanished and came again. On fit.
A secret glance told her worlds and then broke her heart, and she was jealous and angry, and the
tears came, and they hated all, all, at most, of course, Tom.

Tom was brought before the judge.

But his tongue stuck to the palate, the sweat was on the forehead,
his heart beat - partly because of the greatness of the man, but even
more because he was her father.

He had, it would have been dark, fall down before him and like to worship him. The judge placed
his hand on Tom's head and called him a clever, little man, and asked
him his name.

The boy stammered, coughed and came out at last with difficulty:,, Tom "

"O no - not Tom, but -"

, Thomas. "

The "correct. I did think that something was missing. Good. But I think you're still a Name, and
thou shalt call me, right? "

, Tell the Lord your other name, Thomas, and say: Lord! Do not forget what's right! "

, Thomas Sawyer - sir, "!

, So - that's it! A good boy. A good boy. A brave little boy. Two thousand Verses are a lot -
very, very much! And you need the effort that it has prepared for you, it teach him not to
repent, for knowledge is certainly worth more than any something
else in the world.

They make great men and great men. - One day you will be a great man and a great man, Thomas,
and then you'll look back and say: all my love, All this I owe to the glorious Sunday school
of my home village Teachers who have encouraged me to learn, all to the good superintendent,
who cheered me and I woke up and gave me a beautiful Bible a splendid, splendid Bible so that
I always, always should have with me, all my education!

That you will say, Thomas!

And you'd pay you any money with your treasure of two thousand verses can - No, certainly not!
- And now you can make me and this lady great pleasure and we recite
some of your verses - you will do it gladly, because we are looking
forward so much so a busy boy.

No doubt you know the names of all twelve disciples.

Want So give us the names of the two first chosen disciples? "

Tom pulled a knob, and looked as silly. He blushed and lowered her eyes. Mr. Walters with heart
sank. He told himself that it was not possible, boys from this answer To get to the simplest
question - and just had to ask the judge! But felt he caused himself to come to the rescue and
said, "Answer to the Lord, Thomas, - afraid not! "

Tom was getting redder.

,, Well, I know, I'll tell you, "mixed in here the lady.,, The names of the two first disciples
were - "

, David and Goliath! "

We cover the veil of charity over what was now!

Chapter Five.

to about half past nine clock began ringing the small bell of the church, and immediately began
the people for the morning sermon herbeizuströmen. The Sunday school children were scattered
through whole house and took some one with their parents, to be supervised. Aunt Polly came,
Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her. Tom was first placed in the pulpit, to the extent be possible
from the open window and the summer outdoors away.

The people filled the church. The old, gouty postmaster, who had seen better days, the Mayor and
his wife - because there was a Mayor, along with many other useless things - The local judge,
the widow Douglas, tender, small and lively, a noble, kind-hearted soul and always on top (her
house was the only stone in the village, and the gastfreieste and
Lavish festivities that St. Petersburg could have); Lawyer Riverson;
then the beauty of the village, followed by a crowd of elegantly dressed,
with all sorts of Nonsense draped young heartthrob, and then all the
young clerks of the village, all same time, as they had stood in the
vestibule, licorice rasping - an oil-soaked, silly protection force
- until the last girl had run the gauntlet.

And last of came all the goody-goody, Willie Mufferson his mother so carefully in the lead
to hand as they would be made of glass. He always brought his mother to church and was the favorite
of all the old Ladies. The young people hated him - he was too good, and then he had them
too often as a model been held.

His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket - it was at that time Sunday fashion. Tom
had no handkerchief, and despised every boy who had one. Since the Assembly was pretty much
all here, the bell rang again, as a reminder for Stragglers and Idle, and then a great silence
fell on the church, only interrupted by the tittering and whispering
of the choir.

The choir giggled and whispered always and everywhere during the whole service. There was once a church
choir, which is not bad was brought up, but I do not remember where. It's been a number of years
ago, and I can not remember really in the details - but I think it was in a foreign country.

The clergyman was the song, and read it for a very special, very much in this area popular
style in a singing tone down. His voice began with a faint whisper, grew constantly, until it
reached a point where they Herausstoßung of the last word suddenly broke off and falls down like
a fountain.

He was regarded as a wonderful reader. For all church meetings he was asked to Recite verses,
and when he had finished, the ladies raised their hands and let them to fall into his lap and rolled
their eyes and shook their heads, as did they say, words can not
say anything, it's too wonderful, too wonderful for this world!

After the song the Reverend Mr. Sprague began a kind of daily report by news about spread of meetings
and gatherings, and a thousand things to all worldly pleasures from the given way holy house
seemed to be - a strange fashion, find anywhere in America is, even in big cities and into our age
of abundance into newspapers.

And now came the sermon. It was a good, affable sermons and went down to the individual. She
dealt with the church and the children of the church, with the other churches the village, the
village itself, with the country, with the state, with the authorities of each States with the
United States, with the Congress, the President, with the civil servants; with the poor, storm-tossed
sailors, with the sighing under the yoke of their monarch Million in Europe and the Orient, with
the lucky and the rich who do not have eyes, to see and ears to hear, with the poor souls on the
remote islands, and concluded with the request that wish that his words fall on good soil
and will one day bear fruit a hundredfold. Amen.
This was followed by clothes rustling, and the congregation sat down.
The boy, whose history This book contains, had no joy in this sermon
he heard a call - and perhaps not either. But he noted the particular
details of it, quite unconsciously, because, as I said, he paid little
attention, but he knew the sermon of the priest long ago and noticed
immediately if any time a new passage was inserted, and then he felt
uncomfortable; He held adjective clauses and variations to the traditional
things for unnobel and wrong.

During the sermon, a fly on the seat
of the pew in front of him and tortured him by the constant rubbing
of her legs. Then she hugged her own head and pressed him so strongly
that the members seemed to have grown on the head, tied her Wings
with its hind legs and held her close to the body, like an overcoat,
and performed all her toilet with a rest, as they felt perfectly safe.
And so it was. Because when Tom's hand approached her to catch her,
she remained sitting quietly. - Tom thought if such employment would
have come his way at the beginning of the sermon, it would be a pleasant
have been a pastime for his spirit. - But in the closing sentence
his hand began to to bend and move forward, and right now as the "amen
was spoken," The fly was a prisoner of war.

My mother had that sort of sunshiny nature which easily shifts to shadow, like the atmosphere
of an April day. Cheerfulness held sway with her, except occasionally, when her domestic cares
grew too overwhelming; but her spirits rebounded quickly from discouragement.

Her father was the only one of our grandparents who had survived to my time,--of French descent,
piquant, merry, exceedingly polite, and very fond of us children, whom he was always treating
to raisins and peppermints and rules for good behavior. He had been a soldier in the Revolutionary
War,--the greatest distinction we could imagine. And he was also the sexton of the oldest church
in town,--the Old South,--and had charge of the winding-up of the town clock, and the ringing
of the bell on week-days and Sundays, and the tolling for funerals,--into which mysteries he
sometimes allowed us youngsters a furtive glimpse. I did not believe that there was another
grandfather so delightful as ours in all the world.

Uncles, aunts, and cousins were plentiful in the family, but they did not live near enough
for us to see them very often, excepting one aunt, my father's sister, for whom I was named.
She was fair, with large, clear eyes that seemed to look far into one's heart, with an expression
at once penetrating and benignant. To my childish imagination she was an embodiment of serene
and lofty goodness. I wished and hoped that by bearing her baptismal name I might become like
her; and when I found out its signification (I learned that "Lucy" means "with light"), I wished
it more earnestly still. For her beautiful character was just such an illumination to my young
life as I should most desire mine to be to the lives of others.

My aunt, like my father, was always studying something. Some map or book always lay open before
her, when I went to visit her, in her picturesque old house, with its sloping roof and tall
well-sweep. And she always brought out some book or picture for me from her quaint old-fashioned
chest of drawers. I still possess the "Children in the Wood," which she gave me, as a keepsake,
when I was about ten years old.

Our relatives form the natural setting of our childhood. We understand ourselves best and are
best understood by others through the persons who came nearest to us in our earliest years.
Those larger planets held our little one to its orbit, and lent it their brightness. Happy
indeed is the infancy which is surrounded only by the loving and the good!

Besides those who were of my kindred, I had several aunts by courtesy, or rather by the privilege
of neighborhood, who seemed to belong to my babyhood. Indeed, the family hearthstone came near
being the scene of a tragedy to me, through the blind fondness of one of these.

The adjective is literal. This dear old lady, almost sightless, sitting in a low chair far
in the chimney corner, where she had been placed on her first call to see the new baby, took
me upon her lap, and--so they say--unconsciously let me slip off into the coals. I was rescued
unsinged, however, and it was one of the earliest accomplishments of my infancy to thread my
poor, half-blind Aunt Stanley's needles for her. We were close neighbors and gossips until
my fourth year. Many an hour I sat by her side drawing a needle and thread through a bit of
calico, under the delusion that I was sewing, while she repeated all sorts of juvenile singsongs
of which her memory seemed full, for my entertainment. There used to be a legend current among
my brothers and sisters that this aunt unwittingly taught me to use a reprehensible word. One
of her ditties began with the lines:--

  "Miss Lucy was a charming child;
  She never said, 'I won't.'"

After bearing this once or twice, the willful negative was continually upon my lips; doubtless
a symptom of what was dormant within--a will perhaps not quite so aggressive as it was obstinate.
But she meant only to praise me and please me; and dearly I loved to stay with her in her cozy
up-stairs room across the lane, that the sun looked into nearly all day.

Another adopted aunt lived down-stairs in the same house. This one was a sober woman; life
meant business to her, and she taught me to sew in earnest, with a knot in the end of my thread,
although it was only upon clothing for my ragchildren--absurd creatures of my own invention,
limbless and destitute of features, except as now and then one of my older sisters would, upon
my earnest petition, outline a face for one of them, with pen and ink. I loved them, nevertheless,
far better than I did the London doll that lay in waxen state in an upper drawer at home,--the
fine lady that did not wish to be played with, but only to be looked at and admired.

This latter aunt I regarded as a woman of great possessions. She owned the land beside us and
opposite us. Her well was close to our door, a well of the coldest and clearest water I ever
drank, and it abundantly supplied the whole neighborhood.

The hill behind her house was our general playground; and I supposed she owned that, too, since
through her dooryard, and over her stone wall, was our permitted thoroughfare thither. I imagined
that those were her buttercups that we gathered when we got over the wall, and held under each
other's chin, to see, by the reflection, who was fond of butter; and surely the yellow toadflax
(we called it "lady's slipper") that grew in the rock-crevices was hers, for we found it nowhere
else.

The blue gill-over-the-ground unmistakably belonged to her, for it carpeted an unused triangular
corner of her garden inclosed by a leaning fence gray and gold with sea-side lichens. Its blue
was beautiful, but its pungent earthy odor--I can smell it now--repelled us from the damp corner
where it grew. It made us think of graves and ghosts; and I think we were forbidden to go there.
We much preferred to sit on the sunken curbstones, in the shade of the broad-leaved burdocks,
and shape their spiny balls into chairs and cradles and sofas for our dollies, or to "play
school" on the doorsteps, or to climb over the wall, and to feel the freedom of the hill.

We were a neighborhood of large families, and most of us enjoyed the privilege of "a little
wholesome neglect." Our tether was a long one, and when, grown a little older, we occasionally
asked to have it lengthened, a maternal "I don't care" amounted to almost unlimited liberty.

The hill itself was well-nigh boundless in its capacities for juvenile occupation. Besides
its miniature precipices, that walled in some of the neighbors' gardens, and its slanting slides,
worn smooth by the feet of many childish generations, there were partly quarried ledges, which
had shaped themselves into rock-stairs, carpeted with lovely mosses, in various patterns. These
were the winding ways up our castle-towers, with breakfast-rooms and boudoirs along the landings,
where we set our tables for expected guests with bits of broken china, and left our numerous
rag-children tucked in asleep under mullein blankets or plantain-coverlets, while we ascended
to the topmost turret to watch for our ships coming in from sea.

For leagues of ocean were visible from the tiptop of the ledge, a tiny cleft peak that held
always little rain-pool for thirsty birds that now and then stopped as they flew over, to dip
their beaks and glance shyly at us, as if they wished to share our games. We could see the
steeples and smokes of Salem in the distance, and the bill, as it descended, lost itself in
mowing fields that slid again into the river. Beyond that was Rial Side and Folly Hill, and
they looked so very far off!

They called it "over to Green's" across the river. I thought it was because of the thick growth
of dark green junipers, that covered the cliff-side down to the water's edge; but they were
only giving the name of the farmer who owned the land, Whenever there was an unusual barking
of dogs in the distance, they said it was "over to Green's." That barking of dogs made the
place seem very mysterious to me.

Our lane ran parallel with the hill and the mowing fields, and down our lane we were always
free to go. It was a genuine lane, all ups and downs, and too narrow for a street, although
at last they have leveled it and widened it, and made a commonplace thoroughfare of it. I am
glad that my baby life knew it in all its queer, original irregularities, for it seemed to
have a character of its own, like many of its inhabitants, all the more charming because it
was unlike anything but itself. The hill, too, is lost now, buried under houses.

Our lane came to an end at some bars that let us into another lane,--or rather a footpath or
cowpath, bordered with cornfields and orchards. We were still on home ground, for my father's
vegetable garden and orchard were here. After a long straight stretch, the path suddenly took
an abrupt turn, widening into a cart road, then to a tumble-down wharf, and there was the river!

An "arm of the sea" I was told that our river was, and it did seem to reach around the town
and hold it in a liquid embrace. Twice a day the tide came in and filled its muddy bed with
a sparkling flood. So it was a river only half the time, but at high tide it was a river indeed;
all that a child could wish, with its boats and its sloops, and now and then that most available
craft for a crew of children--a gundalow. We easily transformed the spelling into "gondola,"
and in fancy were afloat on Venetian waters, under some overhanging balcony, perhaps at the
very Palace of the Doges,--willingly blind to the reality of a mudscow leaning against some
rickety wharf posts, covered with barnacles.

Sometimes a neighbor boy who was the fortunate owner of a boat would row us down the river
a fearful, because a forbidden, joy. The widening waters made us tremble with dread and longing
for what might be beyond; for when we had passed under the piers of the bridge, the estuary
broadened into the harbor and the open sea. Then somebody on board would tell a story of children
who had drifted away beyond the harbor-bar and the light-house, and were drowned; and our boyish
helmsman would begin to look grave and anxious, and would turn his boat and row us back swiftly
to the safe gundalow and tumbledown wharf.

The cars rush into the station now, right over our riverside playground. I can often hear the
mirthful shout of boys and girls under the shriek of the steam whistle. No dream of a railroad
had then come to the quiet old town, but it was a wild train of children that ran homeward
in the twilight up the narrow lane, with wind-shod feet, and hair flying like the manes of
young colts, and light hearts bounding to their own footsteps. How good and dear our plain,
two-story dwelling-house looked to us as we came in sight of it, and what sweet odors stole
out to meet us from the white-fenced inclosure of our small garden,--from peach-trees and lilac-bushes
in bloom, from bergamot and balm and beds of camomile!

Sometimes we would find the pathetic figure of white-haired Larkin Moore, the insane preacher,
his two canes lain aside, waiting, in our dooryard for any audience that he could gather: boys
and girls were as welcome as anybody. He would seat us in a row on the green slope, and give
us a half hour or so of incoherent exhortation, to which we attended respectfully, if not reverently;
for his whole manner showed that, though demented, he was deeply in earnest. He seemed there
in the twilight like a dazed angel who had lost his way, and had half forgotten his errand,
which yet he must try to tell to anybody who would listen.

I have heard my mother say that sometimes he would ask if he might take her baby in his arms
and sing to it; and that though she was half afraid herself, the baby--I like to fancy I was
that baby--seemed to enjoy it, and played gleefully with the old man's flowing gray locks.

Good Larkin Moore was well known through the two neighboring counties, Essex and Middlesex.
We saw him afterward on the banks of the Merrimack. He always wore a loose calico tunic over
his trousers; and, when the mood came upon him, he started off with two canes,--seeming to
think he could travel faster as a quadruped than as a biped. He was entirely harmless; his
only wish was to preach or to sing.

A characteristic anecdote used to be told of him: that once, as a stage-coach containing, only
a few passengers passed him on the road, he asked the favor of a seat on the top, and was refused.
There were many miles between him and his destination. But he did not upbraid the ungracious
driver; he only swung his two canes a little more briskly, and kept breast of the horses all
the way, entering the town side by side with the inhospitable vehicles--a running reproach
to the churl on the box.

There was another wanderer, a blind woman, whom my mother treated with great respect on her
annual pilgrimages. She brought with her some printed rhymes to sell, purporting to be composed
by herself, and beginning with the verse:--

  "I, Nancy Welsh, was born and bred
  In Essex County, Marblehead.
  And when I was an infant quite
  The Lord deprived me of my sight."

I labored under the delusion that blindness was a sort of insanity, and I used to run away
when this pilgrim came, for she was not talkative like Larkin Moore. I fancied she disliked
children, and so I shrank from her.

There were other odd estrays going about, who were either well known, or could account for
them selves. The one human phenomenon that filled us little ones with mortal terror was an
unknown "man with a pack on his back." I do not know what we thought he would do with us, but
the sight of one always sent us breathless with fright to the shelter of the maternal wing.
I did not at all like the picture of Christian on his way to the wicket-gate, in "Pilgrim's
Progress," before I had read the book, because he had "a pack on his back." But there was really
nothing to be afraid of in those simple, honest old times. I suppose we children would not
have known how happy and safe we were, in our secluded lane, if we had not conjured up a few
imaginary fears.

Long as it is since the rural features of our lane were entirely obliterated, my feet often
go back and press, in memory, its grass-grown borders, and in delight and liberty I am a child
again. Its narrow limits were once my whole known world. Even then it seemed to me as if it
might lead everywhere; and it was indeed but the beginning of a road which must lengthen and
widen beneath my feet forever.

II.

SCHOOLROOM AND MEETING-HOUSE.

THERE were only two or three houses between ours and the main street, and then our lane came
out directly opposite the finest house in town, a three-story edifice of brick, painted white,
the "Colonel's" residence. There was a spacious garden behind it, from which we caught glimpses
and perfumes of unknown flowers. Over its high walls hung boughs of splendid great yellow sweet
apples, which, when they fell on the outside, we children considered as our perquisites. When
I first read about the apples of the Hesperides, my idea of them was that they were like the
Colonel's "pumpkin-sweetings."

Beyond the garden were wide green fields which reached eastward down to the beach. It was one
of those large old estates which used to give to the very heart of our New England coast towns
a delightful breeziness and roominess.

A coach-and-pair was one of the appurtenances of this estate, with a coachman on the box; and
when he took the family out for an airing we small children thought it was a sort of Cinderella
spectacle, prepared expressly for us.

It was not, however, quite so interesting as the Boston stage-coach, that rolled regularly
every day past the head of our lane into and out of its headquarters, a big, unpainted stable
close at hand. This stage-coach, in our minds, meant the city,--twenty miles off; an immeasurable
distance to us then. Even our elders did not go there very often.

In those early days, towns used to give each other nicknames, like schoolboys. Ours was called
"Bean-town" not because it was especially devoted to the cultivation of this leguminous edible,
but probably because it adhered a long time to the Puritanic custom of saving Sunday-work by
baking beans on Saturday evening, leaving them in the oven over night. After a while, as families
left off heating their ovens, the bean-pots were taken by the village baker on Saturday afternoon,
who returned them to each house early on Sunday morning with the pan of brown bread that went
with them. The jingling of the baker's bells made the matter a public one.

The towns through which our stage-coach passed sometimes called it the "bean-pot." The Jehn
who drove it was something of a wag. Once, coming through Charlestown, while waiting in the
street for a resident passenger, he was hailed by another resident who thought him obstructing
the passage, with the shout,--

"Halloo there! Get your old bean-pot out of the way!"

"I will, when I have got my pork in," was the ready reply. What the sobriquet of Charlestown
was, need not be explained.

We had a good opportunity to watch both coaches, as my father's shop was just at the head of
the lane, and we went to school upstairs in the same building. After he left off going to sea,--before
my birth,--my father took a store for the sale of what used to be called "West India goods,"
and various other domestic commodities.

The school was kept by a neighbor whom everybody called "Aunt Hannah." It took in all the little
ones about us, no matter how young they were, provided they could walk and talk, and were considered
capable of learning their letters.

A ladder-like flight of stairs on the outside of the house led up to the schoolroom, and another
flight, also outside, took us down into a bit of a garden, where grew tansy and spearmint and
southernwood and wormwood, and, among other old-fashioned flowers, an abundance of many-tinted
four o'clocks, whose regular afternoon-opening just at the close of school, was a daily wonder
to us babies. From the schoolroom window we could watch the slow hands of the town clock and
get a peep at what was going on in the street, although there was seldom anybody in sight except
the Colonel's gardener or coachman, going into or out of the driveway directly opposite. It
was a very still street; the front windows of the houses were generally closed, and a few military-looking
Lombardy poplars stood like sentinels on guard before them.

Another shop--a very small one--joined my father's, where three shoemakers, all of the same
name--the name our lane went by--sat at their benches and plied their "waxed ends." One of
them, an elderly man, tall and erect, used to come out regularly every day, and stand for a
long time at the corner, motionless as a post, with his nose and chin pointing skyward, usually
to the northeast. I watched his face with wonder, for it was said that "Uncle John" was "weatherwise,"
and knew all the secrets of the heavens.

Aunt Hannah's schoolroom and "our shop" are a blended memory to me. As I was only a baby when
I began to go to school, I was often sent down-stairs for a half hour's recreation not permitted
to the older ones. I think I looked upon both school and shop entirely as places of entertainment
for little children.

The front shop-window was especially interesting to us children, for there were in it a few
glass jars containing sticks of striped barley-candy, and red and white peppermint-drops, and
that delectable achievement of the ancient confectioner's art, the "Salem gibraltar." One of
my first recollections of my father is connected with that window. He had taken me into the
shop with him after dinner,--I was perhaps two years old,--and I was playing beside him on
the counter when one of his old sea-comrades came in, whom we knew as "Captain Cross." The
Captain tried to make friends with me, and, to seal the bond, asked my father to take down
from its place of exhibition a strip of red peppermints dropped on white paper, in a style
I particularly admired, which he twisted around my neck, saying, "Now I've bought you! Now
you are my girl. Come, go home with me!"

His words sounded as if he meant them. I took it all in earnest, and ran, scared and screaming,
to my father, dashing down the sugar-plums I wanted so much, and refusing even to bestow a
glance upon my amused purchaser. My father pacified me by taking me on his shoulders and carrying
me "pickaback" up and down the shop, and I clung to him in the happy consciousness that I belonged
to him, and that he would not let anybody else have me; though I did not feel quite easy until
Captain Cross disappeared. I suppose that this little incident has always remained in my memory
because it then for the first time became a fact in my consciousness that my father really
loved me as I loved him. He was not at all a demonstrative man, and any petting that he gave
us children could not fail to make a permanent impression.

I think that must have been also the last special attention I received from him, for a little
sister appeared soon after, whose coming was announced to me with the accompaniment of certain
mysterious hints about my nose being out of joint. I examined that feature carefully in the
looking glass, but could not discover anything usual about it. It was quite beyond me to imagine
that our innocent little baby could have anything to do with the possible disfigurement of
my face, but she did absorb the fondness of the whole family, myself included, and she became
my father's playmate and darling, the very apple of his eye. I used sometimes to wish I were
a baby too, so that he would notice me, but gradually I accepted the situation.

Aunt Hannah used her kitchen or her sitting room for a schoolroom, as best suited her convenience.
We were delighted observers of her culinary operations and other employments. If a baby's head
nodded, a little bed was made for it on a soft "comforter" in the corner, where it had its
nap out undisturbed. But this did not often happen; there were so many interesting things going
on that we seldom became sleepy.

Aunt Hannah was very kind and motherly, but she kept us in fear of her ferule, which indicated
to us a possibility of smarting palms. This ferule was shaped much like the stick with which
she stirred her hasty pudding for dinner,--I thought it was the same,--and I found myself caught
in a whirlwind of family laughter by reporting at home that "Aunt Hannah punished the scholars
with the pudding-stick."

There was one colored boy in school, who did not sit on a bench, like the rest, but on a block
of wood that looked like a backlog turned endwise. Aunt Hannah often called him a "blockhead,"
and I supposed it was because he sat on that block. Sometimes, in his absence, a boy was made
to sit in his place for punishment, for being a "blockhead" too, as I imagined. I hoped I should
never be put there. Stupid little girls received a different treatment,--an occasional rap
on the head with the teacher's thimble; accompanied with a half-whispered, impatient ejaculation,
which sounded very much like "Numskull!" I think this was a rare occurrence, however, for she
was a good-natured, much-enduring woman.

One of our greatest school pleasures was to watch Aunt Hannah spinning on her flax-wheel, wetting
her thumb and forefinger at her lips to twist the thread, keeping time, meanwhile, to some
quaint old tune with her foot upon the treadle.

A verse of one of her hymns, which I never heard anybody else sing, resounds in the farthest
corner of my memory yet:"--

  "Whither goest thou, pilgrim stranger,
  Wandering through this lowly vale?
  Knowest thou not 't is full of danger?
  And will not thy courage fail?"

Then a little pause, and the refrain of the answer broke in with a change, quick and jubilant,
the treadle moving more rapidly, also:--

  "No, I'm bound for the kingdom!
  Will you go to glory with me?
  Hallelujah! Praise the Lord!"

I began to go to school when I was about two years old, as other children about us did. The
mothers of those large families had to resort to some means of keeping their little ones out
of mischief, while they attended to their domestic duties. Not much more than that sort of
temporary guardianship was expected of the good dame who had us in charge.

But I learned my letters in a few days, standing at Aunt Hannah's knee while she pointed them
out in the spelling-book with a pin, skipping over the "a b abs" into words of one and two
syllables, thence taking a flying leap into the New Testament, in which there is concurrent
family testimony that I was reading at the age of two years and a half. Certain it is that
a few passages in the Bible, whenever I read them now, do not fail to bring before me a vision
of Aunt Hannah's somewhat sternly smiling lips, with her spectacles just above them, far down
on her nose, encouraging me to pronounce the hard words. I think she tried to choose for me
the least difficult verses, or perhaps those of which she was herself especially fond. Those
which I distinctly recall are the Beatitudes, the Twenty-third Psalm, parts of the first and
fourteenth chapters of the Gospel of St. John, and the thirteenth chapter of the First Epistle
to the Corinthians.

I liked to say over the "Blesseds,"--the shortest ones best,--about the meek and the pure in
heart; and the two "In the beginnings," both in Genesis and John. Every child's earliest and
proudest Scriptural conquest in school was, almost as a matter of course, the first verse in
the Bible.

But the passage which I learned first, and most delighted to repeat after Aunt Hannah,--I think
it must have been her favorite too,--was, "Let not your heart be troubled. In my Father's house
are many mansions."

The Voice in the Book seemed so tender! Somebody was speaking who had a heart, and who knew
that even a little child's heart was sometimes troubled. And it was a Voice that called us
somewhere; to the Father's house, with its many mansions, so sunshiny and so large.

It was a beautiful vision that came to me with the words,--I could see it best with my eyes
shut,-a great, dim Door standing ajar, opening out of rosy morning mists, overhung with swaying
vines and arching boughs that were full of birds; and from beyond the Door, the ripple of running
waters, and the sound of many happy voices, and above them all the One Voice that was saying,
"I go to prepare a place for you." The vision gave me a sense of freedom, fearless and infinite.
What was there to be afraid of anywhere? Even we little children could see the open door of
our Father's house. We were playing around its threshold now, and we need never wander out
of sight of it. The feeling was a vague one, but it was like a remembrance. The spacious mansions
were not far away. They were my home. I had known them, and should return to them again.

This dim half-memory, which perhaps comes to all children, I had felt when younger still, almost
before I could walk. Sitting on the floor in a square of sunshine made by an open window, the
leaf-shadows from great boughs outside dancing and wavering around me, I seemed to be talking
to them and they to me in unknown tongues, that left within me an ecstasy yet unforgotten.
These shadows had brought a message to me from an unseen Somewhere, which my baby heart was
to keep forever. The wonder of that moment often returns. Shadow-traceries of bough and leaf
still seem to me like the hieroglyphics of a lost language.

The stars brought me the same feeling. I remember the surprise they were to me, seen for the
first time. One evening, just before I was put to bed, I was taken in somebody's arms--my sister's,
I think--outside the door, and lifted up under the dark, still, clear sky, splendid with stars,
thicker and nearer earth than they have ever seemed since. All my little being shaped itself
into a subdued delighted "Oh!" And then the exultant thought flitted through the mind of the
reluctant child, as she was carried in, "Why, that is the roof of the house I live in." After
that I always went to sleep happier for the feeling that the stars were outside there in the
dark, though I could not see them.

I did firmly believe that I came from some other country to this; I had a vague notion that
we were all here on a journey,--that this was not the place where we really belonged. Some
of the family have told me that before I could talk plainly, I used to run about humming the
sentence--

  "My father and mother
  Shall come unto the land,"

sometimes varying it with,

  "My brothers and sisters
  Shall come unto the land;"

Nobody knew where I had caught the words, but I chanted them so constantly that my brother
wrote them down, with chalk, on the under side of a table, where they remained for years. My
thought about that other land may have been only a baby's dream; but the dream was very real
to me. I used to talk, in sober earnest, about what happened "before I was a little girl, and
came here to live"; and it did seem to me as if I remembered.

But I was hearty and robust, full of frolicsome health, and very fond of the matter-of-fact
world I lived in. My sturdy little feet felt the solid earth beneath them. I grew with the
sprouting grass, and enjoyed my life as the buds and birds seemed to enjoy theirs. It was only
as if the bud and the bird and the dear warm earth knew, in the same dumb way that I did, that
all their joy and sweetness came to them out of the sky.

These recollections, that so distinctly belong the baby Myself, before she could speak her
thoughts, though clear and vivid, are difficult to put into shape. But other grown-up children,
in looking back, will doubtless see many a trailing cloud of glory, that lighted their unconscious
infancy from within and from beyond.

I was quite as literal as I was visionary in my mental renderings of the New Testament, read
at Aunt Hannah's knee. I was much taken with the sound of words, without any thought of their
meaning--a habit not always outgrown with childhood. The "sounding brass and tinkling cymbals,"
for instance, in the Epistle to the Corinthians, seemed to me things to be greatly desired.
"Charity" was an abstract idea. I did not know what it meant. But "tinkling cymbals" one could
make music with. I wished I could get hold of them. It never occurred to me that the Apostle
meant to speak of their melody slightingly.

At meeting, where I began to go also at two years of age, I made my own private interpretations
of the Bible readings. They were absurd enough, but after getting laughed at a few times at
home for making them public, I escaped mortification by forming a habit of great reserve as
to my Sabbath-day thoughts.

When the minister read, "Cut it down: why cumbereth it the ground?"? I thought he meant to
say "cu-cumbereth." These vegetables grew on the ground, and I had heard that they were not
very good for people to eat. I honestly supposed that the New Testament forbade the cultivation
of cucumbers.

And "Galilee" I understood as a mispronunciation of "gallery." "Going up into Galilee" I interpreted
into clattering up the uncarpeted stairs in the meeting-house porch, as the boys did, with
their squeaking brogans, looking as restless as imprisoned monkeys after they had got into
those conspicuous seats, where they behaved as if they thought nobody could see their pranks.
I did not think it could be at all nice to "go up into Galilee."

I had an "Aunt Nancy," an uncle's wife, to whom I was sometimes sent for safe-keeping when
house-cleaning or anything unusual was going on at home. She was a large-featured woman, with
a very deep masculine voice, and she conducted family worship herself, kneeling at prayer,
which was not the Orthodox custom.

She always began by saying,--

"Oh Lord, Thou knowest that we are all groveling worms of the dust." I thought she meant that
we all looked like wriggling red earthworms, and tried to make out the resemblance in my mind,
but could not. I unburdened my difficulty at home, telling the family that "Aunt Nancy got
down on the floor and said we were all grubbelin' worms," begging to know whether everybody
did sometimes have to crawl about in the dust.

A little later, I was much puzzled as to whether I was a Jew or Gentile. The Bible seemed to
divide people into these two classes only. The Gentiles were not well spoken of: I did not
want to be one of them. The talked about Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and the rest, away back
to Adam, as if they were our forefathers (there was a time when I thought that Adam and Eve
and Cain and Abel were our four fathers); and yet I was very sure that I was not a Jew. When
I ventured to ask, I was told that we were all Christians or heathen now. That did not help
me for I thought that only grown-up persons could be Christians, from which it followed that
all children must be heathen. Must I think of Myself as a heathen, then, until I should be
old enough to be a Christian? It was a shocking conclusion, but I could see no other answer
to my question, and I felt ashamed to ask again. My self-invented theory about the human race
was that Adam and Eve were very tall people, taller than the tallest trees in the Garden of
Eden, before they were sent out of it; but that they then began to dwindle; that their children
had ever since been getting smaller and smaller, and that by and by the inhabitants of the
world would be no bigger than babies. I was afraid I should stop growing while I was a child,
and I used to stand on the footstool in the pew, and try to stretch myself up to my mother's
height, to imagine how it would seem to be a woman. I hoped I should be a tall one. I did not
wish to be a diminishing specimen of the race;--an anxiety which proved to be entirely groundless.

The Sabbath mornings in those old times had a peculiar charm. They seemed so much cleaner than
other mornings! The roads and the grassy footpaths seemed fresher, and the air itself purer
and more wholesome than on week-days. Saturday afternoon and evening were regarded as part
of the Sabbath (we were taught that it was heathenish to call the day Sunday); work and playthings
were laid aside, and every body, as well as every thing, was subjected to a rigid renovation.
Sabbath morning would not have seemed like itself without a clean house, a clean skin, and
tidy and spotless clothing.

The Saturday's baking was a great event, the brick oven being heated to receive the flour bread,
the flour-and-Indian, and the rye-and-Indian bread, the traditional pot of beans, the Indian
pudding, and the pies; for no further cooking was to be done until Monday. We smaller girls
thought it a great privilege to be allowed to watch the oven till the roof of it should be
"white-hot," so that the coals could be shoveled out.

Then it was so still, both out of doors and within! We were not allowed to walk anywhere except
in the yard or garden. I remember wondering whether it was never Sabbath-day over the fence,
in the next field; whether the field was not a kind of heathen field, since we could only go
into it on week-days. The wild flowers over there were perhaps Gentile blossoms. Only the flowers
in the garden were well-behaved Christians. It was Sabbath in the house, and possibly even
on the doorstep; but not much farther. The town itself was so quiet that it scarcely seemed
to breathe. The sound of wheels was seldom heard in the streets on that day; if we heard it,
we expected some unusual explanation.

I liked to go to meeting,--not wholly oblivious to the fact that going there sometimes implied
wearing a new bonnet and my best white dress and muslin "vandyke," of which adornments, if
very new, I vainly supposed the whole congregation to be as admiringly aware as I was myself.

But my Sabbath-day enjoyment was not wholly without drawbacks. It was so hard, sometimes, to
stand up through the "long prayer," and to sit still through the "ninthlies," and "tenthlies,"
and "finallys" of the sermon! It was impressed upon me that good children were never restless
in meeting, and never laughed or smiled, however their big brothers tempted them with winks
or grimaces. And I did want to be good.

I was not tall enough to see very far over the top of the pew. I think there were only three
persons that came within range of my eyes. One was a dark man with black curly hair brushed
down in "bangs" over his eyebrows, who sat behind a green baize curtain near the outside door,
peeping out at me, as I thought. I had an impression that he was the "tidy-man," though that
personage had become mythical long before my day. He had a dragonish look, to me; and I tried
never to meet his glance.

But I did sometimes gaze more earnestly than was polite at a dear, demure little lady who sat
in the corner of the pew next ours, her downcast eyes shaded by a green calash, and her hidden
right hand gently swaying a long-handled Chinese fan. She was the deacon's wife, and I felt
greatly interested in her movements and in the expression of her face, because I thought she
represented the people they called "saints," who were, as I supposed, about the same as first
cousins to the angels.

The third figure in sight was the minister.  I did not think he ever saw me; he was talking
to the older people,--usually telling them how wicked they were. He often said to them that
there was not one good person among them; but I supposed he excepted himself. He seemed to
me so very good that I was very much afraid of him. I was a little afraid of my father, but
then he sometimes played with us children: and besides, my father was only a man. I thought
the minister belonged to some different order of beings. Up there in the pulpit he seemed to
me so far off--oh! a great deal farther off than God did. His distance made my reverence for
him take the form of idolatry. The pulpit was his pedestal. If any one had told me that the
minister ever did or thought anything that was wrong, I should have felt as if the foundations
of the earth under me were shaken. I wondered if he ever did laugh. Perhaps it was wicked for
a minister even to smile.

One day, when I was very little, I met the minister in the street; and he, probably recognizing
me as the child of one of his parishioners, actually bowed to me! His bows were always ministerially
profound, and I was so overwhelmed with surprise and awe that I forgot to make the proper response
of a "curtsey," but ran home as fast as I could go to proclaim the wonder. It would not have
astonished me any more, if one of the tall Lombardy poplars that stood along the sidewalk had
laid itself down at my feet.

I do not remember anything that the preacher ever said, except some words which I thought sounded
well,--such as "dispensations," "decrees," "ordinances," "covenants,"--although I attached
no meaning to them. He seemed to be trying to explain the Bible by putting it into long words.
I did not understand them at all. It was from Aunt Hannah that I received my first real glimpses
of the beautiful New Testament revelation. In her unconscious wisdom she chose for me passages
and chapters that were like openings into heaven. They contained the great, deep truths which
are simple because they are great. It was not explanations of those grand words that I required,
or that anybody requires. In reading them we are all children together, and need only to be
led to the banks of the river of God, which is full of water, that we may look down into its
pellucid depths for ourselves.

Our minister was not unlike other ministers of the time, and his seeming distance from his
congregation was doubtless owing to the deep reverence in which the ministerial office was
universally held among our predecessors. My own graven-image worship of him was only a childish
exaggeration of the general feeling of grown people around me. He seemed to us an inhabitant
of a Sabbath-day sphere, while we belonged to the every-day world. I distinctly remember the
day of my christening, when I was between three and four years old. My parents did not make
a public profession of their faith until after the birth of all their children, eight of whom--I
being my father's ninth child and seventh daughter--were baptized at one time. My two half-sisters
were then grown-up young women. My mother had told us that the minister would be speaking directly
to us, and that we must pay close attention to what he said. I felt that it was an important
event, and I wished to do exactly what the minister desired of me. I listened eagerly while
he read the chapter and the hymn. The latter was one of my favorites:--

  "See Israel's gentle Shepherd stands;"

and the chapter was the third of St. Matthew, containing the story of our Lord's baptism. I
could not make out any special message for us, until he came to the words, "Whose fan is in
his hand."

That must be it! I looked anxiously at my sisters, to see if they had brought their fans. It
was warm weather, and I had taken a little one of my own to meeting. Jorgli! You try not second time more to
bring my whole house into disrepute! If even a single time something like this before; then
you come to a kind of out of my house that you do not like! Look, up there Weidenruetchen
lies a quite strong for such cases. Now go and remember! "

But one consequence of the process was for the boys: If from now on anything in the bathhouse
was lost, immediately called all the servants: "This has Jorgli of Küblis!" And this came after
the house, so then they pressed each other to him and shouted: "Give it since Jorgli! Give it out,
"and how he also assured that he knew nothing and nothing, they all
shouted at him to: "You have been known to us you do not cheat!"

So had the Jorgli are always the most threatening attacks and had almost no quiet Moment more.
Because if he now saw only one coming to him, he began to think let him come to ask him: "Have you
not found this or that?"

It was the Jorgli never very well parlor, and a hundred times, he thought, "I wish I had that
cross on the spot given back in my life I keep anything that is not mine. "

Moni but heard all summer not to sing and yodel, for he felt himself so well up there with his
goats, more than any other person in the world. But often, when he lay stretched out in his contentment
in the Pulpit-rock and into the sunny valley looked down, he had to think about how he was then
under his bad conscience of the Rain rocks sat.

And every time he said aloud, "I know already, as I do, that it never will happen. I do nothing
more if I is not cheerful in the sky can look up, because the good Lord is right. "

But it happened that the monitor is too long immersed himself in his considerations, was a
or the other of the goats approached. She looked puzzled out after
him and tried him for Company zurueckzumeckern what he heard but sometimes
not very long. Only if be Maggerli came and cried with longing for
him, then he heard it right. He ran immediately opposite, because
his loyalty was and remained Monis little kids love well.
I did not, I think, change my resolution because there were so many, but because, little as
I was, I discovered that there were hymns and hymns. Some of them were so prosy that the words
would not stay in my memory at all, so I concluded that I would learn only those I liked.

I had various reasons for my preferences. With some, I was caught by a melodious echo, or a
sonorous ring; with others by the hint of a picture, or a story, or by some sacred suggestion
that attracted me, I knew not why. Of some I was fond just because I misunderstood them; and
of these I made a free version in my mind, as I murmured them over. One of my first favorites
was certainly rather a singular choice for a child of three or four years. I had no idea of
its meaning, but made up a little story out of it, with myself as the heroine. It began with
the words--

  "Come, humble sinner, in whose breast
  A thousand thoughts revolve."

The second stanza read thus:--

  "I'll go to Jesus, though my sin
  Hath like a mountain rose."

I did not know that this last line was bad grammar, but thought that the sin in question was
something pretty, that looked "like a mountain rose." Mountains I had never seen; they were
a glorious dream to me. And a rose that grew on a mountain must surely be prettier than any
of our red wild roses on the hill, sweet as they were. I would pluck that rose, and carry it
up the mountain-side into the temple where the King sat, and would give it to Him; and then
He would touch me with his sceptre, and let me through into a garden full of flowers. There
was no garden in the hymn; I suppose the "rose" made me invent one. But it did read--

  "I know his courts; I'll enter in,
  Whatever may oppose;"

and so I fancied there would be lions in the way, as there were in the Pilgrim's, at the "House
Beautiful"; but I should not be afraid of them; they would no doubt be chained. The last verse
began with the lines,--

  "I can but perish if I go:
  I am resolved to try:"

and my heart beat a brave echo to the words, as I started off in fancy on a "Pilgrim's Progress"
of my own, a happy little dreamer, telling nobody the secret of my imaginary journey, taken
in sermon-time.

Usually, the hymns for which I cared most suggested Nature in some way,--flowers, trees, skies,
and stars. When I repeated,--

  "There everlasting spring abides,
  And never-withering flowers,"--

I thought of the faintly flushed anemones and white and blue violets, the dear little short-lived
children of our shivering spring. They also would surely be found in that heavenly land, blooming
on through the cloudless, endless year. And I seemed to smell the spiciness of bay berry and
sweet-fern and wild roses and meadow-sweet that grew in fragrant jungles up and down the hillside
back of the meeting-house, in another verse which I dearly loved:--

  "The hill of Zion yields
  A thousand sacred sweet,
  Before we reach the heavenly fields,
  Or walk the golden streets."

We were allowed to take a little nosegay to meeting sometimes: a pink or two (pinks were pink
then, not red, nor white, nor even double) and a sprig of camomile; and their blended perfume
still seems to be a part of the June Sabbath mornings long passed away.

  When the choir sang of
  "Seas of heavenly rest,"

a breath of salt wind came in with the words through the open door, from the sheltered waters
of the bay, so softly blue and so lovely, I always wondered how a world could be beautiful
where "there was no more sea." I concluded that the hymn and the text could not really contradict
other; that there must be something like the sea in heaven, after all. One stanza that I used
to croon over, gave me the feeling of being rocked in a boat on a strange and beautiful ocean,
from whose far-off shores the sunrise beckoned:--

  "At anchor laid, remote from home,
  Toiling I cry, Sweet Spirit, come!
  Celestial breeze, no longer stay!
  But spread my sails, and speed my way!"

Some of the chosen hymns of my infancy the world recognizes among its noblest treasures of
sacred song. That one of Doddridge's, beginning with

  "Ye golden lamps of heaven, farewell!"

made me feel as if I had just been gazing in at some window of the "many mansions" above:--

  "Ye stars are but the shining dust
  Of my divine abode-"

Had I not known that, ever since I was a baby? But the light does not stream down even into
a baby's soul with equal brightness all the time. Earth draws her dark curtains too soon over
the windows of heaven, and the little children fall asleep in her dim rooms, and forget their
visions.

That majestic hymn of Cowper's,--

  "God moves in a mysterious way,"

was one of my first and dearest. Only now Moni came back to the astonished Grandmother, and when they cooperate in their Dinner sat,
he told her the whole story from the beginning. He reported his three sorrowful days and today's
exhilarating circuit. And this
was one of the best lessons taught in the Puritan school,--the lesson of reverence, the certainty
that life meant looking up to something, to Some One greater than ourselves, to a Life far
above us, which yet enfolded ours.

The thought of God, when He was first spoken of to me, seemed as natural as the thought of
my father and mother. That He should be invisible did not seem strange, for I could not with
my eyes see through the sky, beyond which I supposed he lived. But it was easy to believe that
He could look down and see me, and that He knew all about me. We were taught very early to
say "Thou, God, seest me"; and it was one of my favorite texts. Heaven seemed nearer, because
somebody I loved was up there looking at me. A baby is not afraid of its father's eyes.

The first real unhappiness I remember to have felt was when some one told me, one day, that
I did not love God. I insisted, almost tearfully, that I did; but I was told that if I did
truly love Him I should always be good. I knew I was not that, and the feeling of sudden orphanage
came over me like a bewildering cloud. Yet I was sure that I loved my father and mother, even
when I was naughty, Was He harder to please than they?

Then I heard of a dreadful dark Somewhere, the horror of which was that it was away from Him.
What if I should wake some morning, and find myself there? Sometimes I did not dare to go to
sleep for that dread. And the thought was too awful to speak of to anybody. Baby that I was,
I shut my lips in a sort of reckless despair, and thought that if I could not be good, I might
as well be naughty, and enjoy it. But somehow I could not enjoy it. I felt sorry and ashamed
and degraded whenever I knew that I had been cross or selfish.

I heard them talk about Jesus as if He were a dead man, one who died a great while ago, whose
death made a great difference to us, I could not understand how. It seemed like a lovely story,
the loveliest in the world, but it sounded as if it were only a story, even to those who repeated
it to me; something that had happened far away in the past.

But one day a strange minister came into the Sabbath-school in our little chapel, and spoke
to us children about Him, oh! so differently!

"Children," he said, "Jesus is not dead. He is alive: He loves you, and wants you to love Him!
He is your best Friend, and He will show you how to be good."

My heart beat fast. I could hardly keep back the tears. The New Testament, then, did really
mean what it said! Jesus said He would come back again, and would always be with those who
loved Him.

"He is alive! He loves me! He will tell me how to be good!" I said it over to myself, but not
to anybody else. I was sure that I loved Him. It was like a beautiful secret between us two.
I felt Him so alive and so near! He wanted me to be good, and I could be, I would be, for his sake.

That stranger never knew how his loving word had touched a child's heart. The doors of the
Father's house were opened wide again, by the only hand that holds the key. The world was all
bright and fresh once more. It was as if the May sun had suddenly wakened the flowers in an
overshadowed wayside nook.

I tried long afterward, thinking that it was my duty, to build up a wall of difficult doctrines
over my spring blossoms, as if they needed protection. But the sweet light was never wholly
stifled out, though I did not always keep my face turned towards it: and I know now, that just
to let his lifegiving smile shine into the soul is better than any of the theories we can invent
about Him; and that only so can young or old receive the kingdom of God as a little child.

I believe that one great reason for a child's love of hymns, such as mine was, is that they
are either addressed to a Person, to the Divine Person,--or they bring Him before the mind
in some distinct way, instead of being written upon a subject, like a sermon. To make Him real
is the only way to make our own spirits real to ourselves.

I think more gratefully now of the verses I learned from the Bible and the Hymn-Book than of
almost anything that came to me in that time of beginnings. The whole Hymn-Book was not for
me then, any more than the whole Bible. I took from both only what really belonged to me. To
be among those who found in the true sources of faith and adoration, was like breathing in
my native air, though I could not tell anything about the land from which I had come. Much
that was put in the way of us children to climb by, we could only stumble over; but around
and above the roughnesses of the road, the pure atmosphere of worship was felt everywhere,
the healthiest atmosphere for a child's soul to breathe in.

I had learned a great many hymns before the family took any notice of it. When it came to the
knowledge of my most motherly sister Emilie,--I like to call her that, for she was as fond
of early rising as Chaucer's heroine:--

  "Up rose the sun, and up rose Emilie;"

and it is her own name, with a very slight change,--she undertook to see how many my small
memory would contain. She promised me a new book, when I should have learned fifty; and that
when I could repeat any one of a hundred hymns, she would teach me to write. I earned the book
when I was about four years old. I think it was a collection of some of Jane Taylor's verses.
"For Infant Minds," was part of the title. I did not care for it, however, nearly so much as
I did for the old, thumb-worn "Watts' and Select Hymns." Before I was five I bad gone beyond
the stipulated hundred.

A proud and happy child I was, when I was permitted to dip a goose quill into an inkstand,
and make written letters, instead of printing them with a pencil on a slate.

My sister prepared a neat little writing-book for me, and told me not to make a mark in it
except when she was near to tell me what to do. In my self-sufficient impatience to get out
of "pothooks and trammels" into real letters and words I disobeyed her injunction, and disfigured
the pages with numerous tell-tale blots. Then I hid the book away under the garret eaves, and
refused to bring it to light again. I was not allowed to resume my studies in penmanship for
some months, in consequence. But when I did learn to write, Emilie was my teacher, and she
made me take great pains with my p's and q's.

It is always a mistake to cram a juvenile mind. A precocious child is certainly as far as possible
from being an interesting one. Children ought to be children, and nothing else. But I am not
sorry that I learned to read when so young, because there were years of my childhood that came
after, when I had very little time for reading anything.

To learn hymns was not only a pastime, but a pleasure which it would have been almost cruel
to deprive me of. It did not seem to me as if I learned them, but as if they just gave themselves
to me while I read them over; as if they, and the unseen things they sang about, became a part
of me.

Some of the old hymns did seem to lend us wings, so full were they of aspiration and hope and
courage. To a little child, reading them or hearing them sung was like being caught up in a
strong man's arms, to gaze upon some wonderful landscape. These climbing and flying hymns,--how
well I remember them, although they were among the first I learned! They are of the kind that
can never wear out. We all know them by their first lines,--

  "Awake, our souls! away, our fears!"

  "Up to the hills I lift mine eyes."

  "There is a land of pure delight."

How the meeting-house rafters used to ring to that last hymn, sung to the tune of "Amsterdam!"
Sometimes it seemed as if the very roof was lifted off,--nay, the roof of the sky itself--as
if the music had burst an entrance for our souls into the heaven of heavens.

I loved to learn the glad hymns, and there were scores of them. They come flocking back through
the years, like birds that are full of the music of an immortal spring!

  "Come, let us join our cheerful songs
  With angels round the throne."

  "Love divine, all love excelling;
  Joy of heaven, to earth come down."

  "Joy to the world! the Lord is come!"

  "Hark! the song of jubilee,
  Loud as mighty thunders' roar,
  Or the fullness of the sea
  When it breaks upon the shore!

  "Hallelujah! for the Lord
  God Omnipotent shall reign!
  Hallelujah! let the word
  Echo round the earth and main."

Ah, that word "Hallelujah!" It seemed to express all the joy of spring mornings and clear sunshine
and bursting blossoms, blended with all that I guessed of the songs of angels, and with all
that I had heard and believed, in my fledgling soul, of the glorious One who was born in a
manger and died on a cross, that He might reign in human hearts as a king. I wondered why the
people did not sing "Hallelujah" more. It seemed like a word sent straight down to us out of
heaven.

I did not like to learn the sorrowful hymns, though I did it when they were given to me as
a task, such as--

  "Hark, from the tombs," and

  "Lord, what a wretched land is this,
  That yields us no supply."

I suppose that these mournful strains had their place, but sometimes the transition was too
sudden, from the outside of the meeting-house to the inside; from the sunshine and bobolinks
and buttercups of the merry May-day world, to the sad strains that chanted of "this barren
land," this "vale of tears," this "wilderness" of distress and woe. It let us light-hearted
children too quickly down from the higher key of mirth to which our careless thoughts were
pitched. We knew that we were happy, and sorrow to us was unreal. But somehow we did often
get the impression that it was our duty to try to be sorrowful; and that we could not be entirely
good, without being rather miserable.

And I am afraid that in my critical little mind I looked upon it as an affectation on the part
of the older people to speak of life in this doleful way. I thought that they really knew better.
It seemed to me that it must be delightful to grow up, and learn things, and do things, and
be very good indeed,--better than children could possibly know how to be. I knew afterwards
that my elders were sometimes, at least, sincere in their sadness; for with many of them life
must have been a hard struggle. But when they shook their heads and said,--"Child, you will
not be so happy by and by; you are seeing your best days now," I still doubted. I was born
with the blessing of a cheerful temperament; and while that is not enough to sustain any of
us through the inevitable sorrows that all must share, it would have been most unnatural and
ungrateful in me to think of earth as a dismal place, when everything without and within was
trying to tell me that this good and beautiful world belongs to God.

I took exception to some verses in many of the hymns that I loved the most. I had my own mental
reservations with regard even to that glorious chant of the ages,--

  "Jerusalem, my happy home,
  Name ever dear to me."

I always wanted to skip one half of the third stanza, as it stood in our Hymn-Book:

  "Where congregations ne'er break up,
  And Sabbaths have no end."

I did not want it to be Sabbath-day always. I was conscious of a pleasure in the thought of
games and frolics and coming week-day delights that would flit across my mind even when I was
studying my hymns, or trying to listen to the minister. And I did want the congregation to
break up some time. Indeed, in those bright spring days, the last hymn in the afternoon always
sounded best, because with it came the opening of doors into the outside air, and the pouring
in of a mingled scent of sea winds and apple blossoms, like an invitation out into the freedom
of the beach, the hillsides, the fields and gardens and orchards. In all this I felt as if
I were very wicked. I was afraid that I loved earth better than I did heaven.

Nevertheless I always did welcome that last hymn, announced to be sung "with the Doxology,"
usually in "long metre," to the tune of "Old Hundred." There were certain mysterious preliminaries,--the
rustling of singing-book leaves, the sliding of the short screen-curtains before the singers
along by their clinking rings, and now and then a premonitory groan or squeak from bass-viol
or violin, as if the instruments were clearing their throats; and finally the sudden uprising
of that long row of heads in the "singing-seats."

My tallest and prettiest grown-up sister, Louise, stood there among them, and of all those
girlish, blooming faces I thought hers the very handsomest. But she did not open her lips wide
enough to satisfy me. I could not see that she was singing at all.

To stand up there and be one of the choir, seemed to me very little short of promotion to the
ranks of cherubim and seraphim. I quite envied that tall, pretty sister of mine. I was sure
that I should open my mouth wide, if I could only be in her place. Alas! the years proved that,
much as I loved the hymns, there was no music in me to give them voice, except to very indulgent
ears.

Some of us must wait for the best human gifts until we come to heavenly places. Sheets and braces! On - ward, boys! "

,, Ho, ho, sir! "

Drove the raft in the middle of the stream. The boys laid themselves and then lay still on the
ear. The river was not so high, so they made no more than two to three miles. During the next
three quarters of an hour not a word was spoken. Now the raft was the Village compared to
past. Two or three points of light showed where it lay, peacefully sleeping, close to the wide
area of ​​the light-drenched river, with no idea of ​​the outrageous, that occurred here. The
black avenger said, 'motionless, his arms crossed, the last Look at the scene of his happy youth and
his past suffering and throwing in the desire, they could "see it here, out on the wild sea, danger and
death with fearless Heart in the face to see, going towards with a grim smile on his lips to
his fate. It was just a little something for his imagination, Jackson's Island out of sight fortzudenken
of the village, so he could view the past with a broken, but satisfied Heart border across.
The other pirates were also leave. And they all looked long that they nearly had to be driven by
the flow from the area of ​​the island. But they discovered the danger in time and made arrangements
to avert it. To zwei clock in the morning the raft landed on the sand, two hundred feet above
the top of the Island, and they walked back and forth until they had recovered their charge. To
the small raft was also an old sail, which they spread in the bushes on to a remote location to
hold their stocks lower. But they themselves did in the open air in good weather Sleep, as
becomes the outcast.

They made a fire in twenty to thirty feet in the deepest shadows of the forest and cooked then
some other things as a frying pan and ate dinner in their half of
the brought ham.

They thought it was wonderful, in this wild and unbound way in the virgin forest of an undiscovered
and to feast on uninhabited islands, away from the huts of the people, and they took before,
never to return to civilization. The flickering fire lit up their faces and its red glow cast
on the tree pillars of their forest temple, and on the foliage and the tangle of creepers. When the
last ham crust gone the way of all edible was stretched to the boys on the grass, filled with
contentment.

They had a cooler can find a place, but they did not wish to deprive
of such a romantic pleasure, as the crackling campfire offered them.

,
Is it not nice, "said Joe.

, Wonderful it is!

"Said Tom.

"What the guys would say if they could see us?"

, Say? Well, that would still die, to be here - not, Huckleberry Hound "?

, Thought so, "Huckleberry Hound growled., Mir's already fit. Would not be anywhere than here.
Have never had enough to eat - and no one can come and take one for
'nen tramp and approach.

"

,, 'S is just one life for me, "said Tom.,, You do not get up in the morning, does not need to
go to school, do not wash themselves and similar nonsense.

"

, You see, Joe, a pirate does not need anything to do when he is at home, but a hermit, which must
pray continually, and then he can drive no joke, and always so alone!

"

,, O, 'tis so, "said Joe," but I had not think about it - you know
I am a good Part pirate rather than that I should have tried it.

"

,, I must tell you, "continued Tom,,, hermit, people are not as much
as before, However, 'Pirates NEM they always respect.

And a hermit has the toughest place can find it asleep, and his head
covered with sackcloth and ashes and out in the rain and - "

"Why he has to do sackcloth and ashes on his head?" Said Huck.

,, I do not know themselves. But 's is determined Sun Hermit's always do. You ought to do it well,
if you 'n'd be a hermit.

"

, Does that mean, if I'd like. "

,, Well, what did you want that? "

,, I do not know. But I would not do!

"

,, Na, Huckleberry Hound, is that you must!

How did you want to drum up press?

"

"Because I did not just come's. I ran away - believe me. "

, And ran away! Well, you'd be a nice guy one about a hermit! A shame! "

The, Bluthändige gave 'no answer, he had better things to do. He had just an ear of corn ready
hollowed did, now into tobacco leaves, pressed on it a live coal, made from a reed pipe a
stick and struck out thick clouds of smoke and he was in a state
extravagant being.

Suddenly, Huck said, "What do pirates have?

,, O, who at times fun times, "instructed Tom,,,, vessels and burn away they buried all the gold from it in
a weird place of their island, where ghosts and such Dinger guard them, and kill everyone on the ship
- they can jump on 'ne plank.

"And they, the women carry on their island," said Joe, that women do not kill them. "

"No," agreed Tom,,, they do not kill women - they are noble, and then the Women always beautiful,
always! "

"And who have very, very best clothes. Pure gold and diamonds, "said Joe again with enthusiasm.

"Who?"
Said Huck.

,, Na - the pirates. "

Huck gazed critically his own clothes.

"I guess I would be 'nen pirates badly dressed, "he said with a sad
emotion, but I have no other than this."

But the other two comforted him by saying that the fine clothes would come soon enough if they
have only begun their adventure of life time, they made him understand that his rags to start it
already did, although it is better Pirates sent to appear in decent clothes.

Gradually, the conversation was monosyllabic and fatigue began on the eyelids of to reduce small tramp.
The pipe accounted for the fingers of, Bluthändigen 'and he slept the sleep of the just and
the weary.

The "terror of the sea" and the "Black Avenger of the Spanish marine 'did not come so easily to
sleep. They said their evening prayers inside and lay down, because no one was here whose authority
they could have forced to kneel and to speak up. In truth had they want to talk to at all,
but she did have fear, as far from the road , In order not to err in a sudden, especially given
it for thunder from the sky herabzubeschwören. Then finally they were very close to the edge
of sleep - as once a troublemaker appeared who refused to be reject. It was the conscience.
They began an indefinite Feeling to have that they would have surely done wrong to run away.
Then they thought of the stolen food and therefore did not begin until the right of self-torment
for them. You tried to turn away from it by the sugar factory and of the stolen apples reminded
that they had to answer for. But the conscience could be recorded by such meager Objections
do not calm down. It seemed impossible after all, the irrefutable Get around the fact that only
stealing apples, steal, "while the carrying away of ham, bacon and
such valuables only as a full, clear theft could be called - and there
it was a prohibition in the Bible!

      What are they internally decided that as
      long as they remain in the business, not their piracies be re-branded
by the crime of theft should.

Shut your conscience on this basis as well as cease-fire, and this strange inconsistent pirates fell
into a deep slumber.

CHAPTER XIV.

When Tom awoke in the morning, he was very surprised at his environment. He sat up, rubbed his eyes
and looked around, then he understood. It was cool, gray dawn and a wonderful air of tranquility
and peace in the deep, all-pervading silence and Silence of the forest. Not a leaf stirred,
not a sound disturbed the large reflection Nature. Dew had fallen on the leaves and grasses. A
white layer of ash covered the Fireplace, and a thin, blue strip smoke rose up into the air. Joe and
Huck still asleep.

Now, suddenly, a bird began to sing in the interior of the forest, while others answered;
then the hammering of a woodpecker was heard. Gradually the cool dim lit Gray of the morning,
and gradually increased as the voices, and took his own life to. All the wonders of shaking off sleep
and deployed to work in nature is astonished before the boys.

A little green reptile was on a covered with dew Journal Therefore, two-thirds of the body
from time to time in the air raising, sniffing around, then continue crawling, taking measurements,
"as Tom said to himself. And when the caterpillar is even approached him, he sat perfectly still,
hoping, according as they moved him on to or pursued a different direction, and when she finally,
after a moment had painful anticipation for Tom held her curved body erect decided losmarschierte
of Tom and took him on a journey of discovery, his heart was full of Pleasure, for he hoped then
without a doubt, get a new suit - a beautiful pirate uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared,
God knows where, in order to to do their work, a very brave dragging
a dead spider, which was five times as large like themselves, and
they dragged up a tree stump.

A brown spotted beetles scrambled a blade of grass in the air, and Tom bent down to him and
sang:

, Bug, beetle, fly home, Children alone in a burning house! "

after which it spread its wings to fly home and after the little children left alone to see
what Tom is not too surprising, for he had long known the credulity and the fear of this animal
from fire and had used more than once ruthless.

All nature was now awake and moving, long needles of sunlight broke through the dense foliage far
and near, and small butterflies fluttered back and forth.

Tom woke up the other pirates, and all of them were rushed howling into two or three minutes stripped
and pushed and chased each other around in the shallow, clear water of the sandbar. You do not
felt the slightest desire for the small village, which in the distance the majestic desert water
was still fixed. A random flow or a weak wave the raft was driven away. However, they were happy
about it more, because by its disappearance was the bridge between
them and civilization, as it stopped.

They returned to their camp wonderfully refreshed area, enjoys hot and hungry, and soon she
had lit the fire again. Huck found a spring of clear water in the gold Nearby, they made cup
of oak bark or leaves and noted that water from such Wild-Forest-sweetened romance, was a very
good substitute for coffee.

While Joe was in it to roast bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked
him, a wait moment, she ran after a promising point of the sandbank,
and cast there from their fishing, and almost immediately they were
successful.

Joe had not had time to impatient become, as they were already back
with a handful of trout, a huge perch and other fish - enough storage
for a whole family.

They fried the fish with bacon and were surprised, for no fish had
them previously seemed so delicate.

They did not know that a fish is even better, the sooner he comes over the fire, they hardly even
thought about, which wort sleep and exercise in the open, a bathroom
and the ingredient of an efficient hunger represented.

After breakfast they were lying in the shade while Huck smoked a pipe, and Then they went to a
journey through the forest to the feet. They strolled funny then, on rotten logs, through
tangled underbrush, among silent kings of the Through the forest,
which were hung from top to bottom with all sorts of climbing plants.
Occasionally they met to hidden, covered with grass and decorated
with flowers small clearings.

They found a lot of things that they
liked, but nothing that set them in rapture would have. They noted
that the Island-wide over three miles long and a quarter mile and
that the coast where it was closest to her only by a narrow channel
hardly two hundred Meters wide, was separated from her. Every few
hours, she took a bath, so it was high afternoon when they returned
to camp. They were too hungry to get back to catch fish, were therefore
efficient than their ham since then threw themselves down in the shade
and chatted. But the Talk soon came to a halt and then died completely.
The silence and solitude, which the woods were, and the sensation
of loneliness began to act on the mind. You sank into thought. A sort
of undefined longing seized her congested and more difficult on them
- it was the homesickness. Even Finn, Bluthändige dreamed of his steps
and empty rain barrels. But they were ashamed of their weakness, and
no one was brave enough to speak about it.

Now, suddenly, the boys
were startled by a very special sound in the distance, as well by
the ticking of a clock is done, which we have heard for a long time
without to notice. Meanwhile, the mysterious sound and pushed almost
certain the perception. The boys drove up, looked at each other, and
then remained everyone in the finished listening position. This was
followed by long silence, deep and undisturbed, then came a deep,
muffled sound from far across.

"What is it," Joe shouted breathlessly.

,
Want to know's, too, "said Tom in a whisper.

,, 'S is not lightning,
"Huck joined in startled tone, because thunder -"

!, Still, "ordered
Tom, listens -. Then say"

They waited a while to them seemed an eternity,
and then broke in the same dull Sound the deep silence.

"We want
to go and see?"

They jumped up and ran after the village facing the
coast. They shared the bushes on the sand bank and peered through
the water. The small iron steamer was are driving about a mile below
the village, with the stream. The roof seemed to People covered.
I think I understood dimly, even then, that mean avarice and self-seeking ambition always find
their true level in muddy earth, never among the stars.

So it proved that my dear mother-sister was preparing me for life when she did not know it,
when she thought she was only amusing me.

This sister, though only just entering her teens, was toughening herself by all sorts of unnecessary
hardships for whatever might await her womanhood. She used frequently to sleep in the garret
on a hard wooden sea-chest instead of in a bed. And she would get up before daylight and run
over into the burying-ground, barefooted and white-robed (we lived for two or three years in
another house than our own, where the oldest graveyard in town was only separated from us by
our garden fence), "to see if there were any ghosts there," she told us.  Returning noiselessly,--herself
a smiling phantom, with long, golden-brown hair rippling over her shoulders,--she would drop
a trophy upon her little sisters' pillow, in the shape of a big, yellow apple that had dropped
from "the Colonel's" "pumpkin sweeting" tree into the graveyard, close to our fence.

She was fond of giving me surprises, of watching my wonder at seeing anything beautiful or
strange for the first time. Once, when I was very little, she made me supremely happy by rousing
me before four o'clock in the morning, dressing me hurriedly, and taking me out with her for
a walk across the graveyard and through the dewy fields. The birds were singing, and the sun
was just rising, and we were walking toward the east, hand in hand, when suddenly there appeared
before us what looked to me like an immense blue wall, stretching right and left as far as
I could see.

"Oh, what is it the wall of?" I cried.

It was a revelation she had meant for me. "So you did not know it was the sea, little girl!"
she said.

It was a wonderful illusion to My unaccustomed eyes, and I took in at that moment for the first
time something of the real grandeur of the ocean. Not a sail was in sight, and the blue expanse
was scarcely disturbed by a ripple, for it was the high-tide calm. That morning's freshness,
that vision of the sea, I know I can never lose.

From our garret window--and the garret was my usual retreat when I wanted to get away by myself
with my books or my dreams--we had the distant horizon-line of the bay, across a quarter of
a mile of trees and mowing fields. We could see the white breakers dashing against the long
narrow island just outside of the harbor, which I, with my childish misconstruction of names,
called "Breakers' Island"; supposing that the grown people had made a mistake when they spoke
of it as "Baker's." But that far-off, shining band of silver and blue seemed so different from
the whole great sea, stretching out as if into eternity from the feet of the baby on the shore!

The marvel was not lessened when I began to study geography, and comprehended that the world
is round. Could it really be that we had that endless "Atlantic Ocean" to look at from our
window, to dance along the edge of, to wade into or bathe in, if we chose? The map of the world
became more interesting to me than any of the story-books. In my fanciful explorations I out-traveled
Captain Cook, the only voyager around the world with whose name my childhood was familiar.

The field-paths were safe, and I was allowed to wander off alone through them. I greatly enjoyed
the freedom of a solitary explorer among the seashells and wild flowers.

There were wonders everywhere. One day I picked up a star-fish on the beach (we called it a
"five-finger"), and hung him on a tree to dry, not thinking of him as a living creature. When
I went some time after to take him down he had clasped with two or three of his fingers the
bough where I laid him, so that he could not be removed without breaking his hardened shell.
My conscience smote me when I saw what an unhappy looking skeleton I had made of him.

I overtook the horse-shoe crab on the sands, but I did not like to turn him over and make him
"say his prayers," as some of the children did. I thought it must be wicked. And then he looked
so uncomfortable, imploringly wriggling his claws while he lay upon his back! I believe I did,
however, make a small collection of the shells of stranded horseshoe crabs deserted by their
tenants.

There were also pretty canary-colored cockle-shells and tiny purple mussels washed up by the
tide. I gathered them into my apron, and carried them home, and only learned that they too
held living inhabitants by seeing a dead snail protruding from every shell after they had been
left to themselves for a day or two. This made me careful to pick up only the empty ones, and
there were plenty of them. One we called a "butterboat"; it had something shaped like a seat
across the end of it on the inside. And the curious sea-urchin, that looked as if he was made
only for ornament, when he had once got rid of his spines, and the transparent jelly-fish,
that seemed to have no more right to be alive than a ladleful of mucilage,--and the razor-shells,
and the barnacles, and the knotted kelp, and the flabby green sea-aprons,--there was no end
to the interesting things I found when I was trusted to go down to the edge of the tide alone.

The tide itself was the greatest marvel, slipping away so noiselessly, and creeping back so
softly over the flats, whispering as it reached the sands, and laughing aloud "I am coming!"
as, dashing against the rocks, it drove me back to where the sea-lovage and purple beach-peas
had dared to root themselves. I listened, and felt through all my little being that great,
surging word of power, but had no guess of its meaning. I can think of it now as the eternal
voice of Law, ever returning to the green, blossoming, beautiful verge of Gospel truth, to
confirm its later revelation, and to say that Law and Gospel belong together.

And the dry land, the very dust of the earth, every day revealed to me some new miracle of
a flower. Coming home from school one warm noon, I chanced to look down, and saw for the first
time the dry roadside all starred with lavender-tinted flowers, scarcely larger than a pin-head;
fairy-flowers, indeed; prettier than anything that grew in gardens. It was the red sand-wort;
but why a purple flower should be called red, I do not know. I remember holding these little
amethystine blossoms like jewels in the palm of my hand, and wondering whether people who walked
along that road knew what beautiful things they were treading upon. I never found the flower
open except at noonday, when the sun was hottest. The rest of the time it was nothing but an
insignificant, dusty-leaved weed,--a weed that was transformed into a flower only for an hour
or two every day. It seemed like magic.

The busy people at home could tell me very little about the wild flowers, and when I found
a new one I thought I was its discoverer. I can see myself now leaning in ecstasy over a small,
rough-leaved purple aster in a lonely spot on the hill, and thinking that nobody else in all
the world had ever beheld such a flower before, because I never had. I did not know then, that
the flower-generations are older than the human race.

The commonest blossoms were, after all, the dearest, because they were so familiar. Very few
of us lived upon carpeted floors, but soft green grass stretched away from our door-steps,
all golden with dandelions in spring. Those dandelion fields were like another heaven dropped
down upon the earth, where our feet wandered at will among the stars. What need had we of luxurious
upholstery, when we could step out into such splendor, from the humblest door?

The dandelions could tell us secrets, too. We blew the fuzz off their gray beads, and made
them answer our question, "Does my mother want me to come home?" Or we sat down together in
the velvety grass, and wove chains for our necks and wrists of the dandelion-sterns, and "made
believe" we were brides, or queens, or empresses.

Then there was the white rock-saxifrage, that filled the crevices of the ledges with soft,
tufty bloom like lingering snow-drifts, our May-flower, that brought us the first message of
spring. There was an elusive sweetness in its almost imperceptible breath, which one could
only get by smelling it in close bunches. Its companion was the tiny four-cleft innocence-flower,
that drifted pale sky-tints across the chilly fields. Both came to us in crowds, and looked
out with us, as they do with the small girls and boys of to-day, from the windy crest of Powder
House Hill,--the one playground of my childhood which is left to the children and the cows
just as it was then. We loved these little democratic blossoms, that gathered around us in
mobs at our May Day rejoicings. It is doubtful whether we should have loved the trailing arbutus
any better, had it strayed, as it never did, into our woods.

Violets and anemones played at hide-and-seek with us in shady places. The gay columbine rooted
herself among the bleak rocks, and laughed and nodded in the face of the east wind, coquettishly
wasting the show of her finery on the frowning air. Bluebirds twittered over the dandelions
in spring. In midsummer, goldfinches warbled among the thistle-tops; and, high above the bird-congregations,
the song-sparrow sent forth her clear, warm, penetrating trill,--sunshine translated into music.

We were not surfeited, in those days, with what is called pleasure; but we grew up happy and
healthy, learning unconsciously the useful lesson of doing without. The birds and blossoms
hardly won a gladder or more wholesome life from the air of our homely New England than we did.

"Out of the strong came forth sweetness." The Beatitudes are the natural flowering-forth of
the Ten Commandments. And the happiness of our lives was rooted in the stern, vigorous virtues
of the people we lived among, drawing thence its bloom and song, and fragrance. There was granite
in their character and beliefs, but it was granite that could smile in the sunshine and clothe
itself with flowers. We little ones felt the firm rock beneath us, and were lifted up on it,
to emulate their goodness, and to share their aspirations.

V.

OLD NEW ENGLAND.

WHEN I first opened my eyes upon my native town, it was already nearly two hundred years old,
counting from the time when it was part of the original Salem settlement,--old enough to have
gained a character and an individuality of its own, as it certainly had. We children felt at
once that we belonged to the town, as we did to our father or our mother.

The sea was its nearest neighbor, and penetrated to every fireside, claiming close intimacy
with every home and heart. The farmers up and down the shore were as much fishermen as farmers;
they were as familiar with the Grand Banks of Newfoundland as they were with their own potato-fields.
Every third man you met in the street, you might safely hail as "Shipmate," or "Skipper," or
"Captain." My father's early seafaring experience gave him the latter title to the end of his life.

It was hard to keep the boys from going off to sea before they were grown. No inland occupation
attracted them. "Land-lubber" was one of the most contemptuous epithets heard from boyish lips.
The spirit of adventure developed in them a rough, breezy type of manliness, now almost extinct.

Men talked about a voyage to Calcutta, or Hong-Kong, or "up the Straits,"--meaning Gibraltar
and the Mediterranean,--as if it were not much more than going to the next village. It seemed
as if our nearest neighbors lived over there across the water; we breathed the air of foreign
countries, curiously interblended with our own.

The women of well-to-do families had Canton crape shawls and Smyrna silks and Turk satins,
for Sabbath-day wear, which somebody had brought home for them. Mantel-pieces were adorned
with nautilus and conch-shells, and with branches and fans of coral; and children had foreign
curiosities and treasures of the sea for playthings. There was one imported shell that we did
not value much, it was so abundant--the freckled univalve they called a "prop." Yet it had
a mysterious interest for us little ones. We held it to our ears, and listened for the sound
of the waves, which we were told that, it still kept, and always would keep. I remember the
time when I thought that the ocean was really imprisoned somewhere within that narrow aperture.

We were accustomed to seeing barrels full of cocoa-nuts rolled about; and there were jars of
preserved tropical fruits, tamarinds, ginger-root, and other spicy appetizers, almost as common
as barberries and cranberries, in the cupboards of most housekeepers.

I wonder what has become of those many, many little red "guinea-peas" we had to play with!
It never seemed as if they really belonged to the vegetable world, notwithstanding their name.

We had foreign coins mixed in with our large copper cents,--all kinds, from the Russian "kopeck"
to the "half-penny token" of Great Britain. Those were the days when we had half cents in circulation
to make change with. For part of our currency was the old-fashioned "ninepence,"--twelve and
a half cents, and the "four pence ha'penny,"--six cents and a quarter. There was a good deal
of Old England about us still.

And we had also many living reminders of strange lands across the sea. Green parrots went scolding
and laughing down the thimbleberry hedges that bordered the cornfields, as much at home out
of doors as within. Java sparrows and canaries and other tropical songbirds poured their music
out of sunny windows into the street, delighting the ears of passing school children long before
the robins came. Now and then somebody's pet monkey would escape along the stone walls and
shed-roofs, and try to hide from his boy-persecutors by dodging behind a chimney, or by slipping
through an open scuttle, to the terror and delight of juveniles whose premises he invaded.

And there were wanderers from foreign countries domesticated in many families, whose swarthy
complexions and un-Caucasian features became familiar in our streets,--Mongolians, Africans,
and waifs from the Pacific islands, who always were known to us by distinguished names,--Hector
and Scipio, and Julius Caesar and Christopher Columbus. Families of black people were scattered
about the place, relics of a time when even New England had not freed her slaves. Some of them
had belonged in my great-grandfather's family, and they hung about the old homestead at "The
Farms" long after they were at liberty to go anywhere they pleased. There was a "Rose" and
a "Phillis" among them, who came often to our house to bring luscious high blackberries from
the Farms woods, or to do the household washing. They seemed pathetically out of place, although
they lived among us on equal terms, respectable and respected.

The pathos of the sea haunted the town, made audible to every ear when a coming northeaster
brought the rote of the waves in from the islands across the harbor-bar, with a moaning like
that we heard when we listened for it in the shell. Almost every house had its sea-tragedy.
Somebody belonging to it had been shipwrecked, or had sailed away one day, and never returned.

Our own part of the bay was so sheltered by its islands that there were seldom any disasters
heard of near home, although the names of the two nearest--Great and Little Misery--are said
to have originated with a shipwreck so far back in the history of the region that it was never
recorded.

But one such calamity happened in my infancy, spoken of always by those who knew its victims
in subdued tones;--the wreck of the "Persia." The vessel was returning from the Mediterranean,
and in a blinding snow-storm on a wild March night her captain probably mistook one of the
Cape Ann light-houses for that on Baker's Island, and steered straight upon the rocks in a
lonely cove just outside the cape. In the morning the bodies of her dead crew were found tossing
about with her cargo of paper-manufacturers' rags, among the breakers. Her captain and mate
were Beverly men, and their funeral from the meeting-house the next Sabbath was an event which
long left its solemnity hanging over the town.

We were rather a young nation at this time. The History of the United States could only tell
the story of the American Revolution, of the War of 1812, and of the administration of about
half a dozen presidents.

Our republicanism was fresh and wide-awake. The edge of George Washington's little hatchet
had not yet been worn down to its latter-day dullness; it flashed keenly on our young eyes
and ears in the reading books, and through Fourth of July speeches. The Father of his Country
had been dead only a little more than a quarter of a century, and General Lafayette was still
alive; he had, indeed, passed through our town but a few years before, and had been publicly
welcomed under our own elms and lindens. Even babies echoed the names of our two heroes in
their prattle.

We had great "training days," when drum and fife took our ears by storm; When the militia and
the Light Infantry mustered and marched through the streets to the Common with boys and girls
at their heels,--such girls as could get their mother's consent, or the courage to run off
without it.(We never could.)But we always managed to get a good look at the show in one way
or another.

"Old Election," "'Lection Day" we called it, a lost holiday now, was a general training day,
and it came at our most delightful season, the last of May. Lilacs and tulips were in bloom,
then; and it was a picturesque fashion of the time for little girls whose parents had no flower-gardens
to go around begging a bunch of lilacs, or a tulip or two. My mother always made "'Lection
cake" for us on that day. It was nothing but a kind of sweetened bread with a shine of egg-and-molasses
on top; but we thought it delicious.

The Fourth of July and Thanksgiving Day were the only other holidays that we made much account
of, and the former was a far more well behaved festival than it is in modern times. The bells
rang without stint, and at morning and noon cannon were fired off. But torpedoes and fire-crackers
did not make the highways dangerous;--perhaps they were thought too expensive an amusement.
Somebody delivered an oration; there was a good deal said about "this universal Yankee nation";
some rockets went up from Salem in the evening; we watched them from the hill, and then went
to bed, feeling that we had been good patriots.

There was always a Fast Day, which I am afraid most of us younger ones regarded merely as a
day when we were to eat unlimited quantities of molasses-gingerbread, instead of sitting down
to our regular meals.

When I read about Christmas in the English story-books, I wished we could have that beautiful
holiday. But our Puritan fathers shook their heads at Christmas.

Our Sabbath-school library books were nearly all English reprints, and many of the story-books
were very interesting. I think that most of my favorites were by Mrs. Sherwood. Some of them
were about life in India,--"Little Henry and his Bearer," and "Ayah and Lady." Then there were
"The Hedge of Thorns;" "Theophilus and Sophia;" "Anna Ross," and a whole series of little English
books that I took great delight in.

I had begun to be rather introspective and somewhat unhealthily self-critical, contrasting
myself meanwhile with my sister Lida, just a little older, who was my usual playmate, and whom
I admired very much for what I could not help seeing,--her unusual sweetness of disposition.
I read Mrs. Sherwood's "Infant's Progress," and I made a personal application of it, picturing
myself as the naughty, willful "Playful," and my sister Lida as the saintly little "Peace."

This book gave me a morbid, unhappy feeling, while yet it had something of the fascination
of the "Pilgrim's Progress," of which it is an imitation. I fancied myself followed about by
a fiend-like boy who haunted its pages, called "Inbred-Sin;" and the story implied that there
was no such thing as getting rid of him. I began to dislike all boys on his account. There
was one who tormented my sister and me--we only knew him by name--by jumping out at us from
behind doorways or fences on our way to school, making horrid faces at us. "Inbred-Sin," I
was certain, looked just like him; and the two, strangely blended in one hideous presence,
were the worst nightmare of my dreams. There was too much reality about that "Inbreed-Sin."
I felt that I was acquainted with him. He was the hateful hero of the little allegory, as Satan
is of "Paradise Lost."

I liked lessons that came to me through fables and fairy tales, although, in reading Aesop,
I invariably skipped the "moral" pinned on at the end, and made one for myself, or else did
without.

Mrs. Lydia Maria Child's story of "The Immortal Fountain," in the "Girl's Own Book,"--which
it was the joy of my heart to read, although it preached a searching sermon to me,--I applied
in the same way that I did the "Infant's Progress." I thought of Lida as the gentle, unselfish
Rose, and myself as the ugly Marion. She was patient and obliging, and I felt that I was the
reverse.  She was considered pretty, and I knew that I was the reverse of that, too. I wondered
if Lida really had bathed in the Immortal Fountain, and oh, how I wished I could find the way
there! But I feared that trying to do so would be of no use; the fairies would cross their
wands to keep me back, and their wings would darken at my approach.

The book that I loved first and best, and lived upon in my childhood, was "Pilgrim's Progress."
It was as a story that I cared for it, although I knew that it meant something more,--something
that was already going on in my own heart and life. Oh, how I used to wish that I too could
start off on a pilgrimage! It would be so much easier than the continual, discouraging struggle
to be good!

The lot I most envied was that of the contented Shepherd Boy in the Valley of Humiliation,
singing his cheerful songs, and wearing "the herb called Heart's Ease in his bosom"; but all
the glorious ups and downs of the "Progress" I would gladly have shared with Christiana and
her children, never desiring to turn aside into any "By-Path Meadow" while Mr. Great-Heart
led the way, and the Shining Ones came down to meet us along the road. It was one of the necessities
of my nature, as a child, to have some one being, real or ideal, man or woman, before whom
I inwardly bowed down and worshiped. Mr. Great-Heart was the perfect hero of my imagination.
Nobody, in books or out of them, compared with him. I wondered if there were really any Mr.
Great-Hearts to be met with among living men.

I remember reading this beloved book once in a snow-storm, and looking up from it out among
the white, wandering flakes, with a feeling that they had come down from heaven as its interpreters;
that they were trying to tell me, in their airy up-and-down-flight, the story of innumerable
souls. I tried to fix my eye on one particular flake, and to follow its course until it touched
the earth. But I found that I could not. A little breeze was stirring an the flake seemed to
go and return, to descend and then ascend again, as if hastening homeward to the sky, losing
itself at last in the airy, infinite throng, and leaving me filled with thoughts of that "great
multitude, which no man could number, clothed with white robes," crowding so gloriously into
the closing pages of the Bible.

Oh, if I could only be sure that I should some time be one of that invisible company! But the
heavens were already beginning to look a great way off. I hummed over one of my best loved hymns,--

  "Who are these in bright array?"

and that seemed to bring them nearer again.

The history of the early martyrs, the persecutions of the Waldenses and of the Scotch Covenanters,
I read and re-read with longing emulation! Why could not I be a martyr, too? It would be so
beautiful to die for the truth as they did, as Jesus did! I did not understand then that He
lived and died to show us what life really means, and to give us true life, like His,--the
life of love to God with all our hearts, of love to all His human children for His sake;--and
that to live this life faithfully is greater even than to die a martyr's death.

It puzzled me to know what some of the talk I heard about being a Christian could mean. I saw
that it was something which only men and women could comprehend. And yet they taught me to
say those dear words of the Master, "Suffer the little children to come unto Me!" Surely He
meant what He said. He did not tell the children that they must receive the kingdom of God
like grown people; He said that everybody must enter into it "as a little child."

But our fathers were stalwart men, with many foes to encounter. If anybody ever needed a grown-up
religion, they surely did; and it became them well.

Most of our every-day reading also came to us over the sea. Miss Edgworth's juvenile stories
were in general circulation, and we knew "Harry and Lucy" and "Rosamond" almost as well as
we did our own playmates. But we did not think those English children had so good a time as
we did; they had to be so prim and methodical. It seemed to us that the little folks across
the water never were allowed to romp and run wild; some of us may have held a vague idea that
this freedom of ours was the natural inheritance of republican children only.

Primroses and cowslips and daisies bloomed in these pleasant story-books of ours, and we went
a-Maying there, with our transatlantic playmates. I think we sometimes started off with our
baskets, expecting to find those English flowers in our own fields. How should children be
wiser than to look for every beautiful thing they have heard of, on home ground?

And, indeed, our commonest field-flowers were, many of them, importations from the mother-country--clover,
and dandelions, and ox-eye daisies. I was delighted when my mother told me one day that a yellow
flower I brought her was a cowslip, for I thought she meant that it was the genuine English
cowslip, which I had read about. I was disappointed to learn that it was a native blossom,
the marsh-marigold.

My sisters had some books that I appropriated to myself a great deal: "Paul and Virginia;"
"Elizabeth, or the Exiles of Siberia;" "Nina: an Icelandic Tale;" with the "Vicar of Wakefield;"
the "Tour to the Hebrides;" "Gulliver's Travels;" the "Arabian Nights;" and some odd volumes
of Sir Walter Scott's novels.

I read the "Scottish Chiefs"--my first novel when I was about five years old. So absorbed was
I in the sorrows of Lady Helen Mar and Sir William Wallace, that I crept into a corner where
nobody would notice me, and read on through sunset into moonlight, with eyes blurred with tears.
I did not feel that I was doing anything wrong, for I had heard my father say he was willing
his daughters should read that one novel. He probably did not intend the remark for the ears
of his youngest, however.

My appetite for reading was omnivorous, and I devoured a great many romances. My sisters took
them from a circulating library, many more, perhaps, than came to my parents' knowledge; but
it was not often that one escaped me, wherever it was hidden. I did not understand what I was
reading, to be sure; and that was one of the best and worst things about it. The sentimentalism
of some of those romances was altogether unchildlike; but I did not take much of it in. It
was the habit of running over pages and pages to get to the end of a story, the habit of reading
without caring what I read, that I know to have been bad for my mind. To use a nautical expression,
my brain was in danger of getting "water-logged." There are so many more books of fiction written
nowadays, I do not see how the young people who try to read one tenth of them have any brains
left for every-day use.

One result of my infantile novel-reading was that I did not like to look at my own face in
a mirror, because it was so unlike that of heroines, always pictured with "high white foreheads"
and "cheeks of a perfect oval." Mine was round, ruddy, and laughing with health; and, though
I practiced at the glass a good deal, I could not lengthen it by puckering down my lips. I
quite envied the little girls who were pale and pensive-looking, as that was the only ladyfied
standard in the romances. Of course, the chief pleasure of reading them was that of identifying
myself with every new heroine. They began to call me a "bookworm" at home. I did not at all
relish the title.

It was fortunate for me that I liked to be out of doors a great deal, and that I had a brother,
John, who was willing to have me for an occasional companion. Sometimes he would take me with
him when he went huckleberrying, up the rural Montserrat Road, through Cat Swamp, to the edge
of Burnt Hills and Beaver Pond. He had a boy's pride in explaining these localities to me,
making me understand that I had a guide who was familiar with every inch of the way. Then,
charging me not to move until he came back, he would leave me sitting alone on a great craggy
rock, while he went off and filled his basket out of sight among the bushes. Indeed, I did
not want to move, it was all so new and fascinating. The tall pine-trees whispering to each
other across the sky-openings above me, the graceful ferns, the velvet mosses dotted with scarlet
fairy-cups, as if the elves had just spread their table for tea, the unspeakable charm of the
spice-breathing air, all wove a web of enchantment about me, from which I had no wish to disentangle
myself.  The silent spell of the woods held me with a power stronger even than that of the
solemn-voiced sea. Sometimes this same brother would get permission to take me on a longer
excursion,--to visit the old homestead at "The Farms." Three or four miles was not thought
too long a walk for a healthy child of five years; and that road, in the old time, led through
a rural Paradise, beautiful at every season,--whether it were the time of song-sparrows and
violets, of wild roses, of coral-hung barberry-bushes, or of fallen leaves and snow-drifts.
The wildness of the road, now exchanged for elegant modern cultivation, was its great charm
to us. We stopped at the Cove Brook to hear the cat-birds sing, and at Mingo's Beach to revel
in the sudden surprise of the open sea, and to listen to the chant of the waves, always stronger
and grander there than anywhere along the shore. We passed under dark wooded cliffs out into
sunny openings, the last of which held under its skirting pines the secret of the prettiest
woodpath to us in all the world, the path to the ancestral farmhouse.

We found children enough to play with there,--as numerous a family as our own. We were sometimes,
I fancy, the added drop too much of already overflowing juvenility. Farther down the road,
where the cousins were all grown-up men and women, Aunt Betsey's cordial, old-fashioned hospitality
sometimes detained us a day or two. We watched the milking, and fed the chickens, and fared
gloriously. Aunt Betsey could not have done more to entertain us, had we been the President's
children.

I have always cherished the memory of a certain pair of large-bowed spectacles that she wore,
and of the green calash, held by a ribbon bridle, that sheltered her head, when she walked
up from the shore to see us, as she often did. They announced to us the approach of inexhaustible
kindliness and good cheer. We took in a home-feeling with the words "Aunt Betsey" then and
always. She had just the husband that belonged to her in my Uncle David, an upright man, frank-faced,
large-hearted, and spiritually minded. He was my father's favorite brother, and to our branch
of the family "The Farms" meant "Uncle David and Aunt Betsey."

My brother John's plans for my entertainment did not always harmonize entirely with my own
ideas. He had an inventive mind, and wanted me to share his boyish sports. But I did not like
to ride in a wheelbarrow, nor to walk on stilts, nor even to coast down the hill on his sled
and I always got a tumble, if I tried, for I was rather a clumsy child; besides, I much preferred
girls' quieter games.

We were seldom permitted to play with any boys except our brothers. I drew the inference that
our boys must be a great deal better than "the other boys." My brother John had some fine play-fellows,
but he seemed to consider me in the way when they were his guests. Occasionally we would forget
that the neighbor-boys were not girls, and would find ourselves all playing together in delightful
unconsciousness; although possibly a thought, like that of the "Ettrick Shepherd," may now
and then have flitted through the mind of some masculine juvenile:--

  "Why the boys should drive away
  Little sweet maidens from the play,
  Or love to banter and fight so well,--
  That Is the thing I never could tell."

One day I thoughtlessly accepted an invitation to get through a gap in the garden-fence, to
where the doctor's two boys were preparing to take an imaginary sleigh-ride in midsummer. The
sleigh was stranded among tall weeds an cornstalks, but I was politely handed in by the elder
boy, who sat down by my side and tucked his little brother in front at our feet, informing
me that we were father and mother and little son, going to take a ride to Newburyport.  He
had found an old pair of reins and tied them to a saw-horse, that he switched and "Gee-up"-ed
vigorously. The journey was as brief as delightful. I ran home feeling like the heroine of
an elopement, asking myself meanwhile, "What would my brother John say if he knew I had been
playing with boys?" He was very particular about his sisters' behavior. But I incautiously
said to one sister in whom I did not usually confide, that I thought James was the nicest boy
in the lane, and that I liked his little brother Charles, too. She laughed at me so unmercifully
for making the remark, that I never dared look towards the gap in the fence again, beyond which
I could hear the boys' voices around the old sleigh where they were playing, entirely forgetful
of their former traveling companion. Still, I continued to think that my courteous cavalier,
James, was the nicest boy in the lane.

My brother's vigilant care of his two youngest sisters was once the occasion to them of a serious
fright. My grandfather--the sexton--sometimes trusted him to toll the bell for a funeral. In
those days the bell was tolled for everybody who died. John was social, and did not like to
go up into the belfry and stay an hour or so alone, and as my grandfather positively forbade
him to take any other boy up there, he one day got permission for us two little girls to go
with him, for company. We had to climb up a great many stairs, and the last flight was inclosed
by a rough door with a lock inside, which he was charged to fasten, so that no mischievous
boys should follow.

It was strange to be standing up there in the air, gazing over the balcony-railing down into
the street, where the men and women looked so small, and across to the water and the ships
in the east, and the clouds and hills in the west! But when he struck the tongue against the
great bell, close to our ears, it was more than we were prepared for. The little sister, scarcely
three years old, screamed and shrieked,--

"I shall be stunned-ded! I shall be stunned-ded!" I do not know where she had picked up that
final syllable, but it made her terror much more emphatic. Still the great waves of solemn
sound went eddying on, over the hills and over the sea, and we had to hear it all, though we
stopped our ears with our fingers. It was an immense relief to us when the last stroke of the
passing-bell was struck, and John said we could go down.

He took the key from his pocket and was fitting it into the lock, when it slipped, beyond our
reach. Now the little sister cried again, and would not be pacified; and when I looked up and
caught John's blank, dismayed look, I began to feel like crying, too. The question went swiftly
through my mind,--How many days can we stay up here without starving to death?--for I really
thought we should never get down out of our prison in the air: never see our mother's face again.

But my brother's wits returned to him. He led us back to the balcony, and shouted over the
railing to a boy in the street, making him understand that he must go and inform my father
that we were locked into the belfry. It was not long before we saw both him and my grandfather
on their way to the church. They came up to the little door, and told us to push with our united
strength against it. The rusty lock soon yielded, and how good it was to look into those two
beloved human faces once more! But we little girls were not invited to join my brother again
when he tolled the bell: if we had been, I think we should have promptly declined the invitation.

Many of my childish misadventures came to me in connection with my little sister, who, having
been much indulged, too it for granted that she could always have what she wanted.

One day we two were allowed to take a walk together; I, as the older, being supposed to take
care of her. Although we were going towards the Cove, over a secluded road, she insisted upon
wearing a brand-new pair of red morocco boots. All went well until we came to a bog by the
roadside, where sweet-flag and cat-tails grew. Out in the middle of the bog, where no venturesome
boy had ever attempted their seizure, there were many tall, fine-looking brown cat-tails growing.
She caught sight of them, and before I saw what she was doing, she had shot from my side like
an arrow from the bow, and was far out on the black, quaking surface, that at first upheld
her light weight. I stood petrified with horror. I knew all about that dangerous place. I had
been told that nobody had ever found out how deep that mud was. I was uttered just one imploring
"Come back!" when she turned to me with a shriek, throwing up her arms towards me. She was
sinking! There was nobody in sight, and there was no time to think. I ran, or rather flew,
across the bog, with just one thought in my mind, "I have got to get her out!" Some angel must
have prevented me from making a misstep, and sinking with her. I felt the power of a giant
suddenly taking possession of my small frame. Quicker than I could tell of it, I had given
one tremendous pull (she had already sunk above her boot-tops), and had dragged her back to
the road. It is a marvel to me now how I--a child of scarcely six years--succeeded in rescuing
her. It did not seem to me as if I were doing it myself, but as if some unseen Power had taken
possession of me for a moment, and made me do it. And I suppose that when we act from a sudden
impulse to help another out of trouble, it never is ourself that does the good deed. The Highest
Strength just takes us and uses us. I certainly felt equal to going straight through the earth
to China after my little sister, if she had stink out of sight.

We were two miserable looking children when we reached home, the sticky ooze having changed
her feet into unmanageable lumps of mud, with which my own clothes also were soiled. I had
to drag or carry her all the way, for she could not or would not walk a step. And alas for
the morocco boots! They were never again red. I also received a scolding for not taking better
care of my little sister, and I was not very soon allowed again to have her company in my rambles.

We usually joined with other little neighbor girls in some out-of-door amusement near home.
And our sports, as well as our books, had a spice of Merry Old England. They were full of kings
and queens, and made sharp contrasts, as well as odd mixtures, with the homeliness of our everyday
life.

One of them, a sort of rhymed dialogue, began with the couplet:--

  "Queen Anne, Queen Anne, she sits in the sun,
  As fair as a lady, as white as a nun."

If "Queen Anne" did not give a right guess as to which hand of the messenger held the king's
letter to her, she was contemptuously informed that she was

  "as brown as a bun."

In another name, four little girls joined hands across, in couples, chanting:--

  "I wish my father were a king,
  I wish my mother were a queen,
  And I a little companion!"

concluding with a close embrace in a dizzying whirl, breathlessly shouting all together,--

  "A bundle of fagots! A bundle of fagots!"

In a third, which may have begun with a juvenile reacting of the Colonial struggle for liberty,
we ranged ourselves under two leaders, who made an archway over our heads of their lifted hands
and arms, saying, as we passed beneath,--

  "Lift up the gates as high as the sky,
  And let King George and his army pass by!"

We were told to whisper "Oranges" or "Lemons" for a pass-word; and "Oranges" always won the
larger enlistment, whether British or American.

And then there was "Grandmother Gray," and the

  "Old woman from Newfoundland,
  With all her children in her hand;"

and the

  "Knight from Spain
  Inquiring for your daughter Jane,"

and numberless others, nearly all of them bearing a distinct Old World flavor. One of our play-places
was an unoccupied end of the burying-ground, overhung by the Colonel's apple-trees and close
under his wall, so that we should not be too near the grave-stones.

I do not think that death was at all a real thing to me or to my brothers and sisters at this
time. We lived so near the graveyard that it seemed merely the extension of our garden. We
wandered there at will, trying to decipher the moss-grown inscriptions, and wondering at the
homely carvings of cross-bones and cherubs and willow-trees on the gray slate-stones. I did
not associate those long green mounds with people who had once lived, though we were careful,
having been so instructed, not to step on the graves. To ramble about there and puzzle ourselves
with the names and dates, was like turning over the pages of a curious old book. We had not
the least feeling of irreverence in taking the edge of the grave-yard for our playground. It
was known as "the old burying-ground"; and we children regarded it with a sort of affectionate
freedom, as we would a grandmother, because it was old.

That, indeed, was one peculiar attraction of the town itself; it was old, and it seemed old,
much older than it does now. There was only one main street, said to have been the first settlers'
cowpath to Wenham, which might account for its zigzag picturesqueness. All the rest were courts
or lanes.

The town used to wear a delightful air of drowsiness, as if she had stretched herself out for
an afternoon nap, with her head towards her old mother, Salem, and her whole length reclining
towards the sea, till she felt at her feet, through her green robes, the clip of the deep water
at the Farms. All her elder children recognized in her quiet steady-going ways a maternal unity
and strength of character, as of a town that understood her own plans, and had settled down
to peaceful, permanent habits. Her spirit was that of most of our Massachusetts coast-towns.
They were transplanted shoots of Old England. And it was the voice of a mother-country more
ancient than their own, that little children heard crooning across the sea in their cradle-hymns
and nursery-songs.

VI.

GLIMPSES OF POETRY.

OUR close relationship to Old England was sometimes a little misleading to us juveniles. The
conditions of our life were entirely different, but we read her descriptive stories and sang
her songs as if they were true for us, too. One of the first things I learned to repeat--I
think it was in the spelling-book--began with the verse:--

  "I thank the goodness and the grace
  That on my birth has smiled,
  And made me, in these latter days,
  A happy English child."

And some lines of a very familiar hymn by Dr. Watts ran thus:--

  "Whene'er I take my walks abroad,
  How many poor I see.
  . . . . . . . . . . . .
  "How many children in the street
  Half naked I behold;
  While I am clothed from head to feet,
  And sheltered from the cold."

Now a ragged, half-clothed child, or one that could really be called poor, in the extreme sense
of the word, was the rarest of all sights in a thrifty New England town fifty years ago. I
used to look sharply for those children, but I never could see one. And a beggar! Oh, if a
real beggar would come along, like the one described in

  "Pity the sorrows of a poor old man,"

what a wonderful event that would be! I believe I had more curiosity about a beggar, and more
ignorance, too, than about a king. The poem read:--

  "A pampered menial drove me from the door."

What sort of creature could a "pampered menial" be?  Nothing that had ever come under our observation
corresponded to the words. Nor was it easy for us to attach any meaning to the word "servant."
There were women who came in occasionally to do the washing, or to help about extra work. But
they were decently clothed, and had homes of their own, more or less comfortable, and their
quaint talk and free-and-easy ways were often as much of a lift to the household as the actual
assistance they rendered.

I settled down upon the conclusion that "rich" and "poor" were book-words only, describing
something far off, and having nothing to do with our every-day experience. My mental definition
of "rich people," from home observation, was something like this: People who live in three-story
houses, and keep their green blinds closed, and hardly ever come out and talk with the folks
in the street. There were a few such houses in Beverly, and a great many in Salem, where my
mother sometimes took me for a shopping walk. But I did not suppose that any of the people
who lived near us were very rich, like those in books.

Everybody about us worked, and we expected to take hold of our part while young. I think we
were rather eager to begin, for we believed that work would make men and women of us.

I, however, was not naturally an industrious child, but quite the reverse. When my father sent
us down to weed his vegetable-garden at the foot of the lane, I, the youngest of his weeders,
liked to go with the rest, but not for the sake of the work or the pay. I generally gave it
up before I had weeded half a bed. It made me so warm! and my back did ache so! I stole off
into the shade of the great apple-trees, and let the west wind fan my hot cheeks, and looked
up into the boughs, and listened to the many, many birds that seemed chattering to each other
in a language of their own. What was it they were saying? and why could not I understand it?
Perhaps I should, sometime. I had read of people who did, in fairy tales.

When the others started homeward, I followed. I did not mind their calling me lazy, nor that
my father gave me only one tarnished copper cent, while Lida received two or three bright ones.
I had had what I wanted most. I would rather sit under the apple-trees and hear the birds sing
than have a whole handful of bright copper pennies. It was well for my father and his garden
that his other children were not like me.

The work which I was born to, but had not begun to do, was sometimes a serious weight upon
my small, forecasting brain.

One of my hymns ended with the lines,--

  "With books, and work, and healthful play,
  May my first years be passed,
  That I may give, for every day,
  Some good account at last."

I knew all about the books and the play; but the work,--how should I ever learn to do it?

My father had always strongly emphasized his wish that all his children, girls as well as boys,
should have some independent means of self-support by the labor of their hands; that every
one should, as was the general custom, "learn a trade." Tailor's work--the finishing of men's
outside garments--was the trade learned most frequently by women in those days, and one or
more of my older sisters worked at it; I think it must have been at home, for I somehow or
somewhere got the idea, while I was a small child, that the chief end of woman was to make
clothing for mankind.

This thought came over me with a sudden dread one Sabbath morning when I was a toddling thing,
led along by my sister, behind my father and mother. As they walked arm in arm before me, I
lifted my eyes from my father's heels to his head, and mused: "How tall he is! and how long
his coat looks! and how many thousand, thousand stitches there must be in his coat and pantaloons!
And I suppose I have got to grow up and have a husband, and put all those little stitches into
his coats and pantaloons. Oh, I never, never can do it!" A shiver of utter discouragement went
through me. With that task before me, it hardly seemed to me as if life were worth living.
I went on to meeting, and I suppose I forgot my trouble in a hymn, but for the moment it was
real. It was not the only time in my life that I have tired myself out with crossing bridges
to which I never came.

Another trial confronted me in the shape of an ideal but impossible patchwork quilt. We learned
to sew patchwork at school, while we were learning the alphabet; and almost every girl, large
or small, had a bed-quilt of her own begun, with an eye to future house furnishing. I was not
over fond of sewing, but I thought it best to begin mine early.

So I collected a few squares of calico, and undertook to put them together in my usual independent
way, without asking direction. I liked assorting those little figured bits of cotton cloth,
for they were scraps of gowns I had seen worn, and they reminded me of the persons who wore
them. One fragment, in particular, was like a picture to me. It was a delicate pink and brown
sea-moss pattern, on a white ground, a piece of a dress belonging to my married sister, who
was to me bride and angel in One. I always saw her face before me when I unfolded this scrap,--a
face with an expression truly heavenly in its loveliness. Heaven claimed her before my childhood
was ended. Her beautiful form was laid to rest in mid-ocean, too deep to be pillowed among
the soft sea-mosses. But she lived long enough to make a heaven of my childhood whenever she
came home.

One of the sweetest of our familiar hymns I always think of as belonging to her, and as a still
unbroken bond between her spirit and mine. She had come back to us for a brief visit, soon
after her marriage, with some deep, new experience of spiritual realities which I, a child
of four or five years, felt in the very tones of her voice, and in the expression of her eyes.

My mother told her of my fondness for the hymn-book, and she turned to me with a smile and
said, "Won't you learn one hymn for me--one hymn that I love very much?"

Would I not? She could not guess how happy she made me by wishing me to do anything for her
sake. The hymn was,--

  "Whilst Thee I seek, protecting Power."

In a few minutes I repeated the whole to her and its own beauty, pervaded with the tenderness
of her love for me, fixed it at once indelibly in my memory. Perhaps I shall repeat it to her
again, deepened with a lifetime's meaning, beyond the sea, and beyond the stars. Suddenly the tinny Bell on, and
a voice gave the order to divest. A few minutes later, the peak the boat from the steamer risen
sharply, and the journey had begun. Tom felt himself raised by his success - he knew that it
was the last trip, which made the boat that evening.

After a long twelve or fifteen minutes the car stopped, and Tom slipped overboard and swam in the dark to the
shore, he landed fifty feet below - for safety before any of wandering Known. He ran through
some busy streets and was soon on his back fence Aunt. He climbed over, approached the house cautiously,
and peered through the living room window, there he saw light.

There sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's mother, densely crowded, busy chatting. They sat
on the bed, and that stood between them and the door. Tom crept cautiously to Door and carefully
began to press the lever. Then he pressed strongly, and the door creaked. He continued his
work and stopped each time when it creaked, till he believed crawl
on their knees to.

And he stuck his head and tried carefully.

"Why the lights flicker like this?" Said Aunt Polly.

Hurriedly Tom himself.

"I do believe the door is open! Truly, it is open! Listen for the ghost stories Today on at all!
Go, 'and they do too, Sid! "

At the same moment Tom disappeared under the bed.

He stood and panted 'ne time, and then he crawled so far ahead that he was Aunt Polly's feet
almost touch.

"But as I said," Aunt Polly started up again, he was not bad, just - how should I say - cracked!
Just a little reckless, you know, and thoughtless-volatile. He never thought to be a colt. Bos
says' he's never, he was the good-hearted boy who been there ever
is, "and she began to cry.

,, Grade 'so it was with my Joe - always
full of mischief and placed on each mischief; and so unselfish and
kind as can only be one - and it hurts me terribly, to think that
I could go and smack him one because he took the milk should, and
no thought that I had cast them away as mad himself - and I will never
see him again in this world, never, never, never - poor deserted boy,
"Mrs. Harper! sobbed, as was to break her heart.

"I hope Tom is better off where he is," said Sid, "but when he comes in some things would have
been better - "

, Sid! "Tom felt extremely strict view from the eyes of the old lady, although he could not see. "It
is not a word against my Tom, now he's gone!

God will take his assume you care only for yourself, my dear. Oh, Mrs. Harper, I do not know
how I to endure without him - I do not know how shall I endure without him! He was so affectionate
to me - although he would have broken my old heart at times almost "!

"The Lord's gave and the Lord hath taken away, the name of the Lord be praised! But 'tis so
hard - oh, it 's so hard! Only last Saturday was Joe a dreamer to me in the nose , And I burst
him down. At that time I knew of course not, how soon - oh, if I could still see me, I'd 'hug
him and bless it. "

"Yes, yes, I can imagine what you feel, Mrs. Harper, I know exactly
what you !

Feel 'S is not longer than last night, there was Tom the cat and filled it full of , Pain killers,
'and I thought the animal would "tear down the house! And - God forgive me - I gave him one
with the thimble on your head - poor boy, poor dead boy! But He is now out of all pain. And
the last words I heard from him, were - "

But this memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke down completely. Tom sobbed even now - more
out of pity for himself than anyone else.

He could also Mary cry and talk from time to time, a kind word about themselves heard. He began a better
opinion than in the past have of themselves. He was, by his aunt Grief so deeply that he was
on the verge, come forth from under the bed and surprise with his coming-off, and the theatrical
effect was quite to his taste, but he withstood it and remained quiet.

He continued to listen and was composed of all sorts of hints that it accepted only I, the boys
were killed while swimming, then the small raft was missing, then announced a couple of boys
who had promised runaway, the village should soon from them hear ". The wise heads had this and
that together rhymes and explained, were the hoodlums on this raft of them down and would soon
arrive in the next town below upward. But noon the raft had been found about five or six miles
below the village at the Missouriküste, and since we had given up hope, they had to be drowned
otherwise the hunger would have driven them home by nightfall - if not earlier. It was believed
that the search for the bodies had therefore not been successful
because the accident occurred in the middle of the river have, because
the boys would be a good swimmer otherwise have saved the bank.

That was Wednesday evening. If they do not have to Saturday would be found, one would have to give
up all hope, and the funeral service should be take place on Sunday morning. Tom shuddered.

Mrs. Harper wanted a tearful voice, good night "and prepared to march.

Then, with a sudden impulse, embraced the two bereaved women crying to your hearts content out
and separated. Aunt Polly was tender twice by Sid and Mary, Good Night " said. Sid sobbed a
little, but Mary was crying from my heart.

Aunt Polly knelt down and prayed for Tom so impressive, so passionate and with so boundless
love in her words and her old trembling voice that he once again,
long before it was over, burst into tears.

He had long after she had gone to bed, waiting for came from time to time she still sometimes
a heart-breaking sigh, tossed restlessly back and forth and could not go to sleep. But eventually
she was quiet and only occasionally sighed during sleep.

Now the boy crawled out, was directed at the bed into the air, the light shaded with the Handstand
and long, you are considering. His heart was full of pity for her. He pulled his Sykomorenrinde
out and laid it beside the candle. But he remembered something, and he wondered. On his face
was the happy reflection of his thoughts. He quickly put the bark back in his pocket, he bent down
and kissed the faded lips, and made himself surreptitiously like this, closing the door behind him.

He
made his way back to the steam boat, found no one there, and went boldly on board the ship,
which he knew, was left - except for a watchman, who is include sleep and tended like a stone
image. He pulled up the little boat, jumped in and swam back out there soon to the current.
When he removed a mile from the village was, he headed straight across, and lay down the hard stuff.
He just reached the landing site on the other side - a little something for him. He had a great
desire to hijack the boat, for he thought, but one must consider it as a "ship" and it is therefore
legitimate prey for a pirate. But then he said to himself that detailed investigations subsequently
employed would be, and that could have ended with a discovery. He sprang to the shore and penetrated
into the forest. He sat down and put a long rest, torturing himself with efforts to stay awake,
and he sought again his "homeland." The night was almost over. It was bright daylight, until he
was over the island. He rested again until the sun all up and was
poured over the river with its splendor, and then he jumped into the
water.

Shortly thereafter, He was dripping at the entrance of the camp and
heard Joe say, "No, Tom is loyal, Huck, and He will come again.

He will not burn out. He knows that it's a shame for 'nen pirates would, and Tom's too proud for
something. He's on some what from.

Should like 'but you know very well what? "

,, Na - the things are there but now we do not?

, Almost, but not quite, Huck. The scribble says they are our property, if he does not until
breakfast is back. "

"What he is," Tom said in a theatrical pose, great kicking camp.

A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was soon on the spot, and while heck out the boys about
it, told Tom (with many embellishments) his adventures. They were a noble and boastful company of
heroes was over when his narrative. Then Tom made from it in a shady place to sleep until noon,
the other Pirates set out to catch and discovery.

CHAPTER XVI.

After lunch, made the whole gang after the sandbar to where turtle eggs to search. They kicked holes
in the sand, and when they found a hollow point, they threw on their knees and dug with their
hands. Sometimes they caught fifty or sixty eggs in a heap. They were perfectly round, soft things,
a little less like a British Walnut. They had a delicious egg dishes
for the evening, and also on Friday morning.

After breakfast she ran with Hurray and somersaults on the beach, blew himself up around each other,
threw off their clothes and were naked, and then they put their fun driving in the shallow Water
away, against the flow of call, which swept them around the legs and the fun still more elevated. Sometimes
they stood together, and splashed each other with the palm of hand Water in the face by participating,
each turning his back, crept to the splashes to escape, and then suddenly grabbed and fought for
so long, until the strength of his Opponents had ducked - and then
they turned all three into a tangle of white arms and legs, and appeared
at the same time again, panting, laughing, spitting and breathless.

After they had spent itself so neatly, she got out, threw themselves into the dry, hot sand lay
there and covering themselves properly with it, and then they ran back to the water, and the game
began again. Finally, they realized that their naked state with flesh-colored Jerseys similarity
did. So she drew a circle in the sand and had a circus - With three clowns in it, because nobody
wanted to leave this proudest post to another. Then they sought out their marbles and played,
until even that pleasure was boring.

Huck and Joe swam then again, Tom did not want to participate, because
he found that when he Tighten its cord rattlesnakes had lost by the
ankles, and he wondered as he retains without the protection of this
mysterious protection product for so long before a seizure was set.

He did not venture back into the water until he had found her again, and now the others were
tired and about to rest. Strolling around, they separated gradually fell into melancholy and
began to look over the broad expanse of water, where the village lay sleepily in the sun. Tom
found himself, as with the toe, Becky " wrote in the sand, and he wiped it out, angry at his
weakness. But he wrote it again - Nevertheless, he was nothing for it. He wiped it out again and
withdrew from all temptation, by driving the other boys together and they pushed against each
other.

But Joe's mind was totally depressed gradually. He was so homesick that he be Misery was hardly
able to bear. The tears were with him near the overflow. Even Huck was melancholy. Tom's heart
was heavy, but he took pains not to show it.

He had a Secret that he wanted to divulge yet, but if not soon lift
this depression was, he had to betray it.

He said with visible joy as: believe, I, 'S are before us have been pirates on the island.
We hope to see it!

Maybe they have buried treasure here.

Would it not you like, somewhere rusted on 'old ne encountering chest
full of gold or silver, eh?

And there was only a faint buzz that was soon gone.

Tom tried still one or two stratagems, but even this failed. It was quite daunting. Joe sat
there, poking with a stick in the sand and looked very gloomy.

Finally, he said, "Oh, boys, let's us give up.

I want to go home '. 'S is so lonely here.

"

, Oh what is, Joe, to be better after a little, "said Tom., Alone the splendid opportunity for
fishing. "

, Mag know nothing of fish.

I want to go home! "

"But, Joe, nowhere you can swim as good as here."

, Swimming is nothing. I have no desire to swim, if not who's there to give me says I should
not do it. I want to go home! "

, Oh, Coward! Infant! You just want to be your old man -.

Appreciative 'I'

"Yes - I want my mother! And you would too if you had one.

I am not infant more than you! "And Joe sobbed a little.

, 'Well,' tis well, we want to let the crying mother son home do not,
Huck?

Arm Thing - if it has stop longing to see his mother? Target's halt. You stay here, not, Huck?
We want to stay? "

"J - a," Huck said, without much conviction.

,, As long as I live, I no longer speaking to you, "Joe said looking
up.,, You did it."

Sadly he got up and began to dress himself.

,, Mach me out of it really something, "Tom threw out.,, 'S no one needs you. Make it so that
you come home and let me laugh at you. Are 'n beautiful pirate! Huck and me, we are not cry babies.
We want to stay, do not, Huck? Let him go if he wants to quite. But think, if need be we are
without him. "

But Tom still was not feel very well, but it troubled him to see how Joe defiant continued to dress.
And then it was uncomfortable as Huck with eyes the preparations
Joe followed so closely and with such uncanny silence.

Suddenly Joe began without a Word of farewell to wade to the Illinoisufer. Tom's heart began
to sink. He squinted by Huck. Huck could not bear the sight and not lowered his eyes. Then
he said: "You - Tom - I wish to go. 'S that until now so lonely, now it will be even worse. Let
us also, Tom? "

"I do not go! Yes you can go if you want. I'll stay! "

, Tom - I will prefer to go ".

, 'Well,' tis good, so go yet! Who's stopping you? "

Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes.

, Tom, "he said, would that you were going with. Think about it. We do over there on the shore
waiting for you. "

, Since, as you can wait 'ne nice' for a long time, I tell you. "

Huck stole sorrowfully away, and Tom looked after him during a violent
desire, his Pride despite running behind, tore at his heart.

He hoped they would stop, but she waded slowly on.

She was overwhelmed by Tom consciousness, how lonely and quiet it would be then. He fought a
final struggle with his pride and then he ran after his comrades,
yelling: "Wait but wait!

Will you say something! "

They stopped at once and turned around. When he had reached them,
he began his Auszukramen secret, and they listened sullenly, until
at last understood what the point in the matter was, and in a real
war cries of applause broke out and said, 's would be great, and if
he had told them the sooner they would not be gone. Tom put forward
a plausible excuse, but in truth he had feared that not once his secret
would cause them any longer to stay with him, and therefore did he
held back as a last resource.

The escapees returned happily and eagerly
took their game on again, continually with wonder and admiration of
Tom's fabulous plan, and his genius is entertaining.

After a sumptuous
feast of fish eggs and told Tom that he wanted to learn to smoke.
Joe liked the idea, and he said he wanted to learn. So did Huck whistles
and he filled it. The two newcomers have not yet had never smoked
anything other than chocolate cigars, and the have never been regarded
as male.

Now they stretched out, leaning on their elbows and began
to puff slowly and with little confidence. The smoke had an unpleasant
taste, and they cleared their throats a little, but Tom said:

, Pah!
'S so easy! Had I known that it was all, I would long ago's learned!
"

"I, too," said Joe.,, 'S' s actually nothing. "

To smoke, God,
how many times I 'have seen NEN man, and thought, would I's can you.
But I've never thought I's can. Here's how I always do not, Huck?
You've got it myself often hear say, not, Huck? Huck knows that I've
told it. "

"Yes, often enough," said Huck.

,, Well, I've got it
too, "Tom began once more., A hundred times. Plays down there at the
slaughterhouse. Remember not, Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and Johnny
Miller, and Jeff Thatcher, then, I's said. Remember not, Huck, I'm
told it '? "

"Yes, This is where," said Huck., 'Twas the day when
I' lost ne white marble had - no, 'twas the day before. "

, Says
Da 'I's you, "said Tom., Huck's recalls."

, Believe me, I can 'smoke
the pipe - all day, "said Joe, Will lead me not bad.."

,, Na, me
neither. I can smoke 'every day, but I bet you Jeff Thatcher's can
not. "

, Jeff Thatcher! Dear God - no two trains can 'the bear! Let's
him just once try - he should have seen. "

"I wish that he's ity,
and Johnny Miller - wish I can 'Johnny Miller' s try to see."

, You
think not? Sitting at the
window with my book and my knitting, while she was preparing dinner or supper with a depressed
air because she missed the abundant provision to which she held been accustomed, I would go
from hymn to hymn, selecting those which I thought would be most comforting to her, out of
the many that my memory-book contained, and taking care to pronounce the words distinctly.

I was glad to observe that she listened to

  "Come, ye disconsolate,"

and

  "How firm a foundation;"

and that she grew more cheerful; though I did not feel sure that my singing cheered her so
much as some happier thought that had come to her out of her own heart. Nobody but my mother,
indeed, would have called my chirping singing. But as she did not seem displeased, I went on,
a little more confidently, with some hymns that I loved for their starry suggestions,--

  "When marshaled on the nightly plain,"

and

  "Brightest and best of the sons of the morning,"

and

  "Watchman, tell us of the night?"

The most beautiful picture in the Bible to me, certainly the loveliest in the Old Testament,
had always been that one painted by prophecy, of the time when wild and tame creatures should
live together in peace, and children should be their fearless playmates. Even the savage wolf
Poverty would be pleasant and neighborly then, no doubt! A Little Child among them, leading
them, stood looking wistfully down through the soft sunrise of that approaching day, into the
cold and darkness of the world. Oh, it would be so much better than the garden of Eden!

Yes, and it would be a great deal better, I thought, to live in the millennium, than even to
die and go to heaven, although so many people around me talked as if that were the most desirable
thing of all. But I could never understand why, if God sent us here, we should be in haste
to get away, even to go to a pleasanter place.

I was perplexed by a good many matters besides. I had learned to keep most of my thoughts to
myself, but I did venture to ask about the Ressurrection--how it was that those who had died
and gone straight to heaven, and had been singing there for thousands of years, could have
any use for the dust to which their bodies had returned. Were they not already as alive as
they could be? I found that there were different ideas of the resurrection among "orthodox"
people, even then. I was told however, that this was too deep a matter for me, and so I ceased
asking questions. But I pondered the matter of death; what did it mean? The Apostle Paul gave
me more light on the subject than any of the ministers did. And, as usual, a poem helped me.
It was Pope's Ode, beginning with,--

  "Vital spark of heavenly flame,"--

which I learned out of a reading-book. To die was to "languish into life." That was the meaning
of it! and I loved to repeat to myself the words,--

  "Hark! they whisper: angels say,
  'Sister spirit, come away!'"

A hymn that I learned a little later expressed to me the same satisfying thought:

  "For strangers into life we come,
  And dying is but going home."

The Apostle's words, with which the song of "The Dying Christian to his Soul" ends, left the
whole cloudy question lit up with sunshine, to my childish thoughts:--

  "O grave, where is thy 'victory?
  O death, where is thy sting?"

My father was dead; but that only meant that he had gone to a better home than the one be lived
in with us, and by and by we should go home, too.

Meanwhile the millennium was coming, and some people thought it was very near. And what was
the millennium? Why, the time when everybody on earth would live just as they do in heaven.
Nobody would be selfish, nobody would be unkind; no! not so much as in a single thought. What
a delightful world this would be to live in then! Heaven itself could scarcely be much better!
Perhaps people would not die at all, but, when the right time came, would slip quietly away
into heaven, just as Enoch did.

My father had believed in the near millennium. His very last writing, in his sick-room, was
a penciled computation, from the prophets, of the time when it would begin. The first minister
who preached in our church, long before I was born, had studied the subject much, and had written
books upon this, his favorite theme. The thought of it was continually breaking out, like bloom
and sunshine, from the stern doctrines of the period.

One question in this connection puzzled me a good deal. Were people going to be made good in
spite of themselves, whether they wanted to or not? And what would be done with the bad ones,
if there were any left? I did not like to think of their being killed off, and yet everybody
must be good, or it would not be a true millennium.

It certainly would not matter much who was rich, and who was poor, if goodness, and not money,
was the thing everybody cared for. Oh, if the millennium would only begin now! I felt as if
it were hardly fair to me that I should not be here during those happy thousand years, when
I wanted to so much. But I had not lived even my short life in the world without leading something
of my own faults and perversities; and when I saw that there was no sign of an approaching
millennium in my heart I had to conclude that it might be a great way off, after all. Yet the
very thought of it brought warmth and illumination to my dreams by day and by night. It was
coming, some time! And the people who were in heaven would be as glad of it as those who remained
on earth.

That it was a hard world for my mother and her children to live in at present I could not help
seeing. The older members of the family found occupations by which the domestic burdens were
lifted a little; but, with only the three youngest to clothe and to keep at school, there was
still much more outgo than income, and my mother's discouragement every day increased.

My eldest brother had gone to sea with a relative who was master of a merchant vessel in the
South American trade. His inclination led him that way; it seemed to open before him a prospect
of profitable business, and my mother looked upon him as her future stay and support.

One day she came in among us children looking strangely excited. I heard her tell some one
afterwards that she had just been to hear Father Taylor preach, the sailors minister, whose
coming to our town must have been a rare occurrence. His words had touched her personally,
for he had spoken to mothers whose first-born had left them to venture upon strange seas and
to seek unknown lands. He had even given to the wanderer he described the name of her own absent
son--"Benjamin." As she left the church she met a neighbor who informed her that the brig "Mexican"
had arrived at Salem, in trouble. It was the vessel in which my brother had sailed only a short
time before, expecting to be absent for months. "Pirates" was the only word we children caught,
as she hastened away from the house, not knowing whether her son was alive or not. Fortunately,
the news hardly reached the town before my brother himself did. She met him in the street,
and brought him home with her, forgetting all her anxieties in her joy at his safety.

The "Mexican" had been attacked on the high seas by the piratical craft "Panda," robbed of
twenty thousand dollars in specie, set on fire, and abandoned to her fate, with the crew fastened
down in the hold. One small skylight had accidentally been overlooked by the freebooters. The
captain discovered it, and making his way through it to the deck, succeeded in putting out
the fire, else vessel and sailors would have sunk together, and their fate would never have
been known.

Breathlessly we listened whenever my brother would relate the story, which he did not at all
enjoy doing, for a cutlass had been swung over his head, and his life threatened by the pirate's
boatswain, demanding more money, after all had been taken. A Genoese messmate, Iachimo, shortened
to plain "Jack" by the "Mexican's" crew, came to see my brother one day, and at the dinner
table he went through the whole adventure in pantomime, which we children watched with wide-eyed
terror and amusement. For there was some comedy mixed with what had been so nearly a tragedy,
and Jack made us see the very whites of the black cook's eyes, who, favored by his color, had
hidden himself--all except that dilated whiteness--between two great casks in the bold. Jack
himself had fallen through a trap-door, was badly hurt, and could not extricate himself.

It was very ludicrous. Jack crept under the table to show us how he and the cook made eyes
at each other down there in the darkness, not daring to speak. The pantomime was necessary,
for the Genoese had very little English at his command.

When the pirate crew were brought into Salem for trial, my brother had the questionable satisfaction
of identifying in the court-room the ruffian of a boatswain who had threatened his life. This
boatswain and several others of the crew were executed in Boston. The boy found his brief sailor-experience
quite enough for him, and afterward settled down quietly to the trade of a carpenter.

Changes thickened in the air around us. Not the least among them was the burning of "our meeting-house,"
in which we had all been baptized. One Sunday morning we children were told, when we woke,
that we could not go to meeting that day, because the church was a heap of smoking ruins. It
seemed to me almost like the end of the world.

During my father's life, a few years before my birth, his thoughts had been turned towards
the new manufacturing town growing up on the banks of the Merrimack. He had once taken a journey
there, with the possibility in his mind of making the place his home, his limited income furnishing
no adequate promise of a maintenance for his large family of daughters. From the beginning,
Lowell had a high reputation for good order, morality, piety, and all that was dear to the
old-fashioned New Englander's heart.

After his death, my mother's thoughts naturally followed the direction his had taken; and seeing
no other opening for herself, she sold her small estate, and moved to Lowell, with the intention
of taking a corporation-house for mill-girl boarders. Some of the family objected, for the
Old World traditions about factory life were anything but attractive; and they were current
in New England until the experiment at Lowell had shown that independent and intelligent workers
invariably give their own character to their occupation. My mother had visited Lowell, and
she was willing and glad, knowing all about the place, to make it our home.

The change involved a great deal of work. "Boarders" signified a large house, many beds, and
an indefinite number of people. Such piles of sewing accumulated before us! A sewing-bee, volunteered
by the neighbors, reduced the quantity a little, and our child-fingers had to take their part.
But the seams of those sheets did look to me as if they were miles long!

My sister Lida and I had our "stint,"--so much to do every day. It was warm weather, and that
made it the more tedious, for we wanted to be running about the fields we were so soon to leave.
One day, in sheer desperation, we dragged a sheet up with us into an apple-tree in the yard,
and sat and sewed there through the summer afternoon, beguiling the irksomeness of our task
by telling stories and guessing riddles.

It was hardest for me to leave the garret and the garden. In the old houses the garret was
the children's castle. The rough rafters,--it was always ail unfinished room, otherwise not
a true garret,--the music of the rain on the roof, the worn sea-chests with their miscellaneous
treasures, the blue-roofed cradle that had sheltered ten blue-eyed babies, the tape-looms and
reels and spinning wheels, the herby smells, and the delightful dream corners,--these could
not be taken with us to the new home. Wonderful people had looked out upon us from under those
garret-eaves. Sindbad the Sailor and Baron Munchausen had sometimes strayed in and told us
their unbelievable stories; and we had there made acquaintance with the great Caliph Haroun
Alraschid.

To go away from the little garden was almost as bad. Its lilacs and peonies were beautiful
to me, and in a corner of it was one tiny square of earth that I called my own, where I was
at liberty to pull up my pinks and lady's delights every day, to see whether they had taken
root, and where I could give my lazy morning-glory seeds a poke, morning after morning, to
help them get up and begin their climb. Oh, I should miss the garden very much indeed!

It did not take long to turn over the new leaf of our home experience. One sunny day three
of us children, my youngest sister, my brother John, and I, took with my mother the first stage-coach
journey of our lives, across Lynnfield plains and over Andover hills to the banks of the Merrimack.
We were set down before an empty house in a yet unfinished brick block, where we watched for
the big wagon that was to bring our household goods.

It came at last; and the novelty of seeing our old furniture settled in new rooms kept us from
being homesick. One after another they appeared,--bedsteads, chairs, tables, and, to me most
welcome of all, the old mahogany secretary with brass-handled drawers, that had always stood
in the "front room" at home. With it came the barrel full of books that had filled its shelves,
and they took their places as naturally as if they had always lived in this strange town.

There they all stood again side by side on their shelves, the dear, dull, good old volumes
that all my life I had tried in vain to take a sincere Sabbath-day interest in,--Scott's Commentaries
on the Bible, Hervey's "Meditations," Young's "Night Thoughts," "Edwards on the Affections,"
and the Writings of Baxter and Doddridge. Besides these, there were bound volumes of the "Repository
Tracts," which I had read and re-read; and the delightfully miscellaneous "Evangelicana," containing
an account of Gilbert Tennent's wonderful trance; also the "History of the Spanish Inquisition,"
with some painfully realistic illustrations; a German Dictionary, whose outlandish letters
and words I liked to puzzle myself over; and a descriptive History of Hamburg, full of fine
steel engravings--which last two or three volumes my father had brought with him from the countries
to which he had sailed in his sea-faring days. A complete set of the "Missionary Herald", unbound,
filled the upper shelves.

Other familiar articles journeyed with us: the brass-headed shovel and tongs, that it had been
my especial task to keep bright; the two card-tables (which were as unacquainted as ourselves
with ace, face, and trump); the two china mugs, with their eighteenth-century lady and gentleman
figurines curiosities brought from over the sea, and reverently laid away by my mother with
her choicest relics in the secretary-desk; my father's miniature, painted in Antwerp, a treasure
only shown occasionally to us children as a holiday treat; and my mother's easy-chair,--I should
have felt as if I had lost her, had that been left behind. The earliest unexpressed ambition
of my infancy had been to grow up and wear a cap, and sit in an easy-chair knitting and look
comfortable just as my mother did.

Filled up with these things, the little one-windowed sitting-room easily caught the home feeling,
and gave it back to us. Inanimate Objects do gather into themselves something of the character
of those who live among them, through association; and this alone makes heirlooms valuable.
They are family treasures, because they are part of the family life, full of memories and inspirations.
Bought or sold, they are nothing but old furniture. Nobody can buy the old associations; and
nobody who has really felt how everything that has been in a home makes part of it, can willingly
bargain away the old things.

My mother never thought of disposing of her best furniture, whatever her need. It traveled
with her in every change of her abiding-place, as long as she lived, so that to us children
home seemed to accompany her wherever she went. And, remaining yet in the family, it often
brings back to me pleasant reminders of my childhood. No other Bible seems quite so sacred
to me as the old Family Bible, out of which my father used to read when we were all gathered
around him for worship. To turn its leaves and look at its pictures was one of our few Sabbath-day
indulgences; and I cannot touch it now except with feelings of profound reverence.

For the first time in our lives, my little sister and I became pupils in a grammar school for
both girls and boys, taught by a man. I was put with her into the sixth class, but was sent
the very next day into the first. I did not belong in either, but somewhere between. And I
was very uncomfortable in my promotion, for though the reading and spelling and grammar and
geography were perfectly easy, I had never studied any thing but mental arithmetic, and did
not know how to "do a sum." We had to show, when called up to recite, a slateful of sums, "done"
and "proved." No explanations were ever asked of us.

The girl who sat next to me saw my distress, and offered to do my sums for me. I accepted her
proposal, feeling, however, that I was a miserable cheat.  But I was afraid of the master,
who was tall and gaunt, and used to stalk across the schoolroom, right over the desk-tops,
to find out if there was any mischief going on. Once, having caught a boy annoying a seat-mate
with a pin, he punished the offender by pursuing him around the schoolroom, sticking a pin
into his shoulder whenever he could overtake him. And he had a fearful leather strap, which
was sometimes used even upon the shrinking palm of a little girl. If he should find out that
I was a pretender and deceiver, as I knew that I was, I could not guess what might happen to
me. He never did, however. I was left unmolested in the ignorance which I deserved. But I never
liked the girl who did my sums, and I fancied she had a decided contempt for me.

There was a friendly looking boy always sitting at the master's desk; they called him "the
monitor." It was his place to assist scholars who were in trouble about their lessons, but
I was too bashful to speak to him, or to ask assistance of anybody. I think that nobody learned
much under that regime, and the whole school system was soon after entirely reorganized.

Our house was quickly filled with a large feminine family. As a child, the gulf between little
girlhood and young womanhood had always looked to me very wide. I suppose we should get across
it by some sudden jump, by and by. But among these new companions of all ages, from fifteen
to thirty years, we slipped into womanhood without knowing when or how.

Most of my mother's boarders were from New Hampshire and Vermont, and there was a fresh, breezy
sociability about them which made them seem almost like a different race of beings from any
we children had hitherto known.

We helped a little about the housework, before and after school, making beds, trimming lamps,
and washing dishes. The heaviest work was done by a strong Irish girl, my mother always attending
to the cooking herself. She was, however, a better caterer than the circumstances required
or permitted. She liked to make nice things for the table, and, having been accustomed to an
abundant supply, could never learn to economize. At a dollar and a quarter a week for board,(the
price allowed for mill-girls by the corporations) great care in expenditure was necessary.
It was not in my mother's nature closely to calculate costs, and in this way there came to
be a continually increasing leak in the family purse. The older members of the family did everything
they could, but it was not enough. I heard it said one day, in a distressed tone, "The children
will have to leave school and go into the mill."

There were many pros and cons between my mother and sisters before this was positively decided.
The mill-agent did not want to take us two little girls, but consented on condition we should
be sure to attend school the full number of months prescribed each year. I, the younger one,
was then between eleven and twelve years old.

I listened to all that was said about it, very much fearing that I should not be permitted
to do the coveted work. For the feeling had already frequently come to me, that I was the one
too many in the overcrowded family nest. Once, before we left our old home, I had heard a neighbor
condoling with my mother because there were so many of us, and her emphatic reply had been
a great relief to my mind:--

"There is isn't one more than I want. I could not spare a single one of my children."

But her difficulties were increasing, and I thought it would be a pleasure to feel that I was
not a trouble or burden or expense to anybody. So I went to my first day's work in the mill
with a light heart. The novelty of it made it seem easy, and it really was not hard, just to
change the bobbins on the spinning-frames every three quarters of an hour or so, with half
a dozen other little girls who were doing the same thing. When I came back at night, the family
began to pity me for my long, tiresome day's work, but I laughed and said,--

"Why, it is nothing but fun. It is just like play."

And for a little while it was only a new amusement; I liked it better than going to school
and "making believe" I was learning when I was not. And there was a great deal of play mixed
with it. We were not occupied more than half the time. The intervals were spent frolicking
around around the spinning-frames, teasing and talking to the older girls, or entertaining
ourselves with the games and stories in a corner, or exploring with the overseer's permission,
the mysteries of the the carding-room, the dressing-room and the weaving-room.

I never cared much for machinery. The buzzing and hissing and whizzing of pulleys and rollers
and spindles and flyers around me often grew tiresome. I could not see into their complications,
or feel interested in them. But in a room below us we were sometimes allowed to peer in through
a sort of blind door at the great water-wheel that carried the works of the whole mill. It
was so huge that we could only watch a few of its spokes at a time, and part of its dripping
rim, moving with a slow, measured strength through the darkness that shut it in. It impressed
me with something of the awe which comes to us in thinking of the great Power which keeps the
mechanism of the universe in motion. Even now, the remembrance of its large, mysterious movement,
in which every little motion of every noisy little wheel was involved, brings back to me a
verse from one of my favorite hymns:--

  "Our lives through various scenes are drawn,
  And vexed by trifling cares,
  While Thine eternal thought moves on
  Thy undisturbed affairs."

There were compensations for being shut in to daily toil so early. The mill itself had its
lessons for us. But it was not, and could not be, the right sort of life for a child, and we
were happy in the knowledge that, at the longest, our employment was only to be temporary.

When I took my next three months at the grammar school, everything there was changed, and I
too was changed. The teachers were kind, and thorough in their instruction; and my mind seemed
to have been ploughed up during that year of work, so that knowledge took root in it easily.
It was a great delight to me to study, and at the end of the three months the master told me
that I was prepared for the high school.

But alas! I could not go. The little money I could earn--one dollar a week, besides the price
of my board--was needed in the family, and I must return to the mill. It was a severe disappointment
to me, though I did not say so at home. I did not at all accept the conclusion of a neighbor
whom I heard talking about it with my mother. His daughter was going to the high school, and
my mother was telling him how sorry she was that I could not.

"Oh," he said, in a soothing tone, "my girl hasn't got any such head-piece as yours has. Your
girl doesn't need to go."

Of course I knew that whatever sort of a "head-piece" I had, I did need and want just that
very opportunity to study. I think the solution was then formed, inwardly, that I would go
to school again, some time, whatever happened. I went back to my work, but now without enthusiasm.
I had looked through an open door that I was not willing to see shut upon me.

I began to reflect upon life rather seriously for a girl of twelve or thirteen. What was I
here for? What could I make of myself? Must I submit to be carried along with the current,
and do just what everybody else did? No: I knew I should not do that, for there was a certain
Myself who was always starting up with her own original plan or aspiration before me, and who
was quite indifferent as to what people, generally thought.

Well, I would find out what this Myself was good for, and that she should be! It was but the
presumption of extreme youth. How gladly would I know now, after these long years, just why
I was sent into the world, and whether I have in any degree fulfilled the purpose of my being!

In the older times it was seldom said to little girls, as it always has been said to boys,
that they ought to have some definite plan, while they were children, what to be and do when
they were grown up. There was usually but one path open before them, to become good wives and
housekeepers. And the ambition of most girls was to follow their mothers' footsteps in this
direction; a natural and laudable ambition. But girls, as well as boys, must often have been
conscious of their own peculiar capabilities,--must have desired to cultivate and make use
of their individual powers. When I was growing up, they had already begun to be encouraged
to do so. We were often told that it was our duty to develop any talent we might possess, or
at least to learn how to do some one thing which the world needed, or which would make it a
pleasanter world.

When I thought what I should best like to do, my first dream--almost a baby's dream--about
it was that it would be a fine thing to be a schoolteacher, like Aunt Hannah. Afterward, when
I heard that there were artists, I wished I could some time be one. A slate and pencil, to
draw pictures, was my first request whenever a day's ailment kept me at home from school; and
I rather enjoyed being a little ill, for the sake of amusing myself in that way. The wish grew
up with me; but there were no good drawing-teachers in those days, and if there had been, the
cost of instruction would have been beyond the family means. My sister Emilie, however, who
saw my taste and shared it herself, did her best to assist me, furnishing me with pencil and
paper and paint-box.

If I could only make a rose bloom on paper, I thought I should be happy! or if I could at last
succeed in drawing the outline of winter-stripped boughs as I saw them against the sky, it
seemed to me that I should be willing to spend years in trying. I did try a little, and very
often. Jack Frost was my most inspiring teacher. His sketches on the bedroom window-pane in
cold mornings were my ideal studies of Swiss scenery, crags and peaks and chalets and fir-trees,--and
graceful tracery of ferns, like those that grew in the woods where we went huckleberrying,
all blended together by his touch of enchantment. I wondered whether human fingers ever succeeded
in imitating that lovely work.

The taste has followed me all my life through, but I could never indulge it except as a recreation.
I was not to be an artist, and I am rather glad that I was hindered, for I had even stronger
inclinations in other directions; and art, really noble art, requires the entire devotion of
a lifetime.

I seldom thought seriously of becoming an author, although it seemed to me that anybody who
had written a book would have a right to feel very proud. But I believed that a person must
be exceedingly wise before presuming to attempt it: although now and then I thought I could
feel ideas growing in my mind that it might be worth while to put into a book,--if I lived
and studied until I was forty or fifty years old.

I wrote my little verses, to be sure, but that was nothing; they just grew.  They were the
same as breathing or singing. I could not help writing them, and I thought and dreamed a great
many that were ever put on paper. They seemed to fly into my mind and away again, like birds
with a carol through the air. It seemed strange to me that people should notice them, or should
think my writing verses anything peculiar; for I supposed that they were in everybody's mind,
just as they were in mine, and that anybody could write them who chose.

One day I heard a relative say to my mother,--

"Keep what she writes till she grows up, and perhaps she will get money for it. I have heard
of somebody who earned a thousand dollars by writing poetry."

It sounded so absurd to me. Money for writing verses! One dollar would be as ridiculous as
a thousand. I should as soon have thought of being paid for thinking!  My mother, fortunately,
was sensible enough never to flatter me or let me be flattered about my scribbling. It never
was allowed to hinder any work I had to do. I crept away into a corner to write what came into
my head, just as I ran away to play; and I looked upon it only as my most agreeable amusement,
never thinking of preserving anything which did not of itself stay in my memory. This too was
well, for the time did lot come when I could afford to look upon verse-writing as an occupation.
Through my life, it has only been permitted to me as an aside from other more pressing employments.
Whether I should have written better verses had circumstances left me free to do what I chose,
it is impossible now to know.

All my thoughts about my future sent me back to Aunt Hannah and my first infantile idea of
being a teacher. I foresaw that I should be that before I could be or do any thing else. It
had been impressed upon me that I must make myself useful in the world, and certainly one could
be useful who could "keep school" as Aunt Hannah did. I did not see anything else for a girl
to do who wanted to use her brains as well as her hands. So the plan of preparing myself to
be a teacher gradually and almost unconsciously shaped itself in my mind as the only practicable
one. I could earn my living in that way,--all-important consideration.

I liked the thought of self-support, but I would have chosen some artistic or beautiful work
if I could. I had no especial aptitude for teaching, and no absorbing wish to be a teacher,
but it seemed to me that I might succeed if I tried. What I did like about it was that one
must know something first. I must acquire knowledge before I could impart it, and that was
just what I wanted. I could be a student, wherever I was and whatever else I had to be or do,
and I would!

I knew I should write; I could not help doing that, for my hand seemed instinctively to move
towards pen and paper in moments of leisure. But to write anything worth while, I must have
mental cultivation; so, in preparing myself to teach, I could also be preparing myself to write.

This was the plan that indefinitely shaped itself in my mind as I returned to my work in the
spinning-room, and which I followed out, not without many breaks and hindrances and neglects,
during the next six or seven years,--to learn all I could, so that I should be fit to teach
or to write, as the way opened. And it turned out that fifteen or twenty of my best years were
given to teaching.

VIII.

BY THE RIVER.

IT did not take us younger ones long to get acquainted with our new home, and to love it.

To live beside a river had been to me a child's dream of romance. Rivers, as I pictured them,
came down from the mountains, and were born in the clouds. They were bordered by green meadows,
and graceful trees leaned over to gaze into their bright mirrors. Our shallow tidal creek was
the only river I had known, except as visioned on the pages of the "Pilgrim's Progress," and
in the Book of Revelation. And the Merrimack was like a continuation of that dream.

I soon made myself familiar with the rocky nooks along Pawtucket Falls, shaded with hemlocks
and white birches. Strange new wild flowers grew beside the rushing waters,--among them Sir
Walter Scott's own harebells, which I had never thought of except as blossoms of poetry; here
they were, as real to me as to his Lady of the Lake! I loved the harebell, the first new flower
the river gave me, as I had never loved a flower before.

There was but one summers holiday for us who worked in the mills--the Fourth of July. We made
a point of spending it out of doors, making excursions down the river to watch the meeting
of the slow Concord and the swift Merrimack; or around by the old canal-path, to explore the
mysteries of the Guard Locks; or across the bridge, clambering up Dracut Heights, to look away
to the dim blue mountains.

On that morning it was our custom to wake one another at four o'clock, and start off on a tramp
together over some retired road whose chief charm was its unfamiliarity, returning to a very
late breakfast, with draggled gowns and aprons full of dewy wild roses. No matter if we must
get up at five the next morning and go back to our hum-drum toil, we should have the roses
to take with us for company, and the sweet air of the woodland which lingered about them would
scent our thoughts all day, and make us forget the oily smell of the machinery.

We were children still, whether at school or at work, and Nature still held us close to her
motherly heart. Nature came very close to the mill-gates, too, in those days. There was green
grass all around them; violets and wild geraniums grew by the canals; and long stretches of
open land between the corporation buildings and the street made the town seem country-like.

The slope behind our mills (the "Lawrence" Mills) was a green lawn; and in front of some of
them the overseers had gay flower-gardens; we passed in to our work through a splendor of dahlias
and hollyhocks.

The gray stone walls of St. Anne's church and rectory made a picturesque spot in the middle
of the town, remaining still as a lasting monument to the religious purpose which animated
the first manufacturers. The church arose close to the oldest corporation (the "Merrimack"),
and seemed a part of it, and a part, also, of the original idea of the place itself, which
was always a city of worshipers, although it came to be filled with a population which preferred
meeting-houses to churches. I admired the church greatly. I had never before seen a real one;
never anything but a plain frame meeting-house; and it and its benign, apostolic-looking rector
were like a leaf out of an English story-book.

And so, also, was the tiny white cottage nearly opposite, set in the middle of a pretty flower-garden
that sloped down to the canal. In the garden there was almost always a sweet little girl in
a pink gown and white sunbonnet gathering flowers when I passed that way, and I often went
out of my path to do so. These relieved the monotony of the shanty-like shops which bordered
the main street. The town had sprung up with a mushroom-rapidity, and there was no attempt
at veiling the newness of its bricks and mortar, its boards and paint.

But there were buildings that had their own individuality, and asserted it.  One of these was
a mud-cabin with a thatched roof, that looked as if it had emigrated bodily from the bogs of
Ireland. It had settled itself down into a green hollow by the roadside, and it looked as much
at home with the lilac-tinted crane's-bill and yellow buttercups as if it had never lost sight
of the shamrocks of Erin.

Now, too, my childish desire to see a real beggar was gratified. Straggling petitioners for
"cold victuals" hung around our back yard, always of Hibernian extraction; and a slice of bread
was rewarded with a shower of benedictions that lost itself upon us in the flood of its own
incomprehensible brogue.

Some time every summer a fleet of canoes would glide noiselessly up the river, and a company
of Penobscot Indians would land at a green point almost in sight from our windows. Pawtucket
Falls had always been one of their favorite camping-places. Their strange endeavors, to combine
civilization with savagery were a great source of amusement to us; men and women clad alike
in loose gowns, stove-pipe hats, and moccasons; grotesque relies of aboriginal forest-life.
The sight of these uncouth-looking red men made the romance fade entirely out of the Indian
stories we had heard. Still their wigwam camp was a show we would not willingly have missed.

The transition from childhood to girlhood, when a little girl has had an almost unlimited freedom
of out-of-door life, is practically the toning down of a mild sort of barbarianism, and is
often attended by a painfully awkward self-consciousness. I had an innate dislike of conventionalities.
I clung to the child's inalienable privilege of running half wild; and when I found that I
really was growing up, I felt quite rebellious.

I was as tall as a woman at thirteen, and my older sisters insisted upon lengthening my dresses,
and putting up my mop of hair with a comb. I felt injured and almost outraged because my protestations
against this treatment were unheeded and when the transformation in my visible appearance was
effected, I went away by myself and had a good cry, which I would not for the world have had
them know about, as that would have added humiliation to my distress. And the greatest pity
about it was that I too soon became accustomed to the situation. I felt like a child, but considered
it my duty to think and behave like a woman. I began to look upon it as a very serious thing
to live. The untried burden seemed already to have touched my shoulders. For a time I was morbidly
self-critical, and at the same time extremely reserved. The associates I chose were usually
grave young women, ten or fifteen years older than myself; but I think I felt older and appeared
older than they did.

Childhood, however, is not easily defrauded of its birthright, and mine soon reasserted itself.
At home I was among children of my own age, for some cousins and other acquaintances had come
to live and work with us. We had our evening frolics and entertainments together, and we always
made the most of our brief holiday hours. We had also with us now the sister Emilie of my fairy-tale
memories, who had grown into a strong, earnest-hearted woman. We all looked up to her as our
model, and the ideal of our heroine-worship; for our deference to her in every way did amount
to that.

She watched over us, gave us needed reproof and commendation, rarely cosseted us, but rather
made us laugh at what many would have considered the hardships of our lot. She taught us not
only to accept the circumstances in which we found ourselves, but to win from them courage
and strength. When we came in shivering from our work, through a snowstorm, complaining of
numb hands and feet, she would say cheerily, "But it doesn't make you any warmer to say you
are cold;" and this was typical of the way she took life generally, and tried to have us take
it. She was constantly denying herself for our sakes, without making us feel that she was doing
so. But she did not let us get into the bad habit of pitying ourselves because we were not
as "well off" as many other children. And indeed we considered ourselves pleasantly situated;
but the best of it all was that we had her.

Her theories for herself, and her practice, too, were rather severe; but we tried to follow
them, according to our weaker abilities. Her custom was, for instance, to take a full cold
bath every morning before she went to her work, even though the water was chiefly broken ice;
and we did the same whenever we could be resolute enough. It required both nerve and will to
do this at five o'clock on a zero morning, in a room without a fire; but it helped us to harden
ourselves, while we formed a good habit. The working-day in winter began at the very earliest
daylight, and ended at half-past seven in the evening.

Another habit of hers was to keep always beside her at her daily work something to study or
to think about. At first it was "Watts on the Improvement of the Mind," arranged as a textbook,
with questions and answers, by the minister of Beverly who had made the thought of the millennium
such a reality to his people. She quite wore this book out, carrying it about with her in her
working-dress pocket.  After that, "Locke on the Understanding" was used in the same way. She
must have known both books through and through by heart. Then she read Combe and Abercrombie,
and discussed their physics and metaphysics with our girl boarders, some of whom had remarkably
acute and well-balanced minds. Her own seemed to have turned from its early bent toward the
romantic, her taste being now for serious and practical, though sometimes abstruse, themes.
I remember that Young and Pollock were her favorite poets.

I could not keep up with her in her studies and readings, for many of the books she liked seemed
to me very dry. I did not easily take to the argumentative or moralizing method, which I came
to regard as a proof of the weakness of my own intellect in comparison with hers. I would gladly
have kept pace with her if I could. Anything under the heading of "Didactick," like some of
the pieces in the old "English Reader," used by school-children in the generation just before
ours, always repelled me. But I though it necessary to discipline myself by reading such pieces,
and my first attempt at prose composition, "On Friendship," was stiffly modeled after a certain
"Didactick Essay" in that same English Reader.

My sister, however, cared more to watch the natural development of our minds than to make us
follow the direction of hers. She was really our teacher, although she never assumed that position.
Certainly I learned more from her about my own capabilities, and how I might put them to use,
than I could have done at any school we knew of, had it been possible for me to attend one.

I think she was determined that we should not be mentally defrauded by the circumstances which
had made it necessary for us to begin so early to win our daily bread. This remark applies
especially to me, as my older sisters (only two or three of them had come to Lowell) soon drifted
away from us into their own new homes or occupations, and she and I were left together amid
the whir of spindles and wheels. But they had no desire to this proud achievement for lack of exercise to lose
again, oh no, they practiced after dinner with quite good success, and so they spent a wonderful
evening.

They were with their new art proud and happy as when she was six Indian tribes were scalped and
butchered.

Let's talk they puff away, and bragging rights - for we create at
the moment to do more with them.

CHAPTER XVIII.

In the village there was, however, on that peaceful Saturday afternoon, not at all special Serenity.
Harpers, and Aunt Polly's family were in mourning and sorrow and
many tears.

Unusual silence lay over the place, although it also used herzugehen otherwise quiet enough. With
absent-minded air of the residents went to their stores and spoke
little, but she sighed often.

The free Saturday seemed a burden to the children. They had no heart for their games and she
finally gave in completely.

Afternoon went to Becky Thatcher in gloomy mood on the abandoned school yard and felt very
lonely.

But she found nothing she could cheer.

,, O, if only I could find his old brass button, "she sighed softly.,, Now have I nothing to remember
him, "And she choked back a few tears.

Suddenly she stopped and whispered: 'degree' here's it. Oh God, if I again should do, I do not'd
say - I'd say it not for the whole world! But he is now gone - and I'll never him - never see
her again - "

This idea led to the collapse them, they slipped away, while the tears of the Bake went down.

Then
came a crowd of boys and girls - playmates of Tom and Joe, - looked out over the Fence and
talked in half-tone, as Tom was doing this and that in the last time when she had seen, and how
Joe did it and those incidental remark had (with an uncanny Anticipation of events, as they
did now) - and every speaker described exactly the place where the missing refugees had been
standing at that time, and then they added: , And I was just so straight
as I now stand, 'and he'd be as if you and I've paid exactly on everything,
and he smiled - just - and then ran over me properly whole - dreadful
- ing, you know, too, and I could 'I do not even think what it will
be could, but now I know.

"

It was war, who the dead boy was last seen, many collected these sad
claim, offering evidence, corroborated by witnesses more or less on,
and when finally adopted was who she saw in the last act and the last
words with them had changed, the nominees were given by a kind of
sacred significance and were all stared at and envied.

A poor little boy who never particularly noted been said, with a proud expression was neat:,,
Well, I was once beaten Tom Sawyer "

But this fame was very transient. Most of the boys could say that, and the reduced the award but very.
The company trotted to a low voice even more memories exchanging
of the lost heroes.

As was the Sunday school at the end of the next day, the bell began
to toll, instead of, as else to ring.

It was a very peaceful Sunday, and the sad tone seemed to be the to thoughtful calm that was
on the nature and mix. The villagers came by and by one standing in the lobby for a moment
to change and whispering about the sad event entertaining.

But in the house of God was not whispered. Only the solemn rustle of clothes by they went to their
seats disturbed the silence here. No one knew how to remember that The church would have ever been
so full.

There was an expectant, muffled silence, and then Aunt Polly entered, followed by Sid and Mary
and the Harpersche family, all in deep mourning, and the whole community and the priest stood
up reverently and stood until the mourners at the first bank had settled.

Again there was a general silence, only occasionally interrupted by stifled sobs, and then the
clergyman raised his hands and prayed. A moving hymn was sung, after which The text follows:
I am the comfort and the life.

During his sermon the priest gave such images of the gentleness, the Honorable Of life and the promising
talents of the lost passages, that anyone imagine, to recognize these portraits, felt pain at the
thought that he was against all that had hitherto been blind and
resistant to the boy, nothing but bugs and patches had seen.

The clergyman told some touching event in the life of the disappeared, that her gentle, generous
natures revealed, and the people could now easily see how noble and these events were beautiful and remember
with sorrow the fact that to them at that time, when she was going on, seemed wicked pranks
were rogues who earned the bull whip. The community was moved more and more, the further progress the
touching sermon to Finally, everything was broken, and even accusing his tearful complaints to a chorus
Sobbing united, even the priest gave himself up to his feelings and wept on the open Pulpit.

A rustling in the choir, but no one paid any attention to that was, a moment later creaked
the door of the church. The priest raised his eyes from flowing handkerchief, and stood like a
thunder. One after another pair of eyes followed his, and then, as if driven by a pulse rose
the church and saw the three dead boys leisurely heraufgeschlendert
the course came forward Tom, then Joe, last Huck, a ruin changing
rags, with moderately puzzled sheep Face.

They had been hidden in the unused choir and had her own funeral oration listened.

Aunt Polly, Mary and the Harpers threw themselves upon the resurrected
her with kisses überschüttend and Credits uttering, while poor Huck
confused and uncomfortable while stood without knowing the least what
he do with himself and where he was before all the Eyes, of which
none should bade him turn.

He stood hesitating for a moment and made a timid attempt to steal
away to but Tom seized him and said:

, Aunt Polly, 'Tis not right.

'S must look forward to someone, Huck again! "

, And 's should too! I am glad to see him, poor, abandoned child! "

And Aunt Polly turned her affectionate attention to him now - making
him only made uncomfortable than before.

Suddenly the minister shouted with laughter: "Praise the Lord, the Almighty King Honor! - Sing
- and puts your pure heart!

And they did.

That old song of praise and thanksgiving penetrated up with a triumphant fervor, and while it made everything
tremble, looked up Tom Sawyer, the pirates to get to the envious youth round and well-known
in his heart that this was the proudest moment in his life!

When the church was poured forth, all thought, they probably want to do it again fool To hear her
sing this song of thanks again Sun

Tom received on that day and everything blows kisses - according to
Aunt Polly's mood, as previously in one year, and he now knew exactly
what mostly thanks to God and love for he put it.

CHAPTER XIX.

That was Tom's great secret - the idea of ​​returning home with his pirate brethren to listen to
their own grave speech.

They were in the early morning hours of Sunday on a tree trunk Missouriufer over to the swim,
where they were five or six miles below the village; had it close
to the places to sleep in the forest almost to the bright days were,
by slipped more secluded alley to the church and had her sleep on
the choir between a chaos of broken benches over.

At breakfast on Monday morning, Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving
to Tom, and very attentive to his wishes.

The conversation was unusually lively.

In the course said the same Aunt Polly: "Well, Tom, I will not grade 'say it' ne was particularly
nice thing to all people in distress hold fast 'in a week, while
her young ones' machtet a good time, but sad is it, Tom, that you
could be so stubborn, let me suffer!

If you On a tree trunk come over to your corpse could talk, you would have to come to me 's
sign to give, that thou mayest not dead, but simply run away. "

"Yes, Tom," said Mary,,, you could have done.

And I think you Hadst it done if you would have thought of it.

"

, Would you, Tom? "Said Aunt Polly, as her face lit up expectantly.,, Na - Say, is that you have
done if you had thought of it "?

,, I - well - I do not!

'S'd' yes tell everything! "

, Tom, I would have thought so, you had me to love for something like that, "Aunt Polly sighed
sadly, in a tone in which Tom was very uncomfortable. ,, 'S would'
have been something if you get if you had taken the trouble to think
about it - if thou didst not already.

,, Na, Grandmother, Graeme,
you just do not know, "Mary reassured.,, 'S times as volatile Toms
Art - he is always so distracted that he never thinks of something.

"

, So much the worse. Sid'd 'think about it.

And Sid'd have done ', also came and' s. Tom, one day you'll remember
back when it's too late, and wish that you do 'S little more if you
had cared for me, where's you would have been so easy.

"

,, Na, auntie, you know, I love you, "Tom coaxed.

"I'd better know's, if thou didst more."

, Will, 'I would have thought about it, "Tom said in repentant tone,
but -.

I have at least dreamed of you. 'Tis something, no? "

,, 'S is not much -' s for a cat a lot - but it 's better than nothing.

What have you you dream? "

,, Na, in the Wednesday night I dreamed that her säßet together, close
to the bed, and Sid was sitting on the Wooden box and Mary close to
him.

"

"Thus it was - how it was exactly! But am glad that you dream about at least one of us up have
made an effort. "

"And I dreamed that Joe Harper's mother would 'here."

,, Na - she was here!

Dreamed you more? "

,, O - 'nen heap! But 's now everything is blurred. "

,, Na, try just - bethink thee - As It Gets "?

,, 'S what seems to me as if the wind - the wind blown'd' - - "

, Think better after, Tom!

The wind does not blow - well!

Tom pressed his reflection during a tense moment the fingers against
the forehead and then said: "Well - now I know it!

Now I have it again! He let the light flicker - "

"God have mercy on thee! Next. Tom, go on! "

"And I's was as you said, 'Well - I believe even the door -'"

"Next, Tom!"

,, Let me think 'nen moment!

Only 'nen moment. - Correct, yes - you said did you mean, the door would "open."

,, As I sit here '- I said so! 'Tell it not I, Mary?

Go on! "

"And then - then - - yes, I do not entirely sure, but 'tis me, as if you had you can go to Sid,
and - and - - "

,, Na, na? Where do I let him? What I had him do, Tom? "

,, You made him - you know - oh, you let him close the door! "

, By heaven, 'tis so!

So what I still my 'days have' not yet heard! Tell me no more dreams mean anything! The wise
about Harper should get to know them before I "ne Hours'm older.

'd 'Look but how they talk with their superstitions to the "rum is coming! Next, Tom! "

,, O, now it's all as clear as day! Then you said I should not 'bad, just careless and thoughtless,
and never thought anything was - how - how - think ',' s was 'N Fill - or so ".

,, Na, so that's it, yes! Na - God miracle! Next, Tom! "

"And then you started to cry."

"Yes, I did it I did it! And certainly not the first time. - And then - "

"Then Mrs. Harper began to cry and said that Joe would 'grade' so one, and she wanted it Had
it not gehaun reason that he should have taken the cream, which they
themselves but would have been thrown away '- "

, Tom!

The Spirit was upon you! You had gift of prophecy - yes, of course, that you had! Good God!
Next Tom! "

, Then Sid said - - he said - "

, Believe me, I said nothing, "Sid threw in quickly.

,, But, didst thou it Sid, "said Mary.

, Let the bickering and let Tom speak. What did he say, Tom? "

"He said - I think he said that he hoped I'd be better off where I was set, but if I would have been better
at times' - "

,, There - you hear it? 'S were his own words! "

"And you light it properly at home test."

"I think probably that I did it! 'S must be an angel been here! An angel was here, 's is no doubt!
"

"And Mrs. Harper told about Joe, as he is chasing her through 'nen enthusiasts' nen terror would
have, and you told about Peter and the, pain-killer '- "

,, As true as I live! "

"And then you schwatztet mess all that the river had been searched by us and that shall be our funeral
on Sunday, 'and then you fell and the old Mrs. Harper you in his arms and wept, and then they
went away. "

,, 'S was exactly like that! 'S was exactly as sure as I sit here out of the chair'. Tom if you had,
it can not tell better if you had been here! And then what? Next, Tom! "

"Then I dreamed that you prayed for me - and I could see you and hear every word that you said.
And then you went to bed, and I was so sad that I click 'n play Sykomorenrinde
wrote: 'We are not dead - we are just continuing to be pirates,' and
laid on the the table next to the candlestick.

And then you looked so out of love, as you slept, I dreamed that
I bent over you and kissed you.

"

, Didst thou's, Tom? Didst thou's? But I truly forgive you for everything! "

And they concluded the boy in her arms with such fervor that he was
like the blackest the traitor appeared.

,, 'T was very nice -' s
was just a - dream, "Sid muttered softly to himself, but audible.

,
Shut up, Sid!

Everyone is doing exactly the same thing in a dream, do what he would
do if he would awake '!

Here, Tom, is a nice apple I've saved for you 'if you ever recovered
would - now, continue to school!

I thank the dear God and Father of us all; I've got you again, 'he is patient and merciful
to those who believe it to him and keep his word, although I know
I do not deserve His goodness, but if only the Good had his blessing
and his hand to assist you on the rough paths of life; 'd 'be a little
happiness here, and few would, when the long night comes to its Glory
may enter. - Well, does continue, Sid, Mary, Tom - does away, grabs
you, I have long held up enough.

"

The children went to school and the old lady to Mrs. Harper, to their
disbelief by Toms wonderful dream destroyed.

Sid was careful not to utter the thought of him dominated, as he left the house, A little bit
transparent - 's is too long for 'Nen dream - and not a mistake. "

What a hero Tom was become!

He jumped up and no more having romped, but moved with graceful seriousness,
as befits a pirate, who feels that he is the center of public attention.

And he was, in fact, he sought to face so as he saw the eyes, and
hear not the remarks as he dahinschlenderte so, but they were good
medicine for him.

Small boys as he stuck to his heels, proudly, to be seen with him
and tolerated him as if he was the drummer at the head of Procession
or the elephant had been leading a menagerie into town.

Even-aged Boys did not know he had ever been away, but they are consumed none the less envy.
They would have given anything, his dark, sun-burned to have skin and its excellent reputation,
and Tom had both for less than a circus given away.

At school the children made so much out of him and Joe, and showed them so wordy admiration
that it was not long until the two heroes were inflated quite intolerable. You began to tell
their adventures to their hungry listeners - but they started only on, the stories could have
no ending at a digressions on embellishing such fertile imagination than theirs was. And finally,
when they pulled out their pipes and carelessly started to smoke,
the highest summit of glory was reached.

Tom resolved to take care in future no longer to Becky Thatcher. His fame was enough. He wanted
to live for the glory. Now he was an outstanding personality, she would probably try again to tie,
"Well, she did -. they should see that he is as insensible could be like other people. Degrees
they came along. Tom pretended he did not see it. He left and joined another group boys and girls
and began to tell. He soon realized that they are excited, with glowing cheeks and shining eyes,
umhertrippelte and imagined, as they think of nothing else, herumzuschubsen as with other school
girls and emit a loud laugh, when she had caught one, but he also noted that they always close
their prisoners made, and that to him, then furtively always hinüberschielte. Of the vicious
vanity flattered in it, and instead it would have driven him back To compromise it made him even
more arrogant and made him even more obedient a muscle , Put on when he knew nothing of their
presence. Suddenly she gave her romping around on, ran around undecided, sighed a few times
and looked furtively and wistfully Tom with the eyes. Then they discovered how earnestly Tom chatted
with Amy Lawrence. She felt a stabbing pain and was distracted at once and uncertain. She decided
to go like this, but her feet carried her to her resolve despite back down to the group. She
accepted a girl, right next to Tom - with forced high spirits, "You,
Mary Austin!

You bad girl, why do not you come to Sunday school yesterday? "

"I was still there - have you seen me not you"?

"But, no! Were you there? Where you sat it? "

"In Miss Peters in
their class, where I always sit. I've seen you. "

"Thus, really?
Well, 'tis but mad that I did not see you'. I wish you so said of
the picnic. "

,, O, that's splendid! Who wants to give one? "

,
My mom can give me one. "

, Oh, how charming! Hope that I may come?
"

,, Well, of course, 'tis but my picnic. 'S can get anyone I want
- and up I will. "

,, The time is nice. When is it? "

,, Na - soon.
Around your holiday 'around. "

,, The time is' n fun! Do you have
all boys and girls invited? "

"Yes, all who are my friends - or would
be," and she glanced again as stealthily according to Tom, but he
just told Amy Lawrence about the terrible storm on the island and
as the lightning struck the great sycamore,,, very close to me, not
three paces away. "

, You, can I come too? "Said Gracie Miller.

"And
I?" Sally Rogers.

"And I, too?" Susy Harper. "And Joe?"

"Yes."

And
so more and more with joyful applause until everyone in the group,
their invitation had brought up to Tom and Amy. Tom then turned away
from cold, still talking, and Amy pulled away with her. Becky's lips
trembled and tears came into her eyes. You suppressed with these telltale
signs forzierter serenity and started babbling, But the pleasure of
the picnic was over, and from everything else they did now nothing
more. As soon as they could, they ran away, hid and rescued by the
type their sex through tears of her sorrow. Then she sat sulkily,
with offended Air there until the bell rang. With vindictive look
in his eyes, she jumped up, gave their thick braids a tremendous boost,
and thought she knew now what they have to do.

In the corner sat
Tom continued his flirting with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction.
And he was eager to find Becky and torturing his superiority. Finally,
he discovered them, but his heart was suddenly in the pants. She sat
on a bench behind the school building completely furnished, with Alfred
Temple, looking at a picture book. And so engrossed both were, and
their heads stuck to the book so close together that they did nothing
to seemed to perceive her. Jealousy ran red hot through Tom's veins.
He began to to hate himself because he the opportunity for reconciliation,
which commanded him Becky not used had. He called himself a fool and
did his honorary title, which occur to him just wanted. He could have
screamed with rage. Amy chatted happily continue throughout by focusing
on and went off, because her heart was full of bliss, but Tom's tongue
seemed paralyzed. He did not hear what Amy said, and whenever she
paused, waiting for his answer, he could only hervorstammeln any clumsy
remark that all wrong as often as possible was attached. Again and
again he looked for the back of the school building to go to to feast
on the hated sight. He could not help it. And tortured him to see
as Becky Thatcher did not seem to know that he also still in the country
or even among the living while. However, they saw him very well, and
she was very much of their victory conscious and saw him with delight
suffer as much as she had previously suffered.

Amy's happiness began
to be unbearable. Tom defended all sorts of matters that he had done
before. He had gone, and was passing the time. But in vain - the girl
had not loose. Tom thought, "Oh, they get the devil - I will never
get rid of? Finally, He had to really get his affairs, she gave him
innocent the promise after-school him, lying in wait "to do. The stagedriver
looked upon us as his especial charge, and we had a sense of personal property in the Salem
and Lowell stagecoach, which had once, like a fairy-godmother's coach, rumbled down into our
own little lane, taken possession of us, and carried us off to a new home.

My married sisters had families growing up about them, and they liked to have us younger ones
come and help take care of their babies. One of them sent for me just when the close air and
long days' work were beginning to tell upon my health, and it was decided that I had better
go. The salt wind soon restored my strength, and those months of quiet family life were very
good for me.

Like most young girls, I had a motherly fondness for little children, and my two baby-nephews
were my pride and delight. The older one had a delicate constitution, and there was a thoughtful,
questioning look in his eyes, that seemed to gaze forward almost sadly, and foresee that he
should never attain to manhood. The younger, a plump, vigorous urchin, three or four months
old, did, without doubt, "feel his life in every limb." He was my especial charge, for his
brother's clinging weakness gave him, the first-born, the place nearest his mother's heart.
The baby bore the family name, mine and his mother's; "our little Lark," we sometimes called
him, for his wide-awakeness and his merry-heartedness.(Alas! neither of those beautiful boys
grew up to be men! One page of my home-memories is sadly written over with their elegy, the
"Graves of a Household." Father, mother, and four sons, an entire family, long since passed
away from earthly sight.)

The tie between my lovely baby-nephew and myself became very close. The first two years of
a child's life are its most appealing years, and call out all the latent tenderness of the
nature on which it leans for protection. I think I should have missed one of the best educating
influences of my youth, if I had not had the care of that baby for a year or more just as I
entered my teens. I was never so happy as when I held him in my arms, sleeping or waking; and
he, happy anywhere, was always contented when he was with me.

I was as fond as ever of reading, and somehow I managed to combine baby and book. Dickens's
"Old Curiosity Shop" was just then coming out in a Philadelphia weekly paper, and I read it
with the baby playing at my feet, or lying across my lap, in an unfinished room given up to
sea-chests and coffee-bags and spicy foreign odors. (My cherub's papa was a sea-captain, usually
away on his African voyages.) Little Nell and her grandfather became as real to me as my darling
charge, and if a tear from his nurse's eyes sometimes dropped upon his cheek as he slept, he
was not saddened by it. When he awoke he was irrepressible; clutching at my hair with his stout
pink fists, and driving all dream-people effectually out of my head. Like all babies, he was
something of a tyrant; but that brief, sweet despotism ends only too soon. I put him gratefully
down, dimpled, chubby, and imperious, upon the list of my girlhood's teachers.

My sister had no domestic help besides mine, so I learned a good deal about general housework.
A girl's preparation for life was, in those days, considered quite imperfect, who had no practical
knowledge of that kind. We were taught, indeed, how to do everything that a woman might be
called upon to do under any circumstances, for herself or for the household she lived in. It
was one of the advantages of the old simple way of living, that the young daughters of the
house were, as a matter of course, instructed in all these things. They acquired the habit
of being ready for emergencies, and the family that required no outside assistance was delightfully
independent.

A young woman would have been considered a very inefficient being who could not make and mend
and wash and iron her own clothing, and get three regular meals and clear them away every day,
besides keeping the house tidy, and doing any other needed neighborly service, such as sitting
all night by a sick-bed.  To be "a good watcher" was considered one of the most important of
womanly attainments. People who lived side by side exchanged such services without waiting
to be asked, and they seemed to be happiest of whom such kindnesses were most expected.

Every kind of work brings its own compensations and attractions. I really began to like plain
sewing; I enjoyed sitting down for a whole afternoon of it, fingers flying and thoughts flying
faster still,--the motion of the hands seeming to set the mind astir. Such afternoons used
to bring me throngs of poetic suggestions, particularly if I sat by an open window and could
hear the wind blowing and a bird or two singing. Nature is often very generous in opening her
heart to those who must keep their hands employed. Perhaps it is because she is always quietly
at work herself, and so sympathizes with her busy human friends. And possibly there is no needful
occupation which is wholly unbeautiful. The beauty of work depends upon the way we meet it--whether
we arm ourselves each morning to attack it as an enemy that must be vanquished before night
comes, or whether we open our eyes with the sunrise to welcome it as an approaching friend
who will keep us delightful company all day, and who will make us feel, at evening, that the
day was well worth its fatigues.

I found my practical experience of housekeeping and baby-tending very useful to me afterwards
at the West, in my sister Emilie's family, when she was disabled by illness. I think, indeed,
that every item of real knowledge I ever acquired has come into use somewhere or somehow in
the course of the years. But these were not the things I had most wished to do. The whole world
of thought lay unexplored before me,--a world of which I had already caught large and tempting
glimpses, and I did not like to feel the horizon shutting me in, even to so pleasant a corner
as this. And the worst of it was that I was getting too easy and contented, too indifferent
to the higher realities which my work and my thoughtful companions had kept keenly clear before
me. I felt myself slipping into an inward apathy from which it was hard to rouse myself. I
could not let it go on so. I must be where my life could expand.

It was hard to leave the dear little fellow I had taught to walk and to talk, but I knew he
would not be inconsolable. So I only said "I must go,"--and turned my back upon the sea, and
my face to the banks of the Merrimack.

When I returned I found that I enjoyed even the familiar, unremitting clatter of the mill,
because it indicated that something was going on. I liked to feel the people around me, even
those whom I did not know, as a wave may like to feel the surrounding waves urging it forward,
with or against its own will. I felt that I belonged to the world, that there was something
for me to do in it, though I had not yet found out what. Something to do; it might be very
little, but still it would be my own work. And then there was the better something which I
had almost forgotten--to be! Underneath my dull thoughts the old aspirations were smouldering,
the old ideals rose and beckoned to me through the rekindling light. It is always from left to happened.
With host tables with strict ceremonial first one always maintains the right of women the housewife,
then the right of the landlord, then left to serve from housewives and so on. After the ladies come
first then the women. The hosts themselves are always served last. After meals with less embarrassing
ceremony the guests, the courts of the series to serve, or the courts at one end of the table
are set up and then by the Guests themselves passed.
 That, I felt, did not require great gifts or a fine
education. We might all be that to each other. And there was no opportunity for vanity or pride
in receiving a beautiful influence, and giving it out again.

I do not suppose that I definitely thought all this, though I find that the verses I wrote
for our two mill magazines at about this time often expressed these and similar longings. They
were vague, and they were too likely to dissipate themselves in mere dreams. But our aspirations
come to us from a source far beyond ourselves. Happy are they who are "not disobedient unto
the heavenly vision"!

A girl of sixteen sees the world before her through rose-tinted mists, a blending of celestial
colors and earthly exhalations, and she cannot separate their elements, if she would; they
all belong to the landscape of her youth. It is the mystery of the meeting horizons,--the visible
beauty seeking to lose and find itself in the Invisible.

In returning to my daily toil among workmates from the hill-country, the scenery to which they
belonged became also a part of my life. They brought the mountains with them, a new background
and a new hope. We shared an uneven path and homely occupations; but above us hung glorious
summits never wholly out of sight. Every blossom and every dewdrop at our feet was touched
with some tint of that far-off splendor, and every pebble by the wayside was a messenger from
the peak that our feet would stand upon by and by.

The true climber knows the delight of trusting his path, of following it without seeing a step
before him, or a glimpse of blue sky above him, sometimes only knowing that it is the right
path because it is the only one, and because it leads upward. This our daily duty was to us.
Though we did not always know it, the faithful plodder was sure to win the heights. Unconsciously
we learned the lesson that only by humble Doing can any of us win the lofty possibilities of
Being. For indeed, what we all want to find is not so much our place as our path. The path
leads to the place, and the place, when we have found it, is only a clearing by the roadside,
an opening into another path.

And no comrades are so dear as those who have broken with us a pioneer road which it will be
safe and good for others to follow; which will furnish a plain clue for all bewildered travelers
hereafter. There is no more exhilarating human experience than this, and perhaps it is the
highest angelic one. It may be that some such mutual work is to link us forever with one another
in the Infinite Life.

The girls who toiled together at Lowell were clearing away a few weeds from the overgrown track
of independent labor for other women. They practically said, by numbering themselves among
factory girls, that in our country no real odium could be attached to any honest toil that
any self-respecting woman might undertake.

I regard it as one of the privileges of my youth that I was permitted to grow up among those
active, interesting girls, whose lives were not mere echoes of other lives, but had principle
and purpose distinctly their own. Their vigor of character was a natural development. The New
Hampshire girls who came to Lowell were descendants of the sturdy backwoodsmen who settled
that State scarcely a hundred years before. Their grandmothers had suffered the hardships of
frontier life, had known the horrors of savage warfare when the beautiful valleys of the Connecticut
and the Merrimack were threaded with Indian trails from Canada to the white settlements. Those
young women did justice to their inheritance. They were earnest and capable; ready to undertake
anything that was worth doing. My dreamy, indolent nature was shamed into activity among them.
They gave me a larger, firmer ideal of womanhood.

Often during the many summers and autumns that of late years I have spent among the New Hampshire
hills, sometimes far up the mountainsides, where I could listen to the first song of the little
brooks setting out on their journey to join the very river that flowed at my feet when I was
a working girl on its banks,--the Merrimack,--I have felt as if I could also hear the early
music of my workmates' lives, those who were born among these glorious summits. Pure, strong,
crystalline natures, carrying down with them the light of blue skies and the freshness of free
winds to their place of toil, broadening and strengthening as they went on, who can tell how
they have refreshed the world, how beautifully they have blended their being with the great
ocean of results? A brook's life is like the life of a maiden. The rivers receive their strength
from the rock-born hills, from the unfailing purity of the mountain-streams.

A girl's place in the world is a very strong one: it is a pity that she does not always see
it so. It is strongest through her natural impulse to steady herself by leaning upon the Eternal
Life, the only Reality; and her weakness comes also from her inclination to lean against something,--upon
an unworthy support, rather than none at all. She often lets her life get broken into fragments
among the flimsy trellises of fashion and conventionality, when it might be a perfect thing
in the upright beauty of its own consecrated freedom.

Yet girlhood seldom appreciates itself. We often hear a girl wishing that she were a boy. That
seems so strange! God made no mistake in her creation. He sent her into the world full of power
and will to be a helper; and only He knows how much his world needs help. She is here to make
this great house of humanity a habitable and a beautiful place, without and within,--a true
home for every one of his children. It matters not if she is poor, if she has to toil for her
daily bread, or even if she is surrounded by coarseness and uncongeniality: nothing can deprive
her of her natural instinct to help, of her birthright as a helper. These very hindrances may,
with faith and patience, develop in her a nobler womanhood.

No; let girls be as thankful that they are girls as that they are human beings; for they also,
according to his own loving plan for them, were created in the image of God. Their real power,
the divine dowry of womanhood, is that of receiving and giving inspiration. In this a girl
often surpasses her brother; and it is for her to hold firmly and faithfully to her holiest
instincts, so that when he lets his standard droop, she may, through her spiritual strength,
be a standard bearer for him. Courage and self-reliance are now held to be virtues as womanly
as they are manly; for the world has grown wise enough to see that nothing except a life can
really help another life. It is strange that it should ever have held any other theory about woman.

That was a true use of the word "help" that grew up so naturally in the rendering and receiving
of womanly service in the old-fashioned New England household. A girl came into a family as
one of the home-group, to share its burdens, to feel that they were her own. The woman who
employed her, if her nature was at all generous, could not feel that money alone was an equivalent
for a heart's service; she added to it her friendship, her gratitude and esteem. The domestic
problem can never be rightly settled until the old idea of mutual help is in some way restored.
This is a question for girls of the present generation to consider, and she who can bring about
a practical solution of it will win the world's gratitude.

We used sometimes to see it claimed, in public prints, that it would be better for all of us
mill-girls to be working in families, at domestic service, than to be where we were. Perhaps
the difficulties of modern housekeepers did begin with the opening of the Lowell factories.
Country girls were naturally independent, and the feeling that at this new work the few hours
they had of every-day leisure were entirely their own was a satisfaction to them. They preferred
it to going out as "hired help." It was like a young man's pleasure in entering upon business
for himself. Girls had never tried that experiment before, and they liked it. It brought out
in them a dormant strength of character which the world did not previously see, but now fully
acknowledges. Of course they had a right to continue at that freer kind of work as long as
they chose, although their doing so increased the perplexities of the housekeeping problem
for themselves even, since many of them were to become, and did become, American house-mistresses.

It would be a step towards the settlement of this vexed and vexing question if girls would
decline to classify each other by their occupations, which among us are usually only temporary,
and are continually shifting from one pair of hands to another. Changes of fortune come so
abruptly that the millionaire's daughter of to-day may be glad to earn her living by sewing
or sweeping tomorrow.

It is the first duty of every woman to recognize the mutual bond of universal womanhood. Let
her ask herself whether she would like to hear herself or little sister spoken of as a shop-girl,
or a factory-girl, or a servant-girl, if necessity had compelled her for a time to be employed
in either of the ways indicated. If she would shrink from it a little, then she is a little
inhuman when she puts her unknown human sisters who are so occupied into a class by themselves,
feeling herself to be somewhat their superior. She is really the superior person who has accepted
her work and is doing it faithfully, whatever it is. This designating others by their casual
employments prevents one from making real distinctions, from knowing persons as persons. A
false standard is set up in the minds of those who classify and of those who are classified.

Perhaps it is chiefly the fault of ladies themselves that the word "lady" has nearly lost its
original meaning (a noble one) indicating sympathy and service;--bread-giver to those who are
in need. The idea that it means something external in dress or circumstances has been too generally
adopted by rich and poor; and this, coupled with the sweeping notion that in our country one
person is just as good as another, has led to ridiculous results, like that of saleswomen calling
themselves "sales-ladies." I have even heard  a chambermaid at a hotel introduce herself to
guests as "the chamber-lady."

I do not believe that any Lowell mill-girl was ever absurd enough to wish to be known as a
"factory-lady," although most of them knew that "factory-girl" did not represent a high type
of womanhood in the Old World. But they themselves belonged to the New World, not to the Old;
and they were making their own traditions, to hand down to their Republican descendants--one
of which was and is that honest work has no need to assert itself or to humble itself in a
nation like ours, but simply to take its place as one of the foundation-stones of the Republic.

The young women who worked at Lowell had the advantage of living in a community where character
alone commanded respect. They never, at their work or away from it, heard themselves contemptuously
spoken of on account of their occupation, except by the ignorant or weak-minded, whose comments
they were of course to sensible to heed.

We may as well acknowledge that one of the unworthy tendencies of womankind is towards petty
estimates of other women. This classifying habit illustrates the fact. If we must classify
our sisters, let us broaden ourselves by making large classifications. We might all place ourselves
in one of two ranks--the women who do something and the women who do nothing; the first being
of course the only creditable place to occupy. And if we would escape from our pettinesses,
as we all may and should, the way to do it is to find the key to other lives, and live in their
largeness, by sharing their outlook upon life. Even poorer people's windows will give us a
new horizon, and people's windows will give us a new horizon, and often a far broader one than
our own.

X.

MILL-GIRLS' MAGAZINES

THERE was a passage from Cowper that my sister used to quote to us, because, she said, she
often repeated it to herself, and found that it did her good:--

  "In such a world, so thorny, and where none
  Finds happiness unblighted, or if found,
  Without some thistly sorrow at its side,
  It seems the part of wisdom, and no sin
  Against the law of love, to measure lots
  With less distinguished than ourselves, that thus
  We may with patience bear our moderate ills,
  And sympathize with others, suffering more."

I think she made us feel--she certainly made me feel--that our lot was in many ways an unusually
fortunate one, and full of responsibilities. She herself was always thinking what she could
do for others, not only immediately about her, but in the farthest corners of the earth. She
had her Sabbath-school class, and visited all the children in it: she sat up all night, very
often, watching by a sick girl's bed, in the hospital or in some distant boarding-house; she
gave money to send to missionaries, or to help build new churches in the city, when she was
earning only eight or ten dollars a month clear of her board, and could afford herself but
one "best dress," besides her working clothes. That best dress was often nothing but a Merrimack
print. But she insisted that it was a great saving of trouble to have just this one, because
she was not obliged to think what she should wear if she were invited out to spend an evening.
And she kept track of all the great philanthropic movements of the day. She felt deeply the
shame and wrong of American slavery, and tried to make her workmates see and feel it too.(Petitions
to Congress for the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia were circulated nearly
every year among the mill-girls, and received thousands of signatures.)

Whenever she was not occupied with her work or her reading, or with looking after us younger
ones,--two or three hours a day was all the time she could call her own,--she was sure to be
away on some errand of friendliness or mercy.

Those who do most for others are always those who are called upon continually to do a little
more, and who find a way to do it. People go to them as to a bank that never fails. And surely,
they who have an abundance of life in themselves and who give their life out freely to others
are the only really rich.

Two dollars a week sounds very small, but in Emilie's hands it went farther than many a princely
fortune of to-day, because she managed with it to make so many people happy. But then she wanted
absolutely nothing for herself; nothing but the privilege of helping others.

I seem to be eulogizing my sister, though I am simply relating matters of fact. I could not,
however, illustrate my own early experience, except by the lives around me which most influenced
mine. And it was true that our smaller and more self-centred natures in touching hers caught
something of her spirit, the contagion of her warm heart and healthy energy. For health is
more contagious than disease, and lives that exhale sweetness around them from the inner heaven
of their souls keep the world wholesome.

I tried to follow her in my faltering way, and was gratified when she would send me to look
up one of her stray children, or would let me watch with her at night by a sick-bed. I think
it was partly for the sake of keeping as close to her as I could--though not without a sincere
desire to consecrate myself to the Best--that I became, at about thirteen, a member of the
church which we attended.

Our minister was a scholarly man, of refined tastes and a sensitive organization, fervently
spiritual, and earnestly devoted to his work. It was all education to grow up under his influence.
I shall never forget the effect left by the tones of his voice when he first spoke to me, a
child of ten years, at a neighborhood prayer-meeting in my mother's sitting-room. He had been
inviting his listeners to the friendship of Christ, and turning to my little sister and me,
he said,--

"And these little children, too; won't they come?"

The words, and his manner of saving them, brought the tears to my eyes. Once only before, far
back in my earlier childhood--I have already mentioned the incident--had I heard that Name
spoken so tenderly and familiarly, yet so reverently. It was as if he had been gazing into
the face of an invisible Friend, and bad just turned from Him to look into ours, while he gave
us his message, that He loved us.

In that moment I again caught a glimpse of One whom I had always known, but had often forgotten,--One
who claimed me as his Father's child, and would never let me go. It was a real Face that I
saw, a real Voice that I heard, a real Person who was calling me. I could not mistake the Presence
that had so often drawn near me and shone with sunlike eyes into my soul. The words, "Lord,
lift Thou up the light of thy countenance upon us!" had always given me the feeling that a
beautiful sunrise does. It is indeed a sunrise text, for is not He the Light of the World?

And peaceful sunshine seemed pouring in at the windows of my life on the day when I stood in
the aisle before the pulpit with a group, who, though young, were all much older than myself,
and took with them the vows that bound us to his service. Of what was then said and read I
scarcely remember more than the words of heavenly welcome in the Epistle, "Now therefore ye
are no more strangers and foreigners." It was like coming home, like stepping a little farther
beyond the threshold in at the open door of our Father's house.

Perhaps I was too young to assume those vows. Had I deferred it a few years there would have
been serious intellectual hindrances. But it was not the Articles of Faith I was thinking of,
although there was a long list of them, to which we all bowed assent, as was the custom. It
was the homecoming to the "house not made with hands," the gladness of signifying that I belonged
to God's spiritual family, and was being drawn closer to his heart, with whom none of us are
held as "strangers and foreigners."

I felt that I was taking up again the clue which had been put into my childish hand at baptism,
and was being led on by it into the unfolding mysteries of life. Should I ever let it slip
from me, and lose the way to the "many mansions" that now seemed so open and so near? I could
not think so. Judge Thatcher sent hopeful Messages from
the cave, but they brought no real relief.

Towards morning came the old Welshman, smeared with clay and wax, home exhausted to death. He
found Huck still in bed, which had been prepared for him, and delirious with fever. The Doctors
were all in the cave, so was the widow Douglas, to look after the patients. She said she would do
her best for him, because, whether he is good, bad or neither However, he is God's creature,
and nothing that was of God, we should disregard. The Valais said Huck had good or excellent, as the
widow said, 'can you count on that. He plays with the men themselves. He will never leave
him. He's never does.

He does not forget Creature that comes from him. "

Early in the morning came back some troops of men into the village, the most studied but still
further. All that had to report was that one, as far as one ever in The cave was penetrated,
was that every angle, every column searched most carefully was. Where to go in the mazes, everywhere one
could light near and far back and forth flit see, calls and gun shots had sent their sound down
to the lowest gears. At one point, away from the commonly visited part, it had the name "Becky" and
"Tom" written with soot on a rock found near it and spotted a band. Mrs Thatcher saw the tape
and broke into tears. She complained that it was the last memory they should have of their
child, and that no other could ever be as precious memories; because this band was the last thing
she got from the little body before him the terrible Death destroyed. Some have argued that
we see in the cave sometimes distant gleam of light, and then made each time an entire squad
with loud shouts of joy on there - and then each time followed by the saddest disappointment.
It did not come from the children, it was only the light of a seeker.

Three dreadful days and nights dragged their endless hours away, and sank into the village in
silent despair. For nothing that people had a sense.

Just made the surprising Discovery that the owner of the temperance inn-owned spirits have
aroused little weak sensation, it was also outrageous.

In a lucid moment Huck began with a weak voice of taverns in general
to asked to speak and finally, fearing the worst from the outset whether,
since he is ill , had been discovered something in the temperance-inn
was.

The widow said yes. Huck went to bed in the air, eyes rolling, "What - what's"?

, Off! And it 's been locked then.

Lie there still, child - as you got me scared! "

, Only you tell me - just the left - please state: - Was it Tom Sawyer,
who's discovered "?

The widow burst into tears: "Hush, hush, child! habs told you, you shall not . Speak You are
very, very sick! "

So nothing was found as a schnapps, would it have been the money that's does indeed have powerful Stir.
So the treasure was gone forever - forever! - But why cry Do they? Strange that the woman was
crying there.

Such gloomy thoughts went through my head Huck, and because of the so produced exhaustion he
fell asleep. The widow said to herself: "So there - now he's asleep again - poor guy! Tom Sawyer find
it! Mercy on - but if someone wanted to find Tom Sawyer!

Many There's certainly not that still have hope, or even enough strength to go on a quest! "

Thirty-second
chapter.

Let us now return to Tom and Becky's share of the picnic. With the rest of society they drove
through the dark corridors, the well-known wonders of the cave looking at - with high-sounding
names like "lounge", "Cathedral", "Aladdin's Palace", etc. equipped miracle. Then, when the
fun began trapping and hiding participated Tom Becky and diligently, until the beginning was
boring. Then they walked a down winding stone alley, by holding up candles, the half-hidden in cobwebs
Names, dates, places and post slogans read, that the walls were decorated.

As they drove alone and continue talking, they realized finally that they are already in a part
of the cave were, which had no such inscriptions. They scribbled their own name, with candle-smoke
under a ledge and went on. Suddenly came them to a place where a spring trickling down over boulders
and Kalkstückchen with it impulsive, through endless centuries on a small Niagara wrapped in
eternal darkness unchangeable rocks formed. Tom squeezed his small body under it to the waterfall to illuminate.
He found that he concealed a kind of natural stone staircase into the depths, which was wedged
between narrow walls. The desire to play the discoverer seized it immediately. Becky agreed
with him, and they made the safety back on and smoke signals went on a search. They pursued this
path, deep into the deepest abyss the cave several such signs, and then drove around back and
forth to get things to discover that they could amaze the world above. Somewhere they found
a large Cave, shining from the curvature of a large amount of stalactites on the length and extent
a man hung. Amazed, and they went through and suddenly verwundernd led the cave in a narrow passage,
and this brought them to a stunningly handsome fountain, its pool with a shiny sheet of ice crystal
was covered. He was in the Middle of a hall-like room, whose walls were supported by a fantastic
series shaped, formed from limestone columns, the result of thousands of restless falling Water droplets.
In the vault itself had formed huge bales of bats, many one thousand contiguous; the lights
to frighten the animals, and they came as one hundred down, squealing and mad rush of the flames
of the candles. Tom knew their way and the danger that was created here. He seized Becky's
hand and pulled her in to the first auftuenden course, and not too
early to put out for a bat with its wings Becky's light , while they
ran from the cave.

The animals followed the children have a good track, but the fugitives plunged into every new
passage, and so finally escaped the dangerous Situation.

Tom found a subterranean lake, the dark water far away lost in the shadow of the unknown. Tom wanted
transmutor its banks, but added that it would be better to sit and
rest a while before.

Now, for the first time lay the deep silence of the surroundings, like a wet hand on the minds
of children.

Becky said, "You know, taken on it, I'm not so, but it seems so long
ago, since I've heard the others'.

"

,, Na, Becky, think a moment, we're deep in them, and I do not know
how far north or south or west or whatever else they can possibly
hear this.

"

Becky was scared. , Wants to 'know how long' we are already down here, Tom. Let We would rather turn
back. "

"Yes, remember well, 'tis better. Perhaps it is better. "

, Can you find the way, Tom? For me it is purely a maze. "

, Thought well, I can 'see n. But then the bats if we make the candles, is I've seen terrible thing.
Let's try 'nen other way where we do not have to. "

"Yes, but I hope ', we will not run.

'S would be too horrible. "

And the child shivered with horror at the mere thought of the terrible possibility.

They pursued a course for a long time in silence, looking after each
new opening, whether there are not one to see its features leave,
but nothing was visible.

As often as Tom's investigation hired, Becky explored his face after
an encouraging sign, and he said confidently: ,, O, 'tis all right!

That one's not yet, but we will already come to the right! " But every unsuccessful research,
he felt less and less confidence, and finally he began to relent at random in each passage that
opens, desperate in the hope to find out what did not so bitter. He still said: "'s would be right,"
but in his heart weighed such paralyzing fear that the words had lost their sound and sounded as
though he said.

"Everything is lost," Becky, half dead with fear, clings to him and
tried to desperately to hold back the tears, but they came anyway.

Finally she said: "Oh, Tom, what the bats. Let's go back the same way! We are only on and on further
off. "

Tom stood still, listening, "he said.

Complete silence, so deep silence that even her breathing was audible. Tom shouted. The sound
echoed through the hollow passages and produced hundred times in response to the distance in a weak
to die tone that sounded like mocking laughter.

,, O, do not do it again, Tom! 'S is too horrible, "Becky pleaded.

,, This is horrible, but 's must be, Becky. You could hear us, you know? "

And he cried again. This "could" was as terrible as the mocking laughter, it spoke utter hopelessness
of it. The children remained in silence and listened. But nothing was heard. Tom turned suddenly
on the same road back, and hastened his Steps. It was not long since revealed a degree of uncertainty
in his movements Becky a new and terrible fact: he could not find the way!

, Oh, Tom, you have no character more done! "

, Becky, what I was' s ass! What 's ass! Thought did not, but believe that we are back would.
And now I can not find the way more, it 's done so durch'nander so "!

, Tom, Tom, we are lost! we are lost! Never, never again will we come out of this horrible Cave
out!

Oh, why are we not stay with the others! "

They fell down and broke out in such heart-rending cry that Tom gripped by the thought was that
she would die or go mad. He sat down beside her and put his Arm around her, she hid her face
in his chest, she cried out to the accused, melted in useless remorse, and the distant echo gave
everything back as derisive laughter. Tom asked, again to take courage, and she said she can
not. He began to accuse themselves bitterly since he had brought them into this terrible situation.
This worked. She said she would again trying to take hope that she would bring himself and follow
him wherever he also lead would, if he is the only way something would speak again, for he was not
worse than themselves

So they sat down again on the move - aimlessly, only to chance letting themselves. All they
could do was, indeed, to go forward.

During the short time they revived weak Hope, not because of any considerations, but simply
because it is the nature is to be confident, as long as age and the
habit of failure you have not the wings have been broken.

Suddenly, Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This parsimony spoke terribly clear. Words
were not necessary.

Becky understood, and her hope died again.

She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in the bag - and yet he had to save!

Then the fatigue began to assert.

The children tried not to yield to it, set for the idea, and thereby lose a lot of precious time, spurred
them back on, will soon get around this, now in that direction was, but at least Progress and
could have some of the success, but to put the death was said to summon and accelerate.

Becky's frail body finally refused the service, she sat down. Tom stayed with her, and they talked
of home, their friends, their comfortable beds, and above all - the Daylight! Becky cried, and Tom
racked his brains to get some of their spells find, but all his words
of encouragement were long used arguments and sounded mockery.

Finally, the exhaustion pushed so hard on Becky, that she fell asleep.

Tom was happy.

He sat there, staring at her troubled face and looked at it always
more brighten under the influence of pleasant dreams, and finally,
a smile spread over from.

Also it seemed to these peaceful facial features a bit of peace and oblivion to move, his thoughts
were lost in recent days and conjured up fond memories forth.

While he was deep in it, Becky woke up with a lovely, small pools on - but she died on her lips,
and a groan followed it.

,, O, how I could sleep! I wish I were never, never woke up again!

No, no, Tom, This is not true, Tom! Do not look so!

I want to say's yes! "

, Becky, I was so glad that you were asleep, and now you're back strong, and we will Way to find
out already! "

, Do's, try Tom! But I have a dream so 'n beautiful country views.

I believe there we both go now. "

"No, no! Be kind, Becky, and let us go and 's try. "

They stood up and walked on, hand in hand and hopeless.

They tried to imagine how long they had been in the cave, but all
she knew was that there are days and weeks seemed, and yet it was
not possible because their candles're still burning.

A long time had passed - they can not say how long one - as Tom suggested, to walk quietly and listen,
if they did not hear water dripping somewhere, they would have a Source related. Soon they were
really one, and Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were very tired, yet Becky said, to go
further. She wondered is that Tom disagreed. She did not. They sat and Tom fastened his Candle on
the wall before them. Again, they were difficult to feel. There was a long deep silence. Since Becky
whimpered: "Tom, I'm so hungry!"

Tom took something out of the bag. , You know that?

"He asked.

Becky almost smiled. ,, This is our wedding cake, Tom! "

"Yes - you want ',' s'd really great as 'n bars, because it' s all we have."

"I've kept from the picnic, Tom, to dream of what 's the adult people do with the wedding cake
- but now it is our - "

She left the sentence unfinished. Tom divided the cake and Becky ate with good appetite, while only herumknapperte
it. There was a lot of cold water - to order the meal. Soon struck Becky before going further. Tom
was silent a moment, then said:

, Becky can endure you's when I tell you what -? "

Becky was deathly pale, but she said she was thinking.

,, Well, Becky, we must stay here, where's water supply. This little
bit because is our last light!

"

Then Becky broke into tears and wailed but quiet. Tom did what he could to calm her down, but
with low success. Finally breathed Becky: "Tom!"

,, Well, Becky? "

, But you have to miss us and looking after us! "

, Certainly, they have to! Of course they must! "

"Search us well now, Tom?"

,, Well, I think 'but she's doing! - Hoff 'at least she's doing. "

,, When you may have missed us, Tom? "

, Think but - as she walked back to the steam boat ".

, Tom, 's but had to be dark - they could remember it, that we never got?

, Believe no. But then your mother was aware as the others came home. "

A frightened look in Becky's eyes brought Tom to his senses and he remembered that he had given
up as a sad mistake. Becky should come home at night does not do it! The children were quiet
and thoughtful. Then taught a new fit of despair at Becky Tom, that she had the same thought
as he is - that Sunday morning to take half was before Mrs. Thatcher
discovered that Becky was not at Harpers.

The kids sewed eyes on the Kerzenrestchen and watched as it mercilessly smaller and smaller was,
saw that finally only a half-inch wick was left, saw the flickering flame, up and down a small column
of smoke rising from the wick, and then - then there was the terror of complete darkness.

How long after Becky came gradually to the knowledge that her crying in Tom's arms was, did
not both. All they knew was that after apparently very long time both awoke out of dead-like sleep
and were aware of their misery again. Tom said, It could be Sunday, maybe Monday. He tried
to get Becky to talk, but her grief was too depressing, she had lost all hope. Tom comforted
her with the comment that they would be missed for a long time, and there was no doubt that
the search have already begun. He wanted to scream, but maybe someone would come. He tried
it - but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so horrible that he's not a second might do.

The
hours went there again to put an agonizing hunger. A piece of cake half Toms was still there,
they divided and ate it. But they seemed only to be hungry. The poor Crumbs awakened only the
desire for more.

Suddenly Tom said: "Shh! Do you hear anything? "

Both held their breath and listened. It was something like a distant cry audibly. Immediately answered
Tom, and Becky leader's hand, he ran in that direction along the corridor. Then he listened again;
again the sound was audible, and, it seemed, yet closer.

!, It's you, "thought Tom, you come Come with Becky -.! Now everything is good!"

The joy of the prisoners was almost overwhelming.

The progress, however, was difficult because there were many gaps, we therefore had to be extremely
careful. Soon they came to one and had to stop. She could be three feet deep, but a hundred - there
was no Come over. Tom lay down flat and gave him so deep it was possible. No soil. They had
to stay and wait for the rescuers would come. They listened, apparently The calls sounded
more distant. One to two minutes, then were they all died! Heart-breaking Despair! Tom shouted
until he was hoarse, but in vain.

He said Becky hopeful , but passed an eternity anxious waiting, no call was heard.

The children groped back to the source. Endlessly dragged down time. They slept again and woke up
hungry and hopeless. Tom thought it must now be Tuesday.

Now he had a new idea. There was close by a few aisles. It would be better to examine some of
them, as the burden of despair to take into inaction.

He took a kite leash from his pocket, attached to a cliff and he and Becky went Tom preceded by the
lead unraveled slowly forward. ended after twenty step the transition in a descending course.
Tom threw himself on his knees, felt around and sought to get around the hand at the corner
of the rock, he made a violent effort, possible to go far, and saw, not twenty yards away, a
human hand, a light-holding, appear around the corner! Tom let out a cry of triumph, and suddenly
came the hand of the associated body - that of the Indians-Joe! Tom froze and he could move a limb.
This He was very surprised that, Spaniards "to see them do is head over heels. He wondered
is that Joe is not recognized his voice and him not for his testimony
in court the neck I cut off. The response was so good his voice made
unrecognizable. Undoubtedly It was, he thought. The shock had relaxed
every muscle in it. He decided if he still have enough strength to
return to the source, remain there to do, and nothing should it can
cause back, the danger of a clash with the Indians-Joe suspend. He
was concerned that Becky from what he had seen to have notice anything.
He said he had only called at random again.

But hunger and wretchedness
were getting worse. Again, a time deadly monotony at the source and
a long sleep once brought him to a different decision. When they awoke,
tortured by a furious hunger. Tom thought it would have Wednesday
or Thursday, perhaps be Friday or Saturday, and that the search was
abandoned long ago. He suggested another to investigate transition.
He was now ready to take on Joe and all the horrors. But Becky was
very weak. She was sunk in deep insensibility, and would not interfere
be. She explained where she was now waiting to do - and die, so it
would not be long. Tom should look only to the kite line further,
but she implored him sometimes come back and talk to her, and when
the terrible moment had come However, he should be at her and hold
her hand - and everything would be over. Tom kissed them with choking
sensation in his throat, pointing to forces confidence, the search
ends or to find a way out of the cave. Then he took the kite leash
and made to crawling on hands and feet, of which, tortured by hunger
and sick with sad forebodings of Coming.

Chapter XXXIII.

Tuesday
morning came and gave way to dawn. The village of St. Petersburg was
as in the dead sleep. The lost children were not found. Public prayers
were been held for them, how much unheard prayers might also have
risen to heaven! But still no hopeful news came from the cave. Most
seekers had abandoned their efforts and returned to their daily activities,
because after they believe the children would have to be abandoned
for good. Mrs Thatcher was very ill and was mostly delirious. They
said it was heartbreaking to hear their cries for her child, they
raise their heads and listen for several minutes and then moan again
be discouraged in to see the throw pillows. Aunt Polly had sunk into
total depression, her gray Hair was almost white. Sad and despondent
decided the village on Tuesday evening.

At about midnight rang out
wild bells, at the moment, the streets were met of half-dressed, sleepy
people who shouted: "Out, out - they are found! They are found! "
Tin pans and horns still increased the spectacle, the people formed
large teams, the ran to the river to take the children receive, which
in open Car, surrounded by screaming people used, came, Hurrah Hurrah
of roaring, rolling the train through the streets.

The village was
illuminated, no one went back to bed, it was the biggest night at
the small Nest had ever experienced. During the first half hour drew
a veritable procession of citizens after Judge Thatcher's house, the
rescued tore in to kiss her, pushed Mrs. Thatcher Hand-searched in
vain for words, and poured out again, all with tears flooding.

Aunt
Polly's happiness was complete and Mrs. Thatcher almost. Completely
they could only be when a messenger with the message on their luck
still wandering in the cave Man would be reached.

Tom lay on the
sofa, surrounded by eager listeners, telling the story of his great
Adventures here and there small embellishments attached, he closed
with a description of how he left Becky, to make a new foray; as two
courses, as far as his line filed, pursued, as he also examined a
third and on the point was to turn back, when he discovered in the
far distance a faint glimmer of light that looked like daylight; as
he threw away the lead and it zukroch, head and shoulders through
a narrow opening pressed and saw the right bank of the Mississippi.
And it would have been random night, he would have the Glimmer of
light not seen and would be reversed without examining the course of!
Mine seemed to me as unmanageable as an overgrown spoilt child. It had to be  watched in a
dozen directions every minute, and even then it was always getting itself and me into trouble.
I felt as if the half-live creature, with its great, groaning joints and whizzing fan, was
aware of my incapacity to manage it, and had a fiendish spite against me. I contracted an unconquerable
dislike to it; indeed, I had never liked, and never could learn to like, any kind of machinery.
And this machine finally conquered me. It was humiliating, but I had to acknowledge that there
were some things I could not do, and I retired from the field, vanquished.

The two things I had enjoyed in this room were that my sister was with me, and that our windows
looked toward the west. When the work was running smoothly, we looked out together and quoted
to each other all the sunset-poetry we could remember. Our tastes did not quite agree. Her
favorite description of the clouds was from Pollok:--

  "They seemed like chariots of saints,
  By fiery coursers drawn; as brightly hued
  As if the glorious, bushy, golden locks
  Of thousand cherubim had been shorn off,
  And on the temples hung of morn and even."

I liked better a translation from the German, beginning

  "Methinks it were no pain to die
  On such an eve, while such a sky
  O'ercanopies the west."

And she generally had to hear the whole poem, for I was very fond of it; though the especial
verse that I contrasted with hers was,--

  "There's peace and welcome in yon sea
  Of endless blue tranquillity;
  Those clouds are living things;
  I trace their veins of liquid gold,
  And see them silently unfold
  Their soft and fleecy wings."

Then she would tell me that my nature inclined to quietness and harmony, while hers asked for
motion and splendor. I wondered whether it really were so. But that huge, creaking framework
beside us would continually intrude upon our meditations and break up our discussions, and
silence all poetry for us with its dull prose.

Emilie found more profitable work elsewhere, and I found some that was less so, but far more
satisfactory, as it would give me the openings of leisure which I craved.

The paymaster asked, when I left, "Going where on can earn more money?"

"No," I answered, "I am going where I can have more time." "Ah, yes!" he said sententiously,
"time is money." But that was not my thought about it. "Time is education," I said to myself;
for that was what I meant it should be to me.

Perhaps I never gave the wage-earning element in work its due weight. It always seemed to me
that the Apostle's idea about worldly possessions was the only sensible one,--

  "Having food and raiment, let us be therewith content."

If I could earn enough to furnish that, and have time to study besides,--of course we always
gave away a little, however little we had,--it seemed to me a sufficiency. At this time I was
receiving two dollars a week, besides my board. Those who were earning much more, and were
carefully "laying it up," did not appear to be any happier than I was.

I never thought that the possession of money would make me feel rich: it often does seem to
have an opposite effect. But then, I have never had the opportunity of knowing, by experience,
how it does make one feel. It is something to have been spared the responsibility of taking
charge of the Lord's silver and gold. Let us be thankful for what we have not, as well as for
what we have!

Freedom to live one's life truly is surely more desirable than any earthly acquisition or possession;
and at my new work I had hours of freedom every day. I never went back again to the bondage
of machinery and a working-day thirteen hours long.

The daughter of one of our neighbors, who also went to the same church with us, told me of
a vacant place in the cloth-room, where she was, which I gladly secured. This was a low brick
building next the counting-room, and a little apart from the mills, where the cloth was folded,
stamped, and baled for the market.

There were only half a dozen girls of us, who measured the cloth, and kept an account of the
pieces baled, and their length in yards. It pleased me much to have something to do which required
the use of pen and ink, and I think there must be a good many scraps of verse buried among
the blank pages of those old account-books of that found their way there during the frequent
half-hours of waiting for the cloth to be brought in from the mills.

The only machinery in the room was a hydraulic arrangement for pressing
the cloth into bales, managed by two or three men, one of whom was
quite a poet, and a fine singer also. His hymns were frequently in
request, on public occasions. He lent me the first volume of Whittier's
poems that I ever saw. It was a small book, containing mostly
Antislavery pieces. "The Yankee Girl" was one of them, fully to
appreciate the spirit of which, it is necessary to have been a
working-girl in slave-labor times.  Go back! for thy gold
  Is red with the blood of the hearts thou hast sold!"

There was in this volume another poem which is not in any of the later editions, the impression
of which, as it remains to me in broken snatches, is very beautiful. It began with the lines

  "Bind up thy tresses, thou beautiful one,
  Of brown in the shadow, and gold in the sun."

I grew so familiar with this volume that I felt acquainted with the poet long before I met
him. It remained in my desk-drawer for months. I thought it belonged to my poetic friend, the
baler of cloth. But one day he informed me that it was a borrowed book; he thought, however,
he should claim it for his own, now that he had kept it so long. Upon which remark I delivered
it up to the custody of his own conscience, and saw it no more.

One day, towards the last of my stay at Lowell (I never changed my work-room again), this same
friendly fellow-toiler handed me a poem to read, which some one had sent in to us from the
counting-room, with the penciled comment, "Singularly beautiful." It was Poe's "Raven," which
had just made its first appearance in some magazine. It seemed like an apparition in literature,
indeed; the sensation it created among the staid, measured lyrics of that day, with its flit
of spectral wings, and its ghostly refrain of "Nevermore!" was very noticeable. Poe came to
Lowell to live awhile, but it was after I had gone away.

Our national poetry was at this time just beginning to be well known and appreciated. Bryant
had published two volumes, and every school child was familiar with his "Death of the Flowers"
and "God's First Temples." Some one lent me the "Voices of the Night," the only collection
of Longfellow's verse then issued, I think.  The "Footsteps of Angels" glided at once into
my memory, and took possession of a permanent place there, with its tender melody. "The Last
Leaf" and "Old Ironsides" were favorites with everybody who read poetry at all, but I do not
think we Lowell girls had a volume of Dr. Holmes's poems at that time.

"The Lady's Book" and "Graham's Magazine" were then the popular periodicals, and the mill-girls
took them. I remember that the "nuggets" I used to pick out of one or the other of them when
I was quite a child were labeled with the signature of Harriet E. Beecher. "Father Morris,"
and "Uncle Tim," and others of the delightful "May-Flower" snatches first appeared in this
way. Irving's "Sketch-Book" all reading people were supposed to have read, and I recall the
pleasure it was to me when one of my sisters came into possession of "Knickerbocker's History
of New York." It was the first humorous book, as well as the first history, that I ever cared
about. And I was pleased enough--for I was a little girl when my fondness for it began--to
hear our minister say that he always read Diedrich Knickerbocker for his tired Monday's recreation.

We were allowed to have books in the cloth-room. The absence of machinery permitted that privilege.
Our superintendent, who was a man of culture and a Christian gentleman of the Puritan-school,
dignified and reserved, used often to stop at my desk in his daily round to see what book I
was reading. One day it was Mather's "Magnalia," which I had brought from the public library,
with a desire to know something of the early history of New England. He looked a little surprised
at the archaeological turn my mind had taken, but his only comment was, "A valuable old book
that." It was a satisfaction to have a superintendent like him, whose granite principles, emphasized
by his stately figure and bearing, made him a tower of strength in the church and in the community.
He kept a silent, kindly, rigid watch over the corporation-life of which he was the head; and
only those of us who were incidentally admitted to his confidence knew how carefully we were
guarded.

We had occasional glimpses into his own well-ordered home-life, at social gatherings. His little
daughter was in my infant Sabbath-school class from her fourth to her seventh or eighth year.
She sometimes visited me at my work, and we had our frolics among the heaps of cloth, as if
we were both children. She had also the same love of hymns that I had as a child, and she would
sit by my side and repeat to me one after another that she had learned, not as a task, but
because of her delight in them. One of my sincerest griefs in going off to the West was that
I should see my little pupil Mary as a child no more. When I came back, she was a grown-up
young woman.

My friend Anna, who had procured for me the place and work beside her which I liked so much,
was not at all a bookish person, but we had perhaps a better time together than if she had
been. She was one who found the happiness of her life in doing kindnesses for others, and in
helping them bear their burdens. Family reverses had brought her, with her mother and sisters,
to Lowell, and this was one strong point of sympathy between my own family and hers. It was,
indeed, a bond of neighborly union between a great many households in the young manufacturing
city. Anna's manners and language were those of a lady, though she had come from the wilds
of Maine, somewhere in the vicinity of Mount Desert, the very name of which seemed in those
days to carry one into a wilderness of mountains and waves. We chatted together at our work
on all manner of subjects, and once she astonished me by saying confidentially, in a low tone,
"Do you know, I am thirty years old!" She spoke as if she thought the fact implied something
serious. My surprise was that she should have taken me into her intimate friendship when I
was only seventeen. I should hardly have supposed her older than myself, if she had not volunteered
the information.

When I lifted my eyes from her tall, thin figure to her fair face and somewhat sad blue eyes,
I saw that she looked a little worn; but I knew that it was from care for others, strangers
as well as her own relatives; and it seemed to me as if those thirty loving years were her
rose-garland. I became more attached to her than ever.

What a foolish dread it is,--showing unripeness rather than youth,--the dread of growing old!
For how can a life be beautified more than by its beautiful years? A living, loving, growing
spirit can never be old. Emerson says:

  "Spring still makes spring in the mind,
  When sixty years are told;"

and some of us are thankful to have lived long enough to bear witness with him to that truth.

The few others who measured cloth with us were nice, bright girls, and some of them remarkably
pretty. Our work and the room itself were so clean that in summer we could wear fresh muslin
dresses, sometimes white ones, without fear of soiling them. This slight difference of apparel
and our fewer work-hours seemed to give us a slight advantage over the toilers in the mills
opposite, and we occasionally heard ourselves spoken of as "the cloth-room aristocracy." But
that was only in fun. Most of us had served an apprenticeship in the mills, and many of our
best friends were still there, preferring their work because it brought them more money than
we could earn.

For myself, no amount of money would have been a temptation, compared with my precious daytime
freedom. Whole hours of sunshine for reading, for walking, for studying, for writing, for anything
that I wanted to do! The days were so lovely and so long! and yet how fast they slipped away!
I had not given up my dream of a better education, and as I could not go to school, I began
to study by myself.

I had received a pretty thorough drill in the common English branches at the grammar school,
and at my employment I only needed a little simple arithmetic. A few of my friends were studying
algebra in an evening class, but I had no fancy for mathematics. My first wish was to learn
about English Literature, to go back to its very beginnings. It was not then studied even in
the higher schools, and I knew no one who could give me any assistance in it, as a teacher.
"Percy's Reliques" and "Chambers' Cyclopoedia of English Literature" were in the city library,
and I used them, making extracts from Chaucer and Spenser, to fix their peculiarities in my
memory, though there was only a taste of them to be had from the Cyclopaedia.

Shakespeare I had read from childhood, in a fragmentary way. "The Tempest," and "Midsummer
Night's Dream," and "King Lear," I had swallowed among my fairy tales. Now I discovered that
the historical plays, notably, "Julius Caesar" and "Coriolanus," had no less attraction for
me, though of a different kind. But it was easy for me to forget that I was trying to be a
literary student, and slip off from Belmont to Venice with Portia to witness the discomfiture
of Shylock; although I did pity the miserable Jew, and thought he might at least have been
allowed the comfort of his paltry ducats. I do not think that any of my studying at this time
was very severe; it was pleasure rather than toil, for I undertook only the tasks I liked.
But what I learned remained with me, nevertheless.

With Milton I was more familiar than with any other poet, and from thirteen years of age to
eighteen he was my preference.

She, too, was much older than I, and a most excellent, energetic, and studious young woman.
I wonder if she remembers how hard we tried to get

  "Beelzebub--than whom,
  Satan except, none higher sat,"

into the limits of our grammatical rules,--not altogether with success, I believe.

I copied passages from Jeremy Taylor and the old theologians into my note-books, and have found
them useful even recently, in preparing compilations. Dryden and the eighteenth century poets
generally did not interest me, though I tried to read them from a sense of duty. Pope was an
exception, however. Aphorisms from the "Essay on Man" were in as common use among us as those
from the Book of Proverbs.

Some of my choicest extracts were in the first volume of collected poetry I ever owned, a little
red morocco book called "The Young Man's Book of Poetry." It was given me by one of my sisters
when I was about a dozen years old, who rather apologized for the young man on the title-page,
saying that the poetry was just as good as if he were not there.

And, indeed, no young man could have valued it more than I did. It contained selections from
standard poets, and choice ones from less familiar sources. One of the extracts was Wordsworth's
"Sunset among the Mountains," from the "Excursion," to read which, however often, always lifted
me into an ecstasy.  That red morocco book was my treasure. It traveled with me to the West,
and I meant to keep it as long as I lived. But alas! it was borrowed by a little girl out on
the Illinois prairies, who never brought it back. I do not know that I have ever quite forgiven
her. I have wished I could look into it again, often and often through the years. But perhaps
I ought to be grateful to that little girl for teaching me to be careful about returning borrowed
books myself. Only a lover of them can appreciate the loss of one which has been a possession
from childhood.

Young and Cowper were considered religious reading, and as such I had always known something
of them. The songs of Burns were in the air. Through him I best learned to know poetry as song.
I think that I heard the "Cotter's Saturday Night" and "A man's a man for a' that" more frequently
quoted than any other poems familiar to my girlhood.

Some of my work-folk acquaintances were regular subscribers to "Blackwood's Magazine" and the
"Westminster" and "Edinburgh" reviews, and they lent them to me. These, and Macaulay's "Essays,"
were a great help and delight. I had also the reading of the "Bibliotheca Sacra" and the "New
Englander;" and sometimes of the "North American Review."

By the time I had come down to Wordsworth and Coleridge in my readings of English poetry, I
was enjoying it all so much that I could not any longer call it study.

A gift from a friend of Griswold's "Poets and Poetry of England" gave me my first knowledge
of Tennyson. It was a great experience to read "Locksley Hall" for the first time while it
was yet a new poem, and while one's own young life was stirred by the prophetic spirit of the
age that gave it birth.

I had a friend about my own age, and between us there was something very much like what is
called a "school-girl friendship," a kind of intimacy supposed to be superficial, but often
as deep and permanent as it is pleasant.

Eliza and I managed to see each other every day; we exchanged confidences, laughed and cried
together, read, wrote, walked, visited, and studied together. Her dress always had an airy
touch which I admired, although I was rather indifferent as to what I wore myself. But she
would endeavor to "fix me up" tastefully, while I would help her to put her compositions for
the "Offering" into proper style. She had not begun to go to school at two years old, repeating
the same routine of study every year of her childhood, as I had.  When a child, I should have
thought it almost as much of a disgrace to spell a word wrong, or make a mistake in the multiplication
table, as to break one of the Ten Commandments. I was astonished to find that Eliza and other
friends had not been as particularly dealt with in their early education. But she knew her
deficiencies, and earned money enough to leave her work and attend a day-school part of the year.

She was an ambitious scholar, and she persuaded me into studying the German language with her.
A native professor had formed a class among young women connected with the mills, and we joined
it. We met, six or eight of us, at the home of two of these young women,--a factory boarding-house,--in
a neat little parlor which contained a piano. The professor was a music-teacher also, and he
sometimes brought his guitar, and let us finish our recitation with a concert. More frequently
he gave us the songs of Deutschland that we begged for. He sang the "Erl-King" in his own tongue
admirably. We went through Follen's German Grammar and Reader:--what a choice collection of
extracts that "Reader" was! We conquered the difficult gutturals, like those in the numeral
"acht und achtzig" (the test of our pronouncing abilities) so completely that the professor
told us a native really would understand us! At his request, I put some little German songs
into English, which he published as sheet-music, with my name. To hear my words sung quite
gave me the feeling of a successful translator. The professor had his own distinctive name
for each of his pupils. Eliza was "Naivete," from her artless manners; and me he called "Etheria,"
probably on account of my star-gazing and verse-writing habits. Certainly there was never anything
ethereal in my visible presence.

A botany class was formed in town by a literary lady who was preparing a school text-book on
the subject, and Eliza and I joined that also. The most I recall about that is the delightful
flower-hunting rambles we took together. The Linnaean system, then in use, did not give us
a very satisfactory key to the science. But we made the acquaintance of hitherto unfamiliar
wild flowers that grew around us, and that was the opening to us of another door towards the
Beautiful.

Our minister offered to instruct the young people of his parish in ethics, and my sister Emilie
and myself were among his pupils. We came to regard Wayland's "Moral Science" (our text-book)
as most interesting reading, and it furnished us with many subjects for thought and for social
discussion.

Carlyle's "Hero-Worship" brought us a startling and keen enjoyment. It was lent me by a Dartmouth
College student, the brother of one of my room-mates, soon after it was first published in
this country. The young man did not seem to know exactly what to think of it, and wanted another
reader's opinion. Few persons could have welcomed those early writings of Carlyle more enthusiastically
than some of us working-girls did. The very ruggedness of the sentences had a fascination for
us, like that of climbing over loose bowlders in a mountain scramble to get sight of a wonderful
landscape.

My room-mate, the student's sister, was the possessor of an electrifying new poem,--"Festus,"--that
we sat up nights to read. It does not seem as if it could be more than forty years since Sarah
and I looked up into each other's face from the page as the lamplight grew dim, and said, quoting
from the poem,--

"Who can mistake great thoughts?"

She gave me the volume afterwards, when we went West together, and I have it still. Its questions
and conjectures were like a glimpse into the chaos of our own dimly developing inner life.
The fascination of "Festus" was that of wonder, doubt, and dissent, with great outbursts of
an overmastering faith sweeping over our minds as we read. Some of our friends thought it not
quite safe reading; but we remember it as one of the inspirations of our workaday youth.

We read books, also, that bore directly upon the condition of humanity in our time. "The Glory
and Shame of England" was one of them, and it stirred us with a wonderful and painful interest.

We followed travelers and explorers,--Layard to Nineveh, and Stephens to Yucatan. And we were
as fond of good story-books as any girls that live in these days of overflowing libraries.
One book, a character-picture from history, had a wide popularity in those days. It is a pity
that it should be unfamiliar to modern girlhood,--Ware's "Zenobia." The Queen of Palmyra walked
among us, and held a lofty place among our ideals of heroic womanhood, never yet obliterated
from admiring remembrance.

We had the delight of reading Frederika Bremer's "Home" and "Neighbors" when they were  fresh
from the fountains of her own heart; and some of us must not be blamed for feeling as if no
tales of domestic life half so charming have been written since. Perhaps it is partly because
the home-life of Sweden is in itself so delightfully unique.

We read George Borrow's "Bible in Spain," and wandered with him among the gypsies to whom he
seemed to belong.

It suggested a somewhat similar verse to my own mind. Why should not our washerwoman's work
have its touch of poetry also?--

  This thought flashed by like a ray of light
  That brightened my homely labor:--
  The water is making my own hands white
  While I wash the robes of my neighbor.

And how delighted we were with Mrs. Kirkland's "A New Home: Who'll Follow?" the first real
Western book I ever read. Its genuine pioneer-flavor was delicious. And, moreover, it was a
prophecy to Sarah, Emilie, and myself, who were one day thankful enough to find an "Aunty Parshall's
dish-kettle" in a cabin on an Illinois prairie.

So the pleasantly occupied years slipped on, I still nursing my purpose of a more systematic
course of study, though I saw no near possibility of its fulfillment. It came in an unexpected
way, as almost everything worth having does come. I could never have dreamed that I was going
to meet my opportunity nearly or quite a thousand miles away, on the banks of the Mississippi.
And yet, with that strange, delightful consciousness of growth into a comprehension of one's
self and of one's life that most young persons must occasionally have experienced, I often
vaguely felt heavens opening for my half-fledged wings to try themselves in. Things about me
were good and enjoyable, but I could not quite rest in them; there was more for me to be, to
know, and to do. I felt almost surer of the future than of the present.

If the dream of the millennium which brightened the somewhat sombre close of the first ten
years of my life had faded a little, out of the very roughnesses of the intervening road light
had been kindled which made the end of the second ten years glow with enthusiastic hope. I
had early been saved from a great mistake; for it is the greatest of mistakes to begin life
with the expectation that it is going to be easy, or with the wish to have it so. What a world
it would be, if there were no hills to climb! Our powers were given us that we might conquer
obstacles, and clear obstructions from the overgrown human path, and grow strong by striving,
led onward always by an Invisible Guide.

Life to me, as I looked forward, was a bright blank of mystery, like the broad Western tracts
of our continent, which in the atlases of those days bore the title of "Unexplored Regions."
It was to be penetrated, struggled through; and its difficulties were not greatly dreaded,
for I had not lost

  "The dream of Doing,--
  The first bound in the pursuing."

I knew that there was no joy like the joy of pressing forward.

XII.

FROM THE MERRIMACK TO THE MISSISSIPPI.

THE years between 1835 and 1845, which nearly cover the time I lived at Lowell, seem to me,
as I look back at them, singularly interesting years. People were guessing and experimenting
and wondering and prophesying about a great many things,--about almost everything. We were
only beginning to get accustomed to steamboats and railroads. To travel by either was scarcely
less an adventure to us younger ones than going up in a balloon.

Phrenology was much talked about; and numerous "professors" of it came around lecturing, and
examining heads, and making charts of cranial "bumps." This was profitable business to them
for a while, as almost everybody who invested in a "character" received a good one; while many
very commonplace people were flattered into the belief that they were geniuses, or might be
if they chose.

Mesmerism followed close upon phrenology; and this too had its lecturers, who entertained the
stronger portion of their audiences by showing them how easily the weaker ones could be brought
under an uncanny influence.

The most widespread delusion of the time was Millerism. A great many persons--and yet not so
many that I knew even one of them--believed that the end of the world was coming in the year
1842; though the date was postponed from year to year, as the prophesy failed of fulfillment.
The idea in itself was almost too serious to be jested about; and yet its advocates made it
so literal a matter that it did look very ridiculous to unbelievers.

An irreverent little workmate of mine in the spinning-room made a string of jingling couplets
about it, like this:--

  "Oh dear! oh dear! what shall we do
  In eighteen hundred and forty-two?

I thought it audacious in her, since surely she and all of us were aware that the world would
come to an end some time, in some way, for every one of us. I said to myself that I could not
have "made up" those rhymes. Nevertheless we all laughed at them together.

A comet appeared at about the time of the Miller excitement, and also a very unusual illumination
of sky and earth by the Aurora Borealis. This latter occurred in midwinter. The whole heavens
were of a deep rose-color--almost crimson--reddest at the zenith, and paling as it radiated
towards the horizon. The snow was fresh on the ground, and that, too, was of a brilliant red.
Cold as it was, windows were thrown up all around us for people to look out at the wonderful
sight. I was gazing with the rest, and listening to exclamations of wonder from surrounding
unseen beholders, when somebody shouted from far down the opposite block of buildings, with
startling effect,--

  "You can't stand the fire
  In that great day!"

It was the refrain of a Millerite hymn. The Millerites believed that these signs in the sky
were omens of the approaching catastrophe. And it was said that some of them did go so far
as to put on white "ascension robes," and assemble somewhere, to wait for the expected hour.

When daguerreotypes were first made, when we heard that the sun was going to take everybody's
portrait, it seemed almost too great a marvel to be believed. While it was yet only a rumor
that such a thing had been done, somewhere across the sea, I saw some verses about it which
impressed me much, but which I only partly remember. These were the opening lines:--

  "Oh, what if thus our evil deeds
  Are mirrored on the sky,
  And every line of our wild lives
  Daguerreotyped on high!"

My sister and I considered it quite an event when we went to have our daguerreotypes taken
just before we started for the West. The photograph was still an undeveloped mystery.

Things that looked miraculous then are commonplace now. It almost seems as if the children
of to-day could not have so good a time as we did, science has left them so little to wonder
about. Our attitude--the attitude of the time--was that of children climbing their dooryard
fence, to watch an approaching show, and to conjecture what more remarkable spectacle could
be following behind. New England had kept to the quiet old-fashioned ways of living for the
first fifty years of the Republic. Now all was expectancy. Changes were coming. Things were
going to happen, nobody could guess what.

Things have happened, and changes have come. The New England that has grown up with the last
fifty years is not at all the New England that our fathers knew. We speak of having been reared
under Puritanic influences, but the traditionary sternness of these was much modified, even
in the childhood of the generation to which I belong.  We did not recognize the grim features
of the Puritan, as we used sometimes to read about him, in our parents or relatives. And yet
we were children of the Puritans.

Everything that was new or strange came to us at Lowell. And most of the remarkable people
of the day came also. How strange it was to see Mar Yohannan, a Nestorian bishop, walking through
the factory yard in his Oriental robes with more than a child's wonder on his face at the stir
and rush of everything! He came from Boston by railroad, and was present at the wedding at
the clergyman's house where he visited. The rapidity of the simple Congregational service astonished
him.

"What? Marry on railroad, too?" he asked.

Dickens visited Lowell while I was there, and gave a good report of what he saw in his "American
Notes." We did not leave work even to gaze at distinguished strangers, so I missed seeing him.
But a friend who did see him sketched his profile in pencil for me as he passed along the street.
He was then best known as "Boz."

Many of the prominent men of the country were in the habit of giving Lyceum lectures, and the
Lyceum lecture of that day was a means of education, conveying to the people the results of
study and thought through the best minds. At Lowell it was more patronized by the mill-people
than any mere entertainment. We had John Quincy Adams, Edward Everett, John Pierpont, and Ralph
Waldo Emerson among our lecturers, with numerous distinguished clergymen of the day. Daniel
Webster was once in the city, trying a law case. Some of my girl friends went to the court-room
and had a glimpse of his face, but I just missed seeing him.

Sometimes an Englishman, who was studying our national institutions, would call and have a
friendly talk with us at work. Sometimes it was a traveler from the South, who was interested
in some way. I remember one, an editor and author from Georgia, who visited our Improvement
Circle, and who sent some of us "Offering" contributors copies of his book after he had returned
home.

One of the pleasantest visitors that I recall was a young Quaker woman from Philadelphia, a
school-teacher, who came to see for herself how the Lowell girls lived, of whom she had heard
so much. A deep, quiet friendship grew up between us two. I wrote some verses for her when
we parted, and she sent me one cordial, charmingly-written letter. In a few weeks I answered
it; but the response was from another person, a near relative. She was dead. But she still
remains a real person to me; I often recall her features and the tone of her voice. It was
as if a beautiful spirit from an invisible world had slipped in among us, and quickly gone
back again.

It was an event to me, and to my immediate friends among the mill-girls, when the poet Whittier
came to Lowell to stay awhile. I had not supposed that it would be my good fortune to meet
him; but one evening when we assembled at the "Improvement Circle," he was there. The "Offering"
editor, Miss Harriet Farley, had lived in the same town with him, and they were old acquaintances.
It was a warm, summer evening. I recall the circumstance that a number of us wore white dresses;
also that I shrank back into myself, and felt much abashed when some verses of mine were read
by the editor,--with others so much better, however, that mine received little attention. 
I felt relieved; for I was not fond of having my productions spoken of, for good or ill. He
commended quite highly a poem by another member of the Circle, on "Pentucket," the Indian name
of his native place, Haverhill.  My subject was "Sabbath Bells." As the Friends do not believe
in "steeple-houses," I was at liberty to imagine that it was my theme, and not my verses, that
failed to interest him.

Various other papers were read,--stories, sketches, etc., and after the reading there was a
little conversation, when he came and spoke to me. I let the friend who had accompanied me
do my part of the talking for I was too much overawed by the presence of one whose poetry I
had so long admired, to say a great deal. But from that evening we knew each other as friends;
and, of course, the day has a white mark among memories of my Lowell life.

Mr. Whittier's visit to Lowell had some political bearing upon the antislavery cause. It is
strange now to think that a cause like that should not always have been our country's cause,--our
country,--our own free nation! But antislavery sentiments were then regarded by many as traitorous
heresies; and those who held them did not expect to win popularity. If the vote of the mill-girls
had been taken, it would doubtless have been unanimous on the antislavery side. But those were
also the days when a woman was not expected to give, or even to have, an opinion on subjects
of public interest.

Occasionally a young girl was attracted to the Lowell mills through her own idealization of
the life there, as it had been reported to her. Margaret Foley, who afterwards became distinguished
as a sculptor, was one of these. She did not remain many months at her occupation,--which I
think was weaving,--soon changing it for that of teaching and studying art. Those who came
as she did were usually disappointed. Instead of an Arcadia, they found a place of matter-of-fact
toil, filled with a company of industrious, wide-awake girls, who were faithfully improving
their opportunities, while looking through them into avenues Toward profit and usefulness,
more desirable yet. It has always been the way of the steady-minded New Englander to accept
the present situation--but to accept it without boundaries, taking in also the larger prospects--all
the heavens above and the earth beneath--towards which it opens.

The movement of New England girls toward Lowell was only an impulse of a larger movement which
about that time sent so many people from the Eastern States into the West. The needs of the
West were constantly kept before us in the churches. We were asked for contributions for Home
Missions, which were willingly given; and some of us were appointed collectors of funds for
the education of indigent young men to become Western Home Missionary preachers. There was
something almost pathetic in the readiness with which this was done by young girls who were
longing to fit themselves for teachers, but had not the means. Many a girl at Lowell was working
to send her brother to college, who had far more talent and character than he; but a man could
preach, and it was not "orthodox" to think that a woman could. And in her devotion to him,
and her zeal for the spread of Christian truth, she was hardly conscious of her own sacrifice.
Yet our ministers appreciated the intelligence and piety of their feminine parishioners. An
agent who came from the West for school-teachers was told by our own pastor that five hundred
could easily be furnished from among Lowell mill-girls. Many did go, and they made another
New England in some of our Western States.

The missionary spirit was strong among my companions. I never thought that I had the right
qualifications for that work; but I had a desire to see the prairies and the great rivers of
the West, and to get a taste of free, primitive life among pioneers.

Before the year 1845, several of my friends had emigrated as teachers or missionaries. One
of the editors of the "Operatives' Magazine" had gone to Arkansas with a mill-girl who had
worked beside her among the looms. They were at an Indian mission--to the Cherokees and Choctaws.
I seemed to breathe the air of that far Southwest, in a spray of yellow jessamine which one
of those friends sent me, pressed in a letter. People wrote very long letters then, in those
days of twenty-five cent postage.

Rachel, at whose house our German class had been accustomed to meet, had also left her work,
and had gone to western Virginia to take charge of a school. She wrote alluring letters to
us about the scenery there; it was in the neighborhood of the Natural Bridge.

My friend Angeline, with whom I used to read "Paradise Lost," went to Ohio as a teacher, and
returned the following year, for a very brief visit, however,--and with a husband. Another
acquaintance was in Wisconsin, teaching a pioneer school. Eliza, my intimate companion, was
about to be married to a clergyman. She, too, eventually settled at the West.

The event which brought most change into my own life was the marriage of my sister Emilie. 

The howling stopped. Tom pricked up his ears. , Shh - what is it?

,, 'S sounds like - like Schweinegrunzen.

Or, Tom - but not, 's someone snores.

,,, Is it? But where, Huckleberry Hound? "

"I believe there, at the other end. 'S sound to, anyway.

Pop wont to sleep sometimes because - With the pigs, but, God bless
you, he makes everything tremble when he snores.

And then, I reckon he is not coming back here! "

The adventure began in the souls of two men to move.

, Huckleberry Hound, are you following me, if I go ahead? "

, Not very happy, Tom! Thinking, 's can be Joe! "

Tom hesitated. But immediately came back to the temptation and decided to attempt to venture,
under the condition that they may flee, once the snoring would stop. So they went on to tiptoe,
one behind the other.

When they only have five step were removed from the snoring, Tom
stepped on a branch that broke with a loud crack.

The man grunted, rolled over in a bit, the moonlight fell on his face - it was Muff Potter.
The hearts of the boys had stood still - as their bodies, when the man did, but now their fear was
gone.

They crept back, slipped through the broken wall and remained at a distance are on hand to say
goodbye, The long eerie wailing sound arose and through the night
air.

They turned around and saw the strange dog a few paces from the spot
where Muff Potter was with the head turned to this, directed the muzzle
to the sky.

,, Gee whiz, he says, "cried both in the same breath.

,
Say, Tom, they say, a nasty dog ​​should have herumgeheult to Johnny
Miller's house - More than two weeks.

And then also 'ne Eule placed on the roof and cried because, the same evening. And there is
but to date none have died yet! "

"Yes, I know. And I mean, that proves nothing.

Was not next Saturday Gracie Miller on the kitchen stove and burned his terrible? "

"Yes - but it is not yet dead.

Even more, she is soon back to full health. "

, All right, wait and only red 'then!

She is gone, as surely there as Muff Potter gone is! The Negro's say something like that and
know exactly Huckleberry Hound Show. "

Thus they parted think.

When Tom got into his bedroom window the night was over.

He undressed with extreme caution, and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody I noticed something
about his journey. He had not seen the brave, snoring Sid was awake - for an hour.
When Tom awoke, Sid was already dressed and gone. The light outside
seemed so late Tom as well as the air. He was taken aback. Why did
they not call him - since he was at this time has always been to?
The idea was hard on his heart.

In five minutes he was dressed and
down the stairs, cranky and sleepy. The Family sat around the table,
but had already had breakfast.

No blame, but facing away from faces.
Profound silence, and a touch of sadness; difficult loaded them on
the sinner's head. He sat down and pretended to be quite funny, but
it was very difficult. He got no smile, no response, and sank into
silence, and his heart sank in the deepest depth.

After breakfast
his aunt took him to the side, and Tom drew a neat, in the Hope that
he would now be beaten, but it should be otherwise. His aunt wept
could tear over him and asked him how he go and break her poor heart.
And finally she said, he would only ruin themselves and their gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave let go because she had lost heart in
relation to him now. On the second day, after a moonlight night on Long Island Sound,
we were floating down the Delaware, between shores misty-green with budding willows; then (most
of us seasick, though I was not) we were tossed across Chesapeake Bay; then there was a railway
ride to the Alleghanies, which gave us glimpses of the Potomac and the Blue Ridge, and of the
lovely scenery around Harper's Ferry; then followed a stifling night on the mountains, when
we were packed like sardines into a stagecoach, without a breath of air, and the passengers
were cross because the baby cried, while I felt inwardly glad that one voice among us could
give utterance to the general discomfort, my own part of which I could have borne if I could
only have had an occasional peep out at the mountain-side. After that it was all river-voyaging,
down the Monongahela into the Ohio, and up the Mississippi.

As I recall this part of it, I should say that it was the perfection of a Western journey to
travel in early spring by an Ohio River steamboat,--such steamboats as they had forty years
ago, comfortable, roomy, and well ordered. The company was social, as Western emigrants were
wont to be when there were not so very many of them, and the shores of the river, then only
thinly populated, were a constantly shifting panorama of wilderness beauty. I have never since
seen a combination of spring colors so delicate as those shown by the uplifted forests of the
Ohio, where the pure white of the dogwood and the peach-bloom tint of the red-bud (Judas tree)
were contrasted with soft shades of green, almost endlessly various, on the unfolding leafage.

Contrasted with the Ohio, the Mississippi had nothing to show but breadth and muddiness. More
than one of us glanced at its level shores, edged with a monotonous growth of cottonwood, and
sent back a sigh towards the banks of the Merrimack. But we did not let each other know what
the sigh was for, until long after. The breaking-up of our little company when the steamboat
landed at Saint Louis was like the ending of a pleasant dream. We had to wake up to the fact
that by striking due east thirty or forty miles across that monotonous Greenness, we should
reach our destination, and must accept whatever we should find there, with such grace as we could.

What we did find, and did not find, there is not room fully to relate here. Ours was at first
the roughest kind of pioneering experience; such as persons brought up in our well-to-do New
England could not be in the least prepared for, though they might imagine they were, as we
did. We were dropped down finally upon a vast green expense, extending hundreds of miles north
and south through the State of Illinois, then known as Looking-Glass Prairie. The nearest cabin
to our own was about a mile away, and so small that at that distance it looked like a shingle
set up endwise in the grass. Nothing else was in sight, not even a tree, although we could
see miles and miles in every direction. There were only the hollow blue heavens above us and
the level green prairie around us,--an immensity of intense loneliness. We seldom saw a cloud
in the sky, and never a pebble beneath our feet. If we could have picked up the commonest one,
we should have treasured it like a diamond. Nothing in nature now seemed so beautiful to us
as rocks. We had never dreamed of a world without them; it seemed like living on a floor without
walls or foundations.

After a while we became accustomed to the vast sameness, and even liked it in a lukewarm way.
And there were times when it filled us with emotions of grandeur. Boundlessness in itself is
impressive; it makes us feel our littleness, and yet releases us from that littleness.

The grass was always astir, blowing one way, like the waves of the sea; for there was a steady,
almost an unvarying wind from the south. It was like the sea, and yet even more wonderful,
for it was a sea of living and growing things. The Spirit of God was moving upon the face of
the earth, and breathing everything into life. We were but specks on the great landscape. But
God was above it all, penetrating it and us with his infinite warmth. The distance from human
beings made the Invisible One seem so near! Only Nature and ourselves now, face to face with Him!

We could scarcely have found in all the world a more complete contrast to the moving crowds
and the whir and dust of the City of Spindles, than this unpeopled, silent prairie.

For myself, I know that I was sent in upon my own thoughts deeper than I had ever been before.
I began to question things which I had never before doubted. I must have reality. Nothing but
transparent truth would bear the test of this great, solitary stillness. The girl said: , Irritant,
Tom. I wish I could draw. "

,, 'S is quite easy, "whispered Tom,,, I will teach you."

"Yes, do you want? When?

, At noon. Are you going home for lunch? "

"If you stay, I stay well."

,, Na, well then. - What is your name?

,
Becky Thatcher. - And you?

Oh, I know: Thomas Sawyer. "

,, So I call if I have done what '.

If I'm honest, they call me Tom.

You will find me Tom called, right? "

"Yes."

Now Tom began to scrawl something on the table, what the girl should
not see again.

But they did not refuse anymore. She demanded to see it.

"It's nothing," Tom said indifferently.

"It's something."

"No, it's nothing. You's do not need to see. "

,, But I want to see it. I want to. - Let me see, please "!

"I'll tell you."

"No, I do not want - I want I want, I want to see it!

"But you say no one? As long as you live? "

"No, I tell no one. Now let me see, "and she laid her little hand on his and followed a small
scuffle. Tom did when he was defending itself seriously, but had
his Hand slide slowly until the words became clear:

"I love you!"

,
Nasty boy!

"She gave him a little pat, but seemed not too bad but be.

Especially in this beautiful moment Tom felt a serious grip on the ear and irresistible up
executive power. He was escorted through the classroom and on his own place transported under
a barrage of mockery and laughter throughout the school. Then remained Teachers during a terrible
moment beside him, and returned finally to his throne back, without having spoken a word. But
although Tom's ear pain, was his heart still full of joy.

When the school was quiet again, Tom was a very worthy attempt to work But the storm was too
violent. Then he should read and brought a miserable Gestümper to light in the geography class,
he made lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, rivers into continents, broke up the messes.
Finally, the spell he rummaged through a Amount of individual words and syllables until he had been
running perfectly and the tin medal, he had won a few months ago as a special honor, had to give back.

Chapter
Seven.

The more conscientious Tom sought to shackle his thoughts on the book, the more wandered them in the
distance. He was finally with a sigh and a yawn. It wanted him seem that it would never noon
today. The air was motionless, not a breath. It was the sleepy sleepy all day. The half-stifled murmur
of the twenty-five Children who were studying there so eager lulled,
a Toms soul, like the Gesumse of bees. Outside in the blazing sunshine,
Cardiff Hill ran in his most lush green large main prang through the
shimmering curtain of air that seen from a distance, the color of
purple had accepted - large due to the heat. A couple of birds fluttered
on lazy wings high in the zenith. No other living thing was visible
except a few cows, and slept also. Tom's heart yearned for freedom,
or at least some employment in order to kill these sad hours. His
hand went into his pocket and his face flashed a gleam of joyous gratitude,
his unconscious self. Then, the matchbox transported to the surface.
He released the bug and put it in front of him on the bench. The unreasonable
Animal was true by the same expression of thanks beautified, but it
was too early to rejoice, because as it was mine, thanks to davonzubegeben
met Tom pushed it with the stylus back and forced it to go in a different
direction. Tom's bosom friend sat next to him, sighing, as Tom had
just done, and now he was immediately aware of the deepest and most
gratifying interest met this lovely pastime. This bosom friend was
Joe Harper. The two boys were inseparable friends throughout the week
- Saturday they were bitter enemies.

It was more to me to come into communication with my wise teacher as a friend than even to
receive the wisdom she had to impart. She was dignified and reticent, but beneath her reserve,
as is often the case, was a sealed fountain of sympathy, which one who had the key could easily
unlock. Thinking of her nobleness of character, her piety, her learning, her power, and her
sweetness, it seems to me as if I had once had a Christian Zenobia or Hypatia for my teacher.

We speak with awed tenderness of our unseen guardian angels, but have we not all had our guiding
angels, who came to us in visible form, and, recognized or unknown, kept beside us on our difficult
path until they had done for us all they could? It seems to me as if one had succeeded another
by my side all through the years,--always some one whose influence made my heart stronger and
my way clearer; though sometimes it has been only a little child that came and laid its hand
into my hand as if I were its guide, instead of its being mine.

My dear and honored Lady-Principal was surely one of my strong guiding angels, sent to meet
me as I went to meet her upon my life-road, just at the point where I most needed her. For
the one great thing she gave her pupils,--scope, often quite left out of woman's education,--I
especially thank her. The true education is to go on forever. But how can there be any hopeful
going on without outlook? And having an infinite outlook, how can progress ever cease? It was
worth while for me to go to those Western prairies, if only for the broader mental view that
opened upon me in my pupilage there.

During my first year at the seminary I was appointed teacher of the Preparatory Department,--a
separate school of thirty or forty girls,--with the opportunity to go on with my studies at
the same time. It was a little hard, but I was very glad to do it, as I was unwilling to receive
an education without rendering an equivalent, and I did not wish to incur a debt.

I believe that the postponement of these maturer studies to my early womanhood, after I had
worked and taught, was a benefit to me. I had found out some of my special ignorances, what
the things were which I most needed to know. I had learned that the book-knowledge I so much
craved was not itself education, was not even culture, but only a help, an adjunct to both.
As I studied more earnestly, I cared for fewer books, but those few made themselves indispensable.
It still seems to me that in the Lowell mills, and in my log-cabin schoolhouse on the Western
prairies, I received the best part of my early education.

The great advantage of a seminary course to me was that under my broad-minded Principal I learned
what education really is: the penetrating deeper and rising higher into life, as well as making
continually wider explorations; the rounding of the whole human being out of its nebulous elements
into form, as planets and suns are rounded, until they give out safe and steady light. This
makes the process an infinite one, not possible to be completed at any school.

Returning from the West immediately after my graduation, I was for ten years or so a teacher
of young girls in seminaries much like my own Alma Mater. The best result to me of that experience
has been the friendship of my pupils,--a happiness which must last as long as life itself.

A book must end somewhere, and the natural boundary of this narrative is drawn with my leaving
New England for the West. I was to outline the story of my youth for the young, though I think
many a one among them might tell a story far more interesting than mine. The most beautiful
lives seldom find their way into print. Perhaps the most beautiful part of any life never does.
I should like to flatter myself so.

I could not stay at the West. It was never really home to me there, and my sojourn of six or
seven years on the prairies only deepened my love and longing for the dear old State of Massachusetts.
I came back in the summer of 1852, and the unwritten remainder of my sketch is chiefly that
of a teacher's and writer's experience; regarding which latter I will add, for the gratification
of those who have desired them, a few personal particulars.

While a student and teacher at the West I was still writing, and much that I wrote was published.
A poem printed in "Sartain's Magazine," sent there at the suggestion of the editor of the "Lowell
Offering" was the first for which I received remuneration--five dollars. Several poems written
for the manuscript school journal at Monticello Seminary are in the "Household" collection
of my verses, among them those entitled "Eureka," "Hand in Hand with Angels," and "Psyche at
School." These, and various others written soon after, were printed in the "National Era,"
in return for which a copy of the paper was sent me. Nothing further was asked or expected.

The little song "Hannah Binding Shoes"--written immediately after my return from the West,--was
a study from life--though not from any one life--in my native town. It was brought into notice
in a peculiar way,--by my being accused of stealing it, by the editor of the magazine to which
I had sent it with a request for the usual remuneration, if accepted. Accidentally or otherwise,
this editor lost my note and signature, and then denounced me by name in a newspaper as a "literary
thiefess;" having printed the verses with a nom de plume in his magazine without my knowledge.
It was awkward to have to come to my own defense. But the curious incident gave the song a
wide circulation.

I did not attempt writing for money until it became a necessity, when my health failed at teaching,
although I should long before then have liked to spend my whole time with my pen, could I have
done so. But it was imperative that I should have an assured income, however small; and every
one who has tried it knows how uncertain a support one's pen is, unless it has become very
famous indeed. My life as a teacher, however, I regard as part of my best preparation for whatever
I have since written. I do not know but I should recommend five or ten years of teaching as
the most profitable apprenticeship for a young person who wished to become an author. To be
a good teacher implies self-discipline, and a book written without something of that sort of
personal preparation cannot be a very valuable one.

Success in writing may mean many different things. I do not know that I have ever reached it,
except in the sense of liking better and better to write, and of finding expression easier.
It is something to have won the privilege of going on. Or they wept with them - and that
was even better than words.

Throughout the terrible night, the women waited for news, but when
finally The morning dawned got to hear nothing but: "Send more candles
and food"

So far as successful publication goes, perhaps the first I considered so came when a poem of
mine was accepted by the "Atlantic Monthly." Its title was "The Rose Enthroned," and as the
poet Lowell was at that time editing the magazine I felt especially gratified. That and another
poem, "The Loyal Woman's No," written early in the War of the Rebellion, were each attributed
to a different person among our prominent poets, the "Atlantic" at that time not giving authors'
signatures. Of course I knew the unlikeness; nevertheless, those who made the mistake paid
me an unintentional compliment. Compliments, however, are very cheap, and by no means signify
success. I have always regarded it as a better ambition to be a true woman than to become a
successful writer. Huckleberry examined it closely. Then
he said:

, Is he real? "

Tom opened his mouth and showed his tooth gap.

, Gut. "Said Huckleberry, he's real."

Tom closed the bug in the box, before the prison of the "pincers" have been was, and the two parted,
each greatly pleased with his replacement.

When Tom reached the small, secluded school, he was quite funny,
like one which has possible haste to enter. He hung up his hat and
sat down with busy Hurry to his place. The teacher, enthroned on a
great chair, had slept a little bit and drove in Toms institutions
in the air.

, Thomas Sawyer! " We can never
expect promotion here, except by taking our place among the lowest, and sharing their difficulties
until they are removed, and we all become graduates together for a higher school.

Humility, Sympathy, Helpfulness, and Faith are the best teachers in this great university,
and none of us are well educated who do not accept their training. The real satisfaction of
living is, and must forever be, the education of all for each, and of each for all. So let
us all try together to be good and faithful women, and not care too much for what the world
may think of us or of our abilities!

My little story is not a remarkable one, for I have never attempted remarkable things. In the
words of one of our honored elder writers, given in reply to a youthful aspirant who had asked
for some points of her "literary career,"--"I never had a career."

