This was the coarse commercial taste of the time, previous to the reforms of Ruskin and Eastlake.
The same might be said of Versailles. There is no true elegance in gilding and glass-work,
including mirrors, unless they be sparingly used.

The Hawthornes were equally overpowered by a dinner-party given by a millionaire and country
squire of Liscard Vale; "two enormous silver dish-covers, with the gleam of Damascus blades,
putting out all the rest of the light;" and after the fish, these were replaced by two other
enormous dishes of equal brilliancy. The table was shortly covered with an array of silver
dishes, reflecting the lights above in dazzling splendor. At one end of the table was a roast
goose and at the other a boiled turkey; while "cutlets, fricassees, ragouts, tongue, chicken-pies,"
and much else, filled the intermediate spaces, and the sideboard groaned under a round of beef
"like the dome of St. Peter's." It was fortunate that the American consul came to this Herculean
repast with an excellent appetite.

Henry Bright was their chief refuge from this flummery, as Hawthorne called it; "an extremely
interesting, sincere, earnest, independent, warm and generous hearted man; not at all dogmatic;
full of questions, and with ready answers. He is highly cultivated, and writes for the Westminster,"--a
man who respected formalities and could preserve decorum in his own household, but liked a
simple, unostentatious mode of living--in brief, he was a true English gentleman. Mrs. Hawthorne
has drawn his portrait with only less skill than her husband:

"His eyes are large, bright, and prominent, rather indicating great facility of language, which
he has. He is an Oxford scholar, and has decided literary tastes. He is delicately strung,
and is as transparent-minded and pure-hearted as a child, with great enthusiasm and earnestness
of character; and, though a Liberal, very loyal to his Queen and very admiring of the aristocracy."

He appears to have been engaged in the Australian carrying trade, and owned the largest sailing
vessel afloat.

Hawthorne went to an exhibition of English landscape paintings, and he remarked that Turner's
seemed too ethereal to have been painted by mortal hands,--the finest compliment that Turner
could have received, for in delicate effects of light and shade,--in painting the atmosphere
itself,--he has no rival.

In January, James Buchanan, who was then minister to England, came to visit Hawthorne, and
talked with him about the presidency,--for which he considered himself altogether too old;
but at the same time he did not suggest the renomination of Franklin Pierce. This, of course,
disclosed his own ambition, and as Hawthorne's impartial pen-and-ink sketch of him may not
be recognized by many readers, on account of the form in which it appears in the note-books,
we append it here, with the regret that Hawthorne could not have treated his friend Pierce
in an equally candid manner.

A certain amount of rusticity would seem to have been essential to a presidential candidate
during the middle of the past century.

During this dismal winter Hawthorne was beset more than ever, by nautical mendicants of all
countries,--Hungarians, Poles, Cubans, Spanish Americans, and French Republicans, who, unhappily
for him, had discovered that the American consul was a tender-hearted man. He had, beside,
to deal with a number of difficult cases of maltreated American sailors,--the more difficult,
because both parties to the suits were greatly given to lying, even on occasions when it would
have been more expedient for them to tell the truth. He has recorded one such in his diary,
that deserves more than a superficial consideration.

An American bark was on the point of sailing, when the captain cast ashore a bruised and battered-looking
man, who made his way painfully to the consulate, and begged Hawthorne for a permit to be placed
in the hospital. He called himself the son of a South Carolina farmer, and stated that he had
gone on board this vessel with a load of farm products, but had been impressed by the captain
for the voyage, and had been so maltreated, that he thought he would die,--and so he did, not
long afterward, at the hospital. Letters were found upon him, substantiating the statement
concerning his father, but it was discovered, from the same source, that he was a jail-bird,
and the tattooed figures upon his arms showed that he had been a sailor of many years' standing,
although he had denied this to the consul. Hawthorne speaks of him as an innocent man, the
victim of criminal brutality little less than murder; it is certainly difficult to account
for such severe ill-treatment, but the man was clearly a bad character, and it is also true
that sea-captains do not interfere with their deck-hands without some kind of provocation.
The man clung desperately to life up to the last moment, and the letters he carried with him
indicated that he was more intelligent than the average of the nautical fraternity.

In June, Hawthorne went with his family to Leamington, of which he afterward published an account
in the Atlantic Monthly, criticised at the time for the manner in which he referred to English
ladies, as "covering a large area of Nature's foot-stool"; but this element in Hawthorne's
English writing has already been considered. From Leamington he went, early in July, to the
English lakes, especially Windermere, and fortunately found time to thoroughly enjoy them.
He enjoyed them not only for their scenery, which he preferred to that of New England, but
also as illustrations to many descriptive passages in Wordsworth's poetry, which serves the
same purpose in the guidebook of that region, as "Childe Harold" serves in the guidebooks for
Italy and Greece. Hawthorne also was interested in such places for the sake of their associations.
He describes Wordsworth's house, the grounds about it, and the cemetery where he lies, with
the accuracy of a scientific report. He finds the grass growing too high about the head-stone
of Wordsworth's grave, and plucks it away with his own hands, reflecting that it may have drawn
its nourishment from his mortal remains. We may suppose that he preserved this grass, and it
is only from such incidental circumstances that we discover who were Hawthorne's favorites
among poets and other distinguished writers. He twice visited Wordsworth's grave.

Their first two winters in Liverpool had not proved favorable to Mrs. Hawthorne's health She
had contracted a disorder in her throat from the prevailing dampness, which threatened to become
chronic, and her husband felt that it would not be prudent for her to remain there another
winter. He thought of resigning and returning to America. Then he thought of exchanging his
consulship for one in southern Europe, although the salaries of the more southern consulates
were hardly sufficient to support a married man. Then he thought of exchanging places with
O'Sullivan, but he hardly knew languages well enough for an ambassador. The doctors, however,
had advised Mrs. Hawthorne to spend a winter at Madeira, and she courageously solved the problem
by proposing to go there alone with her daughters, for which Lisbon and O'Sullivan would serve
as a stepping-stone by the way. There are wives who would prefer such an expedition to spending
a winter in England with their husbands, but Mrs. Hawthorne was not of that mould, and in her
case it was a brave thing to do.

Accordingly, on the second Monday in October, Mrs. Hawthorne and her two daughters sailed for
Lisbon. She was presented at court there; concerning which occasion she wrote a lengthy and
very interesting account to her husband, published in her son's biography. The King of Portugal
held a long conversation with her and Minister O'Sullivan, and she describes him as dressed
in a flamboyant manner,--a scarlet uniform, lavishly ornamented with diamonds. With how much
better taste did the Empress of Austria receive the President of the French Republic,--in a
simple robe of black velvet, fastened at her throat with a diamond brooch. One can envy Mrs.
Hawthorne a winter at Madeira, for there is no place in Europe pleasanter for that purpose,
unless it be Rome. Meanwhile, her husband spent the winter with his son (who was now old enough
to be trusted safely about the streets), at a sea- captains' boarding-house in Liverpool. There,
as in Salem, he felt himself most companionable in such company, as he had been accustomed
to it from boyhood; and it appears that at this time he was in the habit of composing fables
for the entertainment of Julian, not unlike the yarns which sailors often spin to beguile landsmen.
[Footnote: J. Hawthorne, ii. 75.]

Hawthorne found his third winter in Liverpool dismal enough without his wife and the two little
girls, and this feeling was considerably increased by his dislike for the sea-captains' boarding-house
keeper, [Footnote: English Note-book, November 28, 1855.]with whom he was living, and concerning
whom he remarks, that a woman in England "is either decidedly a lady or decidedly not." She
would not have annoyed him so much, had it not been for "her bustle, affectation, intensity,
and pretension of literary taste." The race of landladies contains curious specimens, although
we have met with some who were real ladies nevertheless. Thackeray's description of a French
boarding-house keeper in "The Adventures of Philip" goes to every heart. Hawthorne writes much
in his diary, at this juncture, of his friend Francis Bennoch, who clearly did the best he
could, as a man and a brother, to make life cheerful for his American friend; a true, sturdy,
warm-hearted Englishman.

Christmas was celebrated at Mrs. Blodgett's, after the fashion of a second-rate English house
of entertainment. The servants hung mistletoe about in various places, and woe to the unlucky
wight that was caught under it. Hawthorne presents an amusing picture of his boy Julian, nine
years old, struggling against the endearments of a chamber-maid, and believes that he himself
was the only male person in the house that escaped. [Footnote: English Note-book, December,
1855.]If any man would be sure to escape that benediction, he would have been the one; for
no one could be more averse to public demonstrations of affection.

Hawthorne was witness to a curious strategic manouvre between President Pierce and Minister
Buchanan, which, however, he was not sufficiently familiar with practical politics to perceive
the full meaning of. On the way to Southampton with his wife in October, they called on Buchanan
in London, and were not only civilly but kindly received. Mrs. Hawthorne wished to view the
Houses of Parliament while they were in session, and the ambassador made a knot in his handkerchief,
so as to be sure to remember his promise to her. He informed Hawthorne at that time of his
desire to return to America, but stated that the President had just written to him, requesting
him to remain until April, although he was determined not to do so. He excused himself on the
plea of old age, and Hawthorne seems to have had a suspicion of the insincerity of this, but
concluded on reflection not to harbor it. Pierce knew already that Buchanan was his most dangerous
rival for renomination, and desired that he should remain as far off as possible; while Buchanan
was aware that, if he intended to be on the ground, he must not return so late as to attract
public attention. There were so many presidential aspirants that Pierce may have found it difficult
to supply Buchanan's place, for the time being.

Buchanan delayed a respectful length of time, and then handed in his resignation. His successor,
George M. Dallas, arrived at Liverpool during the second week of March, and Hawthorne who does
not mention him by name, called upon him at once, and gives us this valuable portrait of him.
[Footnote: English Note-book, March, 1856.]

Morton McMichael, whose statue now stands in Fairmount Park, once related this incident concerning
Dallas, at a meeting of the Philadelphia Hock Club. Somewhere about 1850 Dallas was invited
to deliver a 4th of July oration at Harrisburg, where McMichael was also requested to read
the Declaration of Independence. McMichael performed his part of the ceremony, and sat down;
then Dallas arose and thanked the assembly for honoring him with such an invitation, but confessed
to some difficulty in considering what he should say, for an occasion which had been celebrated
by so many famous orators; but that a few nights since, while he was lying awake, it occurred
to him what he should say to them. After this he proceeded to read his address from a newspaper
printed in 1841, which the audience could not see, but which McMichael, from his position on
the platform, could see perfectly well.

Hawthorne's description suggests a man somewhat like this; but the opinion of the Hock Club
was that Dallas was not greatly to blame; for how could any man make two distinct and original
4th of July orations?

The 1st of April 1856, Hawthorne and Bennoch set off on a bachelor expedition of their own,
first to visit Tupper at Albany, as has been already related, and then going to view a muster
of British troops at Aldershot; thence to Battle Abbey, which Hawthorne greatly admired, and
the field of Hastings, where England's greatness began in defeat. He does not mention the battle,
however, in his diary, and it may be remarked that, generally, Hawthorne felt little interest
in historical subjects. After this, they went to London, where Bennoch introduced Hawthorne
at the Milton Club and the Reform Club. At the former, he again encountered Martin F. Tupper,
and became acquainted with Tom Taylor, the editor of Punch, as well as other writers and editors,
of whom he had not previously heard. The Club was by no means Miltonic, and one would suppose
not exactly the place where Hawthorne would find himself much at home. Neither were the proceedings
altogether in good taste. Bennoch opened the ball with a highly eulogistic speech about Hawthorne,
and was followed by some fifty others in a similar strain, so that the unfortunate incumbent
must have wished that the earth would open and let him down to the shades of night below. On
such an occasion, even a feather weight becomes a burden. Oh, for a boy, with a tin horn!

Neither did Hawthorne apparently find his peers at the Reform Club. Douglas Jerrold, who reminded
him somewhat of Ellery Channing, was the most notable writer he met there. There was, however,
very little speech-making, and plenty of good conversation. Unfortunately, he offended Jerrold,
by using the word "acrid" as applied to his writing, instead of some other word, which he could
not think of at the moment. The difficulty, however, was made up over a fresh bottle of Burgundy,
and with the help of Hawthorne's unlimited good-will, so that they parted excellent friends,
and much the better for having known each other. Either Jerrold or some other present told
Hawthorne that the English aristocracy, for the most part hated, despised, and feared men of
literary genius. Is it not much the same in America?

After these two celebrations, and attending the Lord Mayor's banquet, where he admired the
beautiful Jewess whom he has described as Miriam in "The Marble Faun," Hawthorne returned to
Liverpool; and early in May took another recess, with a Mr. Bowman, to York, Edinburgh, the
Trossachs, Abbotsford, and all the haunts of Scott and Burns; with his account of which a large
portion of the second volume of English Note- books is filled; so that, if Scotland should
sink into the sea, as a portion is already supposed to have done in antediluvian times, all
those places could be reconstructed through Hawthorne's description of them.

This expedition lasted nearly three weeks, and on June 12 Hawthorne received word that his
wife, with Una and Rose, had already landed at Southampton. He hastened at once to meet them,
greatly rejoiced to find Mrs. Hawthorne entirely restored to health. They had been separated
for more than seven months.

They first proceeded to Salisbury, to see the cathedral and Stonehenge,--the former, very impressive
externally, but not so satisfactory within; and the latter, a work of man emerging out of Nature.
Then they went to London, to enjoy the June season, and see the regular course of sights in
that huge metropolis. They visited St. Paul's, the Tower, Guildhall, the National Gallery,
the British Museum, Westminster Abbey, and the Houses of Parliament, apparently finding as
much satisfaction in this conventional occupation as they did in the social entertainments
of London. At the house of Mr. S. C. Hall, a noted entertainer of those days, Hawthorne became
acquainted with the most celebrated singer of her time, or perhaps of all time; namely, Jenny
Lind. No modern orator has held such a sway over the hearts of men and women, as that Swedish
nightingale,--for the purity of her voice seemed no more than the emanation of her lofty nature.
Hawthorne describes her as a frank, sincere person, rather tall,--certainly no beauty, but
with sense and self-reliance in her aspect and manners. She immediately gave Hawthorne an illustration
of her frankness by complaining of the unhealthy manner in which Americans, and especially
American women, lived. This seems like a prosaic subject for such a person, but it was natural
enough; for a concert singer has to live like a race-horse, and this would be what would constantly
strike her attention in a foreign country. Hawthorne rallied to the support of his countrywomen,
and believed that they were, on the whole, as healthy and long-lived as Europeans. This may
be so now, but there has been great improvement in the American mode of living, during the
past fifty years, and we can imagine that Jenny Lind often found it difficult to obtain such
food as she required.

That she should have requested an introduction to Hawthorne is significant of her interest
in American literature, and suggests a taste as refined and elevated as her music.

It was on Hawthorne's wedding-day this happened, and a few days later he was invited to a select
company at Monckton Milnes's, which included Macaulay, the Brownings, and Professor Ticknor.
He found both the Brownings exceedingly pleasant and accessible, but was somewhat startled
to find that Mrs. Browning was a believer in spiritism--not such a sound and healthy intelligence
as the author of "Middle-march," and he might have been still more so, if he had known that
she and her husband were ardent admirers of Louis Napoleon. That was something which an American
in those days could not quite understand. However, he found her an exceedingly pleasant companion.
After dinner they looked over several volumes of autographs, in which Oliver Cromwell's was
the only one that would to-day be more valuable than Hawthorne's own.

A breakfast at Monckton Milnes's usually included the reading of a copy of verses of his own
composition, but perhaps he had not yet reached that stage on the present occasion.

Hawthorne heard such varied and conflicting accounts of Charles Dickens that he hardly knew
whether he would like to meet him or not. He wanted to see Tennyson when he was at the Isle
of Wight, but feared that his visit might be looked on as an intrusion, by a person who lived
so retired a life,--judging perhaps from his own experience. While at Windermere he paused
for a moment in front of Harriet Martineau's cottage, but on second thought he concluded to
leave the good deaf lady in peace.

Conway speaks of Hawthorne's social life in England as a failure; but failure suggests an effort
in some direction or other, and Hawthorne made no social efforts. Being lionized was not his
business. He had seen enough of it during the London season of 1856, and after that he retired
into his domestic shell, cultivating the acquaintance of his wife and children more assiduously
than ever, so that even his two faithful allies, Bright and Bennoch, found it difficult to
withdraw him from it. Watching the development of a fine child is much more satisfactory than
any course of fashionable entertainments--even than Lowell's twenty-nine dinner-parties in
the month of June. Nothing becomes more tedious than long-continued pleasure-seeking, with
post- prandial speeches and a constant effort to be agreeable.

Hawthorne remained in England fully seventeen months after this, and made a number of excursions;
especially one to Oxford, where he and his family were dined by a former mayor of the city,
and where he greatly admired the broad verdant grounds and Gothic architecture of the colleges;
and also a second journey to Edinburgh and the Trossachs, undertaken for the benefit of Mrs.
Hawthorne and Una. But we hear no more of him in London society, and it only remains for us
to chronicle his exceptional kindness to an unfortunate American woman.

It seems strange that the first doubt in regard to the authorship of Shakespeare should have
originated on this side of the Atlantic. If Dante was a self-educated poet, there seems no
good reason why Shakespeare should not have been; and if the greatest of French writers earned
his living as an actor, why should not the greatest of English writers have done the same?
That would seem to be much more in harmony with the central idea of American life--the principle
of self- helpfulness; but this is a skeptical epoch, and the tendency of our political institutions
is toward skepticism of character and distrust of tradition. Hence we have Delia Bacon, Holmes,
and Donnelly.

Hawthorne has given future generations an account of Delia Bacon, which will endure as the
portrait of a gifted and interesting woman, diverted from the normal channels of feminine activity
by the force of a single idea; but he makes no mention of his efforts in her behalf. He found
her in the lodgings of a London tradesman, and although she received him in a pleasant and
lady-like manner, he quickly perceived that her mind was in an abnormal condition, and that
it was positively dangerous to discuss her favorite topic in a rational manner. He had a feeling
that the least opposition on his part to the Baconian theory would result in his expulsion
from the room, yet he found her conversation interesting, and recognized that if her conclusions
were erroneous she had nevertheless unearthed valuable historic material, which ought to be
given to the world. He loaned her money, which he did not expect to be repaid, and exerted
himself to find a publisher for her, recollecting perhaps the vows he had made to the gods
in the days of his own obscurity. He mentions in his diary calling on the Rutledges for this
purpose--where he saw Charles Reade, a tall, strong-looking man, just leaving the office. He
also wrote to Ticknor & Fields, and finally did get Miss Bacon's volume brought out in London.
The critics treated it in a contemptuous manner, as a desecration of Shakespeare's memory;
and Hawthorne was prepared for this, but it opened a new era in English bibliography. Shortly
after the publication of her book Miss Bacon became insane.

To many this appeared like a Quixotic adventure, but now we can see that it was not, and that
it was necessary in its way to prove the generosity of Hawthorne. We can readily infer from
it what he might have done with ampler means, and what he must often have wished to do. To
be sure, the truest kindness to Delia Bacon would have been to have purchased a ticket on a
Cunard steamer for her, after her own funds had given out, and to have persuaded her to return
to her own country; but those who have dealt with persons whose whole vitality is absorbed
in a single idea, can testify how difficult, if not impossible, this would have been. It redounds
the more to Hawthorne's credit that although Elizabeth Peabody was converted to Delia Bacon's
theory, Hawthorne himself never entertained misgivings as to the reality of Shakespeare as
a poet and a dramatist.

He had doubts, however, and I felt the same in regard to the authenticity of the verses on
Shakespeare's marble slab. It is fortunate that Miss Bacon's purpose of opening the tomb at
Stratford was not carried out, but that is no reason why it should not be opened in a properly
conducted manner, for scientific purposes--in order to discover all that is possible concerning
so remarkable and mysterious a personality. Raphael's tomb has been opened, and why should
not Shakespeare's be also?

At the Democratic convention in 1856 the Southern delegates wished to renominate Franklin Pierce,
but the Northern delegates refused their agreement to this, because they knew that in such
a case they would be liable to defeat in their own districts. James Buchanan was accordingly
nominated, and Pierce's fears in regard to him were fully realized. He was elected in November,
and the following June appointed Beverly Tucker to succeed Hawthorne as consul at Liverpool.
Hawthorne resigned his office on July 1, 1857, and went with his family on a long tour in Scotland.
Two weeks earlier he had written a memorial to the Secretary of State concerning the maltreatment
of a special class of seamen, which deserved more consideration than it received from the government
at Washington.

The gold discoveries in California had induced a large immigration to America from the British
Isles, and many who went thither in hopes of bettering their fortunes became destitute from
lack of employment, and attempted to work their passage back to Liverpool in American sailing
vessels. It is likely that they often represented themselves as more experienced mariners than
they actually were, and there were also a good many stowaways who might expect little mercy;
but there was no court in England that could take cognizance of their wrongs,--in order to
obtain justice they would have to return to America,--and it cannot be doubted that the more
brutal sort of officers took advantage of this fact. The evil became so notorious that the
British minister at Washington requested Pierce's administration to have legislation enacted
that would cover this class of cases, but the President declined to interfere. This may have
been prudent policy, but Hawthorne felt for the sufferers, and the memorial that he submitted
to our government on their account has a dignity, a clearness and cogency of statement, worthy
of Blackstone or Marshall. It is in marked contrast to the evasive reply of Secretary Cass,
both for its fine English and for the directness of its logic. It is published at length in
Julian Hawthorne's biography of his father, and is unique for the insight which it affords
as to Hawthorne's mental ability in this direction. We may infer from it that if he had made
a study of jurisprudence, he might have risen to the highest position as a writer on law.

Hawthorne's English Note-books are the least interesting of that series, on account of the
literal descriptions of castles, abbeys, scenery and palaces, with which they abound. The perfectly
cultivated condition of England and Scotland, so far as he went in the latter country, is not
stimulating to the imagination; for, as he says somewhere, even the trees seemed to be thoroughly
domesticated. They are excellent reading for Americans who have never been to England, or for
those who wish to renew their memories in regard to certain places there--perhaps better for
the latter than for the former; and there are fine passages in them, especially his descriptions
of the old abbeys and Gothic cathedrals, which seem to have delighted him more than the gardens
at Blenheim and Eton, and to have brought to the surface a rare quality in his nature, or otherwise
hidden in its depths,--his enthusiasm. Never before did words fail him until he attempted to
describe the effect of a Gothic cathedral,--the time-honored mystery of its arches, the sober
radiance of its stained windows, and the solemn aspiration of its lofty vault. As Schiller
says, they are the monuments of a mighty civilization of which we know only too little.

Hawthorne's object in writing these detailed accounts of his various expeditions becomes apparent
from a passage in his Note-book, of the date of August 21, 1856, in which he says: "In my English
romance, an American might bring a certain tradition from over the sea, and so discover the
cross which had been long since forgotten." It may have been his intention from the first to
write a romance based on English soil, but that soil was no longer productive of such intellectual
fruit, except in the form in which Dickens dug it up, like peat, out of the lower classes.
We find Francis Bennoch writing to Hawthorne after his return to America, [Footnote: Mrs. Lathrop,
310.] hoping to encourage him in this direction, but without apparent effect. Instead of a
romance, he made a collection of essays from those portions of his diary which were most closely
connected together, enlarging them and rounding them out, which he published after his return
to America, in the volume we have often referred to as "Our Old Home." But as truthful studies
of English life and manners Mrs. Hawthorne's letters, though not always sensible, are much
more interesting than her husband's diary.

