"I think--I think that'll be awfully nice, don't you, Thad?" said Diantha.

And the loser in the unequal contest surrendered without a blow as he answered, "Just as you say."

Persis had not overestimated her persuasive powers.  She actually brought the Sinclairs to
agree to the liberal terms she had promised the young people.  The hauteur with which Stanley
Sinclair received her at his office the following day, and the explicitness of his statement
that he was not anxious for her advice concerning his domestic affairs, proved unavailing before
Persis' matter-of-fact bluntness.  Anger availed him little since she remained cool.  His irony
rebounded harmless from her absolute certainty of being in the right.  Forced to retreat step
by step, he ended by conceding all that she demanded for the lovers.  If he had an air when
he bade her good morning, of resolving never to forgive her, the knowledge that she had gained
all she came for imparted an unfeigned cordiality to her farewell.

The interview with Annabel was briefer and more dramatic, but quite as conclusive.  As she
pondered on the success that had attended her efforts, Persis indulged in brief philosophy.

"Anybody's at a terrible disadvantage that's afraid of the truth.  Now, it doesn't worry me
a mite to have Annabel call me an old maid, but if I tell her she's thirty-eight she feels
worse than if I'd stuck a knife into her.  Annabel makes me think of those squirming things
that live under stones.  All you have to do to bring 'em to terms is to turn the stone over
and let the light in on 'em.  It beats all how Annabel will scramble to get away from the truth."

The man commissioned to bring home Persis Dale's car relished his task enormously.  He told
every one that there wasn't a thing the matter with the machine.  She had just stalled her
engine and didn't know enough to get it started again.  All Clematis enjoyed the joke, Persis
in particular.

CHAPTER XIX

A DEFERRED INTERMENT

Except for the clerk at the Clematis House the first person to welcome Justin Ware on his next
return to his native town was Annabel Sinclair. She wore a little white veil, vastly becoming,
but masking a tragedy, since she thereby acknowledged the deterioration of her complexion.
The dramatic encounter took place one block from the hotel, and Annabel clasping her gloved
hands uttered the single word; "You!"

The greeting, abrupt in type, is anything else on the lips of a woman who has studied the possibilities
of that monosyllable.  On Annabel's lips it expressed incredulous wonder, gentle reproach and
strong feeling held in check by womanly modesty.  No man can rise superior to this subtle flattery.
Justin greeted her as if she were the woman of his dreams.

"It's really you--after almost a year."  The reproach was uppermost in her voice now, but she
mitigated its severity by allowing him to retain possession of the hand he had seized.

"It has been a long year--for me," replied Justin, and the rival artist thrilled with responsive
admiration.  For his manner said as plainly as words that throughout those dragging twelve
months one thought had possessed him, the desire to see her again.

"Were you on your way home?  May I walk with you?"  He asked the favor with deferential tenderness.
She granted it with an effective flutter of the lids.  Each, realizing the other's proficiency
in the game, was spurred to emulation.

And then abruptly the curtain dropped on the play, for at the first street corner, an automobile
barked a warning.  Justin, who had gallantly taken his companion's arm, the better to assist
her in the perils of the crossing, raised his eyes and at once lost interest in Annabel Sinclair
and her kind.

The woman driving the car to all appearances had not recognized him, her absorption preventing
her from differentiating the human species beyond the broad classification of those likely
to be run over and those in no such danger.  Her color was high, and her face despite a grim
intentness indicated keen satisfaction.  A handsome boy sat beside her, and Justin had a confused
impression of a number of other children in charge of a buxom girl on the back seat.  He stood
motionless gazing after the flying car and oblivious to Annabel's resentful glances.

"Well, good afternoon if you've decided to spend the rest of the day on the street corner."

Justin roused himself.  But he had lost heart in these amateur theatricals.

"Whose car is Persis Dale driving?"

"Her own.  A year brings changes, you see, Mr. Ware.  The car and the children all belong to her."

"What!" he shouted.  His first not unnatural idea was that Persis had become the wife of a
prosperous widower, and he was astonished at the pang for which this thought was responsible.
Resentfully Annabel recognized the difference between the voice of real emotion and counterfeit
tenderness.

Her lips curled as she allayed his consternation.  "She came into a little money--an obliging
aunt died, I believe.  Pity it hadn't come early enough to do her some real good.  She patched
up her old house, and adopted five or six orphan-asylum kids, and I suppose the poor thing
thinks she's having a good time."  Even to the most prejudiced eye Annabel could not have looked
beautiful at that moment.  The venom that poisoned her spirit, disfigured her face like a scar.
Hag-ridden by those unlovely twins, jealousy and hate, she looked for the instant prematurely old.

Justin did not notice.  He was absorbed in gleaning from her all possible information as to
the change in Persis' circumstances and quite indifferent to the emotions of his reluctant
informant.  With the relentlessness of the thoroughly selfish, he continued his cross-examination
till Annabel's mind seemed to herself a squeezed orange.  She felt something like terror mingling
with a sense of physical exhaustion.  It always frightened her to find herself unable to keep
a man's attention focused on herself when she had him to herself.

"When shall I see you again?" she asked, as she approached her home. Had the interview continued
with the dramatic intensity of its beginning, she could safely have left him to ask that question.
Under the circumstances she did not dare.

"I'm not quite sure.  I have some business that has hung fire an unconscionable time, and ungallant
as it seems, we twentieth century fellows have to put business before pleasure."  He smiled
propitiatingly and therein lay the sting, that he did not even take the trouble to conceal
that he was trying to appease her.  Their parting sank to the level of the commonplace for
he shook hands hastily, and her look of appeal flattened itself ineffectively against his preoccupation.

A little skilful quizzing of the hotel clerk confirmed in every detail Annabel's remarkable
story, and in his own room Justin sat down to think the matter through to a conclusion.  The
renewal of his acquaintance with Persis Dale nearly a year earlier had enlightened him as to
the tenacity of certain impressions he had thought obliterated long before.  The girl he had
loved in his callow youth and had forgotten, still retained something of her old fascination
for him.  A year earlier this discovery was responsible for an amused wonder at himself, coupled
with a realization of the need of caution.  Now common sense took sides with his lingering
fondness.  Persis Dale, with a comfortable little fortune added to her unique personality,
had become distinctly desirable.  She was a woman with an infinite capacity for surprises,
which meant that she would not bore the man she married, unduly.  With a little metropolitan
polish added to her native cleverness she should be able to give a good account of herself
socially.  The children were a drawback of course, but there must be some way of getting rid
of an adopted family of which one tired.  And it was quite impossible that Persis' fondness
for the little ones she had picked up the other day, so to speak, would prove a serious rival
to an affection which had been a vital factor in her life for more than twenty years.

By supper-time he had made up his mind.  With a little sigh for the freedom he was relinquishing,
he resolved on matrimony.  He had always intended to marry somebody and domesticity with Persis
promised at least commonplace comfort, something Justin was the last man on earth to despise.
With the children disposed of, Joel sent adrift and Persis' money wisely handled, there was
no reason why they should not get on better than the majority of married people.  Justin ate
an unusually hearty supper as if to fortify himself for his wooing.

He had made up his mind to ignore the change in Persis' circumstances that his call might seem
a spontaneous tribute to her personal attractions.  But the change in the house and its furnishings
was so pronounced that he judged it bad policy to pass it over without comment.  "I thought
for a minute I'd come to the wrong house, Persis, and I felt positively alarmed about myself.
I knew if I couldn't find the Dale place blindfolded, I needed the services of a nerve specialist."
He laughed a little with an air of catching himself up before he had said too much, something
he had found effective with many women.

She smiled upon him gravely.  "It was the improvements that mixed you up, I suppose.  There
was a spot on the ceiling of mother's room where the rain leaked through the winter she died.
After the papering was finished I missed that spot as if it had been human.  Time and again
when I went into that room I'd jump as if I'd got into somebody else's house by mistake." 
Her voice lost a subtle pensive quality as she added: "But the new furniture ain't the best
of the changes, Justin.  I wish I could show you the children, but they're all in bed and asleep."

"I'm not sure I'm sorry."  Justin's voice was low and caressing.  "It's always been hard for
us two to have any time alone.  I used to wonder when I came here who would be sitting by and
listening to every word we said, your father or your mother or Joel or some other young fellow
who'd discovered the most charming girl in Clematis.  If fate has granted us an evening to
ourselves at last, let's be thankful."

He thought it a very fair beginning.  The reference to their early love affair could not fail
to soften her.  The implication that the interference of interested third parties was responsible
for keeping them apart was cleverly done.  It was a distinct surprise at the end of an hour
to find himself no further along than at the start.  Justin had no intention of offering his
hand and heart to any woman without a reasonable assurance of a rapturous acceptance, and singularly
enough, he was far from certainty.  He had been making love in a restrained and subtle fashion
for the better part of an hour and was ready for an avowal of his devotion as soon as Persis
showed any intention of meeting him half-way.  But up to this point, she had skilfully disguised
any such intention, and while showing no displeasure at the sentimental tendency disclosed
in his remark, had so persistently injected a tincture of matter-of-factness into the conversation
that he seemed as far as ever from coming to the point.  With it all, her air was friendly.
He suspected her of playing with him, taking her revenge by keeping him in doubt overnight.

Resistance seldom detracts from a woman's value in a man's eyes.  When Justin rose to go he
was almost ready to believe himself in love.  He was a little angry, slightly amused and more
in doubt as to her state of mind than he often felt regarding his opponents in the eternal
duel. When Persis gave him her hand for good night he held it in both his own for a moment
and raised it to his lips.  The curious rekindling of a burned-out tenderness, due to her lack
of responsiveness, gave the act an effect of sincerity which impressed him, even while he thrilled
with honest passion, as an excellent move.

He looked into her eyes and found them gravely contemplative. "Justin," she said, "there's
something I want to speak to you about if you're not in a hurry."

He tingled with triumph.  Women were all alike.  She could play the coquette for an hour, but
she could not let him leave her till she had heard the words he had been trying all the evening
to speak.  He put down his hat.  "You know of course," he said with an air of repressed feeling,
"that I am at your service now and always."  And as her eyes fell he laid his hand on hers.

It was not easy to restore the balance, but Persis did it.  "The property my aunt left me,"
she began in her most matter-of-fact voice, "brings me a pretty fair income, but nothing's
good enough as long as it might be better.  Only yesterday I got an offer of ten thousand dollars
for some water-works stock in a place out West where Aunt Persis Ann lived for a good many years."

Justin put his hands in his pockets, the character of her opening rendering sentimental advances
ludicrously inopportune.

"Have you any idea what income you get from that stock?"

"Last year it was a thousand and fifty dollars."

"Why, that's over ten per cent. on what the fellow offers you," Justin exclaimed, and Persis
nodded.

"Yes, about ten per cent.  And in the Apple of Eden Investment Company I'd be guaranteed twenty-five
per cent. by the tenth year, with a good chance to double my money even before that.  I didn't
stop you to ask your advice, Justin, for I can see you'd feel a little delicate about urging
me to invest in your company.  But what I've heard from Mis' Hornblower makes it plain enough
that the best thing for me to do is to turn my property into cash as fast as I can and put
every penny into apples."

Justin crossed his feet, reflecting impatiently that it was high time for Persis Dale to have
a husband.  His elation over all that was implied by her consulting him on so personal a matter,
was almost lost in his feeling of annoyance.  This made it plain that he must lose no time,
but marry her offhand.  What with her penchant for orphans and for foolish investments, she
would make ducks and drakes of her fortune unless a man peremptorily took the helm.

"It would be a pity to be precipitate, Persis.  An investment that pays ten per cent. isn't
to be sneezed at nowadays.  And this fellow's offer just now looks as if the stock wasn't in
any danger of depreciating."

He glanced at her and was annoyed to find her face stubborn.  Had she been the type of woman
to accept masculine counsel as akin to divine guidance, his task would have been easier.  Her
evident lack of yielding forced him to take a superior tone.

"My dear girl, you will admit that I am a little better versed in business matters than you
are.  And my advice is to hold on to your stock unless you should have a better reason for
selling than appears at present."

"Ten per cent. looks pretty well alongside the Savings bank, I'll admit.  But why shouldn't
I get twenty-five?  I've got these children to educate.  I can use considerable more than if
I just had myself to think of."

He gulped down his vexation, "Raising apples is a science, Persis.  The weakness of the American
investor is to imagine that he can do whatever any other fellow has done.  Because some horticultural
shark doubles his money on his orchard in a banner year, you fancy you can do the same every year."

"Gracious, Justin!  I'm not going into apple-raising.  I've got my hands full enough without
that.  I'm going to leave the company to run my orchard for me.  All they ask is twenty-five
per cent of the net profits, but you know that without my telling you."

"And suppose there comes a year like 1896, when apples didn't bring enough to pay for the barrels
they were packed in?  You can't count on top-notch prices every season."

"No, but I can count on the company's guarantee."

An oath, a tribute to her obstinacy, winged through his brain.  In his exasperation he forgot
caution.

"That guarantee--"

"Well?"

"There's nothing to hold us after you've become the owner of the property.  If we find that
running your orchard isn't profitable, as we might easily do after one or two bad seasons,
we could slip from under, and you could use the guarantee as you call it, for curl papers.
That's all it would be good for."

He was glad to see that he had shaken her foolish stubbornness at last. She caught her breath
like one jerked back from an unrealized danger by a friendly hand.

"I--I guess it's lucky I consulted you, Justin.  It's foolish for a woman to think that she's
up to all the tricks in business nowadays." The slight trembling of her hand tempted him to
kiss it, though he compromised by merely taking it again.

"If I've helped you a little, Persis, dear girl, I'm very happy.  I only wish you were willing
to make use of me always."  His hope that this was the psychological moment was dashed when
ignoring the attempted caress, she grasped his hand and shook if vigorously.

"Good night, Justin.  Thank you for setting me right in that matter.  I believe that's the
baby starting to cry.  I'll have to hurry up before she rouses the house."

But she got no farther than the foot of the stairs on this errand, and Justin, letting himself
out, gave voice to the oath he had thought more than once that evening.  Persis stood listening
as he made his way down the walk, but up-stairs all was still.  She returned to the living-room
rather slowly.  Through all the various changes in the household, indicative of increased prosperity,
the photograph in the blue plush frame had triumphantly retained its post of honor on the mantel,
a landmark of constancy.  Now she took it up with hands that trembled.

"It's not that I've got anything against you."  She addressed it as if there were an intelligence
back of the vacuous pleasantness of the young face.  "It's only that there's not any you and
hasn't been for I don't know how long.  It's so much deader than death, all ashes to ashes
and dust to dust and the spirit turned into something different." And then Justin's hopes would
have soared high had he seen her, for she kissed the lips that smiled at her, a strange kiss
in which pity blended with forgiveness.

Holding fast to the blue plush frame, Persis passed through the house to the woodshed, found
a trowel among the garden tools, and then made her way into the night.  The sky was overcast,
hiding the stars, but the flitting fire-flies outlined strange constellations against the velvety
darkness.  Persis groped her way through the dewy grass toward the syringa bush, guided as
much by the odor of blossoms as by sight, and falling on her knees used her trowel industriously
for many minutes.  And when the grave was deep enough, she laid the plush frame into its recesses,
hiding the smile she once had loved with heaped-up earth.  Since so many of her girlish hopes
were covered by that same earth, it is not strange that her tears fell upon the little mound.

"I'm going to miss that picture same as if it was alive.  It was always smiling so cheerful
that it cheered me just to look at it.  But when a thing's dead, it ought to be buried, and
as it is, I guess this funeral is pretty near twenty years behind time."

CHAPTER XX

CHECKMATE

In spite of the lack of success which had attended his tentative wooing, Justin Ware slept
soundly, woke cheerful and made a comfortable breakfast.  Over his coffee and pancakes he outlined
not the plans for a systematic siege of Persis' affections, but the maneuver through which
he hoped to carry the Hornblower citadel by storm.  He had used no meaningless figure of speech
when he assured Annabel of his practise of making pleasure secondary to business.  Robert Hornblower's
resistance had piqued and baffled him, the more as he knew that Mrs. Hornblower was his uncompromising
ally.  Indeed his presence in Clematis at this juncture was due to a letter from this invaluable
colleague, casually mentioning that her husband had received an offer for the farm which she
wished he might be induced to accept.  "While I leave all such matters for Robert to decide,
as I consider to be a wife's plain duty," wrote Mrs. Hornblower, with a lavish use of italics,
"I have not hesitated to tell him that I think his closing with the offer is for the best interests
of us all."  And Justin had interpreted the communication to mean that his confederate believed
the day of victory at hand.

He finished his breakfast at an early hour, judged by metropolitan standards, selected the
most promising animal from the sorry exhibition of horse-flesh in the local livery and drove
out to the Hornblower farm, smoking on the way a better cigar than could be bought in Clematis,
and feeling unusually well satisfied with the world and himself.  His failure to bring the
Hornblower affair to a successful conclusion had annoyed him, not so much because of the importance
of the transaction, as because his professional pride was hurt at finding himself unequal to
the task of convincing a henpecked old man.  From the tone of Mrs. Hornblower's letter he was
confident this failure was about to be retrieved, and that Persis would prove amenable to his
flattering advances, could be taken for granted.  On one point he must be firm.  From the beginning
he must assume the necessity of her renouncing her recently acquired family.  He could say
and with truth that children made him nervous.  But to postpone the settlement of the difficulty
until after the wedding would be a fatal blunder.  When women felt sure of a man, they sometimes
developed a disagreeable tenacity in holding to their own way.  Altogether on this early morning
drive, Justin's difficulties dwindled almost to imperceptible points while his blessings loomed
large, a state of mind we are assured, most favorable to success.

Mr. Hornblower came from the barn as he drove up and greeted him with successfully disguised
cordiality.  But a glance convinced Justin that the long siege was nearly at an end.  In the
pouches under the man's weary eyes, in a certain sagging of his lower lip, in an indefinable
air of being beaten, Justin read the signs of approaching capitulation.

"Mis' Hornblower is in the house.  I guess you'd better see her this morning.  I'm pretty busy
for visiting."

"I won't keep you long, Mr. Hornblower.  I just want to lay a proposition before you that's
sure to interest as good a business man as you are."  Justin waited while the farmer tied the
horse, and then, slipping his hand through the old man's arm, guided him dexterously around
the house.  Robert Hornblower yielded like one hypnotized, an expression of rigid horror on
his face as if while seeing some peril immediately ahead, he found himself unable to avoid it.

Mrs. Hornblower sat in a rocking-chair by the window, tapping the floor with her heel as the
chair swayed, and nervously smoothing imaginary wrinkles from an immaculate apron.  Justin
took a step toward her, then stopped with an awkward jerk.  Early as he was, another caller
was ahead of him.  In the opposite corner, grim and unsmiling as fate, sat Persis Dale.

Justin realized his own embarrassment with angry wonder.  He had the emotions of a boy caught
in a foray on the preserve closet.  "Good morning," he said, and was shocked by the startled
suspicion of his own voice.  He carried out his original intention of shaking hands with Mrs.
Hornblower, though without his customary grace of manner, and then turned to go through the
same ceremony with Persis, but her tightly folded arms gave little encouragement to this design.
He compromised by taking a chair near her and saying pleasantly, "You're an early arrival."

"I calculated you'd be here as soon as you got done your breakfast," Persis replied, and left
him to interpret the ambiguous remark as he pleased.

Justin's career had not been of a sort to cultivate undue sensitiveness.  A moment sufficed
to make him master of himself.  "I came out to discuss a little business proposition with Mr.
Hornblower," he explained carelessly.  "But I don't want to interfere with the enjoyment of
you ladies.  Some other time--"

"Don't mind me," interposed Persis.  "Mis' Hornblower and I haven't anything special to talk
about.  We're interested in your business proposition, both of us."

"I don't know as I care to hear it," interrupted Mr. Hornblower, speaking with a certain wildness,
an indication that he had almost reached the limit of resistance.  His voice was shrill and
unnatural. "All I want is to be left in peace on the farm where my father lived and died before
me."

"Robert," said the submissive Mrs. Hornblower witheringly, "I'd be ashamed to talk as if I'd
been born an oyster instead of a man."

"Of course, Mr. Hornblower," Ware began soothingly, "I should be very unwilling to over-persuade
you.  If my proposition does not commend itself to your own good judgment, you are perfectly
justified in turning it down.  Or if you are not in the mood for talking business to-day, some
other time--"

"There's no time like the present," said Persis Dale.  "And if you don't like what he's got
to offer, you can say no, Mr. Hornblower, and stick to it.  Your no is as good as his yes,
I'm sure, when it's your business that's being talked of."

She had suddenly become the dominant figure in the room.  Mrs. Hornblower glanced at her uncertainly.
The promoter smiled propitiatingly.  The old man shuffled toward her with an evident hope that
through proximity he might profit by her sturdy strength.

"I don't mind listening, Persis," he said tremulously.  "I'm a reasonable man.  What I object
to is being nagged and badgered as if I didn't have a right to say my soul was my own."

"I'm sure, Mr. Hornblower," Ware interrupted, "that Miss Dale will tell you that I have no
wish to hurry you into any decision you will regret. In our business, satisfied patrons are
our best asset.  I only want to call attention to a little matter that may have escaped your
attention and then leave you to think it over."  Though his remarks were addressed to the farmer,
his appealing gaze was fixed on Persis.  He was disagreeably uncertain as to her attitude.
Possibly she had come with the purpose of doing him a favor.  And possibly--  But he dismissed
the alternative before it had taken shape in his thoughts. On the evening before he had made
plain his willingness to take up their acquaintance just where it had left off, twenty years
before. And if he knew anything of women, nothing would induce her to imperil the renewal of
that relation.

In spite of this conviction his manner showed embarrassment as he began his explanation.  The
smooth phrases he had used so often that he could have spoken them in his sleep came readily
to his lips, but even to himself they sounded hollow and unconvincing.  He was embarrassed
too, by Persis' tendency to ask questions, to inform herself as to every detail of the plan
he was unfolding.  So persistent was she in her cross-examination, that Mrs. Hornblower showed
signs of irritation.

"Goodness, Persis, it ain't necessary for Mr. Ware to go into all those points.  It ain't as
if this was the first time we had ever talked over the matter."

"It's just as well to have things plain," Persis replied imperturbably. Justin noticed that
she looked less youthful and comely than on the occasions when he had previously seen her.
She had the gray and care-worn look excusable in a woman approaching the fortieth mile-stone
who has spent a wakeful night.  He was conscious of a sense of annoyance in noting the distinctness
of the triangle formed by her firm mouth and the lines that slanted obliquely back from its
corners.  Her persistence, too, troubled him.  He was well aware that there is no more serious
flaw in a wife than the habit of asking questions.

In spite of interruptions he finally finished his story and folded the papers from which he
had used certain figures to give his statements an authoritative air.  Mr. Hornblower squirmed
uneasily, looking at Persis as if appealing for help.

"As I said before, Mr. Hornblower," Justin assured him with an air of gentle consideration,
"I am not at all desirous of hurrying you in the matter.  If you prefer to think over what
I have said, and then when you reach a decision--"

"I don't see," exclaimed Mrs. Hornblower, from her seat near the window, "why it shouldn't
be settled to-day.  We've got a good offer for the farm now, but if Robert keeps Mr. Jeffreys
hanging by the gills, the chances are that he'll satisfy himself somewhere else.  And it isn't
as though we hadn't talked this over from A to izzard."

"You've got to make up your mind sometimes," Persis Dale corroborated her.  "I always feel
as if 'twas a relief to get a thing settled."

Mrs. Hornblower who up to this moment had seemed to regard Persis' presence as an affront,
smiled upon her almost affectionately.  Robert Hornblower had an air of feeling himself deserted.
Justin was not sure.

"But before you get the thing all settled and signed," Persis continued smoothly, "there's
one little thing I'd like to have Mr. Ware explain. If, this investment is such a good thing
for you, why isn't it just as good for me?"

A tense silence followed which Mrs. Hornblower broke.  "For you?"  She pushed her spectacles
up on her forehead as if she found the lenses an obstruction to vision rather than an aid.
"Have you--have you been thinking of putting any money into apples?"

"I asked him last night about investing ten thousand dollars in this company.  He talked against
it--strong.  He gave me to understand that if I was getting ten per cent. on my money I was lucky."

Justin sat with his eyes on the floor, making no effort to explain.  It was checkmate, and
he knew it.  The love of his youth had played with him, tricked him, used him for her purposes
even while he believed her on the point of capitulation.  It was small consolation at that
moment to realize that greater men had lost greater stakes through that little illusion of
being irresistible to the sex.  He turned sick with humiliation, hot with hate.  He had prided
himself on his sophistication, and this country woman had laid a trap for him into which he
had obligingly blundered.  To attempt an explanation would be folly.  Checkmate!

"Ten per cent.!"  Mrs. Hornblower's voice rose shrill and frightened. "Why, in the Apple of
Eden Investment Company--"

"Yes, I reminded him about the twenty-five per cent. by the tenth year, and he laughed at me.
Said the guarantee you set such store by might as well be used for curl papers, if the company
got sick of its bargain."

"Why don't you say something?"  Mrs. Hornblower turned on Justin furiously.  "What do you mean
by letting her run on in this crazy fashion and never wagging your tongue?"  Underneath her
anger sounded a note of despair.  No one who knew Persis Dale ever doubted her absolute truth.
And unless she had lied the thing was beyond explanation.

Before Justin could reply, Robert Hornblower was on his feet.  Another startling transformation
had come over the old man.  Years and decrepitude fell from him like a discarded garment. 
As he advanced upon Justin, his fists clenched, he actually looked a formidable figure.

"You get out of my house, you sneaking lying swindler.  You clear out and never open your head
to me one word about your damned old company or I'll--"

"Robert!" shrieked Mrs. Hornblower in hysterical protest.

Ware rose with as much dignity as the situation permitted.  Few men can feel themselves the
target of the scorn of three honest people and not wince, and Justin, whatever his weaknesses,
did not lack sensibility.

"If you wish to accept Miss Dale's version of the matter, it is immaterial to me.  I have given
you more time than I could well afford to spare so small an investment, because I remembered
you as my boyhood friends.  I shall be glad to drop the matter."  And then, quite against his
will, he looked at Persis.

She sat straight and pale, her eyes steely, her lips grim.  And once he had kissed those lips,
and those contemptuous eyes had poured into his, faith and love unstinted.  As he stumbled
toward the door, the thought crossed his mind that the boy who had won the love and respect
of Persis Dale was not the poor dolt he had thought him.  The years had brought loss as well
as gain.

"Good morning."  He made an effort to speak with his customary easy self-possession, and Mr.
Hornblower's answer was to slam the door upon him.  "Good riddance to damned bad rubbish,"
he roared.

"Robert!" screamed Mrs. Hornblower.  "Profanity at your age.  Twice in five minutes."

"Hold your tongue!"

The mental collapse of Mrs. Hornblower was physically evident.  Flabby and shaken, she sat
looking with unfeigned terror at her metamorphosed lord and master.  And Mr. Hornblower, puffing
out his chest, looked very much like the oldest son of the individual he had appeared an hour
previous.

"I've got a word to say to you, Lena," remarked the reconstructed Mr. Hornblower.  "Women are
all right when they keep their place.  After this I want to have it understood I'm not going
to have any interference in my business."  He walked to the door and turned for a parting defiance.
"Damned if I will."

Mrs. Hornblower's attack of hysterics occupied Persis till noon.  She looked pale and heavy-eyed
as she alighted from her car at her own door.  She was about to enter when an object on the
lawn caught her eye.  Tacked to an upright stake driven into the turf, was a flapping piece
of brown paper on which appeared straggling letters, executed in colored chalk.

"Notiss

I will not klene my teth agen onles I get a nikle a weak

Malcolm Dale."

Persis read this defiance twice, and her lips twitched.  She turned toward the house, but by
this time the children had espied her and shriekingly descended upon her, "like the plagues
of Egypt," thought Mary, watching from the window.

"What makes you look that way?" cried Celia, clutching Persis' hand. "I don't like it."

"What way, child?"

"As though you was a widow."

Persis laughed, thereby diminishing her resemblance to the mourner of Celia's fancy.  With
a child holding fast to each hand, and the others prancing about her and getting underfoot
like so many kittens, she made her way indoors.  "Children been good, Mary?"

"Why, yes'm," Mary admitted with reserve.  "I gave Algie that cough mixture same as you said,
and Malcolm he kept coughing fit to tear his throat to pieces.  Betty says he likes the sirupy
taste.  And Celia teased the baby kissing her till she got her crying."

"I like the taste of the baby," remarked Celia, who had lent an attentive ear to the account
of the family misdemeanors.  "It's like tooth powder, the pink kind."

"A letter came for you, Miss Dale.  Now, my gracious, what's happened to it?  I put it right
here on the table."

CHAPTER XXI

DE PROFUNDIS

In the unabashed pursuit of pleasure into which Persis had plunged, Joel was a half-hearted
participant.  His life-long habit of standing scornfully aloof while his fellow beings strove
to enjoy themselves, proved no match for Celia's artless appeals.  "Please come, Uncle Joel,"
she would, coax.  "It's lots more fun with you along."  And to the open amusement of his neighbors
and his sister's ill-concealed wonder, Joel submitted to long automobile rides, to briefer
excursions on the river and lake and to eating picnic luncheons with his back against a tree
and on his face an expression conveying his unshaken conviction that there were ants in his
sandwich.  It is unlikely that Joel's presence on these occasions added in any marked degree
to the general hilarity, but Celia's satisfaction was unmistakable.  She always sat beside
him with an air of proprietorship, digging her sharp little elbow into the sparse cushioning
of his lean thighs or when weary, dropping her frowsy head against his shoulder with an engaging
certainty that it was there for that very purpose.  Like many another who has defied capture
till after middle life, Joel atoned for past immunity by the thoroughness of his surrender.

But on this particular August morning, when an all-day expedition had been planned to Huckleberry
Mountain, Joel revolted.  Whether he had really been surfeited with picnics, or only feared
that he might grow to enjoy such puerile forms of entertainment, and so lose some of the austere
dignity which had hitherto distinguished him, it is certain that he came down to breakfast
with his mind made up.  Even to Celia's coaxing he was adamant.

"You mustn't tease Uncle Joel any more," Persis finally admonished the child.  "You don't want
him to go if he wouldn't have a good time." And to her brother she added, "You'd better go
to the hotel for your dinner, Joel."

"Oh, I can pick up something that'll do me for a dinner," Joel replied with his old keen relish
for playing the martyr.  And then Celia, dropping her oatmeal spoon, lurched forward in her
chair and imprinted a milky kiss upon his coat sleeve.

"I'll get Uncle Joel's dinner," Celia murmured.  "I'll take care of him."

"But you're going on the picnic."

"No, Aunt Persis," Celia resumed an upright position with a suddenness that endangered her
half-emptied bowl of porridge.  "I don't like picnics 'thout Uncle Joel.  I'd rather stay with
him."

Joel groped for the toast.  The plate was directly in front of him, but he could not see it
for a blinding rush of tears.  Never in his life had he known such sweet elation, never such
humility.  There is an irresistible flattery in the preference of a child.  Except for the
love of his dead mother and for his sister's affection, the latter a curious blending of duty
and traditional sentiment which would have kept on working automatically whatever he might
have done, Joel had never inspired a single unselfish attachment until Celia came into his
life.  The thing was overwhelming.  His hand shook till his fork clattered against his plate.
What was he to have won the heart of a child?

In the two hours that elapsed before their departure, he suffered agonies of apprehension that
Celia would change her mind.  Scraps of cynical comment on the fickleness of her sex, some
of them dating back to Virgil and Juvenal, flitted through his memory and stung like gad-flies.
After winning such honor, after Celia had elected to remain with him, he felt himself unable
to endure the ignominy of having her reconsider.  While Mary made the beds, and Persis packed
the luncheon in the kitchen, and the children raced about getting in one another's way, and
prolonging the preparations they were desirous of hastening, Joel waited in a cold sweat, half
realizing the absurdity of his misgiving, but quite at its mercy.  He knew that if Celia changed
her mind at the last minute and departed with the others, life would not be worth the living.

But the elf-like little creature showed no signs of vacillation.  After rendering valuable
assistance in getting the others ready, including the feat of breaking a fruit jar containing
the lemon juice and sugar, she came and stood at Joel's side, serenely contemplative and content.
Even toward Celia Joel had never been demonstrative.  But as the picnic party took possession
of the machine, and half a dozen hands waved a farewell, he slipped his arm about the child's
shoulders and drew her to him.  The day was edged with gold.  The warm August sunshine seemed
to reach the very depths of his heart.  He had a confused impression that he had done life
an injustice.

"Tell me a story, Uncle Joel," commanded Celia, nestling closer.  "Tell me about Miranda and
Ariel and that horrid old Caliban."  For to reduce Shakespeare to the juvenile comprehension
had been one of the tasks imposed on Joel by his new fealty, nor did it seem to him, as once
it might have done, a base perversion of the matchless creations of the English tongue that
in diluted and modified form, they should interest and entertain a little maid of six.

The morning was a long rapture for the two strange comrades.  Joel told stories till Celia
tired of a passive rôle and entertained him with some of those flights of fancy compared with
which the most audacious attempts of the adult imagination seem tame and groveling.  Then they
took a walk, hand in hand, after which Celia discovered that she was hungry and a raid was
made upon the pantry.  Perhaps nothing so conclusively proved the completeness of Joel's subordination
as the overthrow of his dietetic theories.  The first course of their meal was bread and molasses
and it wound up with honey and ginger snaps.

By this time the sun had taken full possession of the front piazza, and Joel pulled his chair
around to the shady north side of the house and sat there in after-dinner tranquillity while
Celia played about on the lawn.  Joel's eyes followed every movement of the quaint little figure.
He remembered with wonder that other people thought Betty the prettier of the two girls.  To
him that small piquant face with the unruly hair, the straight black brows and the wonderful
kindling eyes, embodied all that was beautiful.  His selfish middle-aged heart ached under
the strain of accommodating this wealth of sweet swelling tenderness.

Celia had wandered across the grass toward the clump of maples which once had shaded the big
barn erected in Joel's youth and never rebuilt after the fire.  She turned to kiss her hand,
and he kissed his back, the first time in a matter of some five and thirty years that his dignity
had so unbent.  The realization that the act would prove highly diverting to his neighbors
caused him to glance anxiously toward the road.  But the white ribbon of dust was undisturbed
by vehicles, and his mind relieved, he looked again for Celia.

A full half minute he stared incredulously, looking this way and that, wavering between startled
apprehension and a conviction of his own folly.  For Celia was nowhere to be seen.  The grass
over which her little feet had twinkled as he turned his head, rippled in the wind and gave
no sign.  The child had not had time to reach the trees, behind, whose trunks her slight form
might easily be concealed.  And then as Joel told himself that he was a fool, a faint wailing
cry brought him to his feet.

He was running before he had time to formulate his fear.  And then a startling memory spurred
him to more desperate haste.  He recalled the old well by the barn, boarded over years before
and later so concealed by the encroachment of grass and weeds that its very existence had been
forgotten.  But time had taken its toll even from the stubborn oak, and at last it had yielded
under a child's light weight.  Joel knew it as he ran, but the sight of the splintered irregular
opening, across which the clover heads nodded serenely to one another, gave a poignant anguish
to his realization.  He tore the rotting planks aside, and looked as it seemed, down into unrelieved
blackness.  Then his sun-dazzled vision adjusted itself to the gloom and he saw the dank, slime-covered
stones that formed the sides of the well, and below the black gleam of water and something
pink and white, that struggled and went under, and showed again.

"Celia, Celia!" Joel shouted.  "Don't be scared.  Uncle Joel's coming."

He had been a coward all his life.  In his boyhood he had shrunk away from risks which to Persis
were exhilarating and delightful.  The ill health of twenty years had tended to confirm and
increase that native weakness.  Yet at this supreme moment no thought of his own danger crossed
his mind, The saving of Celia was all.

He kicked off his slippers and gripping the curb for support, lowered himself into the pit.
A rush of cold air like a breath from an open grave enveloped him.  Finding foothold in the
crevices of the green damp stones, digging his fingers into slimy crannies, panting, slipping,
bruising his flesh without feeling the hurt, this frail hypochondriac went to the aid of the
child who somehow had blundered into his heart.

The water in the well reached Joel's arm-pits as he stood on its bottom and lifted Celia to
his shoulder.  She clung to him for a little with a suffocating grip, strangling, sobbing,
panic-stricken.  And as he strove to soothe her, for the first time fear laid its cold hand
upon him.  He looked up to the circle of blue sky so terrifyingly distant and it seemed incredible
that he could ever have made that precipitous descent.  Unencumbered he had accomplished the
miracle, but he knew he could never climb back to the warm peace of the upper air with Celia
in his arms.

The child's sobs were quieting.  She was perched upon his shoulder, her arm wound tightly about
his neck.  Even at the moment when all the tragic possibilities of the event crowded on his
mind, he felt the tremor of her rigid little body and thought anxiously that Celia was in danger
of taking cold.

With an effort he took a grip upon realities.  Gently he loosened the pressure of the child's
encircling arms.

"Celia, honey, don't hold Uncle Joel so tight.  He's got to get breath enough to holler, so
somebody will come and take us out of this."

He had shouted till he was hoarse before he realized his folly.  There were no neighbors near
enough to hear his cries.  The sensible thing was to husband his strength till some vehicle
passed and then call lustily.  Again he addressed the child.

"Celia, dearie, keep your ears open.  When we hear wheels coming, we'll holler for all we're
worth."

They listened till they heard upon the road the rhythmic foot-beats of horses, and the rattle
of some farmer's wagon rumbling homeward from the village.  Then together they screamed for
help.  But the hoofs went on beating their tattoo till the sound grew faint, and the rattle
of the wagon died in the distance.  Again and again the sound which told of human nearness
woke hope in their hearts only to die in the ensuing silence.

"Uncle Joel," Celia wailed, "I'm co-old."  Her sobs echoed uncannily as if the well were filled
with the ghosts of weeping children.  Again he gazed at the disk of blue sky overhead.  He
seemed to himself to be viewing it from some indeterminate half-way house between life and
death.  And yet of the two, the invisible world seemed nearer than the earth roofed over by
that placid sky.

As time passed his suffering became acute.  The weight of the child on his shoulder was an
increasing torture.  The cramped arm raised to hold her secure was racked by intolerable pain.
The chill of the water was paralyzing.  His heart labored.  His breath came with difficulty.
Celia seemed to be relapsing into an unnatural drowsiness.  Her body sagged lifelessly.  He
found it necessary to stand close to the side of the well, that the wet stones might help to
support her weight.

There was only once he prayed, unless his struggle be counted as one long prayer.  But when
his appeal found words, it was less a petition than a suggestion.  "She's so little, Lord,
for it to end here, and she's had a hard time so far.  The fun's just beginning."  It showed
no lack of wisdom, perhaps, that his prayer ended there.

His mind must have wandered a little later.  It seemed as if his mother were beside him, encouraging
him as she had done long before in his boyhood when he had wrestled with a difficult task.
And then he was out in the woods with a crowd of his boyhood companions and the wild geese
were flying south.  Honk!  Honk!  Honk!  "Guess that's why it's so cold," Joel said, addressing
the shadowy assembly.  "Winter's coming."

The sound of his own voice brought him back to reality.  What he had heard was the horn of
Persis' car.  She had returned.  And the love of life woke in him and gave him strength to
scream lustily again and again.

As the children scrambled out upon the grass, all talking at once, Persis lifted an authoritative
hand.  "Hush!  I thought I heard some one call."

"I don't hear nothing, Miss Dale," said Mary tranquilly.  Persis again enjoined silence.  As
her gaze swept uneasily over the peaceful, familiar scene, her eyes were arrested by one of
the rotting boards which had formed the cover of the unused well.

Joel, wrenching it from its place, had flung it out into the clover. It had not been there
that morning, Persis knew.

She ran toward it with a conviction of calamity which only took concrete form when she heard
her brother's call issuing from the depths of the earth.

"The well," she cried with self-accusing anguish.  "The old well."  But when she stood by its
edge and sent her voice ringing down into its depth, it was steady and strong.

"I'm going for help, Joel.  'Twon't be much of any time now.  Just a little longer."

Mary and the children had never seen the Persis who came running toward them.  They shrank
back from her stern presence, half afraid.

"Mary, take the children into the house and keep them there.  Call up the doctor and tell him
to get here as quick as he can.  And have that coil of new rope that's in the shed ready for
me by the time I'm back."

She had leaped into the machine while she was giving her orders.  It described a dizzy circle
in the grass, shot down the driveway, and sped screaming along the dusty road.  Before the
trembling Mary had had more than time to discharge her commissions the car was back with half
a dozen strong men, harvesters from the farm just below, crowded into the seats.  And when
Doctor Ballard turned his sweating horse up the drive half an hour later, Joel and Celia were
between hot blankets, and stimulants had already stirred their sluggish blood.

It was eight o'clock before the doctor left.  "I've got to see the Packard boy, or I wouldn't
go.  I'll come back and stay the night through."

Persis nodded.  "I'd feel easier to have you in the house.  There won't be no need for you
to lose your sleep.  The spare room's all made up."

Some twenty minutes later Joel roused and spoke.  His respiration was hurried and articulation
difficult.

"Persis--Celia?"

She understood the syncopated sentence.

"Celia's doing fine, the doctor thinks.  She's got a little temperature, but a child's likely
to have fever for any little thing."

He waited some time before putting the next question, rallying his strength for the ordeal
of speech.

"Don't s'pose--'twould do for me--to see her?"

Persis looked at him with a curious tightening of the lips, in her eyes an unaccustomed blending
of tenderness and pride.

"You shall see her, if you want to, Joel.  'Tain't going to hurt her--to speak of."

From the room across the hall she brought Celia, a chrysalid child, sleeping heavily, closely
wrapped in an old plaid shawl, and laid her on Joel's bed.  Celia's thatch of black hair fell
untidily across the pillow.  The fever gave her olive skin an unwonted color.  Joel made an
ineffectual effort to lift his arm.  Then as he desisted, sighing, his sister gently lifted
his hand till it touched the hot fingers of the sleeping child.

"They're--such little--things--Persis."  His labored breath made speech fragmentary.  "It's
funny, how--they fill up--all the room in--a man's heart."

"Yes, I know, Joel.  But I guess maybe you'd better not talk."

"Makes me think of--what the Good Book says, Persis.  'A little child--'"

He did not finish the quotation.  After Persis was sure that he was asleep, she carried Celia
back to her bed and renewed her watch.  The doctor came in about ten o'clock and stood for
a little with his fingers on his patient's pulse.

"You'd better not lose your sleep, Doctor," Persis suggested, glancing at the weary young face.
"You go into the spare room and I'll call you if I need you."

"I'm not tired," the doctor answered.  "I'd as soon sit here for a while."  But he did not
meet her eye.

It was an hour later when the struggling breath lengthened into a sigh, deep-drawn and profound,
irresistibly suggestive of untold relief.  The doctor was at the bedside instantly, but after
a moment he laid the limp hand gently down and turned away.

Persis sank upon her knees, putting her hands over her face down which the tears were streaming,
those strange illogical tears which are life's tribute to death, however it may come.  Yet
even while she wept, phrases of thanksgiving sang melodiously through her brain and echoed
in her heart.  For to this brother of hers it had been given to redeem a life of weakness and
failure by a single heroic sacrifice and to die a man.

CHAPTER XXII

EAVESDROPPING

The winter following Joel's death was unusually severe and to Persis seemed well-nigh endless.
Though Celia had escaped the attack of pneumonia anticipated by the doctor, her long hours
of exposure, coupled with the shock, had told on the sensitive child, and it was months before
she seemed her usual blithe, audacious self.  Without question Celia sorely missed her vanished
play-fellow, and Persis, who had postponed her entering school for another year, because she
did not feel that the child was strong enough for the confinement of the school room, sometimes
doubted her own wisdom and was half convinced that the companionship of other children and
the distraction of Celia's thoughts would have proved sufficient advantage to counterbalance
all drawbacks. The others of Persis' flock with occasional digressions varying in seriousness
from chilblains to croup, maintained as satisfactory a health average as the mother of a young
family can expect.

After the unprecedented severity of the winter the spring came early, as if nature had repented
her harshness and had set herself to make amends.  The sparkle came back to Celia's eyes and
the lilt to her voice.  The children who had been models of deportment while the cold lasted,
developed a frisky unruliness, resulting in Malcolm's playing truant and Algie's coming home
with a black eye, trophy of his first fight.  Persis was too thankful over being able to raise
every window in the house and have the sweet spring air flooding in upon her, to take these
enormities very much to heart.  Indeed, she was almost too busy to deal with the culprits as
they deserved.

After two years in which she had hardly touched a needle, except for the children's little
garments, Persis was again busy dressmaking.  For she had not forgotten her promise to Diantha
Sinclair, and Diantha's wedding-day was approaching, simultaneously with her eighteenth birthday.
Backed up by Persis, Diantha had declared her intentions and put in a plea for a church wedding.
And when her mother stormed and threatened, Diantha made her defiance.

"Oh, very well, mama.  Only I'm going to be married in church.  And if you won't give me a
wedding, Miss Persis will."

In a frenzy Annabel appealed to her husband.  Since he felt as keenly as she in the matter
of what he called "Miss Dale's unwarrantable interference," their mutual indignation was actually
proving a bond between that ill-mated pair.  Since Persis had committed the indiscretion of
reminding her of her age, Annabel had never spoken to her quondam dressmaker, and even such
a crisis as the present could not bring her to the point of submitting to another interview,
in which she might hear other truths equally unwelcome.  If was her husband who faced the enemy.

Persis listened unperturbed while he stated his grievance.  "Mr. Sinclair, if it hadn't been
for me that girl of yours would have been married a year ago.  It would have been a runaway
match if I hadn't coaxed her into giving up and waiting until she could marry with the law
to back her up in doing as she pleased.  I made Diantha some promises then, and I'm going to
keep 'em."

"Your conscience is too tractable, I suppose, to trouble you over setting a young girl like
Diantha against her parents."

Persis regarded him with a slow smile, the significance of which Sinclair plainly had no difficulty
in understanding.  He flushed to the roots of his whitening hair.

"Mr. Sinclair, when a girl's happy at home, I do think it's a pity for her to jump into being
a woman at eighteen.  More'n one I've coaxed into waiting.  But when a girl's disposition is
wearing thin through bickering and nagging day in and day out, the sooner she's in a home of
her own the better."

"I am glad you are ready to guarantee the success of this affair for which you are so largely
responsible," remarked Mr. Sinclair.  This was more of a home-thrust than he knew, but Persis
did not wince.

"As for guaranteeing that anybody's going to be happy anywhere, Mr. Sinclair, only the Almighty
can do that.  My idea is that Diantha has a better chance with a young man who loves her than
with a mother who is jealous of her and a father who hasn't got the courage to take her part."

"If you're going to fall back on vilification, Miss Dale," remarked the other participant in
the dialogue, plainly in a towering rage, "the sooner this interview terminates, the better."

"Well, Mr. Sinclair, I guess you're right about that.  Talking things over won't convert either
of us.  And you understand," continued Persis, following her caller to the door, "that you're
not to feel driven to give Diantha a church wedding.  Only if you don't, I will."

It was due to Persis' effective championship that Diantha's wedding bade fair to prove what
the reporter of the Clematis Weekly News called "A social event of almost metropolitan importance."
There were to be bridesmaids and ushers and a best man.  Admission to the church was by card,
and the ensuing reception at the home of the bride's parents was scheduled to set a new pace
for Clematis society.  And while Annabel, inwardly raging, struggled to put a bold face on
her defeat, Persis was busy with the gown she was resolved to make her masterpiece.  The children
were not allowed to enter the room where the work was progressing, though they sometimes took
awe-stricken peeps through the crack at the mysterious, sheet-draped object suspended from
hooks, and in the twilight taking on an aspect distinctly ghostly.  It was necessary, too,
to carpet the floor of the workroom with sheets when Diantha had a fitting, all of which added
enormously to the romance and mystic glamour inevitably connected with a wedding dress. The
children, with whom Diantha had always been a prime favorite, instead of rushing tumultuously
to meet her, now stood off when she presented herself, and looked her over, as if like the
dress in Persis's workroom, she had become enveloped in mystery.

Mingled with the scraps of white satin which littered the floor were scraps of black silk.
After the wedding-day had been fixed upon, the mother of the groom swept down upon Persis,
wheedling and peremptory by turns.

"Persis Dale, I don't care if you are worth enough to buy and sell me twice over, you've got
to make me a dress to wear to my boy's wedding. It's no use for you to shake your head, Persis,
I ain't had a waist-line since you went out of business.  And when I think how Annabel Sinclair's
going to be rigged out, I'm worried for fear Thad will be ashamed of me.  They say she's going
up the city every week for fittings, just as if she was going to be the bride 'stead of Diantha."

It was clearly reprehensible in Mrs. West after throwing herself on Persis' sympathy and carrying
her point, to be late to a fitting. Persis, who planned to clear the cobwebs from her tired
brain by an exhilarating spin in her car at four o'clock, had appointed two for Mrs. West to
try on the black silk.  By quarter past she was fidgety, and as the clock struck the half hour,
she waxed indignant.

"Now, Etta West needn't think I'm going to put myself out to make her dress if she can't keep
her appointments.  Folks that ask favors ought to be particular not to make any more trouble
than they can help."

Another ten minutes of waiting quite exhausted Persis' store of patience.  She stepped into
the kitchen where Mary's sister was helping Mary with the extra work due to Persis' engrossing
activities.

"Keep an eye on Celia and the baby, girls.  If they say they're hungry try 'em with bread and
butter without any sugar.  I'll probably be back before the rest get home from school, but
if I'm not here, tell 'em not to go away.  We'll have a good ride before supper."

The West dwelling had that look of peaceful complacency characteristic of well-ordered establishments
in mid-afternoon.  Persis entered by the unlocked kitchen door, carrying Mrs. West's skirt
over her arm.  "Mis' West," she called challengingly, "Mis' West."  And then as the silence
remained unbroken, she found her irritation evaporating in anxiety. Could anything be wrong?
"Mis' West," she called again at the foot of the stairs, and an observer could have argued
from her altered voice a corresponding psychological change.

A sound answered her, something between a grunt and a groan, and sufficient to send her scurrying
up the stairs with a marked acceleration of the pulse.  Her vague foreboding took shape when
as she reached the upper hall, she caught sight of a prostrate figure, partially visible through
a half-open door.  "A stroke!" thought Persis, and the black silk slipping from her arm, dropped
in an unheeded heap.

The recumbent figure did not move as Persis flew down the hall, but as she entered the room,
the head stirred slightly as if to look in her direction.  Persis dropped upon her knees.

"Can you understand me, Etta?" she spoke with terrifying gentleness.

"Don't be a fool, Persis Dale."  The vehemence of the rejoinder was startling.  "Why shouldn't
I understand?"

"Then it's just a fall, is it?"

Mrs. West hesitated before replying.  "No," she returned in a tone of marked irritability,
"I didn't fall."

"Then what's the matter?"

"I didn't say there was anything the matter, did I?"  Mrs. West's ill humor seemed to be gaining
on her.  "I s'pose if a body wants to lie down for a while--in her own room--after her day's
work is done--her neighbors haven't any real call to make a fuss."

The amazed Persis continued in a kneeling position, her bewilderment rendering her incapable
of movement.

"You mean that you're lying here--because you like it?"

"On a warm day," said Mrs. West with dignity, "a floor's cooler than a bed and it saves mussing
the spread."

Persis studied her thoughtfully.  "I can't say you look cool, Mis' West.  I guess I never saw
you so fire-red as you are at this minute. But if that's your idea of having a good time, why,
every one to his taste, as the old woman said when she kissed the cow."

She rose with a dignity that matched Mrs. West's own and moved toward the door.  "Maybe you
remember that you had an appointment for a fitting at two," she suggested coldly, "I brought
your dress over, but of course if you're busy enjoying yourself--"

"Persis Dale," cried Mrs. West, her voice breaking, "I didn't think you had it in you to be
so hard-hearted."

Slowly Persis retraced her steps.  Her prostrate friend was weeping. Large impressive tears
rolled slowly over cheeks whose fiery hue suggested the possibility that each drop might immediately
be converted into steam.

"Mis' West," began Persis in a tone of strained patience, "will you please tell me if you've
taken leave of your senses or what?"

Mrs. West's tears flowed faster.  Hysterical tremors agitated the recumbent mass.  "I--I can't
get up," she exploded at length, in seemingly reluctant confidence.

"Can't get up?  But how did you get down?"

"Persis--I--I was rolling."

"Rolling!"

"To reduce, Persis.  My cousin Aggie said she took off twenty pounds in ten weeks rolling half
an hour a day.  And I thought it was worth trying."

Persis suddenly averted her face.

"Don't laugh, Persis.  It may be funny for a man to be fat, but it's a tragedy for a woman.
I've been thinking how Annabel Sinclair will look at that wedding, with a figure like a girl
of twenty-one, and it didn't seem as if I could stand two hundred and twenty-six.  But if rolling's
a cure, I guess I started too late."

"Why can't you get up, Mis' West?" inquired Persis, regarding the prostrate woman with a becomingly
serious countenance.  "You haven't wrenched yourself, anywhere, have you?"

"Not that I know of, Persis.  I didn't hear anything snap.  I guess I'm stalled, like a horse.
Maybe if I wasn't quite so near the couch I could manage.  If Thad or his father get home before
I'm up, I'll never hear the last of it."

Realizing that her friend's apprehension was well grounded, Persis brought her strong muscles
and resolute will to bear upon the problem. She had lifted many a sick patient too weak to
turn upon his pillow, and she knew the trick of making every ounce of energy count.  Inspired
by her example, Mrs. West put forth all her strength and as a result of their combined efforts
she rose with ponderous slowness into a sitting position.  The rest was easy.  With Persis
boosting and panting encouragement, the unhappy exponent of other people's theories regained
her feet and tottered to a chair.

"Goodness, gracious, Persis, I'm as limp as a wash-rag.  No more rolling for me, not if I get
up to three hundred pounds."  She looked at her friend appealingly.  "Don't ask me to stand
up and be fitted, Persis.  There's no more starch in my knees than if they were pieces of string."

Persis made haste to disclaim any such intention.  "What you want is a fan, Mis' West, and
a cup of tea, to quiet your nerves down.  You've got to get braced up before Mr. West comes
in, or he'll be at you to find out what the trouble is.  And when a man gets a little joke
like this on his wife, he's bound to make it last the rest of his natural life."

Leaving her friend to compose herself, Persis hurried to the kitchen and brewed the restorative
cup of tea she had recommended.  As she carried it to her patient the telephone lifted up its
voice.

Mrs. West counted the rings.  "One, two, three, four.  That's Nellie Gibson's call, Persis.
I wish you'd listen and see if you can find out if Josephine Newhall has got there yet.  Nellie's
been talking of that visit all winter."

Persis complied unhesitatingly.  In Clematis no kill-joy had arisen to question the propriety
of listening to the conversation of the other subscribers to a party line.  It was the universal
understanding that one of the foremost if not the chief advantage in having a telephone, was
the gratification to be derived from overhearing the confidences of one's neighbors.  To have
denominated this eavesdropping, would have aroused general indignation.

Persis took down the telephone without a qualm and instantly recognized the high-pitched voice
of Mrs. Gibson, Thomas Hardin's sister.  She was speaking more loudly than is necessary in
such conversation and with a seeming lack of amiability.

"Well if you won't come to supper to-night, when will you come?  Set a time right now."

"Really I don't know, Nellie."  Persis started as the gentle deprecating tones reached her
ears.  "I'm pretty busy at this season. I guess I hadn't better say--"

"Fiddlesticks and folderol!  I know just how busy you are.  I guess if Persis Dale hadn't thrown
you over like a worn-out shoe, you'd have found time enough to get over to see her every blessed
night of the world."

It was clearly the moment for Persis to hang up the receiver. Regrettable as it is to record,
she listened with a seeming accession of interest for Thomas' reply.  But his only answer was
a discreet silence.

"When you talk of being busy," Mrs. Gibson continued witheringly, "I know what's in your mind.
You mean you won't come to this house while Josephine is here."

Still silence on the part of Thomas.

"Thomas Hardin," his sister burst out, "why don't you say something?  I can stand a man that
takes the roof off when he's mad lots better than the kind that shut up like clams.  Are you
coming to supper this week or not?"

"No, Nellie, I guess not."

"You mean you're not coming near the house while Josephine stays?  Be a man.  Speak out plain."

"Nellie," said the goaded Thomas, acting on her counsel, "I haven't got a thing against any
friend of yours, but I'm tired of your match-making."

"Match-making!" Mrs. Gibson repeated, like most who adopt that most thankless of the professions
ready on the instant to repudiate it. "Me!"

"Yes, Nellie, I'm not a suspicious man, but a child in arms could see through your little game.
I dare say you mean it kindly, but when a man's not looking for a wife, it's embarrassing to
have first one woman and then another thrown at his head."

"I suppose," commented Mrs. Gibson acridly, "you'd rather end up your days a pitiable old bachelor,
mooning over the woman who played with you for a dozen years and threw you down at last."

"If she threw me down, 'twas because I deserved it."

"Deserve nothing.  You haven't the sense to go in when it rains, Thomas Hardin, and a week-old
kitten would beat you for gumption.  But for all that, you're a long sight more of a catch
than most men."

This impassioned tribute apparently left Thomas dumb.  Mrs. Gibson followed up her advantage.

"I suppose you'd rather set in meeting and look at the back of Persis Dale's bonnet than to
have a nice wife of your own in the pew beside you."

"Well, since you ask me, Nellie, I would."

"She's made you a laughing-stock.  She don't care any more for you--"

"Of course she don't.  Why should she?  A woman like her."

"Then I wash my hands of you."  Mrs. Gibson's voice suggested tears.

"Thank you, Nellie," Thomas returned gratefully, and his sister's receiver slammed into the
hook.  Thomas followed suit, and last of all, Persis Dale, after assuring herself that she
was not likely to hear more, returned the receiver to its place and went to satisfy her friend's
curiosity.

"Well?"  Mrs. West had emptied her teacup and the soothing effects of the potion showed in
her altered voice.

"Yes, Josephine's there," Persis replied to the elliptical inquiry. "But I gathered from something
that was let drop that maybe she wouldn't stay long.  So if you want a visit with her you'd
better not waste any time."

CHAPTER XXIII

WEDDING BELLS

The wedding dress was finished and a success.

"I guess it'll have to be my valedictory," Persis said with ill-concealed elation.  "I'm never
going to beat that if I dressmake till I'm a hundred."  As for Diantha, her ecstasy implied
that whatever the risks attached to the matrimonial venture, they were abundantly offset by
the privilege of arraying one's self in habiliments of such transcendental charm.

But of the two, the girl's happiness was the least overcast.  Diantha did not realize the pathos
of her ability to leave her home without a pang.  Since tears are only the reverse side of
joy, the bride who says farewell to her girlhood dry-eyed is a legitimate object of sympathy.
Diantha's unclouded happiness was significant of all that her youth had lacked.

But Persis' satisfaction was superficial.  Underneath her stubborn cheer, her genial vivacity,
self-reproach was astir.  While she listened to the outpourings of Diantha's ardent confidence
and laughed over the children's naive inquiries regarding the approaching and stupendous event,
she stood a prisoner at the bar of her conscience, summoned to defend herself against the charge
of injustice to a friend. And the more she pondered the question, the more advisable it seemed
for her to plead guilty and throw herself upon the mercy of the court.

She recalled in extenuation of Thomas's offense that his confession had been strictly voluntary,
prompted only by his own sense of honor.  He might have retained the confidence and friendship
he valued above all else, simply by holding his peace.  Moreover his provocation had not been
slight.  "She looked so like a kitten," he had said of Annabel. Persis knew the look he meant,
that inimitable blending of challenge and retreat, shyness and daring so commingled as to be
most provocative.  Of course he was no match for Annabel, poor honest Thomas.

"It's the good men they make the quickest work of," thought Persis, turning restlessly on an
uneasy pillow.  "It never would have entered Thomas' head, to think any harm of a married woman.
A different kind of man would be on his guard against her and against himself, too.  It came
on Thomas like a thunder-clap out of a clear sky."

Having reached the point of leniency toward her one-time lover, severity with herself was a
natural sequence.  "'Tain't as if I was a girl," Persis owned, in sorrowful compunction.  "I'd
ought to know what men are by this time, and that the best of 'em need to be braced up by some
good woman's backbone."  She could not escape from the painful conviction that she had failed
her friend.  He had turned to her for help and her hurt pride had rendered her oblivious to
his need.

And pride was still to be reckoned with.  Even now when she realized her fault, she shrank
from extending the olive branch.  Thomas loved her and had always loved her.  The episode of
Annabel Sinclair had not altered his loyalty by so much as a ripple on the surface.  And yet
to show by a lifted eyelash or a hand held out that she was ready to let bygones be bygones
seemed among the impossibilities.  The generations of dumb women whose blood ran in her veins
stretched out ghostly hands to hold her back from frankness.   That was a woman's lot, to endure
silently and leave the initiative to the man.

June came and found her vacillating and uncertain.  Mystic fragrances, still whispery nights,
dewy mornings, gay with flowers, were flung into the scale.  And when Diantha's wedding was
but two days off, Persis suddenly capitulated.

"I've always said that folks who'd let their lives go to smash for want of speaking out deserved
all they got.  And now it looks as if I was that sort of a fool myself.  Algie!"  Apparently
apprehensive that common sense would again yield the field to tradition, she flew: to the window.
"Algie!" she shrieked.

The boy came on the run.  Something in Persis' voice made him aware that the occasion did not
admit of trifling.

"Algie, jump on your wheel and ride down to Mr. Hardin's store.  Tell him that if it's convenient
I'd like to see him this evening.  Quick now."

Algie's obedience was instantaneous.  With compressed lips Persis watched his vanishing figure,
her color coming and going.

"Well, so far, so good.  I guess now I've got up my courage to send for him I can leave the
rest to luck."

Thomas came that evening, extremely self-conscious in a new suit, his air of unwonted elegance
heightened by a fresh shave and with his shoes polished into almost immodest prominence.  The
children, in spite of their aggrieved protests, had been sent to bed with the chickens.  Mary
had been despatched to young Mrs. Thompson's on an errand, and the two had the house to themselves.
Thomas waited for Persis to explain her summons.  As she rendered him no assistance, he took
the responsibility of steering the conversation.

"I looks pretty fine round here, Persis.  Shouldn't hardly know the place."

"Well, there have been lots of changes, Thomas, Joel gone and all. Five children in a house
change things without anybody to help 'em."

"They're nice-looking children, too.  That oldest boy, Algie, takes my eye."

"He'll be better-looking when that cut on his lip heals up.  He got hurt in a fight the other
day, the second he's had in three months.  I wanted to ask you what you thought I'd ought to
do when he gets to fighting."

Thomas' heart went down with a thud.  So this was why she had sent for him, to consult him
regarding the training of the boys.  He had not known how her summons had inflated his hopes
until this sickening collapse.  It was only by an effort that he rallied his thoughts sufficiently
to answer.

"Well, I wouldn't worry about that if I was you, Persis.  Seems like all young things was taken
the same way.  Puppies are always squabbling, but 'tisn't that there's any hard feeling.  They
just want to try their teeth.  Seems to me I'd be pretty worried over a boy who never wanted
to fight."

Persis listened appreciatively.  "Thank you, Thomas.  It's a good thing for a woman who's bringing
up a pair of boys to get a man's point of view now and then.  I'm afraid I've kind of neglected
those children this spring.  I've been so taken up with Diantha Sinclair's wedding."

"She'll be a mighty pretty bride," observed Thomas, striving manfully to do his part in the
conversational see-saw.  "She looks a lot like her mother when--"  He broke off, overwhelmed
by the realization that he had introduced the one topic which should never have been mentioned
between Persis and himself.  Choking with mortification, turning deeply crimson as all the
blood in his body seemed rushing toward his brain, he sat motionless, an unhappy martyr consumed
in the fires of his own sensitiveness.

But something had given Persis a clew.  She leaned forward, quite forgetful of her recent shrinking.

"Thomas, you remember what you told me about Annabel Sinclair the last time you were here?"

"Lord!" he panted, but her gaze held him mercilessly.  "I'm not likely to forget it."

"What I want to know is this.  How old was Annabel when--when you kissed her?"

Thomas drew out his handkerchief and mopped his damp forehead.

"Why, I s'pose she was fifteen or sixteen.  She wasn't as tall as Diantha is, and I guess she
was a few years younger."

Persis did not reply.  When he ventured to look in her direction, she was regarding him with
strange dilated eyes.

"Thomas, you said she was Stanley Sinclair's wife."

"Well, she is, isn't she?  Why, you don't mean--"

He interrupted himself, his look changing.  "What kind of a man d'ye think I am, Persis Dale?"
he challenged her angrily.  "If you've known me all your life and think I'm the sort to be
carrying on with other men's wives--well, I guess I'd better be going."

He got to his feet and then sank helplessly into a chair.  He had never seen Persis cry before.
He had not realized that she could cry.  Yet without doubt those were tears upon her cheeks.

But if crying, Persis was smiling, too.  His heart fluttered, and performed some extraordinary
gymnastic feat, when she held out her hand.

"Thomas, I was in the wrong, I'll own it.  I never favored jumping at conclusions and less
than ever now.  Maybe--maybe if I hadn't thought so much of you, I'd have been slower to think
evil."

He did not trouble himself with the feminine lack of logic indicated in her closing words.
He had clasped her hand in both of his and was holding it last, as if he never meant to let it go.

"Persis--Persis, you weren't fair to me in that, but I don't lay any claim to being all I'd
ought to be.  There's no end of things you'd have to forgive.  I don't know as I've ever told
you about the time Ed Collins and I--"

A movement on the part of Persis' disengaged hand checked his confession.

"Thomas," she protested while she smiled, "if you own up to any more things, I declare I believe
I'll have to even up by telling you how old I am.  And that's one thing a woman don't like
to mention, except, of course, to her husband."

Two days later Diantha Sinclair was married at eight o'clock in the evening.  The church was
crowded.  Wide-eyed girls took in every detail and dreamed of acting the star rôle on a similar
happy occasion. Complacent matrons, in their Sunday best, exchanged voluble comments. The wedding
party was a trifle late, and the guests were all early which gave opportunity for soul-satisfying
gossip.

"Ain't those flowers lovely!  I never saw anything to beat 'em except maybe, at Elder Larkins'
funeral.  They say Persis Dale went over to the Lakeview florist's in that car of hers and
brought back flowers enough to fill a wash tub."

"Mis' West looks real nice in that new black silk.  There's nothing like black for toning down
a fat woman."

"There's Eddie Ryan in a dress-suit.  Wonder if it's his'n or just borrowed.  It hangs kind
of baggy.  Shouldn't wonder if his cousin up to Boston let him take his."

Annabel Sinclair's slight girlish figure was the center of interest until the entrance of the
bridal party.  She must have guessed how the tongues were wagging but her color did not fluctuate
under the ordeal. At last Annabel had come to the point of assisting nature.  The carmine had
been applied with artistic restraint, and she had never looked lovelier, but her happiness
in her beauty had vanished.  To retain the admiration which was the breath in her nostrils,
she must henceforth resort to artifice, covering up and hiding what would sooner or later be
revealed in spite of her.  She was not thinking of Diantha as she sat looking straight before
her but only of her own hard fate.

"Annabel Sinclair might be the bride herself," remarked one kindly matron on the other side
of the church.  "Beats all how she keeps her looks."

"Ain't that a handsome dress, though," sighed her companion.  "She had it made in the city.
But Persis Dale made Diantha's dress, and somebody who saw it, told me it was the handsomest
thing she ever clapped her eyes on.  Persis Dale sets everything by that girl."

If the occupants of the pews enjoyed the long wait, not so Thad West. Pale and perspiring,
he looked more like a patient about to be conveyed to an operating table, than a bridegroom
on the threshold of his happiness.

"What do you s'pose is wrong, Scotty?"  He clutched the arm of the friend selected to stand
by him in this ordeal.  "It's way past time."

"Oh, well, girls are always late," returned Scotty with soothing intent.  Thad thought wrathfully
that it was all very well for him to take that tone.  He wasn't going to be married, hang it.

"Ring all right, Scotty?"

"Sure thing."  But in spite of the prompt assurance the best man's hand went to his waistcoat
pocket and fumbled a long nervous minute while the perspiration trickled down Thad's spine.
And then young Scott felt in the other pocket and breathed a sigh of relief.  "Here 'tis."

"You want to keep better track of your dates than that," exclaimed Thad angrily.  "You'll queer
everything if you go feeling around in all your pockets when he's ready for the ring."  His
voice took on a tone of appeal.  "Haven't you got an extra handkerchief, Scotty?  If I keep
on at this rate, my collar--"

"You just keep quiet and I'll mop you up a bit," returned the obliging Scotty, but his friendly
ministrations were interrupted by a blood-curdling whisper from the bridegroom.

"My God, here they come."

There was no doubt about it.  The little organ was wheezing out the wedding march as if it
meant to be equal to the occasion if this proved its swan-song.  The ushers were advancing
up the aisle two by two. With drooping heads and measured steps, the bridesmaids followed,
and then came Diantha on her father's arm.  The little flutter that went over the waiting assembly
was chiefly an involuntary tribute to her girlish grace and beauty, though the dress, too,
came in for its share.

"Might have been bought in Paris for all anybody could tell," was the assurance passed from
lip to lip.  Clematis was proud of that wedding dress.

Stanley Sinclair, very straight and handsome as he moved up the aisle, looked down on the bright
head near his shoulder and remembered that other girl who twenty years before had come up the
church aisle to meet him at the altar.  He had learned long before to sneer at his own lost
illusions, but singularly enough, never until this moment had it occurred to him to wonder
what her dreams might have been that far-away June day.  To his discomfiture the query brought
a pang, and he had thought himself beyond such weakness.  The petrified heart has a certain
advantage over that of flesh, though possibly the ache which proves it human is a ground for
felicitation.

Ten minutes later Thad was wondering what he had been afraid of.  Why, it was nothing.  He
could hardly believe that a matter so momentous could be disposed of in so few minutes.  And
yet it was true, and Diantha's little hand was in his, to have and to hold till death did them
part.

Diantha's composure throughout the ceremony had suggested that being married was an every-day
matter to a person of her wide experience. Her poise and self-possession were the occasion
of wondering comment among the many who were hardly able to realize even now that she had really
grown up.  It was not till the reception, when Persis with Thomas following bashfully in her
wake came up lo proffer her good wishes, that Diantha relapsed into youthfulness.  She flung
her arms about her old friend's neck and kissed her tumultuously.

"Darling Miss Persis, how perfectly lovely you look!  Did you get that beautiful dress just
for my wedding?"

The composition of Persis' reply apparently took a little time.  She did not speak for a minute.

"Yes, I made it for your wedding," she returned at length.  "But I used it for my own, too.
Thomas and I slipped over to the minister's after supper and got married.  So we'll both wish
each other joy, my dearie."

It was a shock of course, but Clematis was getting used to that where Persis was concerned.
And Mrs. Hornblower voiced the feeling of more than herself when she commented on the affair
at the next meeting of the Woman's Club.  Persis was not present.  She and Thomas had gone
on a wedding trip to the seashore, and taken all the children.

"It's a kind of back-handed way of getting a family," said Mrs. Hornblower.  "Picking up one
child here and another there, and then winding up with a husband.  But I must say it'll take
a load off my mind to see a man at the head of Persis Dale's pew."

CHAPTER XXIV

FAIR PLAY

The late October sunshine poured its prodigal gold into the little room of which Annabel Sinclair
was the sole occupant, and as its single door and window were both closed, the resulting temperature
was suggestive of mid-July.  The room itself was plain and bare.  The cottage Thad West had
purchased the year following his marriage was needlessly spacious for the immediate requirements
of the two young people and for that reason, several of the rooms had been left unfurnished
or nearly so, until time should justify Thad's foresight.  As a rule Annabel had a feline instinct
for comfort, selecting the easiest chair and the pleasantest outlook almost unconsciously.
To-day her discomfort and the convent-like austerity of her surroundings failed to impress
her. She was hardly aware of them.

She was not in her daughter's home of her own volition that October morning.  She had yielded
as the most self-willed must on occasion to the assumption of her little world that this was
the place where she would wish to be.  But the first glimpse of Diantha had convinced her that
her shrinking recoil had been well-grounded.  Diantha, deadly pale and yet with little flickering,
unsteady smiles, Diantha, quiet and self-possessed, with nothing but those white cheeks to
show how flesh and spirit shrank from the approaching ordeal, was terrifyingly a stranger.
But that she was a woman there could be no doubt.  And this woman, soon to be a mother, was
her child.

The little, bare, remote room seemed a refuge.  Annabel closed the door and would have locked
it, but the key was missing.  She sank into the single chair, her face storm-swept, transformed
by her emotion almost beyond recognition.  The natural assumption would have been that she
was enduring vicariously the suffering of her daughter, bearing for the second time the pangs
that had given Diantha life.  As a matter of fact, Diantha's pain and peril were remote from
her mood.  Her mind had room for one thought: "Hast thou found me, O mine enemy!"

As she stared before her, hand gripping hand, her bloodless lips moving inarticulately, she
saw the monstrous folly of her self-deception.  She had played at youth, listened to the love-making
of undeveloped boys whose mother she might have been, and made herself believe that she could
cheat Time.  And Time, too, had had his fun.  For the moment it almost seemed to her that her
girlish prettiness had been his merciless concession to add to the spirit of the game, as a
cat lets a mouse run with a sense of recovered freedom, only to pounce again.

And now she was to be a grandmother.  She made a futile effort to face the thought, to adjust
her idea of herself to so astounding a development.  But it was like the effort to imagine
herself belonging to another race, Ethiopian or Oriental.  It was unthinkable.  She had a clearly
defined conception of grandmothers, persons with a generous waist-line and white hair.  Undoubtedly
they were useful people in their way, and worthy of regard.  But she found it impossible to
realize that she herself might belong to their number.

As if recalling some experience far distant, she fell to reviewing the events of the previous
evening.  Her caller had been a young fellow with a carefully nurtured and on the whole a promising
mustache and with a lurid taste in socks.  She had enjoyed the call.  The boy's crude efforts
at veiled sentiment, his languishing glances had been incense to her vanity.  But to-morrow!
"How is your little grandchild, Mrs. Sinclair?" he would say.  Or no!  He would not say it.
He would not come again.  He must realize, as she was doing, the absurdity of their acquaintance.
He would laugh at the old woman who had painted her cheeks that she might look a girl and had
let him kiss her hand as though granting a priceless favor.  Annabel moaned faintly as she
writhed.  Every one would laugh.  Every one must have been laughing for years over her silly
pretenses.

She did not know how long a time had elapsed before heavy footsteps creaked down the hall.
She shuddered and her body stiffened.  The knock was twice repeated before she could utter
an audible, "Come in."

Mrs. West pushed the door ajar and started violently as her eyes fell on Annabel.  As not infrequently
happens with women who preserve an unnaturally youthful appearance, under the stress of deep
emotion, Annabel had aged years in an hour.  It was a moment before Mrs. West could recover
herself.

"I've made us a cup of tea, Mis' Sinclair, and set out a light lunch. We'll both feel better
for a bite."

Annabel shook her head.  "I don't want--anything."  It took an effort to stifle a frenzied
appeal to be left to herself.

This was far from Mrs. West's thoughts.  She creaked into the little room, her ample proportions
making it seem more cramped and small than ever, and patted Annabel's shoulder.

"Oh, come now, Mis' Sinclair, I know just how you feel."--Never was boast vainer.--"But Diantha's
going to come through this all right. She's young and she's strong.  The doctor says she's
got everything in her favor."

Annabel's answer was a vague uncomprehending stare.  Then she began to understand.  Mrs. West
supposed her consumed with anxiety for her daughter's safety, whereas the possibility that
Diantha might die had hardly occurred to her.  She found herself wondering if she were unlike
all other women, an abnormality in her selfishness.  In the larger matters Annabel had remained
contemptuously indifferent to the opinion of her sex, though she would have found their criticism
of her personal appearance disquieting.  But now she was conscious of an unaccustomed sense
of relief that Mrs. West could not read her thoughts.

"I don't want--anything," she repeated mechanically, and Thad's mother departed with obvious
reluctance.  In five minutes she was back with a cup of tea which Annabel swallowed in hopes
of thus purchasing immunity from further kindly attentions.  And Mrs. West, bearing away the
empty tea-cup, carried too, a better opinion of Annabel Sinclair than she would have believed
possible.

"I never thought she cared anything much for Diantha," she told Persis who had dropped in several
times during the day to see how matters were progressing.  "But I must say, I did her an injustice.
She's been pretty nearly crazy all day.  She looks like a ghost."

"Well, she's Diantha's mother when all's said and done," Persis responded.  Happiness makes
for tolerance.  With all her charity for the wrong-doer, Persis had made an exception of Annabel
Sinclair.  But now the years of fatness, following instead of preceding the lean years, the
overflowing fulness of her heart and life had taught her new indulgence.  She was capable of
believing that there was good in the woman.

The afternoon dragged cruelly.  Now and then some faint sound reached Annabel, vaguely suggestive
of the battle which must be waged for every new existence, and each time the sagging body of
the woman stiffened, and her breath grew hurried.  Once Thad passed her window, his young face
set and white, and his eyes reddened as if from weeping.  Annabel shrank away fearful that
his glance might fall on her, but the fixed eyes of the young husband saw only his wife's girlish
face as he had seen it last, colorless, quivering, undaunted.

It was not far from four o'clock when the sound of hurrying feet quickened Annabel's lagging
pulses.  A door shut quickly and then another.  Some one was hurrying down the hall; some one
who brought news.  Annabel found herself on her feet.  And then, instinctively she caught at
the back of her chair to support herself, for the floor was undulating and the sunny room had
grown dark.

Out of the shapeless blur in which her surroundings blended, a face took shape, the face of
Mrs. West, wet with tears and radiant with smiles.  It was she who had sped so lightly down
the long hall as if joy had given wings to her feet.

"It's a boy!"  She laughed out the three exultant words and hurried back to some interrupted
task.  Annabel continued to stand.  When at length she released her grip of the chair, her
fingers were numb and stiff.  The thought crossed her mind that now she was at liberty to go
home, since her grandson had come into the world, but the effort seemed beyond her strength.
She sank into the chair again, half closing her eyes.  The poignant pain of the past hours
had changed to an overwhelming listlessness.  She was too tired to think any longer, too tired
even to suffer.

A brisk knock at the door roused her from her apathy sufficiently for a resentful wish that
they would leave her to herself.  Then the door opened and Persis entered.  Her face wore the
look that had impressed Annabel on the face of Mrs. West, that look of supreme satisfaction,
blended with a curious, vicarious pride, and with it all, something that told of tears held
back.  Annabel's eyes went from that radiant look to the shawl-draped bundle in Persis' arms.
She put out her hand as if to ward off a danger.

Persis halted, gazing in consternation at the wreck of Annabel.  In that shallow face the record
of mental anguish was so unmistakable that the other woman felt a pang of self-reproach.

"Here I've been leaving this poor little bundle of nerves to fight this thing through all alone.
I'd ought to have known she'd be scaring herself into a conniption."  As a reaction from the
severity with which she dealt with her own thoughtlessness, Persis' voice, in addressing Annabel
was as tender and caressing as if she strove to soothe a troubled child.

"Well, Mis' Sinclair, your worry's over.  Diantha came through this fine, and before we know
it, she'll be up and about and as lively as a cricket.  But it's been a hard day for you same
as for the rest of us. The Lord asks a good deal of women, to help Him keep this old world
a-going, but He's got His own way of making it up to 'em."

As if to give point to her words, Persis' eyes dropped to the bundle in her arms.  She came
a step nearer.

"I s'pose, of course, you're glad it's a boy.  I don't know why it is, but you just can't help
feeling tickled when the first baby's a boy. Nine pounds, too.  That's a grandson to be proud of."

"Don't!  Don't!  I don't want to see it."

Annabel's cry was involuntary, wrung from her by the realization of Persis' purpose.  And Persis
who had lifted the shawl that concealed the little face, let it fall again and stood staring.

"You don't want--to see the baby?"

The revulsion indicated by Annabel's attitude was a sufficient answer. Persis crossed to the
cot-bed and sat down.  If there was a person on earth she cordially detested, it was Annabel
Sinclair, yet the conviction that this poor counterfeit of a woman was in need of strength
and sympathy was sufficient to thrust that old dislike into the background.

"I guess to-day's been pretty trying to your nerves, Mis' Sinclair. But you'll feel better
if you take a look at this nice boy.  I've seen a good many of 'em first and last, and I told
Diantha I'd never set eyes on a finer baby."

A curious distortion of Annabel's face broke off Persis' eulogy.  "Are you feeling sick, Mis'
Sinclair?" she asked in real alarm, thinking that she would never have given Annabel credit
for this excess of material solicitude.

"Sick?  Yes, I'm sick of everything.  I'm glad that child's a boy. Those people that drown
the girl babies like kittens, are in the right of it.  No woman ought to live beyond thirty."

"Some of us," remarked Persis, recovering herself with difficulty, "would have missed a good
deal at that rate."  But her lips curled slightly.  She was beginning to understand and to
acquit herself of past injustice.

Annabel had reached a point where speech was a necessity.  For years, she had returned Persis'
dislike with the added venom of a small nature.  But at this moment, when an outpouring of
confidence seemed essential, she knew there was no one to whom she could speak so freely as
to this woman she had hated.

"Life's cruel, cruel!  It promises us women everything.  And then it cheats us and tricks us
and takes away all that it gave, one thing after another.  It's like bleeding to death, losing
your beauty little by little, fighting your hardest and knowing you've got to be beaten in
the end.  When I was a child in bed I used to think I heard footsteps coming along the hall,
slow and stealthy, and I'd lie there trembling and quaking, afraid to open my eyes.  That's
the way I've been listening to old age, creeping on me--for the last ten years."

"And if only you'd got your courage up to opening your eyes when you were a little, trembly
thing, scared of those footsteps, like enough all you'd have seen beside your bed was your
mother smiling down on you."

Annabel looked at the speaker without replying.  Her look offered little encouragement for
Persis to continue, but she needed no such incentive.

"You talk about life's being cruel.  Why, you poor little soul, you don't know what life's
like.  You've never given it a chance.  You haven't played fair."

For years Persis had acknowledged to a desire to give Annabel Sinclair "a good talking to."
On various occasions she had uttered truths that had cut like knives.  She had the same truths
to utter now but the spirit had altered.

"I guess every girl that was ever born liked to have men courting her and ready to fight one
another for a kind word from her.  That's nature.  But it ain't nature to have it last, Mis'
Sinclair.  And that's where you made your mistake.  You wanted to keep right on pretending
it was May after it got along to August or so."

Something she saw in the poor harassed face caused her to change her position slightly, so
that she could pat the listless hand of Diantha's mother while she spoke.

"Life ain't cruel, you poor soul!  It comes along with both hands full. It says to the little
girl, 'Come, drop that doll-baby, I've got something better than that.  Here's a lover for
you.'  And then it says to the girl that's picking and choosing among her beaux, 'Drop that
flirting, I've got something better for you.  Here's a husband and a home!'  And so it goes.
Instead of getting poorer all the time, we're getting richer."

She looked at Annabel tentatively.  She was not altogether sure that her eloquence was having
effect.  But as Annabel sat in an attitude of expectancy, her face turned toward her monitor,
though her eyes were downcast, Persis tried again.

