The British Board of Trade fixes the greatest strain that shall come upon the material in a
wrought-iron bridge, from the combined weight of the bridge and load, at 5 tons per square
inch of the net section of the metal. The French practice allows 3-8/10 tons per square inch
of the cross section of the metal, which, considering the amount taken out by rivet-holes,
is substantially the same as the English allowance. The report of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, above referred to, recommends 10,000 pounds per inch as the maximum for wrought-iron
in tension in railroad bridges. For highway bridges a unit strain of 15,000 pounds per square
inch is often allowed. A very common clause in a specification is that the factor of safety
shall be four, five, or six, as the case may be, meaning by this that the actual load shall
not exceed one-fourth, one-fifth, or one-sixth part of the breaking-load. It is a little unfortunate
that this term, factor of safety, has found its way into use just as it has; for it by no means
indicates what is intended, or what it is supposed to. The true margin for safety is not the
difference between the working-strain and the breaking-strain, but between the working-strain
and that strain which will in any way unfit the material for use. Now, any material is unfitted
for use when it is so far distorted by overstraining that it cannot recover, or, technically
speaking, when its elastic limit has been exceeded. The elastic limit of the best grades of
iron is just about half the breaking-weight, or from 25,000 to 30,000 pounds per inch. A poor
iron will often show a very fair breaking-strength, but, at the same time, will have a very
low elastic limit, and be entirely unfit for use in a bridge. A piece of iron of very inferior
quality will often sustain a greater load before breaking than a piece of the best and toughest
material, for the reason that a tough but ductile iron will stretch before giving way, thus
reducing the area of section, while a hard but poor iron will keep nearly its full size until
it breaks. A tough and ductile iron should bend double, when cold, without showing any signs
of fracture, and should stretch fifteen per cent of its length before breaking; but much of
the iron used in bridges, although it may hold 40,000 or 50,000 pounds per inch before failing,
will not bend over 90 degrees without cracking, and has an elastic limit as low as 18,000 pounds.
It is thus full as important to specify that an iron should have a high elastic limit as that
it should have a high breaking-weight. A specification which allowed no material to be strained
by more than 10,000 pounds per inch, and no iron to be used with a less elastic limit than
25,000 pounds, would, at the same time, agree with the standard requirement, both in England
and in the United States, and would also secure a good quality of iron.

Two documents published some time since illustrate the preceding remarks. The first is the
account of the tests of the iron taken from the Tariffville bridge after its failure, and the
second is the specification for bridges on the Cincinnati Southern Railroad. The Tariffville
bridge, though nominally a wooden one, like most structures of the kind relied entirely upon
iron rods to keep the wood-work together. Although the rods were too small, and seriously defective
in manufacture, the bridge ought not to have fallen from that cause. Sad soul, take comfort,
nor forget That sunrise never failed us yet.

--Celia Thaxter.

WHO-OO-

I wonder if you have ever heard Of the queer, little, dismal Whiney-bird, As black as a crow,
as glum as an owl-- A most peculiar kind of a fowl? He is oftenest seen on rainy days, When
children are barred from outdoor plays; When the weather is bright and the warm sun shines,
Then he flies far away to the gloomy pines, Dreary-looking, indeed,
is his old black cloak, And his whiney cry makes the whole house blue--
"There's nothing to do-oo! there's nothing to do-oo!"

Did you ever meet this doleful bird? He's found where the children
are, I've heard, Now, who can he be?

It can't be you. But who is the Whiney-bird? Who-oo? Who-oo?

--Jean Halifax in St. Nicholas.

THE BLUEBIRD.

BY MABEL OSGOOD WRIGHT.

The National Association of
Audubon Societies Educational Leaflet No. 24.

Who dares write of
the Bluebird, thinking to add a fresher tint to his plumage, a new
tone to his melodious voice, or a word of praise to his gentle life,
that is as much a part of our human heritage and blended with our
memories as any other attribute of home?

Not I, surely, for I know
him too well and each year feel myself more spellbound and mute by
the memories he awakens. Yet I would repeat his brief biography, lest
there be any who, being absorbed by living inward, have not yet looked
outward and upward to this poet of the sky and earth and the fullness
and goodness thereof. An addition of 25 per cent will be made to the strains
produced by the rolling-load considered as static in all parts which are liable to be thrown
suddenly under strain by the passage of a rapidly moving load. A similar addition of 50 per
cent will be made to the strain on suspension links and riveted connections of stringers with
floor-beams, and floor-beams with trusses. The iron-work shall be so proportioned that the
weight of the structure, together with the above specified rolling-load, shall in no part cause
a tensile strain of more than 10,000 pounds per square inch of sectional area. Iron used under
tensile strain shall be tough, ductile, of uniform quality, and capable of sustaining not less
than 50,000 pounds per square inch of sectional area without fracture, and 25,000 pounds per
square inch without taking a permanent set. The reduction of area at the breaking-point shall
average 25 per cent, and the elongation 15 per cent. When cold, the iron must bend, without
sign of fracture, from 90 to 180 degrees."

A specification like this, properly carried out, would put an absolute stop to the building
of such structures as the Tariffville Bridge, and would prevent a very large part of the catastrophes
which so often shock the community, and shake the public faith in iron bridges. Reference has
been made above to the proper loads to be placed upon wrought-iron when under a tensile strain.
Similar loads have been determined for other materials, and for other kinds of strain.

The preceding remarks in regard to the loads for which bridges should be designed, and the
safe weight to be put upon the material, are given to show how far the safety of a bridge is
a matter of fact, and how far a matter of opinion. It will be seen that the limits within which
we are at liberty to vary, are quite narrow, so that bridge-building may correctly be called
a science; and there is no excuse for the person who guesses, either at the load which a bridge
should be designed to bear, or at the size of the different members of the structure. Still
less can we excuse the man who not only guesses, but who, in order to build cheaply, persistently
guesses on the wrong side.

It will, of course, be understood, when it is said that bridge-building may be called a science,
that it can only be so when in the hands of an engineer whose judgment has been matured by
wide experience, and who understands that no mechanical philosophy can be applied to practice
which is not subject to the contingencies of workmanship. There are many bridges which will
stand the test of figures very well, and which are nevertheless very poor structures. The general
plan of a bridge may be good, the computations all right, and yet it may break down under the
first train that passes over it. There are many practical considerations that cannot be, at
any rate have not yet been, reduced to figures. It is not enough that the strains upon each
member of a bridge should be correctly estimated, and fall within the safe limits: the different
members of the bridge must be so connected, and the mechanical details such, as to insure,
under all conditions, the assumed action of the several parts. In fine, while we can say that
a bridge that does not stand the test of arithmetic is a bad bridge, we cannot always say that
a structure which does stand such a test is a good one.

We often hear it argued that a bridge must be safe, since it has been submitted to a heavy
load, and did not break down. Such a test means absolutely nothing. It does not even show that
the bridge will bear the same load again, much less does it show that it has the proper margin
for safety. It simply shows that it did not break down at that time. Every rotten, worn-out,
and defective bridge that ever fell has been submitted to exactly that test. More than this,
it has repeatedly happened that a heavy train has passed over a bridge in apparent safety,
while a much lighter one passing directly afterwards has gone through. In almost all such cases,
the structure has been weak and defective; and finally some heavy load passes over, and cripples
the bridge, so that the next load produces a disaster. For the test of a bridge to be in any
way satisfactory, we must know just what effect such test has had upon the structure. We do
not find this out by simply standing near, and noting that the bridge did not break down. We
must satisfy ourselves beyond all question that no part has been overstrained.

A short time ago the builders of a wretchedly cheap and unsafe highway bridge, in order to
quiet a fear which had arisen that the structure was not altogether sound, tested a span 122
feet long with a load of 58,000 pounds; and inasmuch as the bridge did not break down under
this load, which was less than a quarter part of what it was warranted to carry safely, the
county commissioners considered the result eminently satisfactory, and remarked that the test
was made merely to satisfy the public that the bridge was abundantly safe for all practical
uses. The public would, no doubt, have been satisfied that the Ashtabula bridge was abundantly
safe for all practical uses had it stood on that bridge in the morning and seen a heavy freight-train
go over it, and yet that very bridge broke down directly afterwards under a passenger-train.

Now, according to the common notion, that was a good bridge in the morning, and a very bad
bridge, or rather, no bridge at all, in the evening. The question for the public is, When did
it cease to be a good bridge, and begin to be a bad one? A test like the one referred to above
can do no more than illustrate the ignorance or lack of honesty of those who make it, or those
who are satisfied with it. Such a test might come within a dozen pounds of breaking the bridge
down, and no one be the wiser. The entire absurdity of such testing has recently been illustrated
in the most decided manner. The very same company that built the bridge above referred to,
made also another one on exactly the same plan, and of almost precisely the same size, and
tested it when done by placing almost exactly the same load upon it. The bridge did not break
down; and the county commissioners, for whom the work was done, were satisfied that it was
"abundantly safe for all practical uses," accepted it, paid for it; and in less than ten years
it broke down under a single team and a little snow, weighing in all not over one-tenth part
of the load the bridge was warranted to carry, and not over one-half the load with which it
had been previously tested. If this bridge had been "tested" by five minutes of honest arithmetic,
it would have been promptly condemned the very day it was finished.

In view of the preceding, what shall we say of a bridge company that deliberately builds a
bridge in the middle of a large town, where it will be subjected to heavy teaming, and, owing
to its peculiar location, to heavy crowds, and warrants to the town that it shall safely hold
a ton per running-foot, when the very simplest computation shows beyond chance of dispute that
such a load will strain the iron to 40,000 pounds per square inch? We are to say, either that
such a company is so ignorant that it does not know the difference between a good bridge and
a bad one, or else so wicked as to knowingly subject the public to a wretchedly unsafe bridge.
The case referred to is not an imaginary one, but existed recently in the main street of a
large New-England town. The joints in that bridge, which could safely hold but 20,000 pounds,
were required to hold 60,000 pounds under the load which the builders had warranted the bridge
to carry safely. The case was so bad, that, after a lengthy controversy, the town officers
had a thorough expert examination of the bridge, which promptly condemned it as in imminent
danger of falling, and as having a factor of safety of only 1-15/100, which is practically
no factor at all. Notwithstanding all this, and in the face of the report, the president of
the bridge company came out with a letter in the papers, in which he pronounced the bridge
"perfectly safe." Thus we actually have the president of a bridge company in this country stating
openly that a factor of safety of 1-15/100 makes a bridge perfectly safe, or, in other words,
that a bridge can safely bear the load that will break it down, for he very wisely made not
the slightest attempt to disprove any of the conclusions of the commission; and this company
has built hundreds of highway bridges all over the United States, and is building them to-day
wherever it can find town or county officers ignorant enough to buy them.

It might be supposed, that, under the above condemnation, the authorities controlling the bridge
would have taken some steps to prevent the coming disaster. They did, however, nothing of the
kind, but allowed the public to travel over it for more than a year, at the most fearful risk,
until public indignation became so strong that a special town-meeting was called, and a committee
appointed to remove the old bridge, and to build a new one.

One of the worst cases of utterly dishonest bridge-building that we have had of late years
in Massachusetts, was that of the iron highway bridge across the Merrimac River at Groveland,
a few miles below Haverhill, one span of which broke down in January, 1881. This bridge was
built in 1871-1872, and consisted of 6 spans, each about 125 feet long. The whole cost of the
structure was $80,000, and the contract price for the iron-work was $28,000. The company which
made that bridge, agreed in their contract to give the county a structure that should carry
safely 3,000 pounds per running-foot besides its own weight; but they built a bridge, which,
if they knew enough to compute its strength at all, they knew perfectly well could not safely
carry over one-quarter part of that load. In fact, the weight of the bridge alone is more than
it ever ought to have borne. The company warranted each span of that bridge to carry safely
a net or moving load of 165 tons, and it broke down under a single team and a small amount
of snow. The company warranted that bridge to carry safely a load which would strain the iron
to 50,000 pounds per inch, when it knew perfectly well that 15,000 pounds per inch was the
most that could safely be borne.

There are several concerns in the United States which make a specialty of highway bridges,
and which, taking advantage of the ignorance of public officials, are flooding the country
with bridges no better than that at Groveland. On an average, at least twenty of these miserable
traps tumble down every year, and nothing is done to bring the guilty parties to punishment.
Dishonest builders cheat ignorant officials, and the public suffers the damage and pays the
bills. Is human life worth enough to pay for having these structures inspected, and, if found
unsafe, strengthened or removed? Can we do any thing to prevent towns and counties from being
imposed upon by dishonest builders? We certainly can, if those who control these matters care
enough about it to do it. There are two ways of buying a bridge,--a good way and a bad one;
and these two ways are so plain that no one can misunderstand. To buy a bad bridge, just as
soon as your town or county votes money for a new bridge, certain agents--and they are as numerous
as the agents for sewing-machines or lightning-rods--will call on, or write to, the town or
county officers, and will offer to build any thing under heavens you want of any size, shape,
or material, and for almost any price. They will produce testimonials from all the town and
county officers in the country for the excellence of their bridges, and would not hesitate
to give reference, even, for their moral character, if you should ask it. When the breeding season
is over, the birds travel sometimes in family groups and sometimes in large flocks, moving southward
little by little, according to season and food-supply, some journeying as far as Mexico, others
lingering through the middle and southern states. When the bridge is put up, you never will know whether the iron
is good or bad, nor whether the dimensions and proportions are such as to be safe or not. You
will know that you have paid your money away, but you never will know what you have got for
it until some day when your bridge gets a crowd upon it, and breaks down, and you have the
damage to pay. This mode of buying a bridge is very common. To buy a good bridge, first determine
precisely what you want; and if you don't know any thing in regard to bridge-building yourself,
employ an engineer who does, to make a specification stating exactly what you want, and what
you mean to have. Then advertise for bridge-builders to send in plans and proposals. Let the
contractors understand that all plans and computations are to be submitted to your engineer,
that all materials and workmanship will be submitted to your inspectors, and that the whole
structure is to be made subject to the supervision of a competent engineer, and accepted by
him for you. You will find at once, that, under such conditions, all travelling agents and
builders of cheap bridges will avoid you as a thief does the light of day. You will have genuine
proposals from responsible companies, and their bids should be submitted to your engineer.
When you have made your choice, let the contract be written by your lawyer, and have the plans
and specifications attached. Employ a competent engineer to inspect the work as it goes on;
and when it is done, you will have a bridge which will be warranted absolutely sound by the
best authority. This mode of buying a bridge is very uncommon.

The Ashtabula bridge, it is stated in the report of the committee of the Ohio Legislature appointed
to investigate that disaster, had factors,--we can hardly call them factors of safety,--in
some parts as low as 1-6/10 and 1-2/10, such factors referring to the breaking-weight; and
even these factors were obtained by assuming the load as at rest, and making no allowance for
the jar and shock from a railroad train in motion. Well may the commissioners say, as they
do at the end of their report, "The bridge was liable to go down at any time during the last
ten years under the loads that might at any time be brought upon it in the ordinary course
of the company's business, and it is most remarkable that it did not sooner occur."

