Parcels were put on one side to await more leisurely inspection, but cards and letters were
opened at once, and Rob seated himself by Peggy's side as she placed the pile of envelopes
on a table in the corner.

"We are partners, you know," he reminded her, "so I think I am entitled to a share in these.
What a lot of cards!  Who on earth are the senders?"

"My godfathers, and my godmothers, and all my relatives and friends. The girls at school and
some of the teachers.  This fat one is from `Buns'--Miss Baker, the one whose Sunday hat I
squashed.  She used to say that I was sent to her as wholesome discipline, to prevent her being
too happy as a hard-worked teacher in a ladies' school, but she wept bucketfuls when I came
away.  I liked Buns!  This is from Marjorie Riggs, my chum.  She had a squint, but a most engaging
disposition. This is from Kate Strong: now if there is a girl in the world for whom I cherish
an aversion, it is Katie Strong!  She is what I call a specious pig, and why she wanted to
send me a Christmas card I simply can't imagine.  We were on terms of undying hatred.  This
is from Miss Moss, the pupil teacher.  She had chilblains, poor dear, and spoke through her
dose.  `You busn't do it, Peggy, you really busn't.  It's bost adoying!' Then I did it again,
you know, and she sniggered and tried to look cross.  This is--I don't know who this is from!
It's a man's writing. It looks like a business letter--London postmark--and something printed
in white on the seal.  What is it?  `The Pic-Pic-Piccadilly'--Robert!" Peggy's voice grew shrill
with excitement.  "The Piccadilly Magazine."

"Wh-at!"  Robert grabbed at the envelope, read the words himself, and stared at her with sparkling
eyes.  "It is!  It's the prize, Mariquita! It must be.  What else would they write about? 
Open it and see.  Quick! Shall I do it for you?"

"Yes, yes!" cried Peggy breathlessly.  She craned her head forward as Rob tore open the envelope,
and grasped his arm with both hands. Together they read the typewritten words, together they
gasped and panted, and shrieked aloud in joy.  "We've done it!  We have!  We've won the prize!
Thirty pounds!  Bravo, Rob!  Now you can buy your microscope!"--"Good old Mariquita, it's all
your doing.  Don't speak to us; we are literary people, far above ordinary commonplace creatures
like you.  Thir-ty pounds! made by our own honest toil.  What do you think of that, I'd like
to know?"

Each member of the audience thought something different, and said it amid a scene of wild excitement.
The elders were pleased and proud, though not above improving the occasion by warnings against
secret work, over-anxiety, midnight journeys, etcetera.  Mellicent exclaimed, "How jolly! 
Now you will be able to give presents for the New Year as well as Christmas;" and Arthur said,
"Dear Peggums!  I always loved you; I took the `will,' you know, without any grumbling, and
now you can follow up with the deed as quickly as you like!"  Each one wanted to hold the precious
document in his own hands, to read it with his own eyes, and it was handed round and round
to be exclaimed over in accents of wonder and admiration, while Rob beamed, and Peggy tossed
her pigtail over her shoulder, holding her little head at an angle of complacent satisfaction.

The moment of triumph was very sweet--all the sweeter because of the sorrows of the last few
weeks.  The partners forgot all the hard work, worry, and exhaustion, and remembered only the
joy of success and hope fulfilled.  Robert said little in the way of thanks, preferring to
wait until he could tell Peggy of his gratitude without an audience to criticise his words;
but when his mother began to speak of leaving, it was he who reminded Mrs Asplin of the promise
that the invalid should have her first walk on Christmas Day.

"Let us go on ahead, and take her with us until the carriage overtakes us.  It will do her
no harm.  It's bright and dry--"

"Oh, mater, yes!  I told Peg I would take her out," chimed in Arthur, starting from his seat
by Rosalind's side, and looking quite distressed because he had momentarily forgotten his promise.
"Wrap her up well, and we'll take care of her.  The air will do her good."

"I think it will, but you must not go far--not an inch beyond the crossroads.  Come, Peggy,
and I'll dress you myself.  I can't trust you to put on enough wraps."  Mrs Asplin whisked
the girl out of the room, and wrapped her up to such an extent that when she came downstairs
again she could only puff and gasp above her muffler, declare that she was choking, and fan
herself with her muff.  Choking or not, the eyes of the companions brightened as they looked
at her, for the scarlet tam-o'-shanter was set at a rakish angle on the dark little head, and
Peggy the invalid seemed to have made way for the Peggy of old, with dimpling cheeks and the
light of mischief in her eyes.

The moment that Mrs Asplin stopped fumbling with her wraps, she was out at the door, opening
her mouth to drink in the fresh chill air, and Robert was at her side before anyone had a chance
of superseding him.

"Umph!  Isn't it good?  I'm stifling for a blow.  My lungs are sore for want of exercise. 
I was longing, longing to get out.  Robert, do you realise it?  We have won the prize!  Can
you believe it?  It is almost too good to be true.  It's the best present of all. Soon after
he leaps and flies upon him, advancing and retreating, now on one
side, now on the other, maintaining an ingenious combat; at one time
assailing him with all vigour, at another shunning him.

So actively did he continue this artificial warfare, causing the huge beast to turn around so
frequently on every side to avoid his attacks, that he ultimately came down with a crash that
"made the earth tremble with his fall".

Book viii. chap. 40.
  We seem to have come to the end of so many things, and I hate
ends.  There is this disappointment about Arthur, which spoils all the old plans, and the break-up
of our good times here together.  I shall miss Oswald.  He was a dear old dandy, and his ties
were quite an excitement in life; but I simply can't imagine what the house will be like without
you, Rob!"

"I shall be here for some weeks every year, and I'll run down for a day or two whenever I can.
It won't be good-bye."

"I know--I know! but you will never be one of us again, living in the house, joining in all
our jokes.  It will be quite a different thing. And you will grow up so quickly at Oxford,
and be a man before we know where we are."

"So will you--a woman at least.  You are fifteen in January.  At seventeen, girls put their
hair up and wear long dresses.  You will look older than I do, and give yourself as many airs
as if you were fifty.  I know what girls of seventeen are like.  I've met lots of them, and
they say, `That boy!' and toss their heads as if they were a dozen years older than fellows
of their own age.  I expect you will be as bad as the rest, but you needn't try to snub me.
I won't stand it."

"You won't have a chance, for I shan't be here.  As soon as my education is finished I am going
out to India, to stay until father retires and we come home to settle.  So after to-day--"

"After to-day--the deluge!  Peggy, I didn't tell you before, but I'm off to-morrow to stay
in town until I go up to Oxford on the fourteenth. The pater wants to have me with him, so
I shan't see you again for some months.  Of course I am glad to be in town for most things, but--"

"Yes, but!" repeated Peggy, and turned a wan little face upon him.  "Oh, Rob, it is changing
quickly I never thought it would be so soon as this. So it is good-bye.  No wonder I felt so
blue this morning.  It is good-bye for ever to the old life.  We shall meet again, oh yes!
but it will be different.  Some day when I'm old and grown-up I will see in a newspaper the
name of a distinguished naturalist and discoverer, and say, `I used to know him once.  He was
not at all proud.  He used to pull my hair like any ordinary mortal.'

"Some day I shall enter a ballroom, and see a little lady sitting by the door waving her hands
in the air, and using words a mile long, and shall say to myself, `Do my eyes deceive me? 
Is it indeed the Peggy Pickle of the Past?' and my host will say, `My good sir, that is the
world-famous authoress, Mariquita de Ponsonby Plantagenet Saville!'  Stevenson, I assure you,
is not in it for flow of language, and she is so proud of herself that she won't speak to anyone
under a belted earl."

"That sounds nice!" said Peggy approvingly.  "I should like that; but it wouldn't be a ball,
you silly boy--it would be a conversazione, where all the clever and celebrated people of London
were gathered together, `To have the honour of meeting Miss Saville.'  There would be quite
a number of people whom we knew among the Lions.  A very grand Lady Somebody or other, the
beauty of the season--Rosalind, of course--all sparkling with diamonds, and leaning on the
arm of a distinguished-looking gentleman with orders on his breast.  That's Arthur.  I'm determined
that he shall have orders.  It's the only thing that could reconcile me to the loss of the
Victoria Cross, and a dress-coat is so uninteresting without trimmings!  A fat lady would be
sitting in a corner prattling about half a dozen subjects all in one moment--that's Mellicent;
and a tall, lean lady in spectacles would be imparting useful information to a dandy with an
eyeglass stuck in one eye--that's Esther and Oswald!  Oh dear, I wonder--I wonder--I wonder!
It's like a story-book, Rob, and we are at the end of the first volume. How much shall we have
to do with each other in the second and third; and what is going to happen next, and how, and
when?"

"We--we have to part, that's the next thing," said Rob sadly.  "Here comes the carriage, and
Arthur is shouting for us to stop.  It's good-bye, for the present, Mariquita; there's no help
for it!"

"At the crossroads!" said Peggy slowly, her eye wandering to the sign-board which marked the
paths branching north, south, east, and west.  She stopped short and stood gazing into his
face, her eyes big and solemn, the wind blowing her hair into loose little curls beneath her
scarlet cap, her dramatic mind seizing eagerly on the significance of the position.  "At the
crossroads, Rob, to go our different ways! Good-bye, good-bye!  I hate to say it.  You--you
won't forget me, and like the horrid boys at college better than me, will you, Rob?"

Robert gave a short, strangled little laugh.

"I think--not!  Cheer up, partner!  We will meet again, and have a better time together than
we have had yet.  The third volume is always more exciting than the first.  I say we shall,
and you know when I make up my mind to a thing, it has to be done!"

"Ah, but how?" sighed Peggy faintly.  "But how?"  Vague prophecies of the future were not much
comfort to her in this moment of farewell.  She wanted something more definite; but Rob had
no time to enter into details, for even as she spoke the carriage drew up beside them, and,
while the occupants congratulated Peggy on having walked so far and so well, he could only
grip her hand, and take his place in silence beside his sister.

Lady Darcy bent forward to smile farewell; Rosalind waved her hand, and then they were off
again, driving swiftly homewards, while Peggy stood watching, a solitary figure upon the roadside.

