Whatever his original design, which may have been to take his whole force to Acton Homes, and
then march eastward along the road, he had to drive the Boers from the plateau. I have received
two a week, for this last three weeks, of the friends of peace. On the morrow after Christmas
day I was at work again. When my sisters have called me to my breakfast or dinner, I have been
forced to be reading while I have eaten my food.
 The view that the bullet should do its work before the appeal to the bayonet is made
had at length asserted itself. Moreover, the need for method in attack had been recognised;
first reconnaissance, then shelling; during the shelling the deployment of the infantry in
extended and flexible order, then the musketry duel supported by the artillery; and then, as
the infantry fire proves stronger than the enemy's, an advance from point to point in order
to bring it to closer and more deadly range; last of all, if and where it may be needed, the
charge. These sound tactics--the only tactics appropriate to modern firearms--cannot be hurried,
for to charge men armed with the magazine rifle and not yet shaken is to sacrifice your troops
to their own bravery.

Warren's attack then was rightly deliberate. On Friday, the 19th, he was reconnoitring and
feeling for the enemy. On Saturday the shooting match began. It was continued throughout Sunday,
and was not over on Tuesday. During these days the British were making way, gradually and not
without loss, but steadily. There were, no doubt, pauses for renewing order, for reinforcing,
and for securing the ground won. On Tuesday evening Spion Kop was still held by the Boers,
who seem even then not to have been driven off the plateau, but to have been clinging to its
eastern edge. On Tuesday night Spion Kop was taken. It was assaulted, probably in the dark,
by surprise, and the Boers driven off. Even on Wednesday the Boers were tenaciously resisting
the advance, making heavy attacks on Spion Kop and using their artillery with effect. At midnight
between Wednesday and Thursday Sir Redvers Duller telegraphed home Sir Charles Warren's opinion
that the enemy's position had been rendered untenable, and added his own judgment of the behaviour
of the British troops in the words, "the men are splendid."

All through the week Lyttelton's brigade has been facing a force of the enemy on the eastern
limb of the plateau in front of Potgieter's Drift. He has not pressed an attack but has kept
his infantry back, not pushing them forward to close range, but contenting himself with shelling
the Boer positions.

Sir Redvers Buller before the troops left the camps beside the railway had six infantry brigades.
There are indications in the telegrams of a reorganisation and redistribution of battalions
among the brigades, so that it is hardly safe to speak with certainty as to the present composition
and distribution of the commands. Apparently the left wing under Warren consists of three or
four infantry brigades, the cavalry brigade, and most of the mounted infantry, and five or
six batteries. Sir Charles Warren himself appears to keep the general direction of this wing
in his own hands. Sir F. Clery either commands a division (two brigades), the third brigade
being led by its brigadier, under Sir Charles Warren's direction, or Sir F. Clery is supervising
the whole of the infantry advance. Lyttelton has his own brigade, and Barton's brigade covers
the railhead at Chieveley. That accounts for five of the six brigades. The sixth is Coke's,
of Warren's division. We do not at present know whether this is with Warren on the left wing
or with Duller as a general reserve to be put in to the fight at the decisive moment.

The great difficulties of day-after-day fighting, which has been regarded for some years as
the normal character of future battles, is to secure for the men the food and rest without
which they must soon collapse, and to ensure the continuous supply of ammunition. If these
difficulties can be overcome Sir Redvers Bullers has a good chance of success in his endeavour
to relieve Ladysmith. Once driven from the plateau by Warren, the Boers must retire several
miles before they can reach a second defensive position, and their retirement may be hastened
by pressure on their flanks, which is to be expected from Dundonald's mounted infantry and
cavalry, probably now on the right or northern flank of the Boer line, as well as from Lyttelton
on their left. A small reinforcement would give a fresh impetus to the British advance. If
Coke's brigade has not yet been engaged Sir Redvers Buller will know when and where to use
it--either to reinforce Lyttelton for a blow against the Boer line of retreat or to reinforce
Warren's left. The arrival of the Kildonan Castle at Durban this morning, as far as we know,
with drafts for some of the battalions, is better than nothing, for the drafts will give fresh
vigour to the bodies that receive them. They cannot reach the fighting line before Saturday,
but their arrival then may be most opportune. He is now about 12 years old, "working with two hammers,
one with his foot, the other with his hand, striking off nails as
fast as he can." But I should like to compare his writing with the
writing of any little boys and girls of his age, that meet in our
school-room. There was at least a brigade available at Cape Town a
few days ago, and it could not have been better employed than in strengthening Buller at any
point where he can feed it, at Chieveley if not as a reinforcement to Warren or Lyttelton,
for a fresh brigade at Chieveley would enable Barton to put pressure on the Boers in his front.

Supposing that Warren has by this time compelled the retreat of the Boers from the plateau
for which he has been fighting, what can the Boers do to resist Buller's further advance? They
must try to hold a second position. Two such positions appear to be open to them, if we may
judge by the not very full maps available. The line of hills from Bulbarrow Hill on the north
to the hill near Arnot Hill Farm on the south might give good opportunities for defence; it
blocks the road to Ladysmith, for the Boers occupying the line would be right across these
roads. Another plan would be for the Boers to retreat to the north-east on to the east and
west ridge, which commands from the north the Acton Homes--Dewdrop road. If the Boers took
this position the roads to Ladysmith, or to the rear of the investing lines, would be open.
But Sir Redvers Buller could not advance along them with the Boer forces menacing his flank,
and he would be obliged either to attack them or to contain them by extending a force along
their front to hold its ground against them while he pushed the rest of his force towards Ladysmith.
Whether this would be a prudent plan for the Boers depends upon their numbers, and if they
are strong enough they might combine both plans.

It is, however, by no means certain that Lord Dundonald is unable to prevent the Boers from
crossing the Blaauwbank Spruit. He has not been heard of for a week, and has had plenty of
time to have his force in position to the north of Clydesdale Farm, unless, indeed, he has
been kept in hand behind Warren's left flank ready for pursuit after the capture of the great
plateau.

