Being a legume, it has the power of enriching soils with nitrogen, but probably not to so great
an extent as the larger varieties of clover. Its rootlets, however, have a beneficent influence
on the texture of soils, because of their number, and because of the power of the stems to
produce fresh plants, which occupy the soil when other plants die. The latter furnish a continued
source of food to other grasses, which grow along with white clover in permanent pastures.

Along with blue grass, white clover plants aid in choking out weeds. This result follows largely
as the outcome of the close sod formed by the two. But in some soils, plants of large growth
and bushes and young trees will not thus be crowded out.

=Distribution.=--White clover is certainly indigenous to Europe and to the Northern States,
and probably Western Asia. It grows in every country in Europe, but with greatest luxuriance
in those countries which border on the North Sea, the climates of which are very humid, and
more especially in the Netherlands and Great Britain. It stands in high favor in Holland, but
is not regarded so highly in England, owing, probably, to the great variety of grasses grown
there in permanent pastures. It is generally thought that it was not indigenous to the Southern
States, but has reached these from those farther north. It would seem to be capable of growing
in all countries well adapted to the keeping of cattle; hence, it follows in the wake of successful
live-stock husbandry.

White clover seems able to adapt itself to a great variety of climatic conditions. Nevertheless,
it is certainly better adapted to a moderately cool climate than to one that is hot, and to
a moist, humid climate than to one that is dry. It has much power to live through dry seasons,
but it will not thrive in a climate in which the rainfall is too little for the successful
growth of small cereal grains. Where snow covers it in winter, this clover will grow on timber
soils as far north as any kind of cereal can be made to mature; and it will also grow as far
south as the Mexican boundary on the higher grounds, when there is enough moisture present
to sustain it.

It would probably be correct to say that this plant is found in every State in the Union, and
that it succeeds well in nearly all the Northern States, from sea to sea. Although it grows
well in certain parts of the Southern States, especially in those that lie northward, the general
adaptation in these is not so high as in those further north. The highest adaptation in the
United States is probably found in the Puget Sound region and in the hardwood timber producing
areas of the States which lie south from the Great Lakes and in proximity to them, as Northeastern
Minnesota, Northern Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio and New York. But the adaptation is also high
in the more elevated of the mountain valleys of the Northwestern States when irrigated waters
may be led on to these lands. The areas lowest in adaptation are those that lie within the
semi-arid belt. The low-lying lands of the South, where hot weather is prolonged in summer,
are likewise low in their adaptation, but not so low as the former. The prairie areas of the
Northern Mississippi basin have an adaptation for growing white clover that may be termed intermediate,
but where hardwood forests grow naturally on these the adaptation is high. In New England the
climatic conditions are very favorable, much more so than the soil conditions.

In Canada, conditions are found highly favorable to the growth of this plant in the country
lying eastward from Lake Huron, north of Lakes Erie and Ontario and also on both sides of the
St. Lawrence River. Adaptation is also high along the Pacific and in the mountain valleys not
distant from the Pacific. In all the areas of Canada, which once produced forests, this plant
will grow well. But north from Lakes Huron and Superior, the soil conditions are against it,
because of their rocky character. Certain forest areas west from Lake Superior, and also in
other parts, the sandy soils of which sustain a growth of Jack Pine (Pinus murrayana) trees,
do not grow white clover with much vigor. The prairie areas of Canada, westward from Lake Superior
to the mountains, do not grow white clover with much success, and the adaptation for its growth
would seem to lessen gradually until the Rocky Mountains are approached.

=Soils.=--Small white clover will grow on almost any kind of soil, but by no means equally
well. Highest, probably, in adaptation, especially when climatic conditions are considered
along with those of soil, are the clay loams west of the Cascade Mountains and northward from
California to Alaska. During the moist months of early summer, this plant turns the pastures
in these areas into a flower garden. Almost equally high in adaptation are the volcanic ash
soils of the Rocky Mountain valleys. When amply supplied with water, the finest crops of white
clover can be grown even superior to those grown on the lands described above. Almost the same
may be said of what are termed the hardwood timber soils, which are usually made up of clay
loam lying upon clay. Such areas abound in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, Ontario and some
States further south. In these soils it grows with much luxuriance, more especially when lime
and potash are abundant. Similar luxuriance may be looked for in the deposit soils of river
basins in which the clay element predominates, but not in those that are largely made up of
sand. It will also grow well on the stiffest clays, whether white or red, when moisture is
present. On prairie soils, the success attending it is dependent largely on their texture,
composition and the moisture which they contain under normal conditions. The more firm these
soils are, the better will the clover grow in them, and vice versa. This is equivalent to saying
that the more clay they contain, the better will the white clover grow in them.

Where the humus soils of the prairies are deep and are underlaid with clay, white clover will
grow much better in the subsoil, if laid bare, than in the surface soil. Prairie soils which
lift with the wind are ill adapted to the growth of this plant, whatsoever may be their composition.
Much of the soil in the semi-arid belt would grow this plant in fine form, but want of moisture,
where irrigation is absent makes its growth prohibitory in a large portion of this area. On
ordinary slough soils, this clover finds a congenial home, but it will not grow quite so well,
relatively, in these as alsike clover. On sandy soils, such as those on which Jack pine and
Norway pine (Pinus resinosa) grow, this plant will maintain itself, and in wet seasons will
make considerable showing on these; but in very dry seasons the plants will die, the growth
the following season coming from seeds already in the soil. In the soils of the extreme South,
the inability of white clover to make a good showing is probably more the result of summer
heat than of want of power in the plants to gather food. In those of the Southwest, want of
moisture and excessive heat render its growth, in a sense, prohibitory.

=Place in the Rotation.=--Since white clover is usually not sown for meadow, but is rather
sown for pasture, it can scarcely be called a rotation plant in the strict sense of the term;
and yet, because of the extent to which it grows when it has once obtained a footing in soils,
it is more or less frequent in all rotations in which grass or clover is one of the factors.
As it usually comes into the grass pastures, when these have become established, it will occupy
about the same place as blue grass in rotations; that is to say, whatever would be proper to
sow after the blue grass would be proper to sow after this plant; since the two usually unite
in making the same sod. It will, therefore, be in order to follow this plant with corn to feed
upon the nitrogen furnished by the clover. The same will be true of any small cereal that has
special adaptation for being grown on overturned sod, as for instance, flax or oats, or of
any crop that revels in the decay of vegetable matter, more especially in the early stages
of such decay, as, for instance, potatoes and rape. When white clover is sown on land that
is cultivated, though only sown as a factor in a pasture crop, as with all other clovers it
may best be sown on land that is clean; that is, on land on which the preceding crop has been
cultivated to the extent of securing a clean surface on the same. If, however, this crop must
needs be sown on land that has not been thus cleaned, its great inherent hardihood will enable
it to establish itself where some clovers and grasses would fail.

It is common to sow white clover on land from which the forest has recently been removed, also
on natural prairie, where it has not previously grown. In these instances it simply follows
the crop of forest in the one case and of native prairie in the other. But it will not take
possession of the land in either case to the exclusion of other grasses.

=Preparing the Soil.=--The preparation of the soil for growing this plant is much the same
as for growing other plants of the clover or grass family. Fineness, firmness, cleanness and
moistness are the chief essentials to be looked for in making the seed-bed. For the same reason
that it has much power to grow among weeds for so small a plant, it has also much power to
grow on surfaces not in the best condition of preparation for receiving so small a seed. But
when sown to provide a seed crop, it is specially necessary to make the land thoroughly clean
before sowing the seed. This is necessary for the reason, first, that small white clover, because
of its tardiness in growing in the spring, and because of its comparatively small growth has
not much power to crowd weeds; and second, because of the labor involved in preventing weed
seeds from maturing in a crop that ripens its seeds somewhat late in the season. While it is
advantageous to burn off the grass from a natural meadow where white clover, is to be sown,
it is not so essential, nevertheless, as when preparing such land for being sown with some
other varieties of grass or clover. The young plants will endure under conditions which would
cause those of many other varieties to fail.

=Sowing.=--White clover is sown by much the same methods as the medium red variety. (See page
75.) But it will stand more hardship than the other variety; hence, it may be sown earlier.
This means that it may be sown in northerly latitudes any time, from the melting of the winter
snows until early summer, and in southern latitudes almost any season, except during the hot
summer months. In either latitude, however, the early spring is usually the most suitable season
for sowing.

The seed may be sown by hand, by hand machines, or by the seeder attachment of grain drills.
It is more commonly sown along with other clovers and grasses, and the methods of sowing these
will also be suitable for the sowing of white clover. (See page 18.) But when the seed is sown
alone, as for producing seed crops, the nurse crop need not of necessity be sown thinly, from
the fear that the young plants should be smothered by an undue density of shade.

There is no mixture of clovers and grasses grown for pasture to which this plant may not be
added with profit, providing the seed is not already in the land in sufficient supply. But
it is seldom sown with either clovers or grasses, or with these combined, for the production
of hay. It is the judgment of the author, however, that in localities which have special adaptation
for the growth of this plant, it should render excellent service in providing hay for sheep,
if sown along with alsike clover, and a little timothy; the latter being sown mainly to support
the clovers so that they will not lodge. The white clover would furnish hay considerably finer
even than the alsike; hence, such hay should be peculiarly adapted to the needs of sheep. Some
authorities object to the presence of white clover in hay intended for horses or cattle, lest
it should induce in them more or less salivation. The author leans to the opinion that in cured
hay injury from the source named will in no instance prove serious, owing to the small amount,
relatively, of white clover in average hay crops.

The amount of seed to sow will vary with such conditions as soil, climate and the nature of
the pasture, but in any event it need not be large. The seeds of white clover are small, considerably
smaller than those of alsike. For ordinary grazing along with other grasses, or grasses and
clovers, it will seldom be necessary to sow more than 1 pound of seed per acre. Sometimes a
less quantity will suffice, as when there is more or less of seed in the land, and, as already
intimated, because of the store of seed in the land in many instances, it is not necessary
to sow it at all. Especially is this true of sections which have been tilled for some time.
When sown with alsike clover to provide hay, 2 pounds of seed per acre would be a maximum amount,
and 4 pounds when sown alone to provide seed.

When sown in newly cleared forest lands or on prairie sod, the methods to be followed will
depend upon circumstances. More commonly when thus sown the seed is not covered artificially;
consequently, much of it in dry seasons may not grow. The plan, therefore, of sowing small
amounts of the seed on such lands two years in succession would be safer than to sow twice
the amount of the same in one year. In time this clover would find its way into such areas.
It comes through such agencies as birds, hay fed to teams engaged in lumbering, and the overflow
of streams; and as soon as it gets a foothold its distribution is further accelerated by the
droppings of cattle which contain the seeds, and by the winds.

The power of this plant to increase is simply wonderful. This is owing to: 1. The relatively
large number of seedheads produced from the plants. 2. The power which these have to multiply
by means of rootlets from the incumbent stems, which fasten into the soil. 3. The prolonged
season during which the heads form. 4. The habit of growth in many of the heads, because of
which they are not grazed off. 5. The strong vitality of the seed. "I do hate to be driven so I
don't half understand, because there is no time to have things explained.

School is good fun as far as play goes; but I don't see the sense of making a fellow learn eighty
questions in geography one day, and forget them the next.

"What is to become of me, please?" asked Jill, meekly.

"You and Molly are to have lessons here. I was a teacher when I was young, you know, and liked
it, so I shall be school-ma'am, and leave my house-keeping in better hands than mine. I always
thought that mothers should teach their girls during these years,
and vary their studies to suit the growing creatures as only mothers
can.

"That will be splendid! Will Molly's father let her come?" cried Jill, feeling quite reconciled to
staying at home, if her friend was to be with her.

"He likes the plan very much, for Molly is growing fast, and needs a sort of care that Miss
Dawes cannot give her. I am not a hard mistress, and I hope you will
find my school a pleasant one."

"I know I shall; and I'm not disappointed, because I was pretty sure I couldn't go to the old
school again, when I heard the doctor say I must be very careful for a long time. I thought he meant
months; but if it must be years, I can bear it, for I've been happy
this last one though I was sick," said Jill, glad to show that it
had not been wasted time by being cheerful and patient now.

"That's my good girl!" and Mrs. Minot stroked the curly black head as if it was her own little
daughter's. "You have done so well, I want you to go on improving, for care now will save you pain
and disappointment by and by. You all have got a capital start during these six weeks, so it
is a good time to begin my experiment. If it does not work well, we will go back to school and college
next spring."

"Hurrah for Mamma and the long vacation!" cried Jack, catching up
two big books and whirling them round like clubs, as if to get his
muscles in order at once.

"Now I shall have time to go to the Gymnasium and straighten out my back," said Frank, who was
growing so tall he needed more breadth to make his height symmetrical.

"And to ride horseback. I am going to hire old Jane and get out the little phaeton, so we can
all enjoy the fine weather while it lasts.

Molly and I can drive Jill, and you can take turns in the saddle when you are tired of ball
and boating. Exercise of all sorts is one of the lessons we are to learn," said Mrs. Minot,
suggesting all the pleasant things she could to sweeten the pill
for her pupils, two of whom did love their books, not being old enough
to know that even an excellent thing may be overdone.

"Won't that
be gay? I'll get down the saddle to-day, so we can begin right off.
Lem rides, and we can go together. Hope old Jane will like it as well
as I shall," said Jack, who had found a new friend in a pleasant lad
lately come to town.

"You must see that she does, for you boys are
to take care of her. We will put the barn in order, and you can decide
which shall be hostler and which gardener, for I don't intend to hire
labor on the place any more. Our estate is not a large one, and it
will be excellent work for you, my men."

"All right! I'll see to
Jane. I love horses," said Jack, well pleased with the prospect.

"My
horse won't need much care. I prefer a bicycle to a beast, so I'll
get in the squashes, pick the apples, and cover the strawberry bed
when it is time," added Frank, who had enjoyed the free life at Pebbly
Beach so much that he was willing to prolong it. When the larger clovers predominate, the method
of curing will be the same as for curing these (see page 234), that is to say, it can best
be cured in cocks. When timothy predominates, the method of curing will be the same as for
timothy; that is to say, it may be cured in the cock or in the winrow, according to circumstances.
Owing to the fineness of the stems, it may be cured more quickly than red clover; hence, its
presence in a crop of timothy will not delay much the curing of the latter unless when present
in great abundance.

Under some conditions it would be easily possible to grow white clover for hay alone, and in
some instances with profit, more especially in providing what would be a matchless fodder for
young lambs and young calves. It might be so grown in the clover lands that lie immediately
southward from Lakes Superior and Huron, in the northern Rocky Mountain valleys and on the
valley lands around Puget Sound. On these lands in a favorable season, it would be quite possible
to cut not less than 2 tons per acre, while on average land white clover alone would not yield
more, probably, than 1/2 ton per acre. But even when grown for the purpose named, some alsike
clover sown along with the white clover would add to the yield of hay, and without in any considerable
degree lessening its value for the use named.

=Securing Seed.=--White clover is a great seed-producing plant. The season for bloom covers
a period relatively long, and the number of blossoms produced under favorable conditions on
a given area is very large. But when seed crops are to be produced with regularity, it is necessary
that moisture can be depended upon in sufficient supply in the spring months to produce a vigorous
growth in the plants. Such a climate is found in the Puget Sound country and in a less degree
for some distance south from Lakes Huron and Superior. In areas which can be irrigated, it
is not imperative that the climate shall be thus moist. Such areas, therefore, may be looked
upon as possessed of superior adaptation for the growth of seed crops of white clover.

The areas are limited, however, in which seed crops are grown in the United States; so limited
are they that it has been found very difficult to locate them. Wood County in Central Wisconsin
grows a considerable quantity, and some counties northward in the same State, and probably
also some parts of Northern Michigan, will grow seed equally well.

Where a seed crop is grown every care should be exercised to have it free from foul weeds.
The aim should be to grow it on clean land. Sometimes, however, the seed is self-sown; that
is, it comes into the land without being sown, but even in such areas it is safer to sow 3
pounds of seed per acre in the early spring along with a nurse crop. The best seed crops in
Wisconsin and Michigan are grown on a reasonably stiff clay soil. To get a full crop of seed,
it should be pastured for a time in the spring, or the crop should be run over with the mower
about June 1st, setting the mower bar so as to cut 3 or 4 inches high. No harm will follow
if some of the tops of the clover should be cut off. The grass and weeds thus cut are usually
left on the ground, but sometimes it may be necessary to remove them. In a short time the field
should be one mass of bloom.

The crop is ready for being harvested when the bulk of the heads have turned a dark brown and
when the bulk of them have assumed a reddish brown tint, notwithstanding that some of the later
heads may still be in full flower. Vigorous crops may be cut with the self-rake reaper set
to cut low, otherwise many of the heads will not be gathered. To facilitate this process, the
ground should be made quite smooth even before sowing the seed. But the seed crop is more commonly
cut with the field mower, to the cutter bar of which a galvanized platform is bolted, the sides
of which are about 6 inches high. From this the clover is raked off into bunches with a rake.
These bunches should not be large, and since nearly all the heads in them will point upward,
they should not be turned over if rained on, but simply lifted up with a suitable fork and
moved on to other ground.

The seed crop cures quickly. It may be drawn and threshed at once, or it may be stacked and
threshed when convenient. If stacked, a goodly supply of old hay or straw should be put next
the ground, and much care should be taken to protect the clover by finishing off the stack
carefully with some kind of grass or hay that will shed the rain easily. Since the heads are
very small and numerous, and since, as with all clovers, they break off easily when ripe, much
promptness and care should be exercised in harvesting the seed crop. The best machine for threshing
a seed so small is the clover huller.

The yields of seed will run all the way from less than 3 bushels per acre to 5 bushels, and
some crops have been harvested in Wisconsin which gave 7 bushels per acre. Four bushels would
probably be about an average yield. As the price is usually relatively high compared with other
clovers, the seed from white clover would be quite remunerative were it not that in a dry season
the yield is disappointing. In some instances two crops are grown in succession; in others,
one crop is reaped. The land is then sown to barley the next year, and the following year clover
seed may be reaped again without sowing a second time. Usually, after two successive crops
of seed have been cut, blue grass crowds the clover.

It should be possible to grow prodigious crops of white clover in certain of the northern Rocky
Mountain valleys, as, for instance, in Montana and Washington, where the conditions for the
application of water to grow the plants and of withholding the same when ripening the seed
are completely under the control of the husbandman. The soils in these valleys, as previously
intimated, have high adaptation for growing white clover.

=Renewing.=--White clover is probably more easily renewed than any plant of the clover family.
In fact, it seldom requires renewal in a pasture in which it has obtained a footing as long
as it remains a pasture. This arises from the abundance of the seed production and from the
power of the same to retain germinating properties for a long period. Nevertheless, there may
be instances when it may be wise to scatter more seed in the early spring in a pasture in which
white clover may not be sufficiently abundant. It is also renewed, in a sense, when suitable
fertilizer is applied on the pastures. A dressing of potash will greatly stimulate the growth
of any kind of clover on nearly all soils; hence, the marked increase in the growth of the
clover that usually follows the application of a dressing of wood ashes, especially in the
unleached form. Top-dressings of farmyard manure are also quite helpful to such growth.

The conclusion must not be reached that because white clover is not much in evidence in a permanent
pasture for one or two, or even three dry seasons, if these should follow each other, that
it will not come again and with great vigor and in much abundance when a wet season arrives again.

=For Lawns.=--No other plant of the clover family is so frequently sown when making lawns.
For such a use it is not sown alone, but is always the complement of Kentucky blue grass or
of a mixture of grasses. No two plants can be singled out that are more suitable for lawn making
than white clover and Kentucky blue grass. Both are fine in their habit of growth. The two
in conjunction usually make a more dense sward than either alone, and the clover will grow
and produce many flowers, if not kept clipped too closely when the blue grass is resting in
midsummer.

As lawns are usually small, and a dense sward is desired as quickly as it can be obtained;
the seed should be sown thickly on lawns, at the rate of not less than 5 pounds of seed to
the acre. The early spring is the best time for sowing the seed, but in mild climates it may
be sown at almost any season that may be convenient, providing the ground is moist enough to
germinate the seed. In cold climates, the seed should be sown not later than August, unless
when sown too late for autumn germination. This in some instances may not only be proper, but
commendable.

=As a Honey Plant.=--White clover is proverbial for its ability to furnish honey. There is
probably no single plant which furnishes more or better honey. But its value for such a use
varies greatly in different years. In seasons that are quite dry in the spring, it makes but
little growth and produces but few blossoms; hence, in such seasons bees can obtain but little
honey, relatively, from such a source. It would doubtless be good policy, therefore, for the
growers to encourage the sowing of alsike clover where bees are much kept, since the growth
of this clover is less hindered by dry weather at the season named. Less close pasturing than
is commonly practiced would favorably influence the production of honey from white clover,
and would also result in considerably greater yields of pasture.

CHAPTER IX

JAPAN CLOVER

Japan Clover (Lespedeza striata) was introduced from China or Japan, or from both countries,
into South Carolina in 1849, under the name Japan clover. It is thought the seed came in connection
with the tea trade with these countries. According to Phares, the generic term Lespedeza, borne
by the one-seeded pods of the plants of this family, was assigned to them in honor of Lespedez,
a governor of Florida under Spanish rule. It is sometimes called Bush clover, from the bush-shaped
habit of growth in the plants when grown on good soils, but is to be carefully distinguished
from the Bush clovers proper, which are of little value as food plants.

Japan clover is an annual, but owing to its remarkable power to retain its hold upon the soil,
through the shedding of the seed and the growing of the same, it has equal ability with many
perennials to retain its hold upon the soil. It does not start until late in the spring, nor
can it endure much frost; but its ability to grow in and retain its hold upon poor soils is
remarkable, while its powers of self-propagation in the South would seem to be nearly equal
to those of small white clover (Trifolum repens) in the North. It is, therefore, one of the
hardiest plants of the clover family. Where it has once obtained a foothold, in some soils,
at least, it has been known to crowd out Bermuda grass and even broom sage.

The form of the plants is much affected by the character of the soil in which they grow. On
poor soils, the habit of growth is low and spreading; on good soils, it is more upright. But
it is always more or less branched, and the stems are relatively stiffer than those of other
clovers. They rise but a few inches above the ground in poor soils, not more than 2 to 4; but
in good rich soils it will attain to the height of 2 feet. About 1 foot may be named as the
average height. The leaves are trifoliate. The flower produced in the axils of the leaves are
numerous, but quite small. They appear from July onward, according to locality, but are probably
more numerous in September, and vary from a pink to a rose-colored or purplish tint. The seed
pods are small, flattish oval in shape and contain but one seed. The tap roots are strong in
proportion to the size of the plant and are relatively deep feeding; hence, the ability of
the plant to survive severe drought. The roots have much power to penetrate stiff subsoils.

Japan clover is not usually relished by stock at first, but they soon come to like it, and
are then fond of it. Close grazing does not readily injure it; it also furnishes a good quality
of hay, but except on reasonably good soils, the yields of the hay are not very large. The
chemical analysis compares well with that of red clover.

Japan clover is also an excellent soil renovator. In the Southern States, it is credited with
the renovation of soils so poor that the return was not worth the labor of tillage. Throughout
much of the South, it has rendered much service in thus improving soils. It also grows so thickly
on many soils as to lessen and, in many instances, entirely prevent washing, that great bane
of Southern soils. It will even grow and produce some pasture under the shade of grass or Southern
pines.

=Distribution.=--Japan clover is said to be native to China and other countries in Eastern
Asia. When introduced into Japan, the soil and climatic conditions proved so favorable that
before long it spread out over the whole island. Since its introduction into the United States
it has spread very rapidly.

Since it does not grow early in the season, it needs a warm climate. It grows much better in
moist weather than in a time of drought, but it will also continue to grow in the absence of
rain until the drought becomes excessive. It will then wilt down on poor soils, but grows again
as soon as rain falls.

Since the introduction of Japan clover into the United States in 1849, or, as some think, somewhat
earlier, it has spread over the entire South, from the Ohio River to the Gulf, from the Atlantic
to the Mississippi, and also to the States of Arkansas, Louisiana and Texas beyond the Mississippi.
It was early introduced into Georgia, and came into much favor there. It reached Tennessee
in 1870, and soon spread over many counties. It came later into Louisiana, but soon became
very popular there, largely through the efforts of Colonel J. Burgess McGhee of West Feliciana,
who gave much attention to cultivating it and placing it before the public. While it will grow
readily in any part of the South, it renders better service in the Gulf States than in those
farther north, owing to the longer season for growth. North of the Ohio River it is not likely
to be cultivated, since in the Northern States it is not needed, because of the abundance of
the red clovers and also the small white. It is a less abundant producer than the red clovers,
and is also less palatable. Moreover, the season for growing it is much shorter in these States
than in those south; a fact which greatly lessens its adaptation to northern conditions.

Japan clover has no mission for any of the provinces of Canada, and for the reason that it
has no mission for the Northern States.

=Soils.=--Japan clover is adapted to a wide range of soils. There would seem to be a concensus
of opinion in the Southern States that it will grow on almost any kind of soil. It has grown
well on hard, stiff clays, both white and red; on sandy levels; on gravelly undulations and
slopes; on the banks and in the bottom of gullies; on soils too poor to produce other crops,
as on denuded hills and also in groves. But it will grow much better, of course, on good, rich
land, as on moist loams and rich alluvial soils. While it prefers moist situations, it is not
well adapted to saturated lands. There is no useful pasture plant in the South that would seem
so well able to fight its own battle unaided on poor soils as Japan clover, nor is there any
which has brought so much of renovation to these for the labor involved.

=Place in the Rotation.=--Japan clover can scarcely be classed as a rotation plant in the strict
sense of the term, since it more frequently comes into the fields, as it were, spontaneously,
and owing to the uncommon degree to which it has the power of re-seeding itself, it is frequently
grown and grazed for successive years on the land upon which it has been allowed thus to grow.
Nevertheless, since it is a nitrogen gatherer, when it has fertilized the land sufficiently
by bringing to it a supply of nitrogen and by putting humus into it, crops should follow such
as require much of growth to grow them in best form. Such are cotton, corn and the small cereal
grains. Owing to its power to grow on worn and even on abandoned soils, and to crowd weeds
that grow on them, on such soils it comes in between the cessation of cultivation and the resumption
of the same. It frequently grows as a volunteer crop along with Johnson grass, and where it
comes, it tends to crowd grasses of but little value, as brown sage.

Where pasture is desired winter and summer, it should be quite possible in some localities
to obtain it by sowing such crops annually, as winter oats and sand vetches (Vicia villosa)
every autumn, and the seed of Japan clover on the same. The crops first named would provide
winter and spring grazing, and the clover, summer and autumn grazing. The clovers and the vetches
would both aid in fertilizing the land.

=Preparing the Soil.=--While careful preparation of the land will result in more certain and
uniform germination in the seed, and more rapid growth in the plants, careful preparation of
the seed is not so necessary with Japan clover as with many other pasture and hay plants. The
seeds are strong in germinating power and the plants are much able to grow, even under adverse
conditions, when they do germinate. Usually, the preparation which is suited to nurse crops,
amid which this clover is sown, will be suited also to the clover when it is sown thus.

In many instances, however, it is allowed to re-seed itself where it has been once sown, or
even where it may have come into the soil without sowing. In this way successive pasture crops
have been obtained. But usually where hay crops are wanted, it will prove more satisfactory,
all things considered, to sow the seed.

In many instances, simply scarifying the ground has been found a sufficient preparation for
the seed. Any implement that will pulverize the surface for a few inches downward will answer
for such work. In very many instances, seed, of course, self-sown has become rooted and grown
vigorously on unplowed land.

=Sowing.=--Japan clover is more commonly sown in the spring, but it is sometimes sown in the
autumn. There is more or less of hazard in sowing it in the autumn north of the Gulf States,
since when the plants are young they will not stand much frost. For the same reason, there
is the element of hazard in sowing it too early in the spring. Spring sowing stands highest
in favor, taking the whole area into account, in which the clover is grown. While it is possible
to sow the seed too early in the spring, it will be readily apparent that the earlier it may
be sown without hazard to the young plants, the better will be the returns, because of the
growth secured before the advent of dry weather.

The seed may be sown by any of the methods adopted when sowing medium red clover. (See page
78.) The method which is most labor-saving, however, when sown with a nurse crop, is that which
sows it with an attachment to the grain drill used in sowing the nurse crop. If allowed to
fall in front of the drill tubes, it will not usually need any other covering than that furnished
by the drill tubes followed by the roller.

It may be sown with any of the small cereals, whether these are grown for pasture, for hay,
or for grain. When these are fall sown and the clover seed is not sown until the spring, it
will be well worth while, when the weather and soil will admit of it, to cover the seed with
the harrow. It may also be advisable to sow the seed in pastures, as, for instance, along with
orchard grass, or with tall oat grass, as it would tend to fill the vacancies in the land.

When sown alone, 10 pounds of seed per acre will usually suffice. But where there is much seed
in the land that has been self-sown, a less quantity will suffice. Where hay crops are wanted
from year to year on the same land, it may be obtained by simply disking the land and re-sowing.
If the hay is allowed to approach maturity before being cut, sufficient seed will fall to re-sow
the land for the next year's crop, but the quality of hay so ripe is not so good as if cut
earlier. In pastures, the grazing must not be too close when self-seeding is wanted.

=Pasturing.=--Japan clover is much used in providing grazing in the South. Some writers have
spoken of it as being the most valuable grazing plant that grows in the South. Viewed from
the standpoint of productiveness, this would be assigning it too high a place, since Bermuda
grass produces more grazing, but taking productiveness and the probable influence exerted on
soil fertility together, the estimate may be correct. The ease with which Japan clover may
be propagated is also a strong point in its favor.

Since it starts late in the spring, it only provides grazing during the summer and autumn months,
from May, June or July onward, according to the locality, and it fails with the appearance
of the first heavy frosts. In moist situations, it will furnish grazing during all the summer
and autumn, if not allowed to seed, but in time of drought, it may wither on dry, thin soils
and come on again when the rains of autumn begin to fall. In order to keep the grazing tender
and palatable, it should be reasonably close. If allowed to mature much seed before grazing
begins, the plants will then die, to the great injury of the grazing.

That stock do not take kindly to it at first, as they do to alfalfa and some other plants,
cannot be doubted. But they can soon learn to relish it. It has been praised both for milk
and meat production; hence, the aim should be to have it in all permanent pastures. In some
of these it may be necessary to sow a few pounds of seed per acre at the first. If the grazing
is not too close, the plants thereafter will sufficiently re-seed the land. It has been found
quite possible in short rotations to secure pasture from Japan clover without sowing it on
land on which it has once grown. But to accomplish this effectively, the grazing must not be
so close as to preclude a self-seeding. By growing such plants for winter and spring grazing,
as turf oats and sand vetches, and then grazing the Japan clover, which will grow later on
lands thus managed, grazing may be furnished indefinitely from year to year.

=Harvesting for Hay.=--Japan clover is a good hay plant when grown on strong soils. The quality
is good also when grown under adverse conditions, but the quantity is deficient. On good soils,
the yield is from 1 to 2 tons per acre, the average being about 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 tons. The hay
is also quite merchantable in Southern markets. It is considered superior to baled timothy--timothy
brought in from the North--especially when fed to cows producing milk. Japan clover is best
cut when the plants are in full bloom. But harvesting is frequently deferred to a period somewhat
later where self-seeding of the land is desirable. Late cutting, however, lowers the quality
of the hay, both as regards palatability and digestibility. Much that has been said as to the
curing of medium red clover will also apply to Japan clover.

Successive crops of hay may be grown from year to year on the same land, as already intimated.
(See page 285.) But where other crops are wanted on the same farm, it would be wiser to grow
these in some sort of alternation or succession with the clover crops, so that the former could
feed upon the nitrogen brought to the land by the clover.

=Securing Seed.=--Japan clover is ready for being harvested when the major portion of the seeds
are ripe. This is late in the season. The seed crop is more easily gathered when grown on good
land, owing to the more upright habit of growth. The self-rake reaper is probably the best
implement for cutting, since it lays it off in loose sheaves, and on well-prepared land it
may be made to cut so low as to gather the bulk of the seed. But it may also be cut with the
field mower as small white clover is frequently cut. (See page 275.) Owing to the lateness
of the season at which the seed matures, careful and prompt attention may be necessary to secure
the seed crop without loss, owing to the moistness which characterizes the weather at that season.

When Japan clover is to be harvested for seed, care should be taken to prevent weeds from ripening
their seeds in the same. With a view to prevent this, it will be found helpful in many instances
to run the mower over the field some time after the clover has begun to grow freely in the
late spring or early summer. Such clipping will also have the effect of securing more uniformity
in the ripening of the seed.

The seed may be threshed in much the same way as other clover seed. (See page 107.) The yields
per acre should run from 3 to 8 bushels. It weighs 20 pounds per bushel.

=Renewing.=--Since Japan clover is an annual, it is not necessary to renew it, in the sense
in which more long-lived clovers are renewed, as, for instance, the alsike variety. (See page
216.) About the only renewal practicable is that which insures successive crops of pasture,
hay or seed from the same land where the crop has once been grown. (See page 285.) But the
growth may, of course, be stimulated by the application of dressings of fertilizer, such as
gypsum, or those that may be termed potassic in character.

CHAPTER X

BURR CLOVER

Burr Clover (Medicago maculata) is sometimes called Spotted Medick and sometimes California
clover, also Yellow clover. The name burr clover has doubtless arisen from the closely coiled
seed pod, which, being covered with curved prickles, adhere to wool more or less as burrs do.
The name Spotted Medick has been given because of the dark spot found in the middle of the
leaflets, in conjunction with the family of plants to which it belongs. The name California
clover is given because of the claim that it was much grown in California after having been
introduced there from Chili, and the name yellow clover, from the color of the blossoms. After
its introduction into the United States, seedsmen sell California and Southern burr clover
as two varieties, but the correctness of the distinction thus made has been questioned. Many
persons were wont to confuse it with alfalfa, or, as it is frequently called, lucerne, but
the latter is much more upright in its habit of growth, grows to a greater height, has more
blossoms, blue in color, and seed pods more loosely coiled. It is also to be distinguished
from a variety (Medicago denticulata) which bears much resemblance to it, and which, growing
wild over portions of the plains and foothills of the West, affords considerable pasture.

Burr clover may properly be termed a winter annual, since the seed comes up in the autumn,
furnishes grazing in the winter and spring, and dies with the advent of summer. It is procumbent
or spreading and branched. On good soil some of the plants radiate to the distance of several
feet from the parent root. They have been known to overlap, and thus accumulate until the ground
was covered 2 feet deep with this clover, thus making it very difficult to plow them under.
It is only under the most favorable conditions, however, that the plants produce such a mass
of foliage. The leaves are composed of three somewhat large leaflets. The flowers, as previously
intimated, are yellow, and there are but two or three in each cluster, but the clusters are
numerous; hence, also the pods are numerous. They are about 1/4 of an inch broad, and when
mature are possessed of considerable food value.

Burr clover grows chiefly during the winter, and is at its best for pasture during the months
of March and April, and in the Gulf States dies down after having produced seed in May. Though
it is frequently sown, it has the power of self-propagation to a marked degree, which makes
it possible to grow many crops in succession without re-seeding by hand.

It is not considered a good hay plant, but its value for pasture is considerable, although,
as a rule, animals do not take kindly to it at first, as they do to alfalfa or medium red clover,
but later they become fond of it, but less so, probably, in the case of horses than of other
animals. Being a legume, it is helpful in enriching the land, and being a free grower, it improves
the soil mechanically through its root growth, and also through the stems and leaves, when
these are plowed under.

=Distribution.=--Burr clover is said to be native to Europe and North Africa, but not to North
America, although it has shown high adaptation in adapting itself to conditions as found in
the latter.

Although this plant is hardy in the South, and, as previously stated, makes most of its growth
in the winter, it is not sufficiently hardy to endure the winters far northward. Its highest
adaptation is found in States around the Gulf of Mexico. It also grows with more or less vigor
as far north as North Carolina, Tennessee and Arkansas. For these States its adaptation is,
on the whole, higher than crimson clover, although where the latter will grow readily it is
considered the valuable plant of the two.

For Canada, burr clover has no mission, owing to the sternness of the winter climate in that
country.

=Soils.=--While burr clover will grow with more or less success on almost any kind of soil
possessed of a reasonable amount of fertility and moisture, it is much better adapted to soils
alluvial in character and moist, as, for instance, the deposit soils in the bottom of rivers.
Its power to fight the battle of existence on poor lands is much less than that of Japan clover,
but on soils that grow crops, such as corn or cotton, it may be made to render a service which
the other cannot, since it grows chiefly in winter and early spring, whereas Japan clover grows
in the summer and early autumn, when cultivated crops occupy the land.

=Place in the Rotation.=--Burr clover is grown more in the sense of a catch crop and for pasture
than in that of a crop to be marketed directly. Since it is grown in the winter and spring,
it may be made to come in between various crops. On good producing lands of the South it has
given satisfaction as a pasture plant for winter for many successive years without re-sowing
by hand, when sown in conjunction with crab grass (Panicum sanguinale) for hay. Dr. Phares
grew it thus in Mississippi for about 20 years. In June crab grass sprang up on the ground,
and being cut when in blossom, produced a good crop of hay in August. A lighter cutting was
again taken in October. The clover then took possession of the land and was grazed until spring,
but not so closely as to prevent re-seeding in May, after which the plants died down.

By thus allowing the plants to mature seed, any crop may follow that can be grown after May.
By following burr clover with cow peas, land may be much fertilized in one year. By reversing
the process on land low in fertility, that is, sowing the peas first and the clover later,
a much better growth of the clover will be secured. The seed may also be sown in corn and cotton
crops, with a view to enriching the land. But it is only in the Gulf States that much attention
is given to growing burr clover thus, and for the reason, probably, that the winters are too
cold to admit of the plants furnishing a sufficiency of grazing at that season.

Burr clover is sometimes grown with Bermuda grass. The latter furnishes summer grazing. There
is some merit in the plan, if the seed of the burr clover were sown from year to year. When
the re-seeding of the plants is depended on from season to season there is difficulty in adjusting
the grazing so as to admit of the plants properly re-seeding for the growth that is to follow.
If the Bermuda grass is not closely grazed many of the burrs which contain the seeds may not
reach the ground in time to germinate.

=Preparing the Soil.=--Since burr clover has much power to re-seed the land without preparation,
it is more commonly reproduced thus. But, as with all other plants, it will grow more quickly
and more luxuriantly on a well-prepared seed-bed, where it may be thought worth while to thus
prepare the land. The cultivation given to such crops as corn, cotton or cow peas makes an
excellent preparation of the soil on which to sow burr clover.

=Sowing.=--Usually, burr clover is allowed to re-seed itself after it has once become established
in the soil. In this respect it is not unlike small white clover and Japan clover, but it does
not grow so well as these on poor soil. Where not yet established, it must, of course, be sown
where it is desired to grow it.

The seed is commonly sown in September or early October, but some growers recommend sowing
in the burrs as early as June or July, that the tough surrounding which encloses the seed may
have time to decay. When seed separate from the burr is used, it is sown in the months named.
When sown on well-prepared soil, grazing should be plentiful from February onward.

Burr clover is more commonly sown in the burr. The burrs are usually scattered by hand and
on land that has been pulverized, but it is easily possible, when the conditions are favorable,
to obtain a stand on land that has not been plowed. Where seed is scarce, the burrs are sometimes
planted in squares 3 feet apart each way, a limited number of burrs being dropped at one time.
When thus planted, 1 bushel of burrs will plant several acres. The plants will soon possess
all the ground, but to enable them to do so, pasturing must be deferred for one season. Whether
sown in the burr or otherwise, it is better to cover the seed with the harrow.

One bushel of burrs weighs from 10 to 12 pounds. It has been stated 1 bushel of clean seed
weighs 60 pounds. When sown in the burr, it is usual to sow 3 to 5 bushels per acre, but in
some instances less is sown and in some more. When seed apart from the burr is sown 12 pounds
per acre should suffice. In some instances it is sown on Bermuda sod, but the attempts to grow
it thus have not always proved satisfactory. At the Louisiana Experiment Station it was found
that the burr clover remained long enough and grew large enough to injure the Bermuda. Possibly
closer grazing would have prevented such injury. When sown on Bermuda grass, June, July or
August are the months chosen for scattering the seed.

Burr clover is also sometimes sown in corn and cotton to provide winter grazing, but when thus
sown the object more frequently sought is to enrich the land. Both ends may be accomplished
in some degree.

=Pasturing.=--Opinions differ as to the palatability of this grass. All are agreed that stock
do not take kindly to it at first, but that they come to relish it at least reasonably well
when accustomed to it. It is said to be relished less by horses and mules than by other domestic
animals. It has been praised as a pasture for swine. It is more palatable in the early stages
of its growth, and will bear close grazing, and also severe tramping. It will provide pasture
for six months, but not so bountifully in the first months of growing as later.

=Harvesting for Hay.=--Burr clover is not a good hay plant. Owing to the recumbent character
of the growth it is not easily mowed, nor has it much palatability in the cured form. The yield
is said to be from 1/2 to 1 ton per acre.

=Securing Seed.=--In the Gulf States the seed matures in April and May. The plants grow seed
profusely. Sown in October, stock may usually be allowed free access to it until March, and
if then removed, it will spring up quickly and mature seed so profusely that when the plants
die and partially decay seed may sometimes be collected in hollows, into which it has been
driven by the wind. It is more commonly sown in the burr form, the form in which it is usually
gathered. The more common method of saving the seed, as given by Mr. A. H. Beattie of Starkville,
Mississippi, is to first rake off the dead vines so as to leave the burrs on the ground and
then sweep them together with a suitable wire or street broom. It is then lifted and run through
two sets of sifters of suitable mesh by hand to remove the trash swept up in gathering the
seed. It is probable that other methods more economical of labor are yet to be devised when
harvesting the seed crop. As much as 100 bushels of burrs have been obtained from an acre,
but that is considerably more than the average yield of seed.

=Renewing.=--Since this plant is an annual, it cannot be renewed in the sense in which renewal
is possible with a perennial. But as has been shown above (see page 294), it may be grown annually
for an indefinite period in the same land and without re-sowing by hand. It has also been shown
that by sowing the seed in certain crops at the proper season, from year to year, it may be
made to grow from year to year where the rotation will admit of this. (See page 295.) When
the ground is well stored with seed, the plants will continue to come up freely in the soil
for at least two or three years, even without any re-seeding of the land.

=As a Fertilizer.=--The growing of burr clover exercises a beneficial influence on the land.
Its value for this purpose, since it can be grown as a catch crop, is probably greater than
its value in providing food for stock. Like all plants that are more or less creeping in their
habit of growth, it shades the soil and keeps it moist, which, in conjunction with the influence
of the roots, puts it in a friable condition. When the plants grow rankly, it is not easy to
bury them properly with the ordinary plow, but in such instances, if cut up with a disk harrow,
the work is facilitated. The plants quickly die down so as to make plowing easily possible,
but the aim should be to have such decay take place within the soil rather than above it.

CHAPTER XI

SWEET CLOVER

Sweet clover is so named from the sweet odor which emanates from the living plants. It is of
two species. These are designated, respectively, Melilotus alba and Melilotus officinalis.
The former is also called Bokhara clover, White Melilot and Tree clover. It is possibly more
widely known by the name Bokhara than by any other designation. The latter is sometimes called
Yellow clover. The difference between these in appearance and habits of growth does not seem
to be very marked, except that the blossoms of the former are white and those of the latter
are yellow.

Sweet clover is upright and branched in its habit of growth. It attains to a height of from
2 to 8 feet, according to the soil in which the plants grow. The somewhat small and truncate
leaves are not so numerous, relatively, as with some other varieties of clover, and the stems
are woody in character, especially as they grow older. The blossoms are small and white or
yellow, according to the variety, and the seed pods are black when ripe. The roots are large
and more or less branched, and go down to a great depth in the soil; especially is this true
of the main, or tap root.

The plants, according to Beale, are annual or biennial, but more commonly they are biennial.
They do not usually blossom the year that they are sown, but may blossom within a year from
the date of sowing. For instance, when sown in the early autumn, they may bloom the following
summer. They are exceedingly hardy, having much power to endure extremes of heat and cold,
and to grow in poor soils and under adverse conditions. In some soils they take possession
of road sides and vacant lands, and continue to grow in these for successive years. The impaction
of such soils by stock treading on them seems rather to advance than to hinder the growth.
They start growing early in the spring and grow quickly, especially the second year. They come
into bloom in June, early or later, according to the latitude, and ordinarily only in the year
following that in which they were sown. Because of the fragrant odor which is emitted from
the plants as they grow, they are sometimes introduced into gardens and ornamental grounds.

The uses of the plants are at least three. It has some value as a food for live stock. It has
much value as a fertilizer. It has probably even more value as a food for bees. It has also
been used in binding soils. Its value as a food for stock has probably been overestimated.
It is bitter, notwithstanding the fragrant odor that emanates from it; hence, it is not relished
by stock, insomuch that they will not eat it when they can get other food that is more palatable.
As hay, it is hard to cure and of doubtful palatability when cured. As a fertilizer, its value
does not seem to have been sufficiently recognized, and the same is probably true of it as
bee pasture, although many bee-keepers are alive to its great merit for such a use.

This plant does not seem to find much favor with many. The United States Department of Agriculture
has spoken of it as a "weedy biennial, concerning which extravagant claims have been made."
The laws of some States proscribe it as a weed, and impose penalties directed against any who
allow it to grow. Legislatures should be slow to class a legume as a weed, especially one that
has much power to enrich soils. The author cherishes the opinion that this plant has a mission
in the economy of agriculture and of considerable importance to farmers, especially in soils
that are poor and worn, as soon as they come to understand it properly.

=Distribution.=--Sweet clover is probably indigenous to the semi-arid regions of Asia. The
name Bokhara would seem to indicate as much, but it is also found in many parts of Europe,
and if the facts were known, was doubtless brought from Europe to North America by the first
settlers. For many decades it has been represented in many flower gardens in all parts of the
country.

The plant will endure almost any amount of cold when it is once established. It has stood well
the winters of Manitoba. It can also endure extreme summer heat, since it thrives well in some
parts of Texas. It grows most vigorously where the rainfall is abundant, as in Western Oregon,
and it makes a strong growth in the dry areas of Western Kansas and Nebraska.

Sweet clover will grow vigorously in some part or parts of every State in the Union. Of course,
it has higher adaptation for some conditions than others. In some of the Central and Southern
States, it has multiplied to such an extent without cultivation as to have assumed the character
of a weed; hence, the legislation against it. When it is called to mind that this plant is
a legume, and when the further fact is recognized that it may be used not only in enriching
soils, but at the same time improving them mechanically, in addition to other benefits that
it may be made to render, surely the enactments which prohibit its growth should be repealed
in any State where these exist. In the Northern States, with a normal rainfall, the mission
of this plant is likely to be circumscribed, for the reason that other legumes possessed of
a much higher food value may be grown in these. In the Southern States, its mission will be
more important, since it may be used in some of these with decided advantage in binding soils
and in renovating them, even when too poor to produce a vigorous growth of cow peas. It is
likely also that it may yet be made to render good service in the semi-arid country west of
the Mississippi River, where other clovers cannot be grown.

Sweet clover will grow in all the provinces of Canada. For economic uses, however, it is not
likely to grow to any great extent east of Lake Superior, or west of the Rocky Mountains. Other
legumes more useful may be grown in these areas. But in the intervening wheat-growing region
it is possible that it may come to be used for purposes of soil renovation.

=Soils.=--But little can be gleaned from American sources on this subject. Notwithstanding,
it may be said with safety that it has greater power to grow on poor, worn and hard soils than
any forage plant that has yet been introduced into America for economic uses.

It will probably be found true of it, as of other clovers, that it will thrive best on soils
that have produced timber, and more especially timber of the hardwood varieties. This means,
therefore, that it will grow well in probably all kinds of clay soils and also in loam soils
underlaid with clay. It has high adaptation for soils abounding in lime. It can be made to
succeed on hard clay subsoils from which the surface soil has been removed. But it will also
grow well on sandy soils and even on gravels when a reasonable amount of moisture is present.
The author succeeded in growing it in good form in 1897 and 1898 in a vacant lot in St. Paul,
from which 6 to 8 feet of surface soil had been removed a short time previously. The subsoil
was so sandy that it would almost have answered for building uses.

This clover will probably grow with least success on soils of the prairie so light in texture
as to lift with the winds, and in which the underlying clay is several feet from the surface,
also in slough soils that are much saturated with water.

Since it grows vigorously on road sides, in rocky waste places and even in brick yards when
sown without a covering, the idea has gained currency that the harder the soil, the better
the plants will grow, and the more surely will they be established in the soil; but this view
does not seem to be in accord with the principles which usually govern plant growth. It will,
however, send its roots down into hard subsoils so deeply that in certain seasons the plants
could not be dug up without the aid of a pick.

=Place in the Rotation.=--Since sweet clover seed is more commonly scattered in byplaces, or
is self-sown from plants that have run wild, it can scarcely be said that it has ever been
grown as a regular crop and in a regular rotation. Nor is it ever likely to become a factor
in such a rotation unless its properties shall be so modified that it can be grown acceptably
as a pasture plant. In such an event it would have the same place in the rotation as other
clovers; that is, it would naturally follow a cultivated, that is, a cleaning crop, and precede
some crop or a succession of crops that would profit from the nitrogen and humus which it had
brought to the soil, and also from the influence which the roots would exercise mechanically
upon the same. But the necessity for sowing it on clean ground would not be so great as with
the other clovers, since it has greater power than these to overshadow weeds when the two grow
together.

In the meantime, this plant will probably continue to be grown as in the past; that is, if
sown, it will be sown: 1. In byplaces to provide pasture for bees, in which case in time it
will be superseded by other plants. 2. On worn lands so poor that they refuse to grow valuable
food products sown, partly, at least, with a view to renovate them. And 3. In cuttings made
by railroads and in gullies that have been made in fields, with a view to prevent soil movement.
It may also come to be sown in grain crops in localities where other varieties of clover will
not grow, to be plowed under the following spring.

=Preparing the Soil.=--Since sweet clover will grow on the firmest and most forbidding soils,
even when self-sown, it would not seem necessary, ordinarily, to spend much time in specially
preparing a seed-bed for it. The fact stated is proof of its ability to grow on a firm surface.
It does not follow, however, that such a condition of the seed-bed will give a better stand
of the plants than a pulverized condition of the same, as some have contended. It may be that
on soils that are quite loose near the surface, and under conditions that incline to dry a
seed-bed firm and even hard, may be more conductive to growth in the plants than one in which
the conditions are the opposite. Much rolling of loose soils has been recommended when preparing
the seed-bed with a view to firm them.

When the seed is sown along with grain, the preparation of the soil needed for grain would
be ample preparation also for the clover. When sown on stubble land, in many instances no preparation
by way of stirring the soil would seem necessary. And when sown on railroad embankments, road
sides, rocky situations and byplaces generally no preparation of the soil would be possible.

=Sowing.=--In the North sweet clover is best sown in the spring. In fact, it can only be sown
then with the assurance that it will survive the winter north of a certain limit. That limit
will vary with altitude, but it will probably run irregularly across the Middle States, from
the Atlantic westward to the Cascade Mountains, beyond which it will veer away to the North.
In the Southern States, it may be sown fall or spring, but if sown late in the fall the young
plants will in some instances succumb to the frost of winter. Early fall sowing, therefore,
is much to be preferred to sowing late.

The method of sowing may be the same as in sowing medium red clover (see page 78); that is,
when the seed is sown with grain crops. When sown in byplaces, it will ordinarily be sown by
hand. In such places it will re-seed itself and will likely grow in these for successive seasons.
On railroad embankments, the seed is scattered more commonly on the upper portion, and from
the plants which grow there the seeds produced scatter downward. The plants not only lessen
washing in the soil, but they prepare the same for the growth of grasses. They also aid thus
in the introduction of grasses into rocky and very hard soils.

Sweet clover may be sown with almost any kind of a nurse crop desired, which does not destroy
it with an over-abundant shade. Or it may be sown alone where such a necessity exists. But
the instances are not numerous in which it would be desirable or necessary to sow it alone
on arable soils. There may be conditions when it could be sown successfully at the time of
the last cultivation given to corn and with a view to soil enrichment.

Since sweet clover is seldom sown for the purpose of providing food for live stock, it is not
sown in mixtures, nor is it well adapted for being sown thus, because of the large and luxuriant
character of the growth, which would tend to smother other plants sown along with it.

The amount of seed to sow has been variously stated at from 15 to 20 pounds per acre. The smaller
amount should be enough for almost any purpose, and a much smaller amount should suffice for
sowing in byplaces and along road sides, where the plants retain possession of the ground through
self-seeding.

=Pasturing.=--Because of the bitter aromatic principle which it contains, known as commarin,
stock dislike it, especially at the first. And it is questionable if they can be educated to
like it in areas where other food, which is more palatable, grows abundantly. In an experiment
directed by the author at the Minnesota University Experiment Station, sheep pastured upon
it, and did not take kindly to it; but by turning them in to graze upon it in the morning,
they cropped it down. In localities where good grazing is not plentiful, if live stock have
access to it, especially when the plants are young, they will so crop it down that in a few
years it will entirely disappear. But where other pastures are abundant, it will continue to
grow indefinitely. It would not seem wise to sow it for the purpose of providing grazing, unless
where the conditions for growing other and better grazing are unfavorable.

Some have spoken favorably of sweet clover for soiling uses. It makes a very rapid growth quite
early in the season, and when cut and wilted more or less before being fed, the palatability
is thereby considerably increased. Small plots of this plant near the outbuildings may in this
way be utilized with some advantage in the absence of better soiling plants.

=Harvesting for Hay.=--Sweet clover is not a really good hay plant under any conditions, and
if not cut until it becomes woody, is practically valueless for hay. It ought to be cut for
hay a little before the stage of bloom. If cutting is longer deferred, the plants become woody.
Such early cutting, however, adds much to the difficulty of curing the crop, since, while naturally
succulent, its succulence is then, of course, considerably more than at a later period. It
should be cured like medium red clover. (See page 96.) If not cut sufficiently early, and cured
with as much care as is exercised in curing alfalfa, there will be considerable loss from the
shedding of the leaves.

More commonly the plants are not cut for hay the year that they are sown, but some seasons
such harvesting is entirely practicable in certain situations. The hay crop or crops are usually
taken the second year. Sometimes the crop is cut twice. It is entirely practicable to obtain
two cuttings under ordinary conditions, because of the vigor in the growth, and because of
the early season at which it must be harvested for hay. From 3 to 4 or 5 tons may thus be obtained
in many instances from the two cuttings.

=Securing Seed.=--Nearly all of the seed sown in this country is imported. The author has not
been able to obtain information with reference to growing seed within the United States; hence,
the inference is fair that but little of it has been grown for that purpose up to the present
time. Since, however, it seeds freely, and since the price of seed is high, seed crops, more
especially when the plants are also utilized as bee pasture, ought to prove remunerative in
the hands of judicious growers.

The seed crop is obtained usually, if not always, the second year after the sowing. If cut
for hay before coming into bloom, it will grow up again and bear seed profusely. This would
seem preferable on strong soils, as it would prevent that rankness in growth which would militate
against abundant seed production, and which would add much to the labor of handling the crop.

The seed crop may be cut and handled in substantially the same way as medium red clover when
grown for seed. It may also be cured and thrashed essentially in the same way. (See page 105.)
The author has not been able to obtain information with reference to the average yield of the
seed crop under American conditions. The seed, like that of the medium red variety, should
weigh 60 pounds per bushel.

=Renewing.=--In the sense of a pasture or hay crop, it would not seem necessary to try to renew
this crop, because of the relatively low value which it possesses for these uses. When grown
for bee pasture, it will renew itself for an indefinite period when the plants are not cut
for seed and where the conditions are favorable to growth. When grown to keep soils from washing
or railroad embankments from breaking down, it will, of course, renew itself in the same way.
In time, however, it is usually superseded by some kind of grass, for which it has prepared
the way by the ameliorating and renewing influence which it exerts upon the soil.

=Value for Bee Pasture.=--All authorities are agreed as to the high value of this plant as
a honey producer. The claim has been made for it that for such a use it is more valuable acre
for acre than any ordinary grain crop. By cutting a part of the crop before it comes into bloom,
the season of honey production may be prolonged from, say, July 1st until some time in the
autumn, as the part thus cut will come into bloom after the blooms have left the plants that
were cut. When not disturbed, sweet clover yields honey in the interval between the blooming
of the basswood and the golden rod. The honey is of excellent quality. There should be no good
reasons, therefore, why bee-keepers should not sow the seed in by and waste places. But the
wisdom of growing it as a honey-producing crop on valuable land where other honey crops, as
alsike and white clover, can be grown in good form may be questioned.

=Value as a Fertilizer.=--The high value of this plant as a fertilizer and soil improver cannot
be questioned. But whether it should ever be sown for such a use will depend on the capacity
of the soil to produce other crops valuable for fertilizing and also more valuable for producing
forage or fodder. Where other clovers more useful can be grown, also cow peas, soy beans and
other legumes valuable for food uses, it would seem unwise to sow sweet clover. This would
restrict its use, therefore, as a soil renovator; first, to soils too poor to grow those useful
legumes; second, to areas where the climate conditions will not admit of the growth of these;
and third, to areas from which the surface soil has been removed, and which it is desirable
to so ameliorate and improve the soil thus laid bare that it could later be covered with some
more valuable cover crop. Under present conditions this would restrict its growth for the purpose
named to sandy and gravelly soils, to certain areas in the semi-arid region east of the Rocky
Mountains, and to such small areas as the surface soil had been removed from.

In the semi-arid region where crops of grain and also some varieties of field corn can be grown
successfully, but where the clovers are not successful; it would seem practicable to sow a
few pounds of sweet clover seed per acre at the same time as the grains, and to plow under
the plants produced some time in the month of May the next season. The clover thus buried could
be at once followed by corn or potatoes, or, indeed, by any kind of a cleaning crop. The high
price of seed at present practically forbids growing clover thus.

Whether sweet clover grown for renovating uses should be turned under the season in which it
has been sown will depend largely on the growth that has been made. In many instances, the
growth made is so rank as to justify plowing it under the following autumn. In other instances,
better results will follow plowing it under the next season. It frequently happens that the
growth made is so rank that a strong plow and also a strong team are necessary to do the work
properly.

=Value on Alkali soils.=--This plant has been grown to some extent to aid in removing alkali
from soils superabundantly impregnated with the same. It will grow, it is claimed, under certain
conditions on such soils so surcharged with alkali as to prohibit almost every other form of
vegetable growth. The extent to which it may be thus used profitably had not yet been fully
demonstrated. But where it can be grown on such soils, the fact that it takes up and removes
relatively large quantities of alkali would appear to be well established.

=Destroying the Plants.=--Should the conditions be found so favorable to the growth of the
plant that it persists in growing where it is not wanted, it will soon cease to appear, if
prevented from going to seed. Ordinarily, the blossoms appear only during the second year of
growth. If, therefore, the plants are cut off when in bloom, seed forming will not only be
prevented, but since sweet clover is a biennial, the plants will die. When thus dealt with,
the only source from which other plants may come while extermination is being thus sought is
from seed lodged in the soil and still capable of germinating.

CHAPTER XII

MISCELLANEOUS VARIETIES OF CLOVER

In addition to the varieties of clover that have been discussed at some length in previous
chapters are a number the value of which may be considerable to areas more or less local and
limited. These include Sainfoin, Egyptian clover, Yellow clover, Sand lucerne, Japanese clover,
Beggarweed and Seaside clover. Some of these, as Sainfoin and Buffalo clover, have been in
the country for several years, and yet but little is known as to their behavior, except in
very limited areas. Others, as Buffalo clover, native to the country are thought to have merit,
and yet the degree of such merit does not appear to have been yet proved under cultivation.
The three varieties but recently introduced are thought to have considerable promise for certain
soils and climates to which they have special adaptation, but sufficient trial has not been
given them to determine even approximately the measure of their worth to this country. These
varieties will now be discussed, but for the reasons stated above it will be manifest that
the discussion will of necessity be imperfect and fragmentary in character.

SAINFOIN

Sainfoin (Onobrychis sativa) is a perennial, leguminous, clover-like forage plant of the bean
family. The word Sainfoin is equivalent to the French words for sound or wholesome hay. It
is also frequently called Esparcette or Asperset, more especially in Germany. It is further
known in England by the name Cock's Head, French Grass and Medick Vetchling. In some parts
of France and Switzerland the name has been and probably is yet applied to lucerne (Medicago
sativa).

In its habit of growth it is more woody in the rootstock than clover and more branched. It
also grows to a greater average height. The stems, which are covered with fine hairs, bear
numerous leaves long and pinnate. The blossoms are numerous and of an attractive, pinkish color,
brightening into a crimson tint. The seed pods are flattened from side to side and wrinkled,
and are also sickle-shaped. They bear but one seed. The roots are strong and more or less branched.

Sainfoin, as already intimated, is perennial in its habit of growth. When a field is once well
set with the plants, it should continue to produce crops for a decade, but will eventually
be crowded out with weeds or other grasses. It grows very early in the season, quite as early,
if not earlier, than alfalfa, and continues to grow until autumn.

The feeding value of sainfoin is much the same as that of alfalfa. It is much esteemed where
it can be grown for the production of pasture, of soiling food, and also hay, valuable for
enriching the land, through the medium of the roots, and also when the tops are plowed under
as green manure.

Sainfoin is native throughout the whole of Central Europe and over much of Siberia. Although
native to the southern counties of England, it does not appear to have been cultivated there
before the year 1651, at which time it is said to have been introduced from Flanders. From
what has been said with reference to the distribution of sainfoin in Europe and Asia, it will
be apparent that it is a hardy plant, which has highest adaptation for climates temperate and
mild to moderately cool. Its hardihood has been shown by its surviving the winters in the latitude
of the St. Lawrence River, but the abundant snow covering then provided should not be lost
sight of.

Its adaptation to the United States does not appear to have been proved yet, except in limited
areas. In some of the Montana valleys good crops have been grown with much success in many
of those western valleys, and even on the bench lands at the base of foothills. Nor would there
seem to be any good reasons for supposing that good crops could not be grown in various parts
of the United States where the soil is suitable.

In Canada, sainfoin has succeeded in Quebec. In trials made by the author at the Ontario Agricultural
College at Guelph success was only partial, but the trials were limited. There would seem to
be no good reasons why this plant should not succeed in many places in Canada where limestone
soils prevail.

This plant is best adapted to dry soils calcareous in their composition and somewhat porous
in character. This explains its great affinity for the chalk soils which abound in the south
of England. On the dry, limestone soils of this country it ought to succeed. It has shown much
adaptation for the volcanic soils of the Western mountain region, where it has been tried.
On stiff clays it grows too slowly to be entirely satisfactory. It ought not to be sown on
soils wet or swampy in character.

Since sainfoin is perennial in its habit of growth, and since, when once well set, it will
retain its hold upon the soil for several years, it is not in the strict sense of the term
a rotation plant. When it is grown, however, it should be followed by crops which require large
quantities of nitrogen easily accessible, to enable them to complete their growth. If this
plant should ever be grown to any considerable extent in the mountain States, much that has
been said with reference to the place for alfalfa in the rotation will also apply to sainfoin.
(See page 135.)

It has been found more difficult to get a good stand of sainfoin plants than of other varieties
of the clover family. This is owing to the low germinating power frequently found in the seed.
The stand of plants is frequently found to be too thin and scattering. Weeds, therefore, and
sometimes grasses are much liable to come into the soil occupied by the sainfoin and to crowd
the same. Because of this it is specially important that sainfoin shall be sown on a clean
seed-bed.

The seed is very frequently sown in the hull, and usually in the early spring. But there would
seem to be no reasons why the seed should not be sown in the early autumn in localities where
alfalfa can be sown thus. (See page 145.) In the rough form, it is usually broadcasted by hand,
but would probably also feed through a seed drill. When sown apart from the hull, the seed
may be sown by the same methods as alfalfa. (See page 147.) In the rough form, from 3 to 5
bushels per acre are sown. In the clean form, it is claimed that 40 pounds of seed should be
sown, but that amount of clean and good seed would seem to be excessive on well-prepared land.
The seed in the hull weighs 26 pounds per bushel. The plan of sowing 2 to 3 pounds per acre
of the seed of alsike clover along with the sainfoin would doubtless be found helpful under
some conditions, as it would tend to thicken the crop, more especially the first season.

Sainfoin is a good pasture plant when properly grazed. It does not produce bloat in cattle
or sheep as alfalfa does. In this fact is found one of the strongest reason why it should be
grown in areas where alfalfa is wanted for pasture. It will furnish grazing about as early
as alfalfa, and considerably earlier than medium red clover.

This plant is more frequently grown for soiling food than for hay. For the former use it has
high adaptation, since it will furnish several cuttings of soiling food per season. It will
also furnish two cuttings of hay, or one of hay and one of seed, and under some conditions
more than two cuttings can be obtained. In the latitude of Montreal it is ready to be cut for
hay during the early days of June. It is ready for being cut when the blossoms begin to expand.
Much care is necessary in curing the hay, in order to prevent the too free shedding of the
leaves. The methods for making alfalfa hay will apply also to sainfoin.

Seed may be obtained from the first or second cutting of the crop. It is usually obtained from
the second cutting, as the yield is much larger than that obtained from the first cutting.
The author has not been able to obtain any facts based on experience regarding the harvesting
of the seed crop under American field conditions. But the methods followed in obtaining seed
from alfalfa would probably also answer equally well for sainfoin. Great care is necessary
in handling the seed crop, owing to the ease with which the seed shatters. Special pains are
also necessary to keep the germinating power of the seed from injury from overheating. Nor
does the seed seem able to retain germinating power as long as the seeds of some other varieties
of clover. In experiments conducted by Professor C. A. Zavitz at the Ontario Experiment Station
at Guelph in 1902 and 1903, the average yield per acre was 426.1 pounds.

EGYPTIAN CLOVER

Egyptian clover (Trifolium Alexandrianum) is more commonly known in the Nile valley as Berseem.
It is of at least three varieties. These are the Muscowi, Fachl and Saida, all of which are
more or less closely related to medium red clover. The term Alexandrianum as applied above
is somewhat misleading, as its growth is not specially identified with Alexandria, nor is its
growth in Egypt supposed to be of great antiquity, since no trace of it is found upon the ancient
monuments.

The Muscowi variety, which is commonly grown more especially in lower Egypt, sometimes grows
to the height of 5 feet and over, but usually it is not more than half the height named. In
its habit of growth it is rather upright, like alfalfa, but the hollow stems are softer and
more succulent, and the blossoms occur on heads resembling those of clover, but not so compactly
formed, and they are white in color. The seeds bear a close resemblance to those of crimson
clover. The roots are much shorter, but more spreading in their habit of growth than those
of alfalfa, and in Egyptian soils they bear small tubercles abundantly. This variety, which
is usually grown on land that can be irrigated at any season, produces in some instances 5
cuttings in a season. The Fachl variety is usually grown on land irrigated by the basin system;
that is, the system which covers the land with water but once a year, and for a period more
or less prolonged. But one crop a year is taken from such land. The hay from this variety is
heavier for the bulk than that of the Muscowi. The Saida variety is of a lower habit of growth
than the Muscowi and has a longer tap root, which enables it to stand drought better than the
Muscowi. It is more commonly sown in Egypt southward from Cairo.

All these varieties are annual. The period of growth covered by any one of them is never more
than 9 months, and usually not more than 6 months; that is to say, from October to March. The
Muscowi variety especially grows very rapidly.

Egyptian clover in all its varieties is pre-eminently a soiling plant. It is sometimes pastured
and is also made into hay. It is practically the one fodder crop of Egypt, and is more commonly
fed in the green form. All kinds of stock are fond of it, and it is fed freely to horses, donkeys
and camels at labor, to cows in milk, and to cattle that are being fattened. It also serves
to keep Egyptian soils supplied with nitrogen, for the support of crops grown on them in summer,
especially cotton, and various kinds of grain. Moreover, because of the frequency of the cuttings,
with the Muscowi variety, its growth tends very much to check the growth of weeds.

Egyptian clover is not native to Egypt, but was introduced from some country outside of Egypt,
yet bordering on the Mediterranean. This, at least, is the view presented in Bulletin No. 23,
issued by the Bureau of Plant Industry, United States Department of Agriculture, from which
source much of what is written with reference to this plant has been obtained. In Egypt more
than 1,000,000 acres are grown annually. It is also being tried, with much promise, in other
portions of Northern Africa, as Tunis and Algiers. It is also now being experimented with in
various parts of the Southern and Southwestern States.

Egyptian clover is only adapted to a warm climate. In those parts of the United States which
have a climate not unlike that of Egypt, in many respects, as Florida, Southern Texas, New
Mexico and Arizona, it may have an important mission. It may yet be grown in these areas, or
some of them, where irrigation is practiced in conjunction with cotton, or with certain of
the cereals. If it can be thus grown, it will prove of much value, as it would only occupy
the land when not occupied by the crops usually grown in summer, and it would bring much fertility
to the same, in addition to the forage provided. Since in Tunis it has been found that the
plants have not been killed by cold 2° below zero and in Algiers 9° below that point, the hope
would seem to be justifiable that this clover may yet be grown much further north than the
States named. If grown thus, however, it should not be as a substitute for alfalfa, but rather
to occupy the ground in winter when not producing otherwise. It may yet be found that the Saida
variety may have adaptation for some localities in the West where irrigation cannot be practiced.
This clover is not likely to render any considerable service to any part of Canada, because
of the lack of adaptation in the climate.

Egyptian clover has highest adaptation for deposit soils, such as are made by the settling
of silt held in solution by waters that overflow. In these it will grow with vigor, though
they rest upon coarse sand or even upon gravel not too near the surface. Irrigating waters
to some extent are necessary to grow the plants in best form, although, as previously intimated,
the Saida variety may yet be grown without the aid of such waters. It is the first crop sown
on reclaimed alkaline lands, and growing it on these tends to remove the alkali and to sweeten
and otherwise improve the soils.

The place for this plant in the rotation is readily apparent. Like crimson clover, it is clearly
a catch crop, as it were, and a winter plant, but with the difference that it grows much more
rapidly under suitable conditions and furnishes much more food. The advantage of growing it
northward in the Western mountain valleys when sown in spring, as intimated by the writer of
the bulletin already referred to, would seem to be at least problematical, since it could not
be sown early enough in the spring to produce a crop as early as alfalfa already established.
It would then be grown also as the crop of the season, rather than as a catch crop. The place
for Egyptian clover in the rotation is clearly that of a winter crop, to provide soiling food
for stock and plant food for the land, which may be utilized by the summer crop that follows.

In Egypt the seed is frequently sown on the silt deposited by the waters that have subsided
and before it would be dry enough to plow. At other times, it is sowed on land stirred on the
surface to a greater or less depth, and sprouted through the aid of irrigating waters. In the
valleys of the West that preparation of the soil found suitable for alfalfa would also, doubtless,
be found suitable for this clover.

The seed is sown in the autumn in Egypt, usually in October, but the season of sowing lasts
from September to January, and some crops have been obtained sown as late as April 1st, but
when sown late, the number of the cuttings is reduced and the occupancy of the soil by the
clover interferes with the growing of other crops. Under American conditions, it will doubtless
be found that the best season for sowing Egyptian clover will be just after the removal of
the crop that occupied the land in summer. The seed is usually sowed by hand and without admixture,
but the Fachl variety is sown in some instances with wheat or barley when seed is wanted. The
methods of sowing found suitable for alfalfa would also seem to be proper for sowing Egyptian
clover. (See page 78.) As much as one bushel of seed is sown per acre, but it is thought that
a less amount will suffice under good methods of tillage.

Egyptian clover is sometimes pastured, but it has higher adaptation to soiling, because of
the softness of the stems. When pastured reasonably close, cropping would probably be preferable,
as there would then be less waste from the treading of the plants. Nevertheless, in Egypt considerable
quantities of the hay are stored for feeding in the summer months when green fodder is scarce.

Egyptian clover is sometimes made into hay, but it is not essentially a hay plant. Much care
is necessary when it is being cured to prevent loss in the leaves, and when cured the stems
are so brittle that it is difficult to prevent waste in handling the hay. It is pre-eminently
a soiling crop, and the greater portion is fed in the green form. From 4 cuttings of the Muscowi
variety as much as 25 to 30 tons of green fodder are harvested, and about 10 tons are produced
by 2 cuttings of the Saida variety.

Egyptian clover has not been grown sufficiently long in this country to justify giving information
based upon American experience that could be taken as authoritative, with reference to the
best methods of harvesting the seed crop. There would seem to be no reasons, however, to suppose
that the methods followed in harvesting alfalfa could not be followed with equal advantage
in harvesting Egyptian clover. Nor can anything be said as yet with reference to which cutting
of the series will furnish the best seed crop.

The best service, probably, which this crop can render to the United States is the enrichment
of the soils on which the plants are grown. As the same bacteria which inoculate alfalfa soils
will not answer for Egyptian clover, and as the requisite bacteria may not be found in soils
where it is desirable to grow this clover, the conclusion that it will not grow sufficiently
well in certain soils on which it is being tried should not be reached until the question relating
to the presence or absence of the proper bacteria has been settled. If necessary to introduce
bacteria from Egypt, the obstacles in the way of such introduction would not be at all serious,
if undertaken by the Department of Agriculture.

YELLOW CLOVER

Yellow clover (Medicago lupulina) is to be carefully distinguished from Hop clover (Medicago
procumbens), which it resembles so closely in the form of the leaves and the color of the bloom
as to have given rise in some instances to the interchangeable use of the names. The latter
is so named from the resemblance of the withered head when ripe to a bunch of hops. Its growth
has been almost entirely superseded by Medicago lupulina, since the other variety was low in
production and also in nutrition. Medicago lupulina is also called Black Medick, Nonesuch,
Black Nonesuch and Hop Trefoil. In both England and Germany it is now more commonly grown than
white clover. It is more or less recumbent in its habit of growth, but the stems do not root
as do the runners in the small white variety. The stems, though tender in the early spring,
become woody as the season advances. The flowers, as the name would indicate, are yellow, and
the plants produce seed numerously. The roots, like those of the small white variety, are more
fibrous than in some of the larger varieties.

Yellow clover is perennial. Owing to the power which the plants have to multiply through rooting
and re-seeding, they can stay indefinitely in congenial soils. The growth is vigorous in the
early part of the season, but less so later, and with the advance of the season the herbage
produced becomes more woody in character.

This plant furnishes considerable pasture during the spring months, but in the summer and autumn
it makes but little growth. Though palatable early in the season, it is less so later. Nevertheless,
it may be made to add materially to the produce of pastures in which it grows. It also aids
in fertilizing the soil, though probably not quite to the same extent as white clover.

Yellow clover is indigenous to Europe. It is grown to a considerable extent in pastures in
certain areas in Great Britain, France, Germany and other countries. It has highest adaptation
for climates that are moist and temperate. Although this plant is not extensively grown in
the United States, it would seem probable that it will grow at least reasonably well in a majority
of the States. The exceptions will be those lacking in moisture in the absence of irrigation.
It will grow best in those that more properly lie within the clover belt; that is, in those
that lie northward. It grows with much vigor in Oregon and Washington west of the Cascade Mountains.
In Canada, yellow clover will grow with much vigor in all areas susceptible of cultivation,
unless on certain of the western prairies.

Yellow clover has highest adaptation for calcareous soils. In certain parts of England it has
grown so vigorously on soils rich in lime as almost to assume the character of a troublesome
weed. It will grow well on all clay loam soils, and reasonably well on stiff clays, the climatic
conditions being suitable. It has greater power to grow on dry soils than the small white variety.

Since yellow clover is usually grown as an adjunct to permanent pastures, it can scarcely be
called a rotation plant. But, like other clovers, it enriches the soil, and, therefore, should
be followed by crops that are specially benefited by such enrichment, as, for instance, the
small cereal grains.

Yellow clover when sown is usually sown with other grass mixtures, and along with grain as
a nurse crop; hence, that preparation of the soil suitable for the nurse crop will also be
found suitable for the clover. It is, moreover, a hardy plant, insomuch that in some instances,
if the seed is scattered over unplowed surfaces, as those of pastures, in the early spring,
a sufficient number of plants will be obtained to eventually establish the clover through self-seeding.

The seed is usually sown in the early spring, but in mild latitudes it may also be sown in
the early autumn. It may be sown by the same methods as other clovers. (See page 267.) It is
usually sown to provide pasture, the seed being mixed with that of other pasture plants before
being sown. As the plants, like those of the small white variety, have much power to increase
rather than decrease in pastures, it is not necessary to sow large quantities of seed, not
more usually than 1 pound to the acre. But should the crops be wanted for seed, then not fewer
than 3 to 5 pounds per acre should be sown and without admixture with other grasses or clovers.
When the plants once obtain a footing on congenial soils, there is usually enough of seed in
the soil to make a sufficient stand of the plants in pastures without sowing any seed, but
since the seed is usually relatively cheap, where an insufficient supply in the soil is suspected,
more or less seed should be sown.

Since the stems of yellow clover plants become tough as the season of growth becomes considerably
advanced, where it forms a considerable proportion of the pasture the aim should be to graze
most heavily during the early part of the season. The plants do not make much growth during
the autumn. It would probably be correct to say that it can grow under conditions more dry
than are suitable for white clover, and, consequently, it is more uniformly prominent in evidence
in permanent pastures when it has become established.

Yellow clover is not a really good hay plant, owing to its lack of bulkiness. But in some soils
its presence may add considerably to the weight of a crop of hay, of which it is a factor.

This plant produces seed freely. The seeds are dark in color and weigh 60 pounds to the bushel.
The seed matures early, usually in June or July, according to locality. The methods of harvesting,
threshing and preparing the seed for market are substantially the same as those adapted in
handling small white clover. (See page 272.)

While yellow clover is not the equal of the small white clover in adaptation to our conditions,
it would seem that there are no reasons why it should not be sown to a greater extent than
it is sown under American conditions. A plant that is so hardy, that provides a considerable
quantity of reasonably good pasture, that stores nitrogen in the soil, and that, moreover,
does not stay in the soil to the extent of injuring crops that follow the breaking up of the
pastures, should certainly be encouraged to grow.

SAND LUCERNE

Sand Lucerne (Medicago media), sometimes designated Medicago falcata, is probably simply a
variety of the common alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Some botanists, however, look upon these as
two distinct species. Others believe that Medicago sativa, with blossoms ranging from blue
to violet purple, and Medicago falcata, with yellow blossoms, are two distinct species, while
Medicago media, with blossoms ranging from bluish and purple to lemon yellow, is a hybrid between
these. The name Sand Lucerne has doubtless been given to this plant because of the power which
it has to grow in sandy soils.

Sand lucerne is so nearly like common alfalfa in appearance and habits of growth, that until
the blossoming season, careless observers cannot distinguish between the plants. (See page
114.) Sand lucerne, however, has a more spreading habit of growth than common alfalfa, the
seed-pods are less coiled and the seeds are lighter. The root system is strong and the roots
are probably more branched than those of ordinary alfalfa. Under Michigan experience, given
in Bulletin No. 198 of the Michigan Experiment Station, it has shown considerably higher adaptation
to light, sandy and gravelly soils than the former. The feeding properties of sand lucerne
would not seem to be far different from those of common alfalfa (see page 119), but it is claimed
that the former is considerably less liable to produce bloat in cattle and sheep than the latter.

Sand lucerne is probably native to Europe and Asia. Some attention is given to growing it in
Germany, the principal source from which comes supplies of seed at the present time. It was
introduced into Michigan by the experiment station of that State in 1897, and its behavior
in several trials made to grow it on sandy and gravelly soils in various places, has, on the
whole, been encouraging.

Since this variety, like the Turkestan, being considerably hardier than common alfalfa, can
undoubtedly be grown further north than the latter, there would seem to be no reasons at the
same time why sand lucerne would not grow satisfactorily on sandy soils that lie far south,
but this does not seem as yet to have been proved by actual demonstration. It is possible,
therefore, that this plant may render considerable service to areas scattered over considerable
portions of the United States and Canada, in which the soil is light.

While sand lucerne has higher adaptation than common alfalfa for sandy and gravelly soils,
it does not follow that it has equal adaptation for being grown on ordinary alfalfa soils.
No advantage, however, would result from growing sand lucerne where common alfalfa will grow
equally well, as it is not superior to the latter as a food, if, indeed, it is equal to the
same, and there would be a distinct disadvantage in the greater cost of the seed of sand lucerne.

Sand lucerne is not any more a rotation plant than the common variety. In fact, it is even
less so, since it would not be practicable to introduce it into short rotations when grown
in northerly latitudes, as it does not reach a maximum growth for several years after the seed
has been sown. But in mild latitudes, it may be found practicable to introduce it into short
rotations, like other alfalfa (see page 135), and on land that is too sandy to grow the common
variety in the best form.

Much of what has been said about the preparation of the soil for common alfalfa will equally
apply to the preparation of the same for sand lucerne. (See page 137.) But when the latter
is sown on sandy or gravelly land, a moist condition of the seed-bed at the time of sowing
is even more important than when sowing common alfalfa under ordinary conditions.

The same methods of sowing the seed will be in order as are suitable for sowing common alfalfa
in any particular locality. (See page 147.) This will mean that in Northern areas sand lucerne
can best be sown in the spring and as early as the danger from frost is over, that the plants
may get as much benefit as possible from the moisture in the soil before dry weather begins.
It will also mean that if sown southward in the autumn, it may in some instances be necessary
to wait longer for the sandy soils on which the seed is sown to become sufficiently moist to
sprout the seed than for such a condition in soils on which common alfalfa is usually sown.
The amounts of seed to sow will also be practically the same. (See page 152.)

The adaptation of sand lucerne for providing pasture is as high, if not, indeed, higher, than
that of common alfalfa, since it is said that it has less tendency to produce bloat in cattle
and sheep, and it is not so easily destroyed, at least in Northern areas, by grazing. In providing
pasture, its higher adaptation is in furnishing the same for cattle, swine and horses.

With ample moisture, even as far north as Lansing, Michigan, three crops of hay may ordinarily
be looked for. At the Michigan Experiment Station, sand lucerne sown in 1897 yielded cured:
In 1898, at the rate of 6800 pounds per acre; in 1899, 10,580 pounds; in 1900, 12,310 pounds;
and in 1901, 13,839 pounds. The methods of cutting and curing are the same as for other varieties
of alfalfa. (See page 170.) The quality of the hay is not far different from that of common
alfalfa. If there is a difference, it would, perhaps, be a little against the sand lucerne,
owing to the nature of the land producing it. For soiling food, it may be handled in the same
way as common alfalfa. (See page 166.)

No further information would seem to be available with reference to the production of seed
in the United States than the statement that the efforts to grow it in Michigan had not been
altogether successful. The question thus raised has an important bearing on the future growth
of the plant, as, if seed is to be imported from Europe when sand lucerne is to be sown, the
expense of securing seed is likely to militate against extending its growth. It is probable,
however, that this difficulty will be overcome through the more perfect acclimation of the
plants in the North, or by growing seed from the same in Western areas which have shown higher
adaptation to the production of alfalfa seed.

The value of sand lucerne in fertilizing sandy and gravelly soils in this country may yet be
very considerable. Its value in putting humus into the same may prove equally high. This value
will arise chiefly from its greater ability to grow on such soils than various other legumes.
When sown primarily for such a use, heavy seeding would seem to be preferable to ordinary seeding.

JAPANESE CLOVER

The United States Department of Agriculture has quite recently introduced a variety of clover
known botanically as Lespedeza bicolor. In 1902 small lots of seed were distributed to ascertain
the value of the plant grown under American conditions. Sufficient time has not yet elapsed
to prove its value, but the indications encourage the belief that it will be of some agricultural
value under certain conditions.

This variety of clover is more erect and less branched in its habit of growth than the Japanese
variety Lespedeza striata. Under Michigan conditions it was found to grow to the height of
3 feet on sandy soil and to about half that height on clay soil, the seed having been sown
about the middle of May. The stalks are about the same in structure as those of alfalfa, and
like alfalfa they do not lodge readily. The leaves are ovate in form and of a pea-green tint.
The seed is formed in pods resembling those of lentils, only smaller. The seeds are larger
than those of crimson clover and are oblong in shape. In color they are mottled brown, yellow
and green. The roots in the Michigan test produced nodules freely and without inoculating the
soil by any artificial means. The plants in the same tests were killed to the ground by early
October frosts.

This variety, like that grown so freely in the Southern States, is an annual. In the absence
of experience in growing it under varied conditions, it would be premature to dwell upon its
value. If it should grow readily on sandy land, as the Michigan test would seem to indicate,
it would render substantial service in fertilizing such soils. In the grass garden of the Department
of Agriculture at Washington, D. C., its behavior has been such as to encourage making further
tests.

FLORIDA CLOVER

Florida clover (Desmodium tortuosum) is sometimes grown both for hay and pasture, more especially
in the Gulf States. It has been designated botanically Desmodium molle, and is also known by
the common names Beggar Weed, Giant Beggar Weed, Beggar Ticks and Tickweed. The name Florida
Clover has been given to it because of its prevalence on the light soils of Florida. The name
"beggar" has probably been applied to this plant because of its relation to poverty in soils,
in which it is more commonly grown, and the name "ticks" from the clinging habit of the seed-pods
to surfaces with which they come in contact.

Beggar Weed is an erect and branching plant, which grows from 2 to 10 feet high. No, thank you,
I won't borrow."

"What is it for?"

"Can't tell."

"Why, I thought you told me everything."

"Sorry, but I can't this time. Don't you worry; I shall think of something."

"Couldn't your mother help?"

"Don't wish to ask her."

"Why! can't she know?"

"Nobody can."

"How queer! Is it a scrape, Jack?" asked Jill, looking as curious as a magpie.

"It is likely to be, if I can't get out of it this week, somehow."

"Well, I don't see how I can help if I'm not to know anything;" and Jill seemed rather hurt.

"You
can just stop asking questions, and tell me how a fellow can earn
some money. That would help. I've got one dollar, but I must have
some more;" and Jack looked worried as he fingered the little gold
dollar on his watch-guard.

"Oh, do you mean to use that?"

"Yes,
I do; a man must pay his debts if he sells all he has to do it," said
Jack sternly.

"Dear me; it must be something very serious." And Jill
lay quite still for five minutes, thinking over all the ways in which
Jack ever did earn money, for Mrs. Minot liked to have her boys work,
and paid them in some way for all they did.

"Is there any wood to
saw?" she asked presently, being very anxious to help.

"All done."

"Paths
to shovel?"

"No snow."

"Lawn to rake, then?"

"Not time for that
yet."

"Catalogue of books?"

"Frank got that job."

"Copy those letters
for your mother?"

"Take me too long. Must have my money Friday, if
possible."

"I don't see what we can do, then. It is too early or
too late for everything, and you won't borrow."

"Not of you. No,
nor of any one else, if I can possibly help it. I've promised to do
this myself, and I will;" and Jack wagged his head resolutely.

"Couldn't
you do something with the printing-press? Do me some cards, and then,
perhaps, the other girls will want some," said Jill, as a forlorn
hope.

"Just the thing! What a goose I was not to think of it. I'll
rig the old machine up at once." And, starting from his seat, Jack
dived into the big closet, dragged out the little press, and fell
to oiling, dusting, and putting it in order, like one relieved of
a great anxiety.

"Give me the types; I'll sort them and set up my
name, so you can begin as soon as you are ready. You know what a help
I was when we did the programmes.

The soil does not, as a rule, require deep stirring when preparing it for beggar weed. This
fact finds demonstration in the ability of the plants to re-seed the ground when grown for grazing.

The seed is usually sown in the Gulf States late in March or early in April. It germinates
slowly, and the plants make the most vigorous growth after the weather becomes warm. The seed
is more commonly scattered broadcast, but may be drilled in, and at distances that will or
will not admit of cultivation as may be desired. Thick seeding is preferable to prevent coarseness
and woodiness in the growth of the plants. Not less than 10 pounds of hulled seed per acre
should be sown in the broadcast form when sown for hay. When sown in drills, less seed is required,
but usually the seed is sown broadcast. In the hulled form, in which the seed is more commonly
sold, according to Professor H. H. Hume, the measured bushel weighs 60 to 64 pounds, and with
the hulls on, from 10 to 40 pounds, the average weight, as purchased by dealers, being about
20 pounds. The cleaned seed bears considerable resemblance to clover seed.

All kinds of farm stock, as cattle, horses, mules, sheep and even swine, are said to do well
when grazing on beggar-weed pastures in the summer and autumn. They do not usually graze it
closely after it has been well started, owing to the woody character of the stems. When thus
cropped back, it starts out afresh, and thus continues to produce grazing until the arrival
of frost. It is said that the pasture is of but little value in winter. One strong point, however,
in favor of such pastures, is the ability of the plants to re-seed the land when not grazed
too closely, and thus to perpetuate the grazing from year to year.

No little diversity of opinion exists as to the value of this plant for producing hay. Some
growers speak highly of its palatability and nutrition. Others speak of it as being of very
little value as a hay plant. This difference in opinion is doubtless due largely to cutting
the crop at different stages of growth. If allowed to become too advanced before it is cut,
the woody character of the hay would doubtless make it unpalatable, whereas, if cut early,
at least as early as the showing of the first blooms, if not, indeed, earlier, it would be
eaten with a much greater relish. The yields of hay are said to usually exceed 2 tons per acre.

The seed matures in September and October. The methods of saving the seed have usually been
of a somewhat primitive character, as by hand when saved in small quantities. But there would
seem to be no reason why the seed crop could not be harvested by the binder.

Where alfalfa or cow peas can be successfully grown, either crop would be preferable. But on
some soils these are not a success, especially when the first attempts are made to grow crops.
The choice of hay may be one between a crop of beggar weed and no crop at all. All are agreed
as to the renovation which it brings to soils; hence, when grown or allowed to grow on unproductive
soil for a few years and then plowed under, the soil becomes productive. Since it grows late
rather than early in the season where the seed is in the land, it will not interfere with the
growth of the corn, but will come on later, and thus exert a beneficial influence on the soil.
But the fact should not be overlooked that beggar weed once in the land has considerable power
to stay there. In other words, like sweet clover, it has some of the characteristics of a weed.

BUFFALO CLOVER

Buffalo clover (Trifolium stoloniferum) is a native species procumbent in its habit of growth.
The leaves are most abundant at the base of the plants. The flower heads, about an inch in
diameter, are rose colored, and rise to the height of about one foot from the ground.

This variety, said to be perennial in its habit of growth, is probably the same as Trifolium
reflexum, said to be biennial in Kansas. Plants are found growing wild in prairies, between
forests, and in open woodlands, from Kentucky on the east, to Kansas on the west. It is thought
that this clover would repay cultivation, but the author has not been able to get any information
bearing upon its behavior under cultivation.

SEASIDE CLOVER

Seaside clover (Trifolium invulneratum) has rendered some service to agriculture in what is
known as the "Great Basin," which includes parts of Oregon and Nevada. In Bulletin No. 15,
Bureau of Plant Industry, issued by the United States Department of Agriculture, it is referred
to as one of the most promising species for cultivation in that area. Under the influence of
irrigation it has spread, in one instance cited, into sage brush soil, and there, along with
timothy and red top, has aided in producing fine crops. In, low, swampy, non-alkaline areas,
it often yields from 1/2 to 1-1/4 tons of hay per acre. It has been estimated that with correct
conditions it would be found about equal in producing power and feeding value to alsike clover.
It is at least questionable, however, if it is likely to supersede to any considerable degree
the varieties already under general cultivation.

INDEX

  Alfalfa
    discussion of  114-193
    described  114
    distribution  120
    soils  129
    place in rotation  135
    preparing the soil  137
    sowing  145
    cultivating  154
    pasturing  155
    as soiling food  166
    harvesting for hay  170
    storing  172
    securing seed  179
    renewing  184
    sources of injury  187
    as a fertilizer  191

  Alsike clover
    discussion of  194-217
    described  194
    distribution  197
    soils  199
    place in rotation  201
    preparing the soil  202
    sowing  204
    pasturing  208
    harvesting for hay  210
    securing seed  212
    renewing  216

  Bloating  94

  Buffalo clover
    discussion of  344

  Burr clover
    discussion of  291-299
    described  291
    distribution  293
    soils  293
    place in the rotation  294
    preparing the soil  295
    sowing  295
    pasturing  297
    harvesting for hay  297
    securing seed  297
    renewing  298
    as a fertilizer  298

  Clover
    introduction  1-5
    definition  1
    varieties  2
    distinguishing characteristics  3
    plan of discussion  4

  Clover, general principles for growing
    discussion of  6-56
    adaptation in  6
    place in the rotation  7
    preparing the soil  11
    fertilizers  13
    seasons for sowing  16
    methods of sowing  18
    depth to bury the seed  21
    sowing alone or in combinations  22
    with or without a nurse crop  25
    amounts of seed to sow  27
    pasturing  29
    harvesting  31
    storing  33
    feeding  35
    renewing  37
    as soil improvers  38
    as a weed destroyer  43
    clover sickness  45
    possible improvement in  46
    bacteria and clovers  47

  Clovers, synonyms
    Alexandrian  322
    Alsace  194
    Aspercet  317
    Berseem  322
    Beggar ticks  338
    Beggar weed  338
    Black Medic  329
    Black Nonesuch  329
    Bokhara  300
    Branching  114
    Broad-leaved  57
    Burgundy  114
    California  291
    Chilian  114
    Cocks head  317
    Cow clover  218
    Cow grass  218
    Creeping Trifolium  258
    Dutch  258
    Elegant  194
    Esparcette  317
    Fachl  323
    French clover  338
    French grass  317
    German  238
    German mammoth  238
    Giant beggar weed  338
    Giant  218
    Honeysuckle  258
    Hop  328
    Hop trefoil  329
    Hybrid  194
    Italian  238
    Large  218
    Lucerne (Alfalfa)  114
    Mammoth  57
    Meadow  218
    Meadow trefoil  57
    Medick vetchling  317
    Mexican  114
    Minnesota  118
    Monthly  114
    Muscowi  323
    Nonesuch  329
    Pea vine  218
    Perennial  114
    Perennial hybrid  194
    Perennial red  218
    Pod  194
    Red perennial meadow  118
    Rhenish  218
    Saida  323
    Sand Lucerne  118
    Saplin  218
    Shamrock  258
    Sicilian  114
    Soiling  218
    Spotted Medick  291
    Stem  114
    Swedish  194
    Styrian  114
    Tall  218
    Tickweed  338
    Tree  300
    Turkestan  118
    Wavy stemmed  218
    White Dutch  258
    White Melilot  300
    White Swedish  194
    White trefoil  258
    Winter  238
    Yellow  291
    Zigzag  218

  Crimson clover
    discussion of  238-257
    described  238
    distribution  241
    soils  244
    place in the rotation  245
    preparing the soil  248
    sowing  250
    pasturing  252
    harvesting for hay  253
    securing seed  254
    renewing  256
    facts regarding  256

  Dodder  190

  Egyptian clover
    discussion of  322-328

  Florida clover
    discussion of  338-344

  Grasshoppers  189

  Hoven  94

  Inoculation, soil  53

  Japan clover
    discussion of  279-290
    described  279
    distribution  282
    soils  283
    place in the rotation  284
    preparing the soil  285
    sowing  285
    pasturing  287
    harvesting for hay  288
    securing seed  289
    renewing  290
    new variety  337

  Mammoth clover
    discussion of  218-237
    described  218
    distribution  220
    soils  222
    place in the rotation  224
    preparing the soil  226
    sowing  227
    pasturing  231
    harvesting for hay  233
    securing seed  234
    renewing  236
    compared with medium red  237

  Medium red clover
    discussion of  57-113
    described  57
    distribution  61
    soils  65
    place in the rotation  70
    preparing the soil  74
    sowing  75
    pasturing  91
    harvesting for hay  95
    storing  100
    securing seed  103
    renewing  109
    as a fertilizer  110

  Micro-organisms  48

  Nitragin  53

  Nodules in clover plants  49

  Root tubercles  50

  Sand Lucerne
    discussion of  333-337

  Sainfoin
    discussion of  316-322

  Seaside clover
    discussion of  345

  Sweet clover
    discussion of  300-315
    described  300
    distribution  303
    soils  305
    place in the rotation  306
    preparing the soil  307
    sowing  308
    pasturing  309
    harvesting for hay  310
    securing seed  311
    renewing  311
    value for bee pasture  312
    as a fertilizer  313
    value on alkali soils  314
    destroying the plants  314

  Tubercles, root  50

  Weeds troublesome  235

  White clover
    discussion of  258-278
    described  258
    distribution  261
    soils  264
    place in the rotation  265
    preparing the soil  267
    pasturing  270
    harvesting for hay  271
    securing seed  273
    renewing  276
    for lawns  277
    as a honey plant  278

  Yellow clover
    discussion of  328-332

=Alfalfa=

By F. D. COBURN. Its growth, uses, and feeding value. The fact that alfalfa thrives in almost
any soil; that without reseeding, it goes on yielding two, three, four, and sometimes five
cuttings annually for five, ten, or perhaps 100 years; and that either green or cured it is
one of the most nutritious forage plants known, makes reliable information upon its production
and uses of unusual interest. Such information is given in this volume for every part of America,
by the highest authority. Illustrated. 164 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. New edition. Revised
and enlarged. Illustrated. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. 152 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. $0.50

=Hedges, Windbreaks, Shelters and Live Fences=

By E. P. POWELL. A treatise on the planting, growth and management of hedge plants for country
and suburban homes. It gives accurate directions concerning hedges; how to plant and how to
treat them; and especially concerning windbreaks and shelters. It includes the whole art of
making a delightful home, giving directions for nooks and balconies, for bird culture and for
human comfort. Illustrated. 140 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. It forms a unique and important
addition to our poultry literature. Profusely illustrated. 352 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth.
Illustrated. 312 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. $1.50

=Home Pork Making=

The art of raising and curing pork on the farm. By A. W. FULTON. A complete guide for the farmer,
the country butcher and the suburban dweller, in all that pertains to hog slaughtering, curing,
preserving and storing pork product--from scalding vat to kitchen table and dining room. Illustrated.
125 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. 318 pages. 5 x 7 inches. Cloth. Illustrated. 475 pages. 5 x
7 inches. Cloth. $1.50

=Feeds and Feeding=

By W. A. HENRY. 6 x 9 inches. Cloth. $2.00

=Farmer's Cyclopedia of Agriculture=

A Compendium of Agricultural Science and Practice on Farm, Orchard and Garden Crops, and the
Feeding and Diseases of Farm Animals

  By =EARLEY VERNON WILCOX, Ph.D.=
  and =CLARENCE BEAMAN SMITH, M.S.=

Associate Editors in the Office of Experiment Stations, United States Department of Agriculture

This is a new, practical, and complete presentation of the whole subject of agriculture in
its broadest sense. It is designed for the use of agriculturists who desire up-to-date, reliable
information on all matters pertaining to crops and stock, but more particularly for the actual
farmer. The volume contains

=Detailed directions for the culture of every important field, orchard, and garden crop=

grown in America, together with descriptions of their chief insect pests and fungous diseases,
and remedies for their control. It contains an account of modern methods in feeding and handling
all farm stock, including poultry. The fine arts are Architecture, Sculpture, Painting, Poetry, and
Music, and though we could live if none of these existed, yet life
would be far from the pleasant experience that it is often made to
be through the enjoyment of these arts.

 There are between
6,000 and 7,000 topics covered in these references, and it contains 700 royal 8vo pages and
nearly 500 superb half-tone and other original illustrations, making the most perfect Cyclopedia
of Agriculture ever attempted.

Handsomely bound in cloth, $3.50; half morocco (very sumptuous), $4.50, postpaid

  =ORANGE JUDD COMPANY=,
  52 Lafayette Place, New York, N.Y.
  Marquette Building, Chicago, Ill.

List of Illustrations: The number '2' was missing before 'Medium Red'. Changed.

Page 53: The term 'nitragin' though an odd spelling and is capitalized elsewhere, as it is
a commercial name. Unchanged.

Page 60: The term 'adap s' is a typo for 'adapts'. Changed.

Page 69: The term 'throgh cropping' is a typo for 'through cropping'. Changed.

Page 100: The phrase 'skilled workmen' is a typo for 'skilled workman'. Changed.

Page 103: The term 'pollenization' may be a substitute for 'pollenation' or 'pollination'.
Unchanged.

Page 122: The term 'Sask' is apparently a substitute or abbreviation here for the province
of 'Saskatchewan'.

Page 124: The phrase 'western alleys' is a typo for western valleys. Changed.

Page 124: The phrase 'largely de-depend' is a typo for 'largely depend'. Changed.

Page 189: The phrase 'many instance' is a typo for 'many instances'. Changed.

Page 197: The phrase 'with beekeepers' changed to 'with bee-keepers' to be consistent with
two other occurrences.

Page 229: The term 'Seee page 78' is a typo for 'See page 78'. Changed.

Page 309: The phrase 'ground through self-feeding' is a typo for 'ground through self-seeding'.
Changed.

Page 317: The term 'Asperset' is spelled 'Aspercet' in the index. Unchanged. Couldn't determine
correct spelling.

Page 326: The phrase 'it it clearly a catch crop' is a typo for 'it is clearly a catch crop'.
Changed.

Index Page 349: Although the term 'Sanfoin' is an acceptable alternate spelling for 'Sainfoin',
it doesn't match other occurrences in this text. Changed.

Several instances of comma and periods either missing or interchanged in original text have
been fixed without listing each. They are obvious errors.

Various: The term 'midsummer' is also spelled 'mid-summer' in this book. Unchanged.

End of Transcriber's Notes.