    Now in the upper regions of the atmosphere ... there may be a
      redundancy of inflammable air ... and a proportion of
      dephlogisticated air. In that region there are many electrical
      appearances, as the aurora borealis, falling stars &c; in the
      lower parts of it thunder and lightening, and by these means the
      two kinds of air may be decomposed, and a highly dephlogisticated
      nitrous acid, as mine always was, produced. This being formed,
      will of course, attach itself to any snow or hail that may be
      forming ... confirming in this unexpected manner, the vulgar
      opinion of nitre being contained in snow.

This seems to be the last communication of this character which came from the Doctor's pen.

He was in despair relative to the academy which had ever been his hope for the College which
in his early years in Northumberland he prayed might arise and in which he would be at liberty
to particularly impart his Unitarian doctrines.

An interesting item relative to the Academy appeared in the Aurora for April 1st, 1803. It
shows that State aid for education was sought in those early days. It is a report, and reads--

    A REPORT of the Committee to whom was referred the Petition of
      Thomas Cooper, on behalf of the Northumberland Academy, praying
      legislative aid. The report states that Thomas Cooper appeared
      before the Committee and stated that upward of $4000 had been
      expended on the building appropriated to that institution. That
      the debts due thereon amounted in the whole to near $2000. That
      Dr. Joseph Priestley had the power of disposing of a very valuable
      library consisting of near 4000 volumes of scarce and well chosen
      books in various branches of literature and science, to any public
      seminary of learning in the United States, which library, the said
      Dr. Priestley was desirous of procuring as a gift to the
      Northumberland Academy, provided that institution was likely to
      receive substantial assistance from the legislature, so as to be
      enabled to fulfil the purposes of its establishment,

    That the Trustees would have no occasion to ask of the legislature
      on behalf of that Academy, a subscription greater than a few
      individuals had expended, and were still ready and desirous of
      contributing thereto; and suggest it to your Committee, that if
      out of the monies due from the County of Northumberland to the
      State a sufficient sum was granted to exonerate the Academy from
      debt, no more would be wanted in the future to effect the purposes
      of that institution, than a sum equal in amount to the value of
      the library proposed to be furnished by Dr. Priestley; such value
      to be fixed by a person appointed for the purpose by the
      legislature.

    The Committee was of the opinion that it would be expedient for
      the legislature to coincide with the suggestion of Thomas Cooper
      and so recommended to the Legislature. Their report was adopted,
      39 to 31. It was strongly advocated by Jesse Moore, Esq., General
      Mitchell and N. Ferguson from the city. It was opposed by Jacob
      Alter from Cumberland, who declared that although there were a
      great many public schools and colleges and places of that kind
      scattered over the State, he never knew any good they did, except
      to breed up a set of idle and odious lawyers to plague the people!

At this particular time there still existed confiscated land from the sale of which revenue
was derived, and this income it had been agreed upon should be devoted to the erection and
support of academies throughout the State. Later this scheme was discontinued. But, Dr. Priestley
was not so enthusiastic as formerly. He was occupied with the Church History, three volumes
of which were in print, and it was expected that the fourth volume would follow shortly thereafter.
However, his health was precarious. He could not eat meats, and lived chiefly on broths and
soups, saying,--

    The defect is in the stomach and liver, and of no common kind. If
      I hold out till I have finished what I have now on hand, I shall
      retire from the scene, satisfied and thankful.

This was written in August, and the Doctor stuck bravely to his literary labors. A few months
later he wrote Lindsey,--

    I really do not expect to survive you.

Yet, he also entertained the thought that he might,--

      assist in the publication of a whole Bible, from the several
      translations of particular books, smoothing and correcting them
      where I can.

January of 1804 brought him many interesting, splendid and valuable books from friends in London.
He was overjoyed on their arrival. Promptly he gave himself to their perusal because his deafness
confined him to home and his extreme weakness forbade any excursions. Then the winter kept
him from his laboratory, and his sole occupation was reading and writing. He entertained a
variety of plans, proceeding with some but in the midst of these tasks of love--in the very
act of correcting proof, he quietly breathed his last! It was Monday, February 6, 1804, that
Thomas Cooper, the devoted friend of Priestley, wrote Benjamin Rush:--

  Dear Sir:

    Mr. Joseph Priestley is not at present in spirits to write to his
      friends, and it falls to my lot therefore to acquaint you that Dr.
      Priestley died this morning about 11 o'clock without the slightest
      degree of apparent pain. He had for some time previous foreseen
      his dissolution, but he kept up to the last his habitual
      composure, cheerfulness and kindness. He would have been 71 the
      24th of next month. For about a fortnight there were symptoms of
      dropsy owing to general debility: about two days before his death,
      these symptoms disappeared, and a troublesome cough came on
      perhaps from a translation to the chest.

    Yesterday he had strength enough to look over a revise of the
      Annotations he was publishing on the Old and New Testament, and
      this morning he dictated in good language some notices which he
      wished his son Mr. Priestley to add to his unpublished works. I
      am sure you will sincerely regret the decease of a man so highly
      eminent and useful in the literary and philosophical world, and so
      much presumably your friend.

Yes, the valiant old champion of a lost cause was no more. Two days before his death "he went
to his laboratory"--but, finding his weakness too great, with difficulty returned to his room.
Loyal to his science to the very end!

To American chemists he appeals strongly because of his persistent efforts in research. His
coming to this country aroused a real interest in the science which has not waned in the slightest
since his demise.

When the sad news reached the Hall of the American Philosophical Society, Dr. Benjamin Smith
Barton was chosen to eulogize Priestley. This notable event took place on January 3rd, 1805. When
he was asked by the Duke of Argyle how he had gained this knowledge,
he replied, "I first learned to read; and the masons being at work
on your house, I saw that the architect used a rule and compasses,
and that he made calculations.

    This, my lord, is what I have done; and it seems to me that
      we may learn anything when we know the twenty-four letters of the
      alphabet." The Duke, pleased with this simple answer, drew Stone
      out of obscurity, and provided for him an employment which
      allowed of his favourite pursuit.
       Invitations were given on this occasion to the Revd.
      Clergy of the city; the college of Physicians; the Medical
      Society; the gentlemen of the Bar, with the students at Law; the
      trustees and faculty of the University of Pennsylvania, with their
      students in the Arts and in Medicine; the judges and officers of
      the federal and state Courts; the foreign ministers and other
      public characters then in the city; the mayor; aldermen and city
      councils: the trustees and session of the First Presbyterian
      Church; the directors of the City Library; the directors and
      Physicians of the Pennsylvania Hospital, of the Alms House, and of
      the Dispensary; the proprietor and Director of the Philadelphia
      Museum; and the contributors towards the Cabinet and Library of
      the Society. After the conclusion of a very interesting eulogium,
      the society returned their thanks to the orator, and requested a
      copy for the purpose of publication.

One's curiosity is quickened on thinking what Barton said in his address. Search in many directions
failed to bring forth the Eulogium. It had been ordered to be printed in the Transactions of
the Society. This was never done. But there was a minute (seven years later) in the meeting
of the Society (Nov. 6, 1812) to the effect that

    Dr. Barton's request for permission to withdraw it (Eulogium) to
      be enlarged and published separately was referred for
      consideration to the next meeting.

The request was granted at the next meeting, but nowhere among Barton's literary remains was
the precious document to be found. Lost very probably--when it might have revealed so much.

Priestley's death was deeply mourned throughout the land. The public prints brought full and
elaborate accounts of his life, and touching allusions to the fullness of his brilliant career.
Such expressions as these were heard,--

    As a metaphysician he stands foremost among those who have
      attempted the investigation of its abstruse controversies.

    As a politician he assiduously and successfully laboured to
      extend and illustrate those general principles of civil liberty
      which are happily the foundation of the Constitution of his
      adopted Country,--

    His profound attention to the belles-lettres, and to the other
      departments of general literature, has been successfully
      exemplified among his other writings, by his lectures on oratory
      and criticism, and on general history and policy,--

    Of the most important and fashionable study of Pneumatic
      Chemistry he may fairly be said to be the father.

    He was a man of restless activity, but he uniformly directed that
      activity to what seemed to him the public good, seeking neither
      emolument nor honour from men. Dr. Priestley was possessed of
      great ardour and vivacity of intellect.... His integrity was
      unimpeachable; and even malice itself could not fix a stain on his
      private character.

And what a splendid tribute is contained in the following passages from Cuvier:

    Priestley, loaded with glory, was modest enough to be astonished
      at his good fortune, and at the multitude of beautiful facts,
      which nature seemed to have revealed to him alone. He forgot that
      her favours were not gratuitous, and if she had so well explained
      herself, it was because he had known how to oblige her to do so by
      his indefatigable perseverance in questioning her, and by the
      thousand ingenious means he had taken to snatch her answers from
      her.

    Others carefully hide that which they owe to chance; Priestley
      seemed to wish to ascribe all his merit to fortuitous
      circumstances, remarking, with unexampled candour, how many times
      he had profited by them, without knowing it, how many times he was
      in possession of new substances without having perceived them; and
      he never dissimulated the erroneous views which sometimes directed
      his efforts, and from which he was only undeceived by experience.
      These confessions did honour to his modesty, without disarming
      jealousy. Those to whom their own ways and methods had never
      discovered anything called him a simple worker of experiments,
      without method and without an object "it is not astonishing,"
      they added, "that among so many trials and combinations, he should
      find some that were fortunate." But real natural philosophers were
      not duped by these selfish criticisms.

Many encomiums like the preceding--yes, a thousandfold--could easily be gathered if necessary
to show the regard and confidence held for this remarkable man to whom America is truly very
deeply indebted.

Some years ago the writer paid a visit to the God's Acre of
Northumberland. He arrived after dark and was conveyed to the sacred
place in an automobile. Soon the car stopped. I will lay me down in peace and sleep till
      I wake in the morning of the resurrection. He graciously permitted it to be inserted here.]

Transcriber's notes: ====================

FORMATTING, fixed in text: ==========

A few inconsistencies in the layout and formatting of the book have been corrected (an extra
blank line in a quoted paragraph, for example). Most notably, the "Hints Concerning Public
Education" is an essay by Priestley quoted verbatim in the text. The original layout did not
make a clear distinction between Smith's text and this quoted essay; I have remedied this with
an indent for that section.

TYPOS, fixed in text: =====

It was an interesting fact (text reads inter-resting, broken across a line)

that germ which might once have been supposed (text reads beeen)

September 14, 1794 (text reads September, 14 1794)

the Doctor remained quietly at home (text reads quitely)

on behalf of the Northumberland Academy, praying legislative aid (text reads lesiglative)

science which has not waned in the slightest (text reads slighest)

he uniformly directed that activity (text reads uniformily)

from the rod of lawless power (text reads of of)

Almost all the fresh meat they have (text reads flesh meat)

diversions, beginning with the publication (text reads begining)

rather thoughtful disquisition on dreams (text reads disquisiton)

Footnote 6: J. C. Winston Co. (text reads Wintson)

APPARENT ERRATA, but could be as appearing in the original letters: =============== (left as-is
in text).

conduct will evince that I have been to that of great {Great} Britain.

contributes so much as ours do to the cummunication {communication} of useful knowledge

sense of security which scientificial {scientific?} pursuits require

the same that has been called philogiston {phlogiston}

he would never enter the puplit {pulpit} again.

until it became necesary {necessary} to separate.

we all rejoiced at the aggreeable {agreeable} information

By civil fueds {feuds} exiled my native home

unless you were possessed of Aladin's {Aladdin's} lamp