This hall was very large and handsome, with a high, arched ceiling, and walls hung with wonderful
old tapestries. Standing about in groups were numbers of picturesquely dressed pages, ladies-in-waiting,
richly clad, and Breton gentlemen gorgeous in velvets and lace ruffles, for a hundred of these
always attended Lady Anne wherever she went. At one end of the hall was a dais spread with
cloth of gold, and there, in a carved chair, sat the Lady Anne herself. She wore a beautiful
robe of brocaded crimson velvet, and over her dark hair was a curious, pointed head-dress of
white silk embroidered with pearls and gold thread.

As Count Henri approached, she greeted him very cordially; and then, kneeling before her, he said:

"My Lady, I have the happiness to deliver to your hands these bridal gifts which our gracious
sovereign, King Louis, did me the honour to entrust to my care."

And then, as he handed to her the casket of jewels and the silken package containing the hour
book, she replied:

"Sir Count, I thank you for your courtesy in bearing these gifts to me, and I am well pleased
to receive them."

Then summoning a little page, she told him to carry the presents up to her own chamber, where
she might examine them at her leisure.

By and by, Count Henri withdrew, after asking permission to start the next morning on his return
to Paris; for he wished to report to the king that he had safely accomplished his errand.

And then Lady Anne, having given orders that he and his followers be hospitably entertained
during their stay in the castle, mounted the great stone staircase, and went to her own room,
for she very much wanted to look at the gifts from King Louis.

These she found on a table where the little page had placed them. The casket was uncovered,
while the book was still wrapped up in the piece of silk, so that one could not tell just what
it was.

Lady Anne opened the casket first, as it happened to be nearest to her; and she drew in her
breath, and her eyes sparkled with pleasure, as she lifted out a magnificent necklace, and
other rich jewels that gleamed and glittered in the light like blue and crimson fires. She
tried on all the ornaments, and then, after awhile, when she had admired them to her heart's
content, she took up the silk-covered package, and curiously unwrapped it. When she saw what
it contained, however, her face grew radiant with delight, and--

"Ah!" she exclaimed to herself, "King Louis's gifts are indeed princely, and this one is the
most royal of all!"

For King Louis had been entirely right in thinking nothing would please the Lady Anne quite
so much as a piece of fine illumination.

Still holding the book carefully in her hands, she at once seated herself in a deep, cushioned
chair, and began slowly to turn over the pages, taking the keenest pleasure, as she did so,
in every fresh beauty on which her eyes fell. They address internal procedures to accomplish stated
objectives and document, in advance, the specific organizational elements that will respond
to each type of disaster or "need," with identification of procedures
and resources.

As it fell to the floor, a little page near by hastened to pick it up, and, bending on one
knee, presented it to Lady Anne. At first she frowned a little, for she thought, as had Brother
Stephen, that the book must have been badly bound. But when she took the leaf in her hand,
to her surprise, she saw that it was different from the others, and that it had not been bound
in with them; and then she read over the writing very carefully. When she had finished, she
sat for some time, just as Brother Stephen had done, holding the page in her hand, while her
face wore a very tender expression.

Lady Anne was really deeply touched by Gabriel's little prayer, and she wished greatly that
she herself might find a way to help him and his family out of their trouble.

But the more she thought about it, she realized that she had no authority over a Norman nobleman,
and that no one in France, except the king, was powerful enough to compel Count Pierre to release
the peasant Viaud from imprisonment.

So going over to a little writing-table, she took out a thin sheet of parchment, a quaint goose-quill
pen, and a small horn full of ink, and wrote a letter which she addressed to King Louis. Then
she took the loose leaf on which Gabriel's prayer was written, and, folding it in with her
letter, tied the little packet with a thread of scarlet silk (for no one used envelopes then),
and sealed it with some red wax. And on the wax she pressed a carved ring which she wore, and
which left a print that looked like a tiny tuft of ermine fur encircled by a bit of knotted
cord; for this was Lady Anne's emblem, as it was called, and King Louis, seeing it, would know
at once that the packet came from her.

Then she went down into the great hall of the castle, and sent one of her Breton gentlemen
to bring Count Henri. When the latter entered, she said to him:

"Sir Count, it would give me great pleasure to keep you longer as my guest, but if you must
return to Paris tomorrow, I will ask you to be my bearer for a little packet which I am anxious
to send to King Louis."

Then, as she handed it to him, she added with a smile, "I give it to you now, for if you ride
early in the morning, I must leave my Breton gentlemen to do the honours of your stirrup-cup."

(This last was the cup of wine which it was considered polite to offer a departing guest as
he mounted his horse, and was a little ceremony over which Lady Anne liked to preside herself;
that is, when her guests went away at agreeable hours.)

As Count Henri received the packet from her, he made a very deep bow, and replied that he would
be most happy to serve the Lady Anne in any way he could, and that he only awaited her command
to start at once on his journey.

"Nay," said Lady Anne, with another little smile, "'tis no affair of state importance! Only
a matter of my own on which I have set my heart. But I will not hear to your setting forth,
until you have sat at my table and rested overnight in the castle."

To this Count Henri again gallantly bowed his obedience; and then, before long, Lady Anne led
all the company into the great banquet-hall, where a number of long tables were set out with
roasted game, and bread and wine and the many different cakes and sweetmeats of Bretagne.

The Lady Anne took her place at the head of the longest table of all, and she placed Count
Henri at her right hand. Near them sat many of the ladies-in-waiting, and Breton gentlemen
of the highest rank; while at the farther end, beyond a great silver saltcellar standing in
the middle of the table, were seated those of less degree.

The dishes were of gold and silver, and Lady Anne herself was waited upon by two noblemen of
Bretagne, for she lived very magnificently, as was fitting for the bride of King Louis.

When the supper was over, they all went back into the great castle hall, where bright fires
of logs were blazing in the huge fireplaces; and as they sat in the firelight, they listened
to the beautiful songs and music of two troubadours who had that day chanced to come to the
castle, and who sang so sweetly that it was very late before the company broke up for the night.

