It may be imagined by this, what abuse had been made of a bank, established as a resource always
ready, but which could not exist as such without being always delicately adjusted; and above
all, kept in a state to meet the obligations it had contracted.  I obtained information on
this point from Law, when he came to me on Tuesday mornings; for a long time he played with
me before admitting his embarrassments, and complained modestly and timidly, that the Regent
was ruining everything by his extravagance.  I knew from outsiders more than he thought, and
it was this that induced me to press him upon his balance-sheet.  In admitting to me, at last,
although faintly, what he could no longer hide, he assured me he should not be wanting in resources
provided M. le Duc d'Orleans left him free.  That did not persuade me.  Soon after, the notes
began to lose favour; then to fall into discredit, and the discredit to become public.  Then
came the necessity to sustain them by force, since they could no longer be sustained by industry;
and the moment force showed itself every one felt that all was over.  Coercive authority was
resorted to; the use of gold, silver, and jewels was suppressed (I speak of coined money);
it was pretended that since the time of Abraham,--Abraham, who paid ready money for the sepulchre
of Sarah,--all the civilised nations in the world had been in the greatest error and under
the grossest delusion, respecting money and the metals it is made of; that paper alone was
useful and necessary; that we could not do greater harm to our neighbours--jealous of our greatness
and of our advantages--than to send to them all our money and all our jewels; and this idea
was in no way concealed, for the Indian Company was allowed to visit every house, even Royal
houses, confiscate all the louis d'or, and the coins it could find there; and to leave only
pieces of twenty sous and under (to the amount of not more than 200 francs), for the odd money
of bills, and in order to purchase necessary provisions of a minor kind, with prohibitions,
strengthened by heavy punishment, against keeping more; so that everybody was obliged to take
all the ready money he possessed to the bank, for fear of its being discovered by a valet.
But nobody, as may be imagined, was persuaded of the justice of the power accorded to the Company,
and accordingly authority was more and more exerted; all private houses were searched, informations
were laid against people in order that no money might be kept back, or if it were, that the
guilty parties might be severely punished.

Never before had sovereign power been so violently exercised, never had it attacked in such
a manner the temporal interests of the community. Therefore was it by a prodigy, rather than
by any effort or act of the government, that these terribly new ordonnances failed to produce
the saddest and most complete revolutions; but there was not even talk of them; and although
there were so many millions of people, either absolutely ruined or dying of hunger, and of
the direst want, without means to procure their daily subsistence, nothing more than complaints
and groans was heard.

This violence was, however, too excessive, and in every respect too indefensible to last long;
new paper and new juggling tricks were of necessity resorted to; the latter were known to be
such--people felt them to be such--but they submitted to them rather than not have twenty crowns
in safety in their houses; and a greater violence made people suffer the smaller.  Hence so
many projects, so many different faces in finance, and all tending to establish one issue of
paper upon another; that is to say, always causing loss to the holders of the different paper
(everybody being obliged to hold it), and the universal multitude.  This is what occupied all
the rest of the government, and of the life of M. le Duc d'Orleans; which drove Law out of
the realm; which increased six-fold the price of all merchandise, all food even the commonest;
which ruinously augmented every kind of wages, and ruined public and private commerce; which
gave, at the expense of the public, sudden riches to a few noblemen who dissipated it, and
were all the poorer in a short time; which enabled many financiers' clerks, and the lowest
dregs of the people, profiting by the general confusion, to take advantage of the Mississippi,
and make enormous fortunes; which occupied the government several years after the death of
M. le Duc d'Orleans; and which, to conclude, France never will recover from, although it may
be true that the value of land is considerably augmented.  As a last affliction, the all-powerful,
especially the princes and princesses of the blood, who had been mixed up, in the Mississippi,
and who had used all their authority to escape from it without loss, re-established it upon
what they called the Great Western Company, which with the same juggles and exclusive trade
with the Indies, is completing the annihilation of the trade of the realm, sacrificed to the
enormous interest of a small number of private individuals, whose hatred and vengeance the
government has not dared to draw upon itself by attacking their delicate privileges.

Several violent executions, and confiscations of considerable sums found in the houses searched,
took place.  A certain Adine, employed at the bank, had 10,000 crowns confiscated, was fined
10,000 francs, and lost his appointment.  Many people hid their money with so much secrecy,
that, dying without being able to say where they had put it, these little treasures remained
buried and lost to the heirs.

In the midst of the embarrassments of the finances, and in spite of them, M. le Duc d'Orleans
continued his prodigal gifts.  He attached pensions of 6000 livres and 4000 livres to the grades
of lieutenant-general and camp-marshal.  He gave a pension of 20,000 livres to old Montauban;
one of 6000 livres to M. de Montauban (younger brother of the Prince de Guemene); and one of
6000 livres to the Duchesse de Brissac.  To several other people he gave pensions of 4000 livres;
to eight or ten others, 3000 or 2000 livres.  I obtained one of 8000 livres for Madame Marechal
de Lorges; and one of 6000 livres was given to the Marechal de Chamilly, whose affairs were
much deranged by the Mississippi.  M. de Soubise and the Marquis Noailles had each upwards
of 200,000 livres.  Even Saint- Genies, just out of the Bastille, and banished to Beauvais,
had a pension of 1000.  Everybody in truth wanted an augmentation of income, on account of
the extreme high price to which the commonest, almost necessary things had risen, and even
all other things; which, although at last diminshed by degrees, remain to this day much dearer
than they were before the Mississippi.

The pensions being given away, M. le Duc d'Orleans began to think how he could reduce the public
expenditure.  Persuaded by those in whose financial knowledge he had most confidence, he resolved
to reduce to two per cent. the interest upon all the funds.  This much relieved those who paid,
but terribly cut down the income of those who received, that is to say, the creditors of the
state, who had lent their money at five per cent., according to the loan--and, public faith
and usage, and who had hitherto peacefully enjoyed that interest.  M. le Duc d'Orleans assembled
at the Palais Royal several financiers of different rank, and resolved with them to pass this
edict.  It made much stir among the Parliament men, who refused to register it.  But M. le
Duc d'Orleans would not change his determination, and maintained his decree in spite of them.

By dint of turning and turning around the Mississippi, not to say of juggling with it, the
desire came to establish, according to the example of the English, colonies in the vast countries
beyond the seas.  In order to people these colonies, persons without means of livelihood, sturdy
beggars, female and male, and a quantity of public creatures were carried off.  If this had
been executed with discretion and discernment, with the necessary measures and precautions,
it would have ensured the object proposed, and relieved Paris and the provinces of a heavy,
useless, and often dangerous burthen; but in Paris and elsewhere so much violence, and even
more roguery, were mixed up with it, that great murmuring was excited.  Not the slightest care
had been taken to provide for the subsistence of so many unfortunate people, either while in
the place they were to embark from, or while on the road to reach it; by night they were shut
up, with nothing to eat, in barns, or in the dry ditches of the towns they stopped in, all
means of egress being forbidden them.  They uttered cries which excited pity and indignation;
but the alms collected for them not being sufficient, still less the little their conductors
gave them, they everywhere died in frightful numbers.

This inhumanity, joined to the barbarity of the conductors, to violence of a kind unknown until
this, and to the rascality of carrying off people who were not of the prescribed quality, but
whom others thus got rid of by whispering a word in the ear of the conductors and greasing
their palms; all these things, I say, caused so much stir, so much excitement, that the system,
it was found, could not be kept up.  Some troops had been embarked, and during the voyage were
not treated much better than the others.  The persons already collected were set at liberty,
allowed to do what they pleased, and no more were seized.  Law, regarded as the author of these
seizures, became much detested, and M. le Duc d'Orleans repented having ever fallen in with
the scheme.

The 22nd of May of this year, 1720, became celebrated by the publication of a decree of the
Council of State, concerning the shares of the Company of the Indies (the same as that known
under the name of Mississippi) and the notes of Law's bank.  This decree diminished by degrees,
and from month to month, the value of the shares and the notes, so that, by the end of the
year, that value would have been reduced one-half.

This, in the language of finance and of bankruptcy, was to turn tail with a vengeance: and
its effect, while remedying nothing, was to make people believe that things were in a worse
state than was actually the case. Argenson, who, as we have seen, had been turned out of the
finances to make room for Law, was generally accused of suggesting this decree out of malice,
already foreseeing all the evils that must arise from it.  The uproar was general and frightful.
There was not a rich person who did not believe himself lost without resource; not a poor one
who did not see himself reduced to beggary.  The Parliament, so opposed to the new money system,
did not let slip this fine opportunity.  It rendered itself the protector of the public by
refusing to register the decree, and by promptly uttering the strongest remonstrance against
it.  The public even believed that to the Parliament was due the sudden revocation of the edict,
which, however, was simply caused by the universal complaining, and the tardy discovery of
the fault committed in passing it.  The little confidence in Law remaining was now radically
extinguished; not an atom of it could ever be set afloat again.  Seditious writings and analytical
and reasonable pamphlets rained on all sides, and the consternation was general.

The Parliament assembled on Monday, the 27th of May, in the morning, and named certain of its
members to go to M. le Duc d'Orleans, with remonstrances against the decree.  About noon of
the same day, M. le Duc d'Orleans sent La Vrilliere to say to the Parliament that he revoked
that decree, and that the notes would remain as before.  La Vrilliere, finding that the Parliament
had adjourned, went to the Chief-President, to say with what he was charged.  After dinner
the Parliamentary deputies came to the Palais Royal, where they were well received; M. le Duc
d'Orleans confirmed what they had already heard from La Vrilliere, and said to them that he
would re-establish the funds of the Hotel de Ville at two-and-a- half percent.  The deputies
expected that in justice and in goodness he ought to raise them to at least three per cent.
M. le Duc d'Orleans answered, that he should like not only to raise them to three, but to four,
nay, five per cent.; but that the state of affairs would not permit him to go beyond two-and-a-half.
On the next day was published the counter-decree, which placed the shares and actions as they
were before the 22nd of May.  The decree of that date was therefore revoked in six days, after
having caused such a strange effect.

On Wednesday, the 29th, a pretty little comedy was played.  Le Blanc, Secretary of State, went
to Law, told him that M. le Duc d'Orleans discharged him from his office as comptroller-general
of the finances, thanked him for the attention he had given to it, and announced that as many
people in Paris did not like him, a meritorious officer should keep guard in his house to prevent
any accident that might happen to him.  At the same time, Benzualde, major of the regiment
of Swiss guards, arrived with sixteen of his men to remain night and day in Law's house.

The Scotchman did not in the least expect this dismissal or this guard, but he appeared very
tranquil respecting both, and maintained his usual coolness.  The next day he was taken by
the Duc de la Force to the Palais Royal.  Then comedy number two was played.  M. le Duc d'Orleans
refused to see the financier, who went away without an interview.  On the day after, however,
Law was admitted by the back stairs, closeted with the Regent, and was treated by him as well
as ever.  The comedies were over.

On Sunday, the 2nd of June, Benzualde and his Swiss withdrew from Law's house.  Stock-jobbing
was banished at the same time from the Rue Quincampoix, and established in the Place Vendome.
In this latter place there was more room for it.  The passers-by were not incommoded.  Yet
some people did not find it as convenient as the other.  At this time the King gave up to the
bank one hundred million of shares he had in it.

On the 5th July, a decree of the Council was issued, prohibiting people from possessing jewels,
from keeping them locked up, or from selling them to foreigners.  It may be imagined what a
commotion ensued.  This decree was grafted upon a number of others, the object of all, too
visibly, being to seize upon all coin, in favour of the discredited paper, in which nobody
could any longer have the slightest confidence.  In vain M. le Duc d'Orleans, M. le Duc, and
his mother, tried to persuade others, by getting rid of their immense stores of jewels, that
is to say, by sending them abroad on a journey--nothing more: not a person was duped by this
example; not a person omitted to conceal his jewels very carefully: a thing much more easy
to accomplish than the concealment of gold or silver coin, on account of the smaller value
of precious stones.  This jewellery eclipse was not of long duration.

CHAPTER CI

Immediately after the issue of this decree an edict was drawn up for the establishment of an
Indian commercial company, which was to undertake to reimburse in a year six, hundred millions
of bank notes, by paying fifty thousand dollars per month.  Such was the last resource of Law
and his system.  For the juggling tricks of the Mississippi, it was found necessary to substitute
something real; especially since the edict of the 22nd of May, so celebrated and so disastrous
for the paper.  Chimeras were replaced by realities--by a true India Company; and it was this
name and this thing which succeeded, which took the place of the undertaking previously known
as the Mississippi.  It was in vain that the tobacco monopoly and a number of other immense
monopolies were given to the new company; they could not enable it to meet the proper claims
spread among the public, no matter what trouble might be taken to diminish them at all hazard
and at all loss.

It was now necessary to seek other expedients.  None could be found except that of rendering
this company a commercial one; this was, under a gentler name, a name vague and unpretending,
to hand over to it the entire and exclusive commerce of the country.  It may be imagined how
such a resolution was received by the public, exasperated by the severe decree, prohibiting
people, under heavy penalties, from having more than five-hundred livres, in coin, in their
possession, subjecting them to visits of inspection, and leaving them nothing but bank notes
to, pay for the commonest necessaries of daily life.  Two things resulted; first, fury, which
day by day was so embittered by the difficulty of obtaining money for daily subsistence, that
it was a marvel all Paris did not revolt at once, and that the emeute was appeased; second,
the Parliament, taking its stand upon this public emotion, held firm to the end in refusing
to register the edict instituting the new company.

On the 15th of July, the Chancellor showed in his own house the draught of the edict to deputies
from the Parliament, who remained with him until nine o'clock at night, without being persuaded.
On the morrow, the 16th, the edict was brought forward in the Regency Council.  M. le Duc d'Orleans,
sustained by M. le Duc, spoke well upon it, because he could not speak ill, however bad his
theme.  Nobody said a word, and all bowed their necks.  It was resolved, in this manner, to
send the edict to the Parliament on the morrow, the 17th of July.

That same 17th of July, there was such a crowd in the morning, at the bank and in the neighbouring
streets, for the purpose of obtaining enough money to go to market with, that ten or twelve
people were stifled. Three of the bodies were tumultuously carried to the Palais Royal, which
the people, with loud cries, wished to enter.  A detachment of the King's guards at the Tuileries
was promptly sent there.  La Vrilliere and Le Blanc separately harangued the people.  The lieutenant
of police came; brigades of the watch were sent for.  The dead bodies were afterwards carried
away, and by gentleness and cajoleries the people were at length dispersed.  The detachment
of the King's guards returned to the Tuileries.  By about ten o'clock in the morning, all being
over, Law took it into his head to go to the Palais Royal.  He received many imprecations as
he passed through the streets.  M. le Duc d'Orleans thought it would be well not to let him
leave the Palais Royal, and gave him a lodging there.  He sent back Law's carriage, however,
the windows of which were smashed on the way by the stones thrown at them.  Law's house, too,
was attacked, amid much breaking of windows.  All this was known so late in our quarter of
the Jacobins of the Saint-Dominique, that when I arrived at the Palais Royal there was not
a vestige visible of any disturbance.  M. le Duc d'Orleans, in the midst of a very small company,
was very tranquil, and showed that you would not please him unless you were so also.  I did
not stop long, having nothing to do or say.

