"It is a good epigram," said Sidney, impressed. "But what is to be said of a rich community
which recruits its clergy from the lower classes? The method of election by competitive performance,
common as it is among poor Dissenters, emphasizes the subjection of the shepherd to his flock.
You catch your ministers young, when they are saturated with suppressed scepticism, and bribe
them with small salaries that seem affluence to the sons of poor immigrants. That the ministry
is not an honorable profession may be seen from the anxiety of the minister to raise his children
in the social scale by bringing them up to some other line of business."

"That is true," said Raphael, gravely. "Our wealthy families must be induced to devote a son
each to the Synagogue."

"I wish they would," said Sidney. "At present, every second man is a lawyer. We ought to have
more officers and doctors, too. I like those old Jews who smote the Philistines hip and thigh;
it is not good for a race to run all to brain: I suppose, though, we had to develop cunning
to survive at all. There was an enlightened minister whose Friday evenings I used to go to
when a youth--delightful talk we had there, too; you know whom I mean. Well, one of his sons
is a solicitor, and the other a stockbroker. The rich men he preached to helped to place his
sons. He was a charming man, but imagine him preaching to them the truths in Mordecai Josephs,
as Mr. Saville suggested."

"Our minister lets us have it hot enough, though," said Mr. Henry Goldsmith with a guffaw.

His wife hastened to obliterate the unrefined expression.

"Mr. Strelitski is a wonderfully eloquent young man, so quiet and reserved in society, but
like an ancient prophet in the pulpit."

"Yes, we were very lucky to get him," said Mr. Henry Goldsmith.

The little dark girl shuddered.

"What is the matter?" asked Raphael softly.

"I don't know. I don't like the Rev. Joseph Strelitski. He is eloquent, but his dogmatism irritates
me. I don't believe he is sincere. He doesn't like me, either."

"Oh, you're both wrong," he said in concern.

"Strelitski is a draw, I admit," said Mr. Montagu Samuels, who was the President of a rival
synagogue. "But Rosenbaum is a good pull-down on the other side, eh?"

Mr. Henry Goldsmith groaned. The second minister of the Kensington synagogue was the scandal
of the community. He wasn't expected to preach, and he didn't practise.

"I've heard of that man," said Sidney laughing. "He's a bit of a gambler and a spendthrift,
isn't he? Why do you keep him on?"

"He has a fine voice, you see," said Mr. Goldsmith. "That makes a Rosenbaum faction at once.
Then he has a wife and family. That makes another."

"Strelitski isn't married, is he?" asked Sidney.

"No," said Mr. Goldsmith, "not yet. The congregation expects him to, though. I don't care to
give him the hint myself; he is a little queer sometimes."

"He owes it to his position," said Miss Cissy Levine.

"That is what we think," said Mrs. Henry Goldsmith, with the majestic manner that suited her
opulent beauty.

"I wish we had him in our synagogue," said Raphael. "Michaels is a well-meaning worthy man,
but he is dreadfully dull."

"Poor Raphael!" said Sidney. "Why did you abolish the old style of minister who had to slaughter
the sheep? Now the minister reserves all his powers of destruction for his own flock.'"

"I have given him endless hints to preach only once a month," said Mr. Montagu Samuels dolefully.
"But every Saturday our hearts sink as we see him walk to the pulpit."

"You see, Addie, how a sense of duty makes a man criminal," said Sidney. "Isn't Michaels the
minister who defends orthodoxy in a way that makes the orthodox rage over his unconscious heresies,
while the heterodox enjoy themselves by looking out for his historical and grammatical blunders!"

"Poor man, he works hard," said Raphael, gently. "Let him be."

Over the dessert the conversation turned by way of the Rev. Strelitski's marriage, to the growing
willingness of the younger generation to marry out of Judaism. The table discerned in inter-marriage
the beginning of the end.

"But why postpone the inevitable?" asked Sidney calmly. "What is this mania for keeping up
an effete ism? Are we to cripple our lives for the sake of a word? It's all romantic fudge,
the idea of perpetual isolation. You get into little cliques and mistaken narrow-mindedness
for fidelity to an ideal. I can live for months and forget there are such beings as Jews in
the world. I have floated down the Nile in a dahabiya while you were beating your breasts in
the Synagogue, and the palm-trees and pelicans knew nothing of your sacrosanct chronological
crisis, your annual epidemic of remorse."

The table thrilled with horror, without, however, quite believing in the speaker's wickedness.
Addie looked troubled.

"A man and wife of different religions can never know true happiness," said the hostess.

"Granted," retorted Sidney. "But why shouldn't Jews without Judaism marry Christians without
Christianity? Must a Jew needs have a Jewess to help him break the Law?"

"Inter-marriage must not be tolerated," said Raphael. "It would hurt us less if we had a country.
Lacking that, we must preserve our human boundaries."

"You have good phrases sometimes," admitted Sidney. "But why must we preserve any boundaries?
Why must we exist at all as a separate people?"

"To fulfil the mission of Israel," said Mr. Montagu Samuels solemnly.

"Ah, what is that? That is one of the things nobody ever seems able to tell me."

"We are God's witnesses," said Mrs. Henry Goldsmith, snipping off for herself a little bunch
of hot-house grapes.

"False witnesses, mostly then," said Sidney. "A Christian friend of mine, an artist, fell in
love with a girl and courted her regularly at her house for four years. Then he proposed; she
told him to ask her father, and he then learned for the first time that the family were Jewish,
and his suit could not therefore be entertained. Could a satirist have invented anything funnier?
Whatever it was Jews have to bear witness to, these people had been bearing witness to so effectually
that a daily visitor never heard a word of the evidence during four years. And this family
is not an exception; it is a type. Abroad the English Jew keeps his Judaism in the background,
at home in the back kitchen. When he travels, his Judaism is not packed up among his impedimenta.
He never obtrudes his creed, and even his Jewish newspaper is sent to him in a wrapper labelled
something else. How's that for witnesses? Mind you, I'm not blaming the men, being one of 'em.
They may be the best fellows going, honorable, high-minded, generous--why expect them to be
martyrs more than other Englishmen? Isn't life hard enough without inventing a new hardship?
I declare there's no narrower creature in the world than your idealist; he sets up a moral
standard which suits his own line of business, and rails at men of the world for not conforming
to it. God's witnesses, indeed! I say nothing of those who are rather the Devil's witnesses,
but think of the host of Jews like myself who, whether they marry Christians or not, simply
drop out, and whose absence of all religion escapes notice in the medley of creeds. We no more
give evidence than those old Spanish Jews--Marannos, they were called, weren't they?--who wore
the Christian mask for generations. Practically, many of us are Marannos still; I don't mean
the Jews who are on the stage and the press and all that, but the Jews who have gone on believing.
One Day of Atonement I amused myself by noting the pretexts on the shutters of shops that were
closed in the Strand. 'Our annual holiday,' Stock-taking day,' 'Our annual bean-feast.' 'Closed
for repairs.'"

"Well, it's something if they keep the Fast at all," said Mr. Henry Goldsmith. "It shows spirituality
is not dead in them."

"Spirituality!" sneered Sidney. "Sheer superstition, rather. A dread of thunderbolts. Besides,
fasting is a sensuous attraction. But for the fasting, the Day of Atonement would have long
since died out for these men. 'Our annual bean-feast'! There's witnesses for you."

"We cannot help if we have false witnesses among us," said Raphael Leon quietly. "Our mission
is to spread the truth of the Torah till the earth is filled with the knowledge of the Lord
as the waters cover the sea."

"But we don't spread it."

"We do. Christianity and Mohammedanism are offshoots of Judaism; through them we have won the
world from Paganism and taught it that God is one with the moral law."

"Then we are somewhat in the position of an ancient school-master lagging superfluous in the
school-room where his whilom pupils are teaching."

"By no means. Rather of one who stays on to protest against the false additions of his whilom
pupils."

"But we don't protest."

"Our mere existence since the Dispersion is a protest," urged Raphael. "When the stress of
persecution lightens, we may protest more consciously. We cannot have been preserved in vain
through so many centuries of horrors, through the invasions of the Goths and Huns, through
the Crusades, through the Holy Roman Empire, through the times of Torquemada. It is not for
nothing that a handful of Jews loom so large in the history of the world that their past is
bound up with every noble human effort, every high ideal, every development of science, literature
and art. The ancient faith that has united us so long must not be lost just as it is on the
very eve of surviving the faiths that sprang from it, even as it has survived Egypt, Assyria,
Rome, Greece and the Moors. If any of us fancy we have lost it, let us keep together still.
Who knows but that it will be born again in us if we are only patient? Race affinity is a potent
force; why be in a hurry to dissipate it? The Marannos you speak of were but maimed heroes,
yet one day the olden flame burst through the layers of three generations of Christian profession
and inter-marriage, and a brilliant company of illustrious Spaniards threw up their positions
and sailed away in voluntary exile to serve the God of Israel. We shall yet see a spiritual
revival even among our brilliant English Jews who have hid their face from their own flesh."

The dark little girl looked up into his face with ill-suppressed wonder.

"Have you done preaching at me, Raphael?" inquired Sidney. "If so, pass me a banana."

Raphael smiled sadly and obeyed.

"I'm afraid if I see much of Raphael I shall be converted to Judaism," said Sidney, peeling
the banana. "I had better take a hansom to the Riviera at once. I intended to spend Christmas
there; I never dreamed I should be talking theology in London."

"Oh, I think Christmas in London is best," said the hostess unguardedly.

"Oh, I don't know. Give me Brighton," said the host.

"Well, yes, I suppose Brighton is pleasanter," said Mr. Montagu Samuels.

"Oh, but so many Jews go there," said Percy Saville.

"Yes, that is the drawback," said Mrs. Henry Goldsmith. "Do you know, some years ago I discovered
a delightful village in Devonshire, and took the household there in the summer. The very next
year when I went down I found no less than two Jewish families temporarily located there. Of
course, I have never gone there since."

"Yes, it's wonderful how Jews scent out all the nicest places," agreed Mrs. Montagu Samuels.
"Five years ago you could escape them by not going to Ramsgate; now even the Highlands are
getting impossible."

