The symphony is in three parts, beginning with a maestoso movement, in which the trombones
at once give out the choral motive, "All that has life and breath sing to the Lord,"--a favorite
theme of Mendelssohn. This movement, which is strong and energetic in character, is followed
by an allegretto based upon a beautiful melody, and to this in turn succeeds an adagio religioso
rich in harmony. The symphony clearly reflects the spirit of the cantata, which follows. The
opening chorus ("All that has Life and Breath") is based upon the choral motive, and enunciates
the real hymn of praise. It moves along in a stately manner, and finally leads without break
into a semi-chorus, "Praise thou the Lord, O my Spirit," a soprano solo with accompaniment
of female voices. The tenor in a long dramatic recitative ("Sing ye Praise, all ye redeemed
of the Lord") urges the faithful to join in praise and extol His goodness, and the chorus responds,
first, the tenors, and then all the parts, in a beautiful number, "All ye that cried unto the
Lord." The next number is an exquisite duet for soprano and alto with chorus ("I waited for
the Lord"). It is thoroughly devotional in style, and in its general color and effect reminds
one of the arias, "O Rest in the Lord" from "Elijah," and "The Lord is mindful of His own"
from "St. Paul." This duet is followed by a sorrowful, almost wailing tenor solo, "The Sorrows
of Death had closed all around me," ending with the piercing, anxious cry in recitative, "Watchman!
will the Night soon pass?" set to a restless, agitated accompaniment and thrice repeated. Like
a flash from a cloud comes the quick response of the chorus, "The Night is departing," which
forms the climax of the work. The chorus is beautifully constructed, and very impressive in
its effect. At first the full chorus proclaims the night's departure; it then takes the fugal
form on the words, "Therefore let us cast off the works of darkness," which is most effectively
worked out.

In the finale the male voices are massed on the declaration, "The Night is departing," and
the female voices on the response, "The Day is approaching;" and after alternating repetitions
all close in broad, flowing harmony. This chorus leads directly to the chorale, "Let all Men
praise the Lord," sung first without accompaniment, and then in unison with orchestra. Another
beautiful duet, "My Song shall alway be Thy Mercy," this time for soprano and tenor, follows,
and prepares the way for the final fugued chorus, "Ye Nations, offer to the Lord," a massive
number, stately in its proportions and impressive in its effect, and closing with a fortissimo
delivery of the splendid choral motive, "All that has Life and Breath."

Notwithstanding that the choral part is brief as compared with the "St. Paul" and "Elijah,"
there are many critics who are inclined to pronounce the "Hymn of Praise" Mendelssohn's greatest
work. In its combination of the symphony and the voice parts, the one growing out of the other
and both so intimately connected, it stands almost alone. Some critics have condemned Mendelssohn
for imitating Beethoven's Choral Symphony, though in that colossal work the chorus is not only
subordinate to the symphony, but is even trifling in length as compared with it, and very inferior
in style. While in Mendelssohn's work the symphony is subordinated to the choral part, and
serves only as an introduction to it, they are yet conventionally connected; but in Beethoven's
work the chorus was the product of necessity, as the idea could not have been developed without
it. The instruments had gone as far as possible; the voices must speak.

                                 Elijah.

"Elijah," the most admired of all Mendelssohn's compositions, was finished in 1846. The plan
of the work was first considered in 1837, and was discussed with his friend Klingemann in London.
During the next year he had frequent consultations with another friend, Schubring, as to the
preparation of the book, and many of the passages were selected and scenes sketched out; but
it was not until 1840 that he really began to put it into shape. We learn by a letter that
in 1842 he was still at work upon the book itself. Two years later he received an invitation
to conduct the Birmingham Festival of 1846; and it was evidently at that time he decided to
prepare the work for that occasion. We learn by another letter that on the 23d of May, 1846,
the entire first part and six or eight numbers of the second part were sent to London to a
Mr. Bartholomew, who was engaged translating the text into English. That Mendelssohn himself
was pleased with his work is evident from his own words, written to a friend after he had finished
the first part: "I am jumping about my room for joy. If it only turns out half as good as I
fancy, how pleased I shall be!" By the latter part of July the entire oratorio was in the hands
of Mr. Bartholomew, and on August 18 Mendelssohn himself arrived in London and immediately
began the rehearsals. The work was first performed on the 26th at Birmingham, coming between
Haydn's "Creation" on the 25th, and Handel's "Messiah" on the 27th, the latter oratorio being
followed by Beethoven's Mass in D. A correspondent who was present writes:--

  "How shall I describe what to-day has been in the Music Hall? After
  such an intense enjoyment it is a hard task to express one's feelings
  in cold words. It was a great day for the festival, a great day for the
  performers, a great day for Mendelssohn, a great day for art. Four
  da-capos in the first part, four in the second, making eight encores,
  and at the close the calling out of the composer,--are significant
  facts when one considers that it was the rigid injunction of the
  Committee that the public should not testify its approval by applause.
  But the enthusiasm would be checked by no rules; when the heart is
  full, regulations must stand aside. It was a noble scene, the hall
  filled with men, the galleries gay with ladies, like so many
  tulip-beds, added to the princely music and their thundering bravas."

Mendelssohn himself on the day after the performance writes to his brother in Berlin:--

  "No work of mine ever went so admirably the first time of execution, or
  was received with such enthusiasm by both the musicians and the
  audience, as this oratorio. It was quite evident at the first rehearsal
  in London that they liked it, and liked to sing and play it; but I own
  I was far from anticipating that it would acquire such fresh vigor and
  impetus at the performance. Had you only been there! During the whole
  two hours and a half that it lasted, the large hall, with its two
  thousand people, and the large orchestra were all so fully intent on
  the one object in question that not the slightest sound was to be heard
  among the whole audience, so that I could sway at pleasure the enormous
  orchestra and choir, and also the organ accompaniments. How often I
  thought of you during the time! more especially, however, when 'the
  sound of abundance of rain' came, and when they sang and played the
  final chorus with furore, and when, after the close of the first
  part, we were obliged to repeat the whole movement. Not less than four
  choruses and four airs were encored, and not one single mistake
  occurred in the first part; there were some afterwards in the second
  part, but even these were but trifling. A young English tenor[6] sang
  the last air with such wonderful sweetness that I was obliged to
  collect all my energies, not to be affected, and to continue beating
  time steadily."

