--One
of my associates in this locality, for two or three months, was a man who had had a university
education; but now for eighteen years he had decayed there by inches, a bearded, rough-clad,
clay-stained miner, and at times, among his sighings and soliloquizings, he unconsciously interjected
vaguely remembered Latin and Greek sentences--dead and musty tongues, meet vehicles for the
thoughts of one whose dreams were all of the past, whose life was a failure; a tired man, burdened
with the present, and indifferent to the future; a man without ties, hopes, interests, waiting
for rest and the end.

In that one little corner of California is found a species of mining which is seldom or never
mentioned in print.  It is called "pocket mining" and I am not aware that any of it is done
outside of that little corner.  The gold is not evenly distributed through the surface dirt,
as in ordinary placer mines, but is collected in little spots, and they are very wide apart
and exceedingly hard to find, but when you do find one you reap a rich and sudden harvest.
There are not now more than twenty pocket miners in that entire little region.  I think I know
every one of them personally.  I have known one of them to hunt patiently about the hill-sides
every day for eight months without finding gold enough to make a snuff-box--his grocery bill
running up relentlessly all the time--and then find a pocket and take out of it two thousand
dollars in two dips of his shovel.  I have known him to take out three thousand dollars in
two hours, and go and pay up every cent of his indebtedness, then enter on a dazzling spree
that finished the last of his treasure before the night was gone.  And the next day he bought
his groceries on credit as usual, and shouldered his pan and shovel and went off to the hills
hunting pockets again happy and content.  This is the most fascinating of all the different
kinds of mining, and furnishes a very handsome percentage of victims to the lunatic asylum.

Pocket hunting is an ingenious process.  You take a spadeful of earth from the hill-side and
put it in a large tin pan and dissolve and wash it gradually away till nothing is left but
a teaspoonful of fine sediment. Whatever gold was in that earth has remained, because, being
the heaviest, it has sought the bottom.  Among the sediment you will find half a dozen yellow
particles no larger than pin-heads.  You are delighted.  You move off to one side and wash
another pan.  If you find gold again, you move to one side further, and wash a third pan. 
If you find no gold this time, you are delighted again, because you know you are on the right
scent.

You lay an imaginary plan, shaped like a fan, with its handle up the hill--for just where the
end of the handle is, you argue that the rich deposit lies hidden, whose vagrant grains of
gold have escaped and been washed down the hill, spreading farther and farther apart as they
wandered.  And so you proceed up the hill, washing the earth and narrowing your lines every
time the absence of gold in the pan shows that you are outside the spread of the fan; and at
last, twenty yards up the hill your lines have converged to a point--a single foot from that
point you cannot find any gold.  Your breath comes short and quick, you are feverish with excitement;
the dinner-bell may ring its clapper off, you pay no attention; friends may die, weddings transpire,
houses burn down, they are nothing to you; you sweat and dig and delve with a frantic interest--and
all at once you strike it!  Up comes a spadeful of earth and quartz that is all lovely with
soiled lumps and leaves and sprays of gold.  Sometimes that one spadeful is all--$500.  Sometimes
the nest contains $10,000, and it takes you three or four days to get it all out.