I gather from Mr. Matthew Arnold's essays on criticism that the endeavour of the critic should
be to see the object criticized "as in itself it really is," or as in another passage he says,
"Real criticism obeys an instinct prompting it to know the best that is known and thought in
the world."  "In order to do or to be this, criticism," he says, in italics, "ought to be disinterested."
He points out how much English criticism is not disinterested.

This, it must be remembered, was written in 1865.  Would Mr. Matthew Arnold be happier now
with the Fortnightly and the Nineteenth Century and others?  There is, I think, a good deal
of truth in the passage I have just quoted.  I think he might have allowed that, among so many
writers, each advocating his own view or the view of his party or sect, we ought to have some
chance of forming a judgment.  A question seems to get a fair chance of being

   "Set in all lights by many minds
   To close the interests of all."

But, as I said, there is a good deal in what the writer says.  The Daily News says the Government
is all wrong, and the Daily Telegraph says it is all right; and if any paper ventured to be
moderate it would go to the wall in a week.  I think what he says is true, but there is no
occasion to be so angry about it.  We really are very thankful for such men as Carlyle, Ruskin,
and Matthew Arnold, and I can't help thinking they have had their proper share of praise, and
have had their share of influence upon their age.  The air of neglected superiority, which
they assume, detracts not a little from the pleasure with which one always reads them.

Perhaps some of my conservative friends will regret the good old times in which criticism was
really criticism, when a book had to run the gauntlet of a few well established critics of
the club, or a play was applauded or damned by a select few in the front row of the pit.  I
agree to lament a past which can never return, but, on the whole, I think we are the gainers.
Also, I very much incline to think that the standard of criticism is higher now than in the
very palmy days when Addison wrote; or when the Edinburgh or Quarterly were first started.
I incline to agree with Leslie Stephen in his Hours in a Library, that, if most of the critical
articles of even Jeffrey and Mackintosh were submitted to a modern editor, he would reject
them as inadequate; but I think that perhaps they excel our modern efforts in a certain reserve
and dignity, and in a more matured thoughtfulness.

If criticism is an art, such as I have described it, and is subject to certain rules and conditions;
if good criticism is appreciative, proportionate, appropriate, strong, natural, and bona fide,
and bad criticism is the reverse of all this, why, you will ask, cannot the art be taught by
some School or Academy; and if criticism is so important a matter as you say, surely the State
might see to it?  I must own I am against it.  Mr. Matthew Arnold, who is much in favour of
founding an academy, which is not only to judge of original works but of the criticisms of
others upon them, states the matter very fairly.  He says, "So far as routine and authority
tend to embarrass energy and inventive genius, academies may be said to be obstructive to energy
and inventive genius; and, to this extent, to the human spirit's general advance.  But then
this evil is so much compensated by the propagation on a large scale of the mental aptitudes
and demands, which an open mind and a flexible intelligence naturally engender; genius itself
in the long run so greatly finds its account in this propagation, and bodies like the French
Academy have such power for promoting it, that the general advance of the human spirit is perhaps,
on the whole, rather furthered than impeded by their existence."

But I do not accede to this opinion.  It is under the free open air of heaven, in the wild
woods and the meadows that the loveliest and sweetest flowers bloom, and not in the trim gardens
or the hot-houses, and even in our gardens in England we strive to preserve some lingering
traits of the open country.  I believe that just as the gift of freedom to the masses of our
countrymen teaches them to use that freedom with care and intelligence, just as the abolition
of tests and oaths makes men loyal and trustworthy, so it is well to have freedom in literature
and criticism.  Mistakes will be made and mischief done, but in the long run the effect of
a keen competition, and an advancing public taste will tell.  I don't hesitate to assert, without
fear of contradiction, that critical art has improved rapidly during the last twenty years
in this country, where a man is free to start a critical review, and to write about anybody,
or anything, and in any manner, provided he keeps within the law.  He is only restrained by
the competition of others, and by the public taste, which are both constantly increasing. 
No doubt an author will write with greater spirit, and with greater decorum, if he knows that
his merits are sure to be fairly acknowledged, and his faults certain to be accurately noted.
But this object may be attained, I believe, without an academy.  On the other hand, what danger
there is in an academy becoming cliquey, nay even corrupt.  We have an academy here in the
painting art, but except that it collects within its walls every year a vaster number of daubs
than it is possible for any one ever to see with any degree of comfort, I don't know what particular
use it is of.  As a school or college it may be of use, but as a critical academy it does very
little.

I have thus endeavoured to show what I mean by my six divisions of criticism, and I have no
doubt you will all of you have divined that my six divisions are capable of being expressed
in one word, Criticism must be true.  To be true, it must be appreciative, or understanding,
it must be in due proportion, it must be appropriate, it must be strong, it must be natural,
it must be bona fide.  There is nothing which an Englishman hates so much as being false. 
Our great modern poet, in one of his strongest lines, says--

   "This is a shameful thing for men to lie."

Emerson notices that many of our phrases turn upon this love of truth, such as "The English
of this is," "Honour bright," "His word is as good as his bond."

   "'Tis not enough taste, learning, judgment join;
   In all you speak let truth, and candour shine."

I am certain that if men and women would believe that it is important that they should form
a true judgment upon things, and that they should speak or write it when required, we should
get rid of a great deal of bad art, bad books, bad pictures, bad buildings, bad music, and
bad morals.  I am further certain that by constantly uttering false criticisms we perpetuate
such things.  And what harm we are doing to our own selves in the meantime!  How habitually
warped, how unsteady, how feeble, the judgment becomes, which is not kept bright and vigorous
through right use.  How insensibly we become callous or indolent about forming a correct judgment.

In conclusion, I am aware that I have treated the subject most inadequately, and that others
have treated the same subject with much more power; but I am satisfied of the great importance
of a right use of the critical faculty, and I think it may be that my mode of treatment may
arrest the attention of some minds which are apt to be frightened at a learned method, and
may induce them to take more heed of the judgments which they are hourly passing on a great
variety of subjects.  If we still persist in saying when some one jingles some jig upon the
piano that it is "charming," if we say of every daub in the Academy that it is "lovely," if
every new building or statue is pronounced "awfully jolly," if the fastidious rubbish of the
last volume of poetry is "grand," if the slip-shod grammar of the last new novel is "quite
sweet," when shall we see an end of these bad things?  And observe further, these bad things
live on and affect the human mind for ever.  Bad things are born of bad. Who can tell what
may be the effect of seeing day by day an hideous building, of hearing day by day indifferent
music, of constantly reading a lot of feeble twaddle?  Surely one effect will be that we shall
gradually lose our appreciation of what is good and beautiful.  "A thing of beauty is a joy
for ever."  Ah! but we must have eyes to see it.  This springtime is lovely, if we have the
eyes to see it; but, if we have not, its loveliness is nothing to us, and if we miss seeing
it we shall have dimmer eyes to see it next year and the next; and if we cannot now see beauty
and truth through the glass darkly, we shall be unable to gaze on them when we come to see
them face to face.

II.  ON LUXURY.

