This is how our journey ended: Following my father's wishes and also with the purpose of drawing
near Britanny, we marched towards Anjou, where we arrived on the territory of the seigneur
Guiscard, Count of the region and castle of Mont-Ferrier. All travelers who passed over his
territory had to pay tribute to his toll-gatherers. Poor people, unable to pay, were, according
to the whim of the seigneur's men, put through some disagreeable, or humiliating, or ridiculous
performance: they were either whipped, or made to walk on their hands, or to turn somersaults,
or kiss the bolts of the toll-gatherer's gate. As to the women, they were subjected to revolting
obscenities. Many other people as penniless as ourselves were thus subjected to indignity and
brutality. Desirous of sparing my father and my wife the disgrace, I said to the bailiff of
the seigniory who happened to be there: "The castle I see yonder looks to me weak in many ways.
I am a skillful mason; I have built a large number of fortified donjons; employ me and I shall
work to the satisfaction of your seigneur. All I ask of you is not to allow my father, wife
and children to be maltreated, and to furnish us with shelter and bread while the work lasts."
The bailiff accepted my offer gladly, seeing that the mason, who was killed during the last
war against the castle of Mont-Ferrier, had not yet been replaced, and besides I furnished
ample evidence of knowing how to build. The bailiff assigned us to a hut where we were to receive
a serf's pittance. My father was to cultivate a little garden attached to our hovel, while
Nominoe, then old enough to be of assistance, was to help me at my work which would last until
winter. We contemplated a journey to Britanny after that. We had lived here five months when,
three days ago, I lost my father.

       *       *       *       *       *

To-day the eleventh day of the month of June, of the year 1035, I, Den-Brao add this post-script
to the above lines that I appended to my father's narrative. I have to record a sad event.
The work on the castle of Mont-Ferrier not being concluded before the winter of 1034, the bailiff
of the seigneur, shortly after my father's death proposed to me to resume work in the spring.
I accepted. I love my trade. Moreover, my family felt less wretched here than in Compiegne,
and I was not as anxious as my father to return to Britanny where, after all, there may be
no member of our family left. I accepted the bailiff's offer, and continued to work upon the
buildings, that are now completed. The last piece of work I did was to finish up a secret issue
that leads outside of the castle. Yesterday the bailiff came to me and said: "One of the allies
of the seigneur of Mont-Ferrier, who is just now on a visit at the castle, expressed great
admiration for the work that you did, and as he is thinking of improving the fortifications
of his own manor, he offered the count our master to exchange you for a serf who is a skillful
armorer, and whom we need. The matter was settled between them."

"But I am not a serf of the seigneur of Mont-Ferrier," I interposed; "I agreed to work here
of my own free will."

The bailiff shrugged his shoulders and replied: "The law says--every man who is not a Frank,
and who lives a year and a day upon the land of a seigneur, becomes a serf and the property
of the said seigneur, and as such is subject to taille at will and mercy. You have lived here
since the tenth day of June of the year 1034; we are now at the eleventh day of June of the
year 1035; you have lived a year and a day on the land of the seigneur of Mont-Ferrier; you
are now his serf; you belong to him, and he has the right to exchange you for a serf of the
seigneur of Plouernel. Drop all thought of resisting our master's will. Should you kick up
your heels, Neroweg IV, seigneur and count of Plouernel, will order you tied to the tail of
his horse, and drag you in that way as far as his castle."

I would have resigned myself to my new condition without much grief, but for one circumstance.
For forty years I lived a serf on the domain of Compiegne, and it mattered little to me whether
I exercised my trade of masonry in one seigniory or another. But I remember that my father
told me that he had it from his grandfather Guyrion how an old family of the name of Neroweg,
established in Gaul since the conquest of Clovis, had ever been fatal to our own. I felt a
sort of terror at the thought of finding myself the serf of a descendant of the Terrible Eagle--that
first of the Nerowegs that crossed our path.

May heaven ordain it so that my forebodings prove unfounded! May heaven ordain, my dear son
Nominoe, that you shall not have to register on this parchment aught but the date of my death
and these few words:

"My father Den-Brao ended peaceably his industrious life of a mason serf." It is a story of
Druid Gaul, captivating in its simplicity and superbly preluding the grand drama that is gradually
unfolded from story to story, ending in the great French Revolution.

PRICE     50 CENTS.

New York Labor News Co.

2, 4 & 6 New Reade St., New York, N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PILGRIM'S SHELL

----OR----

FERGAN THE QUARRYMAN

By Eugene Sue.

Translated By Daniel De Leon.

283 pp., on fine book paper, cloth 75 cents.

This great historical story by the eminent French writer is one of the majestic series that
cover the leading and successive episodes of the history of the human race. The novel treats
of the feudal system, the first Crusade and the rise of the Communes in France. It is the only
translation into English of this masterpiece of Sue.

The New York Sun says:

Eugene Sue wrote a romance which seems to have disappeared in a curious fashion, called "Les
Mysteres du Peuple." It is the story of a Gallic family through the ages, told in successive
episodes, and, so far as we have been able to read it, is fully as interesting as "The Wandering
Jew" or "The Mysteries of Paris." The French edition is pretty hard to find, and only parts
have been translated into English. We don't know the reason. One medieval episode, telling
of the struggle of the communes for freedom, is now translated by Mr. Daniel De Leon, under
the title "The Pilgrim's Shell" (New York Labor News Co.). We trust the success of his effort
may be such as to lead him to translate the rest of the romance. It will be the first time
the feat has been done in English.

       *       *       *       *       *

Woman Under Socialism

By August Bebel

Translated from the Original German of the Thirty-third Edition by Daniel De Leon, Editor of
the New York Daily People, with translator's preface and foot notes.

Cloth, 400 pages, with pen drawing of the author.

Price, $1.00

The complete emancipation of woman, and her complete equality with man is the final goal of
our social development, whose realization no power on earth can prevent;--and this realization
is possible only by a social change that shall abolish the rule of man over man--hence also
of capitalists over working-men. Only then will the human race reach its highest development.
The "Golden Age" that man has been dreaming of for thousands of years, and after which they
have been longing, will have come at last. Class rule will have reached its end for all time,
and along with it, the rule of man over woman.

CONTENTS:

