Bills guaranteeing the Indians their lands, justice, and personal freedom continued to pass.
The acts freely admitted that previous guarantees to this effect had been ineffective and that
"manie English doe still intrench upon the said Indians' land," which the Assembly conceived
to be "contrary to justice, and the true intent of the English plantation in this country."
Nevertheless attempts to legislate justice for the Indians continued. It could not be done.
The power of the Assembly's acts was not equal to the power of the frontiersmen's muskets.
However, the acts of the Assembly were not without effect, and in many cases served their purpose.
One of the most notable acts of this Assembly provided that no grants of land should be made
to any Englishman in the future until the Indians had first been guaranteed fifty acres for
each bowman. The good intent of this act seems to have been a direct consequence of the practice
that had arisen in the preceding years of granting patents to Englishmen for land occupied
by the Indians. It was an attempt to make sure that the Indians would not be wholly dispossessed
to satisfy the land hunger of the English.

PARLIAMENTARY GOVERNORS, 1652-1659

Early writers on Virginia history tended to overemphasize how completely affairs in Virginia
during the Commonwealth and Protectorate periods were in the hands of the House of Burgesses.
Still, the House did assume to itself many of the powers of government in the period and asserted
its ultimate authority in all other matters. It took this position out of necessity, and always
with the proviso that, should instructions come from the supreme power in England, it would
obey them.

The first Governor under the Commonwealth, Richard Bennett, was appointed by an act of Assembly
on April 30, 1652, his term to last for one year or until the following meeting of the Assembly,
with the further proviso that the appointment should be in effect "untill the further pleasures
of the states be knowne." Bennett, a planter of Nansemond County, was a Puritan in his religious
outlook and was one of those who had invited New England to send ministers to Virginia in the
early 1640's. When Parliament decided to conquer the colony in 1651 it appointed him one of
the commissioners for the enterprise. It is probable that the secret instructions issued to
Bennett by the Parliamentary authorities required him to come to some agreement with the Burgesses
on who should be Governor until a more formal commission for the office should issue from the
supreme power in England. However, as the years passed, and as instructions from England failed
to deal with Virginia's problems, the House of Burgesses asserted its prerogative more and more.

On March 31, 1655, Edward Digges was elected Governor by the Assembly to replace Bennett. Digges
was the son of Sir Dudley Digges, Master of the Rolls under Charles I. He came to Virginia
sometime before 1650 and bought a plantation on the York River, subsequently known as "Bellfield."
The plantation become famous for the quality of the tobacco grown there, and was also the scene
of Digges's efforts at silk production, in the culture of which he employed three Armenians.
When Digges decided to return to England in 1656, Samuel Mathews was elected to succeed him.
There is some confusion as to whether Governor Mathews was the man who so bedeviled Sir John
Harvey in the 1630's, or his son of the same name.

When Mathews and the Council attempted to dissolve the Assembly on April 1, 1658, the Burgesses
answered that the Governor's action was illegal, and that they would remain and complete their
work. Mathews refused to concede their point formally, though he declared his willingness to
allow them to continue in fact while the dispute was submitted to the Lord Protector in England.
The Burgesses declared his answer unsatisfactory. They demanded a specific acknowledgment that
the House remained undissolved. Mathews and the Council finally agreed to revoke the declaration
of dissolution, but still insisted on referring the dispute to the Lord Protector. The House
rejected this answer as well, asserting that the present power of Virginia resided in the Burgesses,
who were not dissolvable by any power extant in Virginia but themselves. They directed the
High Sheriff of James City County not to execute any warrant but from the Speaker of the House.
In addition, they ordered Col. William Claiborne, the Secretary of the Council, to surrender
the records of the country into the hands of John Smith, the Speaker of the Assembly, on the
basis of the Burgesses' declaration to hold "supreame power of this country."

That the House of Burgesses did not mean its actions to be in defiance of the power that existed
in England, however, is shown by its agreement to proclaim Richard, son of Oliver Cromwell,
Lord Protector when the Governor sent down, at the March 1659 session, an official letter from
His Highness' Council requiring that it be done. Immediately after agreeing to proclaim Richard,
the Burgesses decided to address the new Lord Protector for confirmation of the privilege granted
to the Assembly, perhaps under the terms of Bennett's secret instructions, to elect its own
officers. Although the Speaker of the House assured the Burgesses that the Governor was willing
to join them in such a request, some of the Burgesses expressed a desire to hear the assurance
from the Governor's own lips. He promised to join them in requesting confirmation of these
privileges from His Highness.

The Assembly, at this same session, passed an act electing Mathews Governor again for two years
"and then the Grand Assembly to elect a Governour as they shall think fitt." The act was to
be in force "until his Highness pleasure be further signified." William Claiborne was appointed
Secretary of State on his acknowledgment that he received the place from the Assembly, and
with the proviso that he should continue Secretary until the next Assembly or until the Lord
Protector's pleasure should be further signified to the colony.

The Assembly of 1659 marks the high water point of local government in Virginia. Not only were
the Burgesses supreme in matters of general legislation, compelling the Governor and Secretary
to bow to their sovereign power, but in their home counties affairs were conducted much as
the local justices saw fit. The Assembly of 1659 even authorized free trade with the Indians
by anyone in any goods--even guns and ammunition. Never before had regulation on a point of
such vital interest to the security of the colony been so utterly abandoned.

RECALL OF SIR WILLIAM BERKELEY BY THE ASSEMBLY, 1659-1660

Soon after the Assembly of March 1659 ended, Richard Cromwell resigned the reins of government
in England. The English nation was again plunged into turmoil. Letters arriving in Virginia
spoke of the people divided "some for one Government some for another." The prospect of London
"burned into Ashes and the streets running with blood" was held a likely outcome of the divisions.

In the midst of this troublous situation, Governor Mathews died. The next Assembly met in March
1660. In a move that has astonished historians since that time it asked Sir William Berkeley,
the royal Governor whom its former leaders had deposed, to govern Virginia again. No royal
banners were unfurled; Charles II was not proclaimed King. The House of Burgesses, holding
the supreme power in the colony, merely offered the governorship to the man who had been universally
admired for his justice, humanity, and willingness to sacrifice his own interest to that of
the colony.

Berkeley had been unwilling to disavow his loyalty to the Crown in 1652 and he was not prepared
to do so now. He replied to the Burgesses' invitation by saying that he would not dare to offend
the King by accepting a commission to govern from any power in England opposed to him. He urged
them to choose instead a more vigorous man from amongst their own number. But he did offer
to accept the governorship directly from the House of Burgesses if the Council would concur
with the Burgesses in offering it to him. He promised that if thereafter any supreme power
in England succeeded in re-establishing its authority in Virginia he would immediately lay
down his commission and "will live most submissively obedient to any power God shall set over
me, as the experience of eight yeares have shewed I have done." He would not refuse their call,
he wrote, if they accepted his conditions, for "I should be worthily thought hospitall mad,
if I would not change povertie for wealth,--contempt for honor."

The Council on March 21, 1660, unanimously concurred in the Burgesses' choice of Berkeley as
Governor, and the King's loyal servant was thereupon installed in the office.

Some historians have seen the election of Berkeley as the signal for a royalist purge of the
Parliamentary influences that were thought to have existed in the colony since 1652. A study
of the membership of the House of Burgesses, Council, and county courts, however, shows a continuity
of membership which extends from before the Parliamentary seizure of the colony until after
the restoration of King Charles II. The evidence suggests that there was no violent division
between royalists and Parliamentarians in Virginia. The people were Virginians first and royalists
or Parliamentarians second. The solidarity of their political interests was a harbinger of
the American independence that was slowly to mature in the next century.

On May 29, 1660, the birthday of Charles II, that monarch returned to London and was restored
to the throne of England. Word of the restoration was received in Virginia in the fall, and
Berkeley ordered the sheriffs and chief officers of all counties to proclaim Charles II King
of England, and to cause all writs and warrants from that time on to issue in His Majesty's
name. The Assembly of March 1661, taking into consideration the fact that the colony, by submitting
to the "execrable power" of the Parliamentary forces, had thereby become guilty of the crimes
of that power, enacted that January 30, the day Charles I was beheaded, should "be annually
solemnized with fasting and prayers that our sorrowes may expiate our crime and our teares
wash away our guilt." Another act declared May 29, the day of Charles II's birth and restoration,
a holy day to be annually celebrated "in testimony of our thankfulnesse and joy."

Thus ended the brief period in which Virginia's government was turned upside down and permanent
alteration caused in her relations with England. Although the King once more became the symbol
of the unity of the colony and the mother country, the royal prerogative would never again
be blindly accepted by the people of either place. Larger developments in the economic, social,
and intellectual spheres were bringing to an end the era of all-powerful Kings. Power had descended
to the lower ranks of society, and that power was beginning to be brought into play.

