"

"Is it?"

"It's a seraphic song," continued Lige.

"No!" exclaimed his friend; then, shaking his head, he sighed: "Well, it's mighty sweet."

The song was suddenly woven into laughter in the unseen chamber, and the lights in the windows
went out, and a small lady and a tall lady and a thin old man, all three laughing and talking
happily, came down and drove off in the Briscoe buckboard. The little crowd dispersed quietly;
Lige Willetts plucked to his horse and cantered away to overtake the buckboard; William Todd
took his courage between his teeth, and, the song ringing in his ears, made a desperate resolve
to call upon Miss Bardlock that evening, in spite of its being a week day, and Caleb Parker
gently and stammeringly asked Cynthia if she would wait till he shut up the shop, and let him
walk home with her and Bud.

Soon the Square was quiet as before, and there was naught but peace under the big stars of July.

That day the news had come that Harkless, after weeks of alternate improvement and relapse,
hazardously lingering in the borderland of shadows, had passed the crucial point and was convalescent.
His recovery was assured. But from their first word of him, from the message that he was found
and was alive, none of the people of Carlow had really doubted it. They are simple country
people, and they know that God is good.

CHAPTER XV. NETTLES

Two men who have been comrades and classmates at the Alma Mater of John Harkless and Tom Meredith;
two who have belonged to the same dub and roomed in the same entry; who have pooled their clothes
and money in a common stock for either to draw on; who have shared the fortunes of athletic
war, triumphing together, sometimes with an intense triumphancy; two men who were once boys
getting hazed together, hazing in no unkindly fashion in their turn, always helping each other
to stuff brains the night before an examination and to blow away the suffocating statistics
like foam the night after; singing, wrestling, dancing, laughing, succeeding together, through
the four kindest years of life; two such brave companions, meeting in the after years, are
touchingly tender and caressive of each other, but the tenderness takes the shy, United States
form of insulting epithets, and the caresses are blows. If John Harkless had been in health,
uninjured and prosperous, Tom Meredith could no more have thrown himself on his knees beside
him and called him "old friend" than he could have danced on the slack-wire.

One day they thought the patient sleeping; the nurse fanned him softly, and Meredith had stolen
in and was sitting by the cot. One of Harkless's eyes had been freed of the bandage, and, when
Tom came in, it was closed; but, by and by, Meredith became aware that the unbandaged eye had
opened and that it was suffused with a pathetic moisture; yet it twinkled with a comprehending
light, and John knew that it was his old Tom Meredith who was sitting beside him, with the
air of having sat there very often before. But this bald, middle-aged young man, not without
elegance, yet a prosperous burgher for all that--was this the slim, rollicking broth of a boy
whose thick auburn hair used to make one streak of flame as he spun around the bases on a home
run? Without doubt it was the stupendous fact, wrought by the alchemy of seven years.

For, though seven years be a mere breath in the memories of the old, it is a long transfiguration
to him whose first youth is passing, and who finds unsolicited additions accruing to some parts
of his being and strange deprivations in others, and upon whom the unhappy realization begins
to be borne in, that his is no particular case, and that he of all the world is not to be spared,
but, like his forbears, must inevitably wriggle in the disguising crucible of time. And, though
men accept it with apparently patient humor, the first realization that people do grow old,
and that they do it before they have had time to be young, is apt to come like a shock.

Perhaps not even in the interminable months of Carlow had Harkless realized the length of seven
years so keenly as he did when he beheld his old friend at his bedside. How men may be warped
apart in seven years, especially in the seven years between twenty-three and thirty! At the
latter age you may return to the inseparable of seven years before and speak not the same language;
you find no heartiness to carry on with each other after half an hour. Not so these classmates,
who had known each other to the bone.

Ah, yes, it was Tom Meredith, the same lad, in spite of his masquerade of flesh; and Helen
was right: Tom had not forgotten.

"It's the old horse-thief!" John murmured, tremulously.

"You go plumb to thunder," answered Meredith between gulps.

When he was well enough, they had long talks; and at other times Harkless lay by the window,
and breathed deep of the fresh air, while Meredith attended to his correspondence for him,
and read the papers to him. But there was one phenomenon of literature the convalescent insisted
upon observing for himself, and which he went over again and again, to the detriment of his
single unswathed eye, and this was the Carlow "Herald."

The first letter he had read to him was one from Fisbee stating that the crippled forces left
in charge had found themselves almost distraught in their efforts to carry on the paper (as
their chief might conclude for himself on perusal of the issues of the first fortnight of his
absence), and they had made bold to avail themselves of the services of a young relative of
the writer's from a distant city--a capable journalist, who had no other employment for the
present, and who had accepted the responsibilities of the "Herald" temporarily. There followed
a note from Parker, announcing that Mr. Fisbee's relative was a bird, and was the kind to make
the "Herald" hum. They hoped Mr. Harkless would approve of their bespeaking the new hand on
the sheet; the paper must have suspended otherwise. Harkless, almost overcome by his surprise
that Fisbee possessed a relative, dictated a hearty and grateful indorsement of their action,
and, soon after, received a typewritten rejoinder, somewhat complicated in the reading, because
of the numerous type errors and their corrections. The missive was signed "H. Fisbee," in a
strapping masculine hand that suggested six feet of enterprise and muscle spattering ink on
its shirt sleeves.

John groaned and fretted over the writhings of the "Herald's" headless fortnight, but, perusing
the issues produced under the domination of H. Fisbee, he started now and then, and chuckled
at some shrewd felicities of management, or stared, puzzled, over an oddity, but came to a
feeling of vast relief; and, when the question of H. Fisbee's salary was settled and the tenancy
assured, he sank into a repose of mind. H. Fisbee might be an eccentric fellow, but he knew
his business, and, apparently, he knew something of other business as well, for he wrote at
length concerning the Carlow oil fields, urging Harkless to take shares in Mr. Watts's company
while the stock was very low, two wells having been sunk without satisfactory results. H. Fisbee
explained with exceeding technicality his reasons for believing that the third well would strike
oil.

But with his ease of mind regarding the "Herald," Harkless found himself possessed by apathy.
He fretted no longer to get back to Plattville. With the prospect of return it seemed an emptiness
glared at him from hollow sockets, and the thought of the dreary routine he must follow when
he went back gave him the same faint nausea he had felt the evening after the circus. And,
though it was partly the long sweat of anguish which had benumbed him, his apathy was pierced,
at times, by a bodily horror of the scene of his struggle. At night he faced the grotesque
masks of the Cross-Roads men and the brutal odds again; over and over he felt the blows, and
clapped his hand to where the close fire of Bob Skillett's pistol burned his body.

And, except for the release from pain, he rejoiced less and less in his recovery. He remembered
a tedious sickness of his childhood and how beautiful he had thought the world, when he began
to get well, how electric the open air blowing in at the window, how green the smile of earth,
and how glorious to live and see the open day again. He had none of that feeling now. No pretty
vision came again near his bed, and he beheld his convalescence as a mistake. He had come to
a jumping-off place in his life--why had they not let him jump? What was there left but the
weary plod, plod, and dust of years?

He could have gone back to Carlow in better spirit if it had not been for the few dazzling
hours of companionship which had transformed it to a paradise, but, gone, left a desert. She,
by the sight of her, had made him wish to live, and now, that he saw her no more, she made
him wish to die. How little she had cared for him, since she told him she did not care, when
he had not meant to ask her. He was weary, and at last he longed to find the line of least
resistance and follow it; he had done hard things for a long time, but now he wanted to do
something easy. Under the new genius--who was already urging that the paper should be made
a daily--the "Herald" could get along without him; and the "White-Caps" would bother Carlow
no longer; and he thought that Kedge Halloway, an honest man, if a dull one, was sure to be
renominated for Congress at the district convention which was to meet at Plattville in September--these
were his responsibilities, and they did not fret him. Everything was all right. There was only
one thought which thrilled him: his impression that she had come to the hospital to see him
was not a delusion; she had really been there--as a humane, Christian person, he said to himself.
One day he told Meredith of his vision, and Tom explained that it was no conjuration of fever.

"But I thought she'd gone abroad," said Harkless, staring.

"They had planned to," answered his friend. "They gave it up for some reason. Uncle Henry decided
that he wasn't strong enough for the trip, or something."

"Then--is she--is she here?"

"No; Helen is never here in summer. When she came back from Plattville, she went north, somewhere,
to join people she had promised, I think." Meredith had as yet no inkling or suspicion that
his adopted cousin had returned to Plattville. What he told Harkless was what his aunt had
told him, and he accepted it as the truth.

Mrs. Sherwood (for she was both Mr. and Mrs. Sherwood) had always considered Fisbee an enigmatic
rascal, and she regarded Helen's defection to him in the light of a family scandal to be hushed
up, as well as a scalding pain to be borne. Some day the unkind girl-errant would "return to
her wisdom and her duty"; meanwhile, the less known about it the better.

Meredith talked very little to Harkless of his cousin, beyond lightly commenting on the pleasure
and oddity of their meeting, and telling him of her friendly anxiety about his recovery; he
said she had perfect confidence from the first that he would recover. Harkless had said a word
or two in his delirium and a word or two out of it, and these, with once a sudden brow of suffering,
and a difference Meredith felt in Helen's manner when they stood together by the sick man's
bedside, had given the young man a strong impression, partly intuitive, that in spite of the
short time the two had known each other, something had happened between them at Plattville,
and he ventured a guess which was not far from the truth. Altogether, the thing was fairly
plain--a sad lover is not so hard to read--and Meredith was sorry, for they were the two people
he liked best on earth.

The young man carried his gay presence daily to the hospital, where Harkless now lay in a pleasant
room of his own, and he tried to keep his friend cheery, which was an easy matter on the surface,
for the journalist turned ever a mask of jokes upon him; but it was not hard for one who liked
him as Meredith did to see through to the melancholy underneath. After his one reference to
Helen, John was entirely silent of her, and Meredith came to feel that both would be embarrassed
if occasion should rise and even her name again be mentioned between them.

He did not speak of his family connection with Mr. Fisbee to the invalid, for, although the
connection was distant, the old man was, in a way, the family skeleton, and Meredith had a
strong sense of the decency of reserve in such a matter. There was one thing Fisbee's shame
had made the old man unable not to suppress when he told Parker his story; the wraith of a
torrid palate had pursued him from his youth, and the days of drink and despair from which
Harkless had saved him were not the first in his life. Meredith wondered as much as did Harkless
where Fisbee had picked up the journalistic "young relative" who signed his extremely business-like
missives in such a thundering hand. It was evident that the old man was grateful to his patron,
but it did not occur to Meredith that Fisbee's daughter might have an even stronger sense of
gratitude, one so strong that she could give all her young strength to work for the man who
had been good to her father.

There came a day in August when Meredith took the convalescent from the hospital in a victoria,
and installed him in his own home. Harkless's clothes hung on his big frame limply; however,
there was a drift of light in his eyes as they drove slowly through the pretty streets of Rouen.
The bandages and splints and drugs and swathings were all gone now, and his sole task was to
gather strength. The thin face was sallow no longer; it was the color of evening shadows; indeed
he lay among the cushions seemingly no more than a gaunt shadow of the late afternoon, looking
old and gray and weary. They rolled along abusing each other, John sometimes gratefully threatening
his friend with violence.

The victoria passed a stone house with wide lawns and an inhospitable air of wealth and importunate
rank; over the sward two peacocks swung, ambulating like caravals in a green sea; and one expected
a fine lady to come smiling and glittering from the door. Oddly enough, though he had never
seen the place before, it struck Harkless with a sense of familiarity. "Who lives there?" he
asked abruptly.

"Who lives there? On the left? Why that--that is the Sherwood place," Meredith answered, in
a tone which sounded as if he were not quite sure of it, but inclined to think his information
correct. Harkless relapsed into silence.

Meredith's home was a few blocks further up the same street; a capacious house in the Western
fashion of the Seventies. In front, on the lawn, there was a fountain with a leaping play of
water; maples and shrubbery were everywhere; and here and there stood a stiff sentinel of Lombardy
poplar. It was all cool and incongruous and comfortable; and, on the porch, sheltered from
publicity by a multitude of palms and flowering plants, a white-jacketed negro appeared with
a noble smile and a more important tray, whereon tinkled bedewed glasses and a crystal pitcher,
against whose sides the ice clinked sweetly. There was a complement of straws.

When they had helped him to an easy chair on the porch, Harkless whistled luxuriously. "Ah,
my bachelor!" he exclaimed, as he selected a straw.

"'Who would fardels bear?'" rejoined Mr. Meredith. Then came to the other a recollection of
an auburn-haired ball player on whom the third strike had once been called while his eyes wandered
tenderly to the grandstand, where the prettiest girl of that commencement week was sitting.

"Have you forgot the 'Indian Princess'?" he asked.

"You're a dull old person," Tom laughed. "Haven't you discovered that 'tis they who forget
us? And why shouldn't they? Do we remember well?--anybody except just us two, I mean, of course."

"I've a notion we do, sometimes."

The other set his glass on the tray, and lit his cigarette. "Yes; when we're unsuccessful.
Then I think we do."

"That may be true."

"Of course it is. If a lady wishes to make an impression on me that is worth making, let her
let me make none on her."

"You think it is always our vanity?"

"Analyze it as your revered Thomas does and you shall reach the same conclusion. Let a girl
reject you and--" Meredith broke off, cursing himself inwardly, and, rising, cried gaily: "What
profiteth it a man if he gain the whole wisdom in regard to women and loseth not his own heart?
And neither of us is lacking a heart--though it may be; one can't tell, one's self; one has
to find out about that from some girl. At least, I'm rather sure of mine; it's difficult to
give a tobacco-heart away; it's drugged on the market. I'm going to bring out the dogs; I'm
spending the summer at home just to give them daily exercise."

This explanation of his continued presence in Rouen struck John as quite as plausible as Meredith's
more seriously alleged reasons for not joining his mother and sister, at Winter Harbor. (He
possessed a mother, and, as he explained, he had also sisters to satiety, in point of numbers.)
Harkless knew that Tom had stayed to look after him; and he thought there never was so poor
a peg as himself whereon to hang the warm mantle of such a friendship. He knew that other mantles
of affection and kindliness hung on that self-same peg, for he had been moved by the letters
and visits from Carlow people, and he had heard the story of their descent upon the hospital,
and of the march on the Cross-Roads. Many a good fellow, too, had come to see him during his
better days--from Judge Briscoe, openly tender and solicitous, to the embarrassed William Todd,
who fiddled at his hat and explained that, being as he was in town on business (a palpable
fiction) he thought he'd look in to see if "they was any word would wish to be sent down to
our city." The good will the sick man had from every one touched him, and made him feel unworthy,
and he could see nothing he had done to deserve it. Mr. Meredith could (and would not--openly,
at least) have explained to him that it made not a great deal of difference what he did; it
was what people thought he was.

His host helped him upstairs after dinner, and showed him the room prepared for his occupancy.
Harkless sank, sighing with weakness, into a deep chair, and Meredith went to a window-seat
and stretched himself out for a smoke and chat.

"Doesn't it beat your time," he said, cheerily, "to think of what's become of all the old boys?
They turn up so differently from what we expected, when they turn up at all. We sized them
up all right so far as character goes, I fancy, but we couldn't size up the chances of life.
Take poor old Pickle Haines: who'd have dreamed Pickle would shoot himself over a bankruptcy?
I dare say that wasn't all of it--might have been cherchez la femme, don't you think? What
do you make of Pickle's case, John?"

There was no answer. Harkless's chair was directly in front of the mantel-piece, and upon the
carved wooden shelf, amongst tobacco-jars and little curios, cotillion favors and the like,
there were scattered a number of photographs. One of these was that of a girl who looked straight
out at you from a filigree frame; there was hardly a corner of the room where you could have
stood without her clear, serious eyes seeming to rest upon yours.

"Cherchez la femme?" repeated Tom, puffing unconsciously. "Pickle was a good fellow, but he
had the deuce of an eye for a girl. Do you remember--" He stopped short, and saw the man and
the photograph looking at each other. Too late, he unhappily remembered that he had meant,
and forgotten, to take that photograph out of the room before he brought Harkless in. Now he
would have to leave it; and Helen Sherwood was not the sort of girl, even in a flat presentment,
to be continually thrown in the face of a man who had lost her. And it always went hard, Tom
reflected, with men who stretched vain hands to Helen, only to lose her. But there was one,
he thought, whose outstretched hands might not prove so vain. Why couldn't she have cared for
John Harkless? Deuce take the girl, did she want to marry an emperor? He looked at Harkless,
and pitied him with an almost tearful compassion. A feverish color dwelt in the convalescent's
cheek; the apathy that had dulled his eyes was there no longer; instead, they burned with a
steady fire. The image returned his unwavering gaze with inscrutable kindness.

"You heard that Pickle shot himself, didn't you?" Meredith asked. There was no answer; John
did not hear him.

"Do you know that poor Jeny Haines killed himself, last March?" Tom said sharply.

There was only silence in the room. Meredith got up and rattled some tongs in the empty fireplace,
but the other did not move or notice him in any way.

Meredith set the tongs down, and went quietly out of the room, leaving his friend to that mysterious
interview.

When he came back, after a remorseful cigarette in the yard, Harkless was still sitting, motionless,
looking up at the photograph above the mantel-piece.

They drove abroad every day, at first in the victoria, and, as Harkless's strength began to
come back, in a knock-about cart of Tom's, a light trail of blue smoke floating back wherever
the two friends passed. And though the country editor grew stronger in the pleasant, open city,
Meredith felt that his apathy and listlessness only deepened, and he suspected that, in Harkless's
own room, where the photograph reigned, the languor departed for the time, making way for a
destructive fire. Judge Briscoe, paying a second visit to Rouen, told Tom, in an aside, that
their friend did not seem to be the same man. He was altered and aged beyond belief, the old
gentleman whispered sadly.

Meredith decided that his guest needed enlivening--something to take him out of himself; he
must be stirred up to rub against people once more. And therefore, one night he made a little
company for him: two or three apparently betrothed very young couples, for whom it was rather
dull, after they had looked their fill of Harkless (it appeared that every one was curious
to see him); and three or four married young couples, for whom the entertainment seemed rather
diverting in an absent-minded way (they had the air of remembering that they had forgotten
the baby); and three or four bachelors, who seemed contented in any place where they were allowed
to smoke; and one widower, whose manner indicated that any occasion whatever was gay enough
for him; and four or five young women, who (Meredith explained to John) were of their host's
age, and had been "left over" out of the set he grew up with; and for these the modest party
took on a hilarious and chipper character. "It is these girls that have let the men go by because
they didn't see any good enough; they're the jolly souls!" the one widower remarked, confidentially.
"They've been at it a long while, and they know how, and they're light-hearted as robins. They
have more fun than people who have responsibilities."

All of these lively demoiselles fluttered about Harkless with commiserative pleasantries, and,
in spite of his protestations, made him recline in the biggest and deepest chair on the porch,
where they surfeited him with kindness and grouped about him with extra cushions and tenderness
for a man who had been injured. No one mentioned the fact that he had been hurt; it was not
spoken of, though they wished mightily he would tell them the story they had read luridly in
the public prints. They were very good to him. One of them, in particular, a handsome, dark,
kind-eyed girl, constituted herself at once his cicerone in Rouen gossip and his waiting-maid.
She sat by him, and saw that his needs (and his not-needs, too) were supplied and oversupplied;
she could not let him move, and anticipated his least wish, though he was now amply able to
help himself; and she fanned him as if he were a dying consumptive.

They sat on Meredith's big porch in the late twilight and ate a substantial refection, and
when this was finished, a buzz of nonsense rose from all quarters, except the remote corners
where the youthful affianced ones had defensively stationed themselves behind a rampart of
plants. They, having eaten, had naught to do, and were only waiting a decent hour for departure.
Laughing voices passed up and down the street, and mingled with the rhythmic plashing of Meredith's
fountain, and, beyond the shrubberies and fence, one caught glimpses of the light dresses of
women moving to and fro, and of people sitting bareheaded on neighboring lawns to enjoy the
twilight. Now and then would pass, with pipe and dog, the beflanneled figure of an undergraduate,
home for vacation, or a trio of youths in knickerbockers, or a band of young girls, or both
trio and band together; and from a cross street, near by, came the calls and laughter of romping
children and the pulsating whirr of a lawn-mower: This sound Harkless remarked as a ceaseless
accompaniment to life in Rouen; even in the middle of the night there was always some unfortunate,
cutting grass.

When the daylight was all gone, and the stars had crept out, strolling negroes patrolled the
sidewalks, thrumming mandolins and guitars, and others came and went, singing, making the night
Venetian. The untrained, joyous voices, chording eerily in their sweet, racial minors, came
on the air, sometimes from far away. But there swung out a chorus from fresh, Aryan throats,
in the house south of Meredith's:

        "Where, oh where, are the grave old Seniors?
         Safe, now, in the wide, wide world!"

"Doesn't that thrill you, boy?" said Meredith, joining the group about Harkless's chair. "Those
fellows are Sophomores, class of heaven knows what. Aren't you feeling a fossil. Father Abraham?"

A banjo chattered on the lawn to the north, and soon a mixed chorus of girls and boys sang
from there:

       "O, 'Arriet, I'm waiting, waiting alone out 'ere."

Then a piano across the street sounded the dearthful harmonies of Chopin's Funeral March.

"You may take your choice," remarked Meredith, flicking a spark over the rail in the ash of
his cigar, "Chopping or Chevalier."

"Chopin, my friend," said the lady who had attached herself to Harkless. She tapped Tom's shoulder
with her fan and smiled, graciously corrective.

"Thank you, Miss Hinsdale," he answered, gratefully. "And as I, perhaps, had better say, since
otherwise there might be a pause and I am the host, we have a wide selection. In addition to
what is provided at present, I predict that within the next ten minutes a talented girl who
lives two doors south will favor us with the Pilgrims' Chorus, piano arrangement, break down
in the middle, and drift, into 'Rastus on Parade,' while a double quartette of middle-aged
colored gentlemen under our Jim will make choral offering in our own back yard."

"My dear Tom," exclaimed Miss Hinsdale, "you forget Wetherford Swift!"

"I could stand it all," put forth the widower, "if it were not for Wetherford Swift."

"When is Miss Sherwood coming home?" asked one of the ladies. "Why does she stay away and leave
him to his sufferings?"

"Us to his sufferings," substituted a bachelor. "He is just beginning; listen."

Through all the other sounds of music, there penetrated from an unseen source, a sawish, scraped,
vibration of catgut, pathetic, insistent, painstaking, and painful beyond belief.

"He is in a terrible way to-night," said the widower.

Miss Hinsdale laughed. "Worse every night. The violinist is young Wetherford Swift," she explained
to Harkless. "He is very much in love, and it doesn't agree with him. He used to be such a
pleasant boy, but last winter he went quite mad over Helen Sherwood, Mr. Meredith's cousin,
our beauty, you know--I am so sorry she isn't here; you'd be interested in meeting her, I'm
sure--and he took up the violin."

"It is said that his family took up chloroform at the same time," said the widower.

"His music is a barometer," continued the lady, "and by it the neighborhood nightly observes
whether Miss Sherwood has been nice to him or not."

"It is always exceedingly plaintive," explained another.

"Except once," rejoined Miss Hinsdale. "He played jigs when she came home from somewhere or
other, in June."

"It was Tosti's 'Let Me Die,' the very next evening," remarked the widower.

"Ah," said one of the bachelors, "but his joy was sadder for us than his misery. Hear him now."

"I think he means it for 'What's this dull town to me,'" observed another, with some rancor.
"I would willingly make the town sufficiently exciting for him--"

"If there were not an ordinance against the hurling of missiles," finished the widower.

The piano executing the funeral march ceased to execute, discomfited by the persistent and
overpowering violin; the banjo and the coster-songs were given over; even the collegians' music
was defeated; and the neighborhood was forced to listen to the dauntless fiddle, but not without
protest, for there came an indignant, spoken chorus from the quarter whence the college songs
had issued: "Ya-a-ay! Wetherford, put it away! She'll come back!" The violin played on.

"We all know each other here, you see, Mr. Harkless," Miss Hinsdale smiled benignantly.

"They didn't bother Mr. Wetherford Swift," said the widower. "Not that time. Do you hear him?--'Could
ye come back to me, Douglas'?"

"Oh, but it isn't absence that is killing him and his friends," cried one of the young women.
"It is Brainard Macauley."

"That is a mistake," said Tom Meredith, as easily as he could. "There goes Jim's double quartette.
Listen, and you will hear them try to----"

But the lady who had mentioned Brainard Macauley cried indignantly: "You try to change the
subject the moment it threatens to be interesting. They were together everywhere until the
day she went away; they danced and 'sat out' together through the whole of one country-club
party; they drove every afternoon; they took long walks, and he was at the Sherwoods' every
evening of her last week in town. 'That is a mistake!'"

"I'm afraid it looks rather bleak for Wetherford," said the widower. "I went up to the 'Journal'
office on business, one day, and there sat Miss Sherwood in Macauley's inner temple, chatting
with a reporter, while Brainard finished some work."

"Helen is eccentric," said the former speaker, "but she's not quite that eccentric, unless
they were engaged. It is well understood that they will announce it in the fall."

Miss Hinsdale kindly explained to Harkless that Brainard Macauley was the editor of the "Rouen
Morning Journal"--"a very distinguished young man, not over twenty-eight, and perfectly wonderful."
Already a power to be accounted with in national politics, he was "really a tremendous success,"
and sure to go far; "one of those delicate-looking men, who are yet so strong you know they
won't let the lightning hurt you." It really looked as if Helen Sherwood (whom Harkless really
ought to meet) had actually been caught in the toils at tet, those toils wherein so many luckless
youths had lain enmeshed for her sake. He must meet Mr. Macauley, too, the most interesting
man in Rouen. After her little portrait of him, didn't Mr. Harkless agree that it looked really
pretty dull for Miss Sherwood's other lovers?

Mr. Harkless smiled, and agreed that it did indeed. She felt a thrill of compassion for him,
and her subsequent description of the pathos of his smile was luminous. She said it was natural
that a man who had been through so much suffering from those horrible "White-Cappers" should
have a smile that struck into your heart like a knife.

Despite all that Meredith could do, and after his notorious effort to shift the subject he
could do very little, the light prattle ran on about Helen Sherwood and Brainard Macauley.
Tom abused himself for his wild notion of cheering his visitor with these people who had no
talk, and who, if they drifted out of commonplace froth, had no medium to float them unless
they sailed the currents, of local personality, and he mentally upbraided them for a set of
gossiping ninnies. They conducted a conversation (if it could be dignified by a name) of which
no stranger could possibly partake, and which, by a hideous coincidence, was making his friend
writhe, figuratively speaking, for Harkless sat like a fixed shadow. He uttered scarcely a
word the whole evening, though Meredith knew that his guests would talk about him enthusiastically,
the next day, none the less. The journalist's silence was enforced by the topics; but what
expression and manner the light allowed them to see was friendly and receptive, as though he
listened to brilliant suggestions. He had a nice courtesy, and Miss Hinsdale felt continually
that she was cleverer than usual this evening, and no one took his silence to be churlish,
though they all innocently wondered why he did not talk more; however, it was probable that
a man who had been so interestingly and terribly shot would be rather silent for a time afterward.

That night, when Harkless had gone to bed Meredith sat late by his own window calling himself
names. He became aware of a rhomboidal patch of yellow light on a wall of foliage without,
and saw that it came from his friend's window. After dubious consideration, he knocked softly
on the door.

"Come."

He went in. Harkless was in bed, and laughed faintly as Meredith entered. "I--I'm fearing you'll
have to let me settle your gas bill, Tom. I'm not like I used to be, quite. I find--since--since
that business, I can't sleep without a light. I rather get the--the horrors in the dark."

Incoherently, Meredith made a compassionate exclamation and turned to go, and, as he left the
room, his eye fell upon the mantel-piece. The position of the photographs had been altered,
and the picture of the girl who looked straight out at you was gone. The mere rim of it was
visible behind the image of an old gentleman with a sardonic mouth.

An hour later, Tom came back, and spoke through the closed door. "Boy, don't you think you
can get to sleep now?"

"Yes, Tom. It's all right. You get to bed. Nothing troubles me."

Meredith spent the next day in great tribulation and perplexity; he felt that something had
to be done, but what to do he did not know. He still believed that a "stirring-up" was what
Harkless needed--not the species of "stirring-up" that had taken place last night, but a diversion
which would divert. As they sat at dinner, a suggestion came to him and he determined to follow
it. He was called to the telephone, and a voice strange to his ear murmured in a tone of polite
deference: "A lady wishes to know if Mr. Meredith and his visitor intend being present at the
country-club this evening."

He had received the same inquiry from Miss Hinsdale on her departure the previous evening,
and had answered vaguely; hence he now rejoined:

"You are quite an expert ventriloquist, but you do not deceive me."

"I beg your pardon, sir," creaked the small articulation.

"This is Miss Hinsdale, isn't it?"

"No, sir. The lady wishes to know if you will kindly answer her question."

"Tell her, yes." He hung up the receiver, and returned to the table. "Some of Clara Hinsdale's
play," he explained. "You made a devastating impression on her, boy; you were wise enough not
to talk any, and she foolishly thought you were as interesting as you looked. We're going out
to a country-club dance. It's given for the devotees who stay here all summer and swear Rouen
is always cool; and nobody dances but me and the very young ones. It won't be so bad; you can
smoke anywhere, and there are little tables. We'll go."

"Thank you, Tom, you're so good to think of it, but----"

"But what?"

"Would you mind going alone? I find it very pleasant sitting on your veranda, or I'll get a book."

"Very well, if you don't want to go, I don't. I haven't had a dance for three months and I'm
still addicted to it. But of course----"

"I think I'd like to go." Harkless acquiesced at once, with a cheerful voice and a lifeless
eye, and the good Tom felt unaccountably mean in persisting.

They drove out into the country through mists like lakes, and found themselves part of a procession
of twinkling carriage-lights, and cigar sparks shining above open vehicles, winding along the
levels like a canoe fete on the water. In the entrance hall of the club-house they encountered
Miss Hinsdale, very handsome, large, and dark, elaborately beaming and bending toward them warmly.

"Who do you think is here?" she said.

"Gomez?" ventured Meredith.

"Helen Sherwood!" she cried. "Go and present Mr. Harkless before Brainard Macauley takes her
away to some corner."

CHAPTER XVI. PRETTY MARQUISE

The two friends walked through a sort of opera-bouffe to find her; music playing, a swaying
crowd, bright lights, bright eyes, pretty women, a glimpse of dancers footing it over a polished
floor in a room beyond--a hundred colors flashing and changing, as the groups shifted, before
the eye could take in the composition of the picture. A sudden thrill of exhilaration rioted
in John's pulses, and he trembled like a child before the gay disclosure of a Christmas tree.
Meredith swore to himself that he would not have known him for the man of five minutes agone.
Two small, bright red spots glowed in his cheeks; he held himself erect with head thrown back
and shoulders squared, and the idolizing Tom thought he looked as a king ought to look at the
acme of power and dominion. Miss Hinsdale's word in the hallway was the geniuses touch: a bent,
gray man of years--a word--and behold the Great John Harkless, the youth of elder days ripened
to his prime of wisdom and strength! People made way for them and whispered as they passed.
It had been years since John Harkless had been in the midst of a crowd of butterfly people;
everything seemed unreal, or like a ball in a play; presently the curtain would fall and close
the lights and laughter from his view, leaving only the echo of music. It was like a kaleidoscope
for color: the bouquets of crimson or white or pink or purple; the profusion of pretty dresses,
the brilliant, tender fabrics, and the handsome, foreshortened faces thrown back over white
shoulders in laughter; glossy raven hair and fair tresses moving in quick salutations; and
the whole gay shimmer of festal tints and rich artificialities set off against the brave green
of out-doors, for the walls were solidly adorned with forest branches, with, here and there
amongst them, a blood-red droop of beech leaves, stabbed in autumn's first skirmish with summer.
The night was cool, and the air full of flower smells, while harp, violin, and 'cello sent
a waltz-throb through it all.

They looked rapidly through several rooms and failed to find her indoors, and they went outside,
not exchanging a word, and though Harkless was a little lame, Tom barely kept up with his long
stride. On the verandas there were fairy lamps and colored incandescents over little tables,
where people sat chatting. She was not there. Beyond was a terrace, where a myriad of Oriental
lanterns outlined themselves clearly in fantastically shaped planes of scarlet and orange and
green against the blue darkness. Many couples and groups were scattered over the terrace, and
the young men paused on the steps, looking swiftly from group to group. She was not there.

"We haven't looked in the dancing-room," said Tom, looking at his companion rather sorrowfully.
John turned quickly and they reentered the house.

He had parted from her in the blackness of storm with only the flicker of lightning to show
her to him, but it was in a blaze of lights that he saw her again. The dance was just ended,
and she stood in a wide doorway, half surrounded by pretty girls and young men, who were greeting
her. He had one full look at her. She was leaning to them all, her arms full of flowers, and
she seemed the radiant centre of all the light and gaiety of the place. Even Meredith stopped
short and exclaimed upon her; for one never got used to her; and he remembered that whenever
he saw her after absence the sense of her beauty rushed over him anew. And he believed the
feeling on this occasion was keener than ever before, for she was prettier than he had ever
seen her.

"No wonder!" he cried; but Harkless did not understand. As they pressed forward, Meredith perceived
that they were only two more radii of a circle of youths, sprung from every direction as the
waltz ended, bearing down upon the common focus to secure the next dance. Harkless saw nothing
but that she stood there before him. He feared a little that every one might notice how he
was trembling, and he was glad of the many voices that kept them from hearing his heart knock
against his ribs. She saw him coming toward her, and nodded to him pleasantly, in just the
fashion in which she was bowing to half a dozen others, and at that a pang of hot pain went
through him like an arrow--an arrow poisoned with cordial, casual friendliness.

She extended her hand to him and gave him a smile that chilled him--it, was so conventionally
courteous and poised so nicely in the manner of society. He went hot and cold fast enough then,
for not less pleasantly in that manner did she exclaim: "I am very glad to see you, Mr. Harkless,
so extremely glad! And so delighted to find you looking strong again! Do tell me about all
our friends in Plattville. I should like to have a little chat with you some time. So good
of you to find me in this melee."

And with that she turned from the poor fellow to Meredith. "How do you do. Cousin Tom? I've
saved the next dance for you." Then she distributed words here and there and everywhere, amongst
the circle about her--pretty Marquise with a vengeance! "No, Mr. Swift, I shall not make a
card; you must come at the beginning of a dance if you want one. I cannot promise the next;
it is quite impossible. No, I did not go as far north as Mackinac. How do you do, Mr. Burlingame?--Yes,
quite an age;--no, not the next, I am afraid; nor the next;--I'm not keeping a card. Good evening,
Mr. Baird. No, not the next. Oh, thank you, Miss Hinsdale!--No, Mr. Swift, it is quite impossible--I'm
so sorry. Cousin, the music is commencing; this is ours."

As she took Meredith's arm, she handed her flowers to a gentleman beside her with the slightest
glance at the recipient; and the gesture and look made her partner heartsick for his friend;
it was so easy and natural and with the air of habit, and had so much of the manner with which
a woman hands things to a man who partakes of her inner confidences. Tom knew that Harkless
divined the gesture, as well as the identity of the gentleman. They started away, but she paused,
and turned to the latter. "Mr. Macauley, you must meet Mr. Harkless. We leave him in your care,
and you must see that he meets all the pretty girls--you are used to being nice to distinguished
strangers, you know."

Tom put his arm about her, and whirled her away, and Harkless felt as if a soft hand had dealt
him blow after blow in the face. Was this lady of little baffling forms and small cold graces
the girl who had been his kind comrade, the girl who stood with him by the blue tent-pole,
she who had run to him to save his life, she who walked at his side along the pike? The contrast
of these homely scenes made him laugh grimly. Was this she who had wept before him--was it
she who had been redolent of kindness so fragrantly natural and true--was it she who said she
"loved all these people very much, in spite of having known them only two days"?

He cried out upon himself for a fool. What was he in her eyes but a man who had needed to be
told that she did not love him! Had he not better--and more courteously to her--have avoided
the meeting which was necessarily an embarrassment to her? But no; he must rush like a Mohawk
till he found her and forced her to rebuff him, to veil her kindness in little manners, to
remind him that he put himself in the character of a rejected importunate. She had punished
him enough, perhaps a little too cruelly enough, in leaving him with the man to whom she handed
bouquets as a matter of course. And this man was one whose success had long been a trumpet
at his ear, blaring loudly of his own failure in the same career.

It had been several years since he first heard of the young editor of the Rouen "Journal,"
and nowadays almost everybody knew about Brainard Macauley. Outwardly, he was of no unusual
type: an American of affairs; slight, easy, yet alert; relaxed, yet sharp; neat, regular, strong;
a quizzical eye, a business chin, an ambitious head with soft, straight hair outlining a square
brow; and though he was "of a type," he was not commonplace, and one knew at once that he would
make a rattling fight to arrive where he was going.

It appeared that he had heard of Harkless, as well as the Carlow editor of him. They had a
few moments of shop, and he talked to Harkless as a brother craftsman, without the offense
of graciousness, and spoke of his pleasure in the meeting and of his relief at Harkless's recovery,
for, aside from the mere human feeling, the party needed him in Carlow--even if he did not
always prove himself "quite a vehement partisan." Macauley laughed. "But I'm not doing my duty,"
he said presently; "I was to present you to the pretty ones only, I believe. Will you designate
your preferred fashion of beauty? We serve all styles."

"Thank you," the other answered, hurriedly. "I met a number last night--quite a number, indeed."
He had seen them only in dim lights, however, and except Miss Hinsdale and the widower, had
not the faintest recognition of any of them, and he cut them all, except those two, one after
the other, before the evening was over; and this was a strange thing for a politician to do;
but he did it with such an innocent eye that they remembered the dark porch and forgave him.

"Shall we watch the dancing, then?" asked Macauley. Harkless was already watching part of it.

"If you will. I have not seen this sort for more than five years."

"It is always a treat, I think, and a constant proof that the older school of English caricaturists
didn't overdraw."

"Yes; one realizes they couldn't."

Harkless remembered Tom Meredith's fine accomplishment of dancing; he had been the most famous
dancer of college days, and it was in the dancer that John best saw his old friend again as
he had known him, the light lad of the active toe. Other couples flickered about the one John
watched, couples that plodded, couples that bobbed, couples that galloped, couples that slid,
but the cousins alone passed across the glistening reflections as lightly as October leaves
blown over the forest floor. In the midst of people who danced with fixed, glassy eyes, or
who frowned with determination to do their duty or to die, and seemed to expect the latter,
or who were pale with the apprehension of collision, or who made visible their anxiety to breathe
through the nose and look pleased at the same time, these two floated and smiled easily upon
life. Three or four steep steps made the portly and cigarette-smoking Meredith pant like an
old man, but a dance was a cooling draught to him. As for the little Marquise--when she danced,
she danced away with all those luckless hearts that were not hers already. The orchestra launched
the jubilant measures of the deux-temps with a torrent of vivacity, and the girl's rhythmic
flight answered like a sail taking the breeze.

There was one heart she had long since won which answered her every movement. Flushed, rapturous,
eyes sparkling, cheeks aglow, the small head weaving through the throng like a golden shuttle--ah,
did she know how adorable she was! Was Tom right: is it the attainable unattainable to one
man and given to some other that leaves a deeper mark upon him than success? At all events
the unattainable was now like a hot sting in the heart, but yet a sting more precious than
a balm. The voice of Brainard Macauley broke in:

"A white brow and a long lash, a flushing cheek and a soft eye, a voice that laughs and breaks
and ripples in the middle of a word, a girl you could put in your hat, Mr. Harkless--and there
you have a strong man prone! But I congratulate you on the manner your subordinates operate
the 'Herald' during your absence. I understand you are making it a daily."

Macauley was staring at him quizzically, and Harkless, puzzled, but without resentment of the
other's whimsey, could only decide that the editor of the Rouen "Journal" was an exceedingly
odd young man. All at once he found Meredith and the girl herself beside him; they had stopped
before the dance was finished. He had the impulse to guard himself from new blows as a boy
throws up his elbow to ward a buffet, and, although he could not ward with his elbow, for his
heart was on his sleeve--where he began to believe that Macauley had seen it--he remembered
that he could smile with as much intentional mechanism as any wornout rounder of afternoons.
He stepped aside for her, and she saw what she had known but had not seen before, for the thickness
of the crowd, and this was that he limped and leaned upon his stick.

"Do let me thank you," he said, with a louder echo of her manner of greeting him, a little
earlier. "It has been such a pleasure to watch you dance. It is really charming to meet you
here. If I return to Plattville I shall surely remember to tell Miss Briscoe."

At this she surprised him with a sudden, clear look in the eyes, so reproachful, so deep, so
sad, that he started. She took her flowers from Macauley, who had the air of understanding
the significance of such ceremonies very well, and saying, "Shan't we all go out on the terrace?"
placed her arm in Harkless's, and conducted him (and not the others) to the most secluded corner
of the terrace, a nook illumined by one Japanese lantern; to which spot it was his belief that
he led her. She sank into a chair, with the look of the girl who had stood by the blue tent-pole.
He could only stare at her, amazed by her abrupt change to this dazzling, if reproachful, kindness,
confused by his good fortune.

"'If you go back to Plattville!'" she said in a low voice. "What do you mean?"

"I don't know. I've been dull lately, and I thought I might go somewhere else." Caught in a
witchery no lack of possession could dispel, and which the prospect of loss made only stronger
while it lasted, he took little thought of what he said; little thought of anything but of
the gladness it was to be with her again.

"'Somewhere else?' Where?"

"Anywhere."

"Have you no sense of responsibility? What is to become of your paper?"

"The 'Herald'? Oh, it will potter along, I think."

"But what has become of it in your absence, already? Has it not deteriorated very much?"

"No," he said; "it's better than it ever was before."

"What!" she cried, with a little gasp.

"You're so astounded at my modesty?"

"But please tell me what you mean," she said quickly. "What happened to it?"

"Isn't the 'Herald' rather a dull subject? I'll tell you how well Judge Briscoe looked when
he came to see me; or, rather, tell me of your summer in the north."

"No," she answered earnestly. "Don't you remember my telling you that I am interested in newspaper
work?"

"I have even heard so from others," he said, with an instant of dryness.

"Please tell me about the 'Herald'?"

"It is very simple. Your friend, Mr. Fisbee, found a substitute, a relative six feet high with
his coat off, a traction engine for energy and a limited mail for speed. He writes me letters
on a type writer suffering from an impediment in its speech; and in brief, he is an enterprising
idiot with a mania for work-baskets."

Her face was in the shadow.

"You say the--idiot--is enterprising?" she inquired.

"Far more enterprising and far less idiot than I. They are looking for oil down there, and
when he came he knew less about oil than a kindergarten babe, and spoke of 'boring for kerosene'
in his first letter to me; but he knows it all now, and writes long and convincing geological
arguments. If a well comes in, he is prepared to get out an extra! Perhaps you may understand
what that means in Plattville, with the 'Herald's' numerous forces. I owe him everything, even
the shares in the oil company, which he has persuaded me to take. And he is going to dare to
make the 'Herald' a daily. Do you remember asking me why I had never done that? It seemed rather
a venture to try to compete with the Rouen papers in offering State and foreign news, but this
young Gulliver has tacked onto the Associated Press, and means to print a quarto--that's eight
pages, you know--once a week, Saturday, and a double sheet, four pages, on other mornings.
The daily venture begins next Monday."

"Will it succeed?"

"Oh, no!" he laughed.

"You think not?" Her interest in this dull business struck him as astonishing, and yet in character
with her as he had known her in Plattville. Then he wondered unhappily if she thought that
talking of the "Herald" and learning things about the working of a country newspaper would
help her to understand Brainard Macauley.

"Why have you let him go on with it?" she asked. "I suppose you have encouraged him?"

"Oh, yes, I encouraged him. The creature's recklessness fascinated me. A dare-devil like that
is always charming.'"

"You think there is no chance for the creature's succeeding with the daily?"

"None," he replied indifferently.

"You mentioned work-baskets, I think?"

He laughed again. "I believe him to be the original wooden-nutmeg man. Once a week he produces
a 'Woman's Page,' wherein he presents to the Carlow female public three methods for making
currant jelly, three receipts for the concoction of salads, and directs the ladies how to manufacture
a pretty work-basket out of odd scraps in twenty minutes. The astonishing part of it is that
he has not yet been mobbed by the women who have followed his directions."

"So you think the daily is a mistake and that your enterprising idiot should be mobbed? Why?"
She seemed to be taking him very seriously.

"I think he may be--for his 'Woman's Page.'"

"It is all wrong, you think?"

"What could a Yankee six-footer cousin of old Fisbee's know about currant jelly and work-baskets?"

"You know about currant jelly and work-baskets yourself?"

"Heaven defend the right, I do not!"

"You are sure he is six feet?"

"You should see his signature; that leaves no doubt. And, also, his ability denotes his stature."

"You believe that ability is in proportion to height, do you not?" There was a dangerous luring
in her tone.

His memory recalled to him that he was treading on undermined ground, so he hastened to say:
"In inverse proportion."

"Then your substitute is a failure. I see," she said, slowly.

What muffled illumination there was in their nook fell upon his face; her back was toward it,
so that she was only an outline to him, and he would have been startled and touched to the
quick, could he have known that her lip quivered and her eyes filled with tears as she spoke
the last words. He was happy as he had not been since his short June day; it was enough to
be with her again. Nothing, not even Brainard Macauley, could dull his delight. And, besides,
for a few minutes he had forgotten Brainard Macauley. What more could man ask than to sit in
the gloom with her, to know that he was near her again for a little while, and to talk about
anything--if he talked at all? Nonsense and idle exaggeration about young Fisbee would do as
well as another thing.

"The young gentleman is an exception," he returned. "I told you I owed everything to him; my
gratitude will not allow me to admit that his ability is less than his stature. He suggested
my purchase of a quantity of Mr. Watts's oil stock when it was knocked flat on its back by
two wells turning out dry; but if Mr. Watts's third well comes in, and young Fisbee has convinced
me that it will, and if my Midas's extra booms the stock and the boom develops, I shall oppose
the income tax. Poor old Plattville will be full of strangers and speculators, and the 'Herald'
will advocate vast improvements to impress the investor's eye. Stagnation and picturesqueness
will flee together; it is the history of the Indiana town. Already the 'Herald' is clamoring
with Schofields' Henry--you remember the bell-ringer?--for Main Street to be asphalted. It
will all come. The only trouble with young Fisbee is that he has too much ability."

"And yet the daily will not succeed?"

"No. That's too big a jump, unless my young man's expressions on the tariff command a wide
sale amongst curio-hunters."

"Then he is quite a fool about political matters?"

"Far from it; he is highly ingenious. His editorials are often the subtlest cups of flattery
I ever sipped, many of them showing assiduous study of old files to master the method and notions
of his eagle-eyed predecessor. But the tariff seems to have got him. He is a very masculine
person, except for this one feminine quality, for, if I may say it without ungallantry, there
is a legend that no woman has ever understood the tariff. Young Fisbee must be an extremely
travelled person, because the custom-house people have made an impression upon him which no
few encounters with them could explain, and he conceives the tariff to be a law which discommodes
a lady who has been purchasing gloves in Paris. He thinks smuggling the great evil of the present
tariff system; it is such a temptation, so insidious a break-down of moral fibre. His views
must edify Carlow."

She gave a quick, stifled cry. "Oh! there isn't a word of truth in what you say! Not a word!
I did not think you could be so cruel!"

He bent forward, peering at her in astonishment.

"Cruel!"

"You know it is a hateful distortion--an exaggeration!" she exclaimed passionately. "No man
living could have so little sense as you say he has. The tariff is perfectly plain to any child.
When you were in Plattville you weren't like this--I didn't know you were unkind!"

"I--I don't understand, please----"

"Miss Hinsdale has been talking--raving--to me about you! You may not know it--though I suppose
you do--but you made a conquest last night. It seems a little hard on the poor young man who
is at work for you in Plattville, doing his best for you, plodding on through the hot days,
and doing all he knows how, while you sit listening to music in the evenings with Clara Hinsdale,
and make a mock of his work and his trying to please you----"

"But I didn't mention him to Miss Hinsdale. In fact, I didn't mention anything to Miss Hinsdale.
What have I done? The young man is making his living by his work--and my living, too, for that
matter. It only seems to me that his tariff editorials are rather humorous."

She laughed suddenly--ringingly. "Of course they are! How should I know? Immensely humorous!
And the good creature knows nothing beyond smuggling and the custom-house and chalk marks?
Why, even I--ha, ha, ha!--even I--should have known better than that. What a little fool your
enterprising idiot must be!--with his work-baskets and currant jelly and his trying to make
the 'Herald' a daily!--It will be a ludicrous failure, of course. No doubt he thought he was
being quite wise, and was pleased over his tariff editorials--his funny, funny editorials--his
best--to please you! Ha, ha, ha! How immensely funny!"

"Do you know him?" he asked abruptly.

"I have not the honor of the gentleman's acquaintance. Ah," she rejoined bitterly, "I see what
you mean; it is the old accusation, is it? I am a woman, and I 'sound the personal note.' I
could not resent a cruelty for the sake of a man I do not know. But let it go. My resentment
is personal, after all, since it is against a man I do know--you!"

He leaned toward her because he could not help it. "I'd rather have resentment from you than
nothing."

"Then I will give you nothing," she answered quickly.

"You flout me!" he cried. "That is better than resentment."

"I hate you most, I think," she said with a tremulousness he did not perceive, "when you say
you do not care to go back to Plattville."

"Did I say it?"

"It is in every word, and it is true; you don't care to go back there."

"Yes, it is true; I don't."

"You want to leave the place where you do good; to leave those people who love you, who were
ready to die to avenge your hurt!" she exclaimed vehemently. "Oh, I say that is shameful!"

"Yes, I know," he returned gravely. "I am ashamed."

"Don't say that!" she cried. "Don't say you are ashamed of it. Do you suppose I do not understand
the dreariness it has been for you? Don't you know that I see it is a horror to you, that it
brings back your struggle with those beasts in the dark, and revivifies all your suffering,
merely to think of it?" Her turns and sudden contradictions left him tangled in a maze; he
could not follow, but must sit helpless to keep pace with her, while the sheer happiness of
being with her tingled through his veins. She rose and took a step aside, then spoke again:
"Well, since you want to leave Carlow, you shall; since you do not wish to return, you need
not.--Are you laughing at me?" She leaned toward him, and looked at him steadily, with her
face close to his. He was not laughing; his eyes shone with a deep fire; in that nearness he
hardly comprehended what she said. "Thank you for not laughing," she whispered, and leaned
back from him. "I suppose you think my promises are quite wild, and they are. I do not know
what I was talking about, or what I meant, any better than you do. You may understand some
day. It is all--I mean that it hurts one to hear you say you do not care for Carlow." She turned
away. "Come."

"Where?"

"It is my turn to conclude the interview. You remember, the last time it was you who--" She
broke off, shuddering, and covered her face with her hands. "Ah, that!" she exclaimed. "I did
not think--I did not mean to speak of that miserable, miserable night. And I to be harsh with
you for not caring to go back to Carlow!"

"Your harshness," he laughed. "A waft of eider."

"We must go," she said. He did not move, but sat staring at her like a thirsty man drinking.
With an impulsive and pretty gesture she reached out her hand to him. Her little, white glove
trembled in the night before his eyes, and his heart leaped to meet its sudden sweet generosity;
his thin fingers closed over it as he rose, and then that hand he had likened to a white butterfly
lay warm and light and quiet in his own. And as they had so often stood together in their short
day and their two nights of the moon, so now again they stood with a serenading silence between
them. A plaintive waltz-refrain from the house ran through the blue woof of starlit air as
a sad-colored thread through the tapestry of night; they heard the mellow croon of the 'cello
and the silver plaints of violins, the chiming harp, and the triangle bells, all woven into
a minor strain of dance-music that beat gently upon their ears with such suggestion of the
past, that, as by some witchcraft of hearing, they listened to music made for lovers dancing,
and lovers listening, a hundred years ago.

"I care for only one thing in this world," he said, tremulously. "Have I lost it? I didn't
mean to ask you, that last night, although you answered. Have I no chance? Is it still the
same? Do I come too late?"

The butterfly fluttered in his hand and then away.

She drew back and looked at him a moment.

"There is one thing you must always understand," she said gently, "and that is that a woman
can be grateful. I give you all the gratitude there is in me, and I think I have a great deal;
it is all yours. Will you always remember that?"

"Gratitude? What can there--"

"You do not understand now, but some day you will. I ask you to remember that my every act
and thought which bore reference to you--and there have been many--came from the purest gratitude.
Although you do not see it now, will you promise to believe it?"

"Yes," he said simply.

"For the rest--" She paused. "For the rest--I do not love you."

He bowed his head and did not lift it.

"Do you understand?" she asked.

"I understand," he answered, quietly.

She looked at him long, and then, suddenly, her hand to her heart, gave a little, pitying,
tender cry and moved toward him. At this he raised his head and smiled sadly. "No; don't you
mind," he said. "It's all right. I was such a cad the other time I needed to be told; I was
so entirely silly about it, I couldn't face the others to tell them good-night, and I left
you out there to go in to them alone. I didn't realize, for my manners were all gone. I'd lived
in a kind of stupor, I think, for a long time; then being with you was like a dream, and the
sudden waking was too much for me. I've been ashamed often, since, in thinking of it--and I
was well punished for not taking you in. I thought only of myself, and I behaved like a whining,
unbalanced boy. But I had whined from the moment I met you, because I was sickly with egoism
and loneliness and self-pity. I'm keeping you from the dancing. Won't you let me take you back
to the house?"

A commanding and querulous contralto voice was heard behind them, and a dim, majestic figure
appeared under the Japanese lantern.

"Helen?"

The girl turned quickly. "Yes, mamma."

"May I ask you to return to the club-house for supper with me? Your father has been very much
worried about you. We have all been looking for you."

"Mamma, this is Mr. Harkless."

"How do you do?" The lady murmured this much so far under her breath that the words might have
been mistaken for anything else--most plausibly, perhaps, for, "Who cares if it is?"--nor further
did she acknowledge John's profound inclination. Frigidity and complaint of ill-usage made
a glamour in every fold of her expensive garments; she was large and troubled and severe. A
second figure emerged from behind her and bowed with the suave dignity that belonged to Brainard
Macauley. "Mr. Macauley has asked to sit at our table," Mrs. Sherwood said to Helen. "May I
beg you to come at once? Your father is holding places for us."

"Certainly," she answered. "I will follow you with Mr. Harkless."

"I think Mr. Harkless will excuse you," said the elder lady. "He has an engagement. Mr. Meredith
has been looking everywhere for him to take Miss Hinsdale out to supper."

"Good-night, Miss Sherwood," said John in a cheerful voice. "I thank you for sitting out the
dance with me."

"Good-night," she said, and gave him her hand. "I'm so sorry I shan't see you again; I am only
in Rouen for this evening, or I should ask you to come to see me. I am leaving to-morrow morning.
Good-night.--Yes, mamma."

The three figures went toward the bright lights of the club-house. She was leaning on Macauley's
arm and chatting gaily, smiling up at him brightly. John watched her till she was lost in the
throng on the veranda. There, in the lights, where waiters were arranging little tables, every
one was talking and moving about, noisily, good-humored and happy. There was a flourish of
violins, and then the orchestra swung into a rampant march that pranced like uncurbed cavalry;
it stirred the blood of old men with militant bugle calls and blast of horns; it might have
heralded the chariot of a flamboyant war god rioting out of sunrise, plumed with youth. Some
quite young men on the veranda made as if they were restive horses champing at the bit and
heading a procession, and, from a group near by, loud laughter pealed.

John Harkless lifted to his face the hand that had held hers; there was the faint perfume of
her glove. He kissed his own hand. Then he put that hand and the other to his forehead, and
sank into her chair.

"Let me get back," he said. "Let me get back to Plattville, where I belong."

Tom Meredith came calling him. "Harkless? John Harkless?"

"Here I am, Tom."

"Come along, boy. What on earth are you doing out here all alone? I thought you were with--I
thought some people were with you. You're bored to death, I know; but come along and be bored
some more, because I promised to bring you in for supper. Then we'll go home. They've saved
a place for you by Miss Hinsdale."

"Very well, lad," answered Harkless, and put his hand on the other's shoulder. "Thank you."

The next day he could not leave his bed; his wounds were feverish and his weakness had returned.
Meredith was shaken with remorse because he had let him wander around in the damp night air
with no one to look after him.

CHAPTER XVII. HELEN'S TOAST

Judge Briscoe was sitting out under the afternoon sky with his chair tilted back and his feet
propped against the steps. His coat was off, and Minnie sat near at hand sewing a button on
the garment for him, and she wore that dreamy glaze that comes over women's eyes when they
sew for other people.

From the interior of the house rose and fell the murmur of a number of voices engaged in a
conversation, which, for a time, seemed to consist of dejected monosyllables; but presently
the judge and Minnie heard Helen's voice, clear, soft, and trembling a little with excitement.
She talked only two or three minutes, but what she said stirred up a great commotion. All the
voices burst forth at once in ejaculations--almost shouts; but presently they were again subdued
and still, except for the single soft one, which held forth more quietly, but with a deeper
agitation, than any of the others.

"You needn't try to bamboozle me," said the judge in a covert tone to his daughter, and with
a glance at the parlor window, whence now issued the rumble of Warren Smith's basso. "I tell
you that girl would follow John Harkless to Jericho."

Minnie shook her head mysteriously, and bit a thread with a vague frown.

"Well, why not?" asked the judge crossly.

"Why wouldn't she have him, then?"

"Well, who knows he's asked her yet?"

Minnie screamed derisively at the density of man, "What made him run off that way, the night
he was hurt? Why didn't he come back in the house with her?"

"Pshaw!"

"Don't you suppose a woman understands?"

"Meaning that you know more about it than I do, I presume," grunted the old gentleman.

"Yes, father," she replied, smiling benignantly upon him.

"Did she tell you?" he asked abruptly.

"No, no. I guess the truth is that women don't know more than men so much as they see more;
they understand more without having to read about it."

"That's the way of it, is it?" he laughed. "Well, it don't make any difference, she'll have
him some time."

"No, father; it's only gratitude."

"Gratitude!" The judge snorted scornfully. "Girls don't do as much as she's done for him out
of gratitude. Look what she's doing; not only running the 'Herald' for him, but making it a
daily, and a good daily at that. First time I saw her I knew right away she was the smartest
girl I ever laid eyes on;--I expect she must have got it from her mother. Gratitude! Pooh!
Look how she's studied his interests, and watched like a cat for chances for him in everything.
Didn't she get him into Eph Watts's company? She talked to Watts and the other fellows, day
after day, and drove around their leased land with 'em, and studied it up, and got on the inside,
and made him buy. Now, if they strike it--and she's sure they will, and I'm sure she knows
when to have faith in a thing--why, they'll sell out to the Standard, and they can all quit
work for the rest of their lives if they want to; and Harkless gets as much as any without
lifting a finger, all because he had a little money--mighty little, too--laid up in bank and
a girl that saw where to put it. She did that for him, didn't she?"

"Don't you see what fun it's been for her?" returned Minnie. "She's been having the best time
she ever had; I never knew any one half so happy."

"Yes; she went up and saw him at that party, and she knows he's still thinking about her. I
shouldn't be surprised if he asked her then, and that's what makes her so gay."

"Well, she couldn't have said 'yes,' because he went back to his bed the next day, and he's
been there most of the time since."

"Pshaw! He wasn't over his injuries, and he was weak and got malaria."

"Well, she couldn't be so happy while he's sick, if she cared very much about him."

"He's not very sick. She's happy because she's working for him, and she knows his illness isn't
serious. He'll be a well man when she says the word. He's love-sick, that's what he is; I never
saw a man so taken down with it in my life."

"Then it isn't malaria?" Minnie said, with a smile of some superiority.

"You're just like your poor mother," the old gentleman answered, growing rather red. "She never
could learn to argue. What I say is that Helen cares about him, whether she says she does or
not, whether she acts like it or not--or whether she thinks she does or not," he added irascibly.
"Do you know what she's doing for him to-day?"

"Not exactly."

"Well, when they were talking together at that party, he said something that made her think
he was anxious to get away from Plattville--you're not to repeat this, child; she told me,
relying on my discretion."

"Well?"

"Do you know why she's got these men to come here to-day to meet her--Warren Smith and Landis
and Homer, and Boswell and young Keating of Amo, and Tom Martin and those two fellows from
Gaines County?"

"Something about politics, isn't it?"

"'Something about politics!'" he echoed. "I should say it is! Wait till it's done, and this
evening I'll tell you--if you can keep a secret."

Minnie set her work-basket on the steps. "Oh, I guess I can keep a secret," she said. "But
it won't make any difference."

"You mean you've said it, and you'll stick to it that it's gratitude till their wedding day."

"She knows he gave her father something to do, and helped him in other ways, when no one else did."

"I know all about that. She reproaches herself for having neglected Fisbee while a stranger
took care of him, and saved him from starving--and worse. She's unreasonable about it; she
didn't know he was in want till long after. That's just like Fisbee, to tell her, afterwards.
He didn't tell her how low he got; but he hinted at it to her, and I guess she understood;
I gathered that much from him. Of course she's grateful, but gratefulness don't account for
everything."

"Yes it does."

"Well, I never expected to have the last word with a woman."

"Well, you needn't," said Minnie.

"I don't. I never do," he retorted. She did not answer, but hummed a little tune and looked
up at the tree-tops.

Warren Smith appeared in the doorway. "Judge," he said, "will you step inside? We need you."

Briscoe nodded and rose at once. As he reached the door, Minnie said in a piercing whisper:

"It's hard to be sure about her, but I'm right; it's gratitude."

"There," he replied, chuckling, "I thought I shouldn't have the last word." Minnie began to
sing, and the judge, after standing in the doorway till he was again summoned from within,
slowly retired.

Briscoe had persisted in his own explanation of Helen's gaiety; nevertheless he did not question
his daughter's assumption that the young lady was enjoying her career in Carlow. She was free
as a bird to go and come, and her duties and pleasures ran together in a happy excitement.
Her hands were full of work, but she sought and increased new tasks, and performed them also.
She came to Carlow as unused to the soil as was Harkless on his arrival, and her educational
equipment for the work was far less than his; her experience, nothing. But both were native
to the State; and the genius of the American is adaptability, and both were sprung from pioneers
whose means of life depended on that quality.

There are, here and there, excrescent individuals who, through stock decadence, or their inability
to comprehend republican conditions, are not assimilated by the body of the country; but many
of these are imports, while some are exports. Our foreign-born agitators now and then find
themselves removed by the police to institutions of routine, while the romantic innocents who
set up crests in the face of an unimpressionable democracy are apt to be lured by their own
curious ambitions, or those of their women-folk, to spend a great part of their time in or
about the villas of Albion, thus paid for its perfidy; and, although the anarchists and the
bubble-hunters make a noise, it is enormously out of proportion to their number, which is relatively
very small, and neither the imported nor the exported article can be taken as characteristic
of our country. For the American is one who soon fits any place, or into any shaped hole in
America, where you can set him down. It may be that without going so far as to suggest the
halls of the great and good and rich, one might mention a number of houses of entertainment
for man and beast in this country, in which Mr. Martin of the Plattville Dry Goods Emporium
would find himself little at ease. But even in the extreme case, if Mr. Martin were given his
choice of being burned to death, or drowned, or of spending a month at the most stupendously
embellished tavern located in our possessions, and supposing him to have chosen the third alternate,
it is probable that he would have grown almost accustomed to his surroundings before he died;
and if he survived the month, we may even fancy him really enjoying moments of conversation
with the night-clerks.

As Mr. Parker observed, Miss Sherwood did not do the Grand Duchess, giving the Carlow tenants
a treat. She felt no duchess symptoms within herself, and though, of course, she had various
manners tucked away to wear as one suits garments to occasions--and it was a Rouen "party-gown"
wherewith she chose to abash poor John Harkless at their meeting--here in Carlow, she was a
woman of affairs, lively, shrewd, engaging, capable; she was herself (at least she was that
side of herself). And it should be explained that Harkless had based his calumny regarding
the tariff on a paragraph or two that crept inadvertently into an otherwise statesmanlike article,
and that "H. Fisbee" understood the tariff as well as any woman who ever lived. But the tariff
inspired no more articles from that pen.

Rodney McCune had lifted his head, and those who had followed his stricken enemy felt that
the cause was lost, without the leader. The old ring that the "Herald" had crushed was a ring
once more, and the heelers had rallied--"the boys were in line again." The work had been done
quietly, and Halloway was already beaten, and beaten badly. John Harkless lay sick, and Rodney
McCune would sit in Congress, for the nomination meant election. But one day the Harkless forces,
demoralized, broken, almost hopeless, woke up to find that they had a leader. Many of them
were content with the belief that this was a young lawyer named Keating, who had risen up in
Amo; but Mr. Keating himself had a different impression.

Helen was a little nervous, and very much excited, over the political conference at Judge Briscoe's.
She planned it with careful diplomacy, and arranged the details with a fine sense of the dramatic.
There was a suggestion she desired to have made in this meeting, which she wished should emanate
from the Amo and Gaines County people, instead of proceeding from Carlow--for she thought it
better to make the outsiders believe her idea an inspiration of their own--so she made a little
comedy and provided for Briscoe's entrance at an effective moment. The judge was a substantial
influence, strong in the councils of his party when he chose to be; and though of late years
he had contented himself with voting at the polls, every one knew what weight he carried when
he saw fit to bestir himself.

When he entered the parlor, he found the politicians in a state of subdued excitement. Helen
sat by the window, blushing, and talking eagerly to old Fisbee. One of the gentlemen from Gaines
County was walking about the room exclaiming, "A glorious conception! A glorious conception!"
addressing the bric-a-brac, apparently. (He thought the conception his own.) Mr. Martin was
tugging at his beard and whispering to Landis and Homer, and the two Amo men were consulting
in a corner, but as the judge came in, one of them turned and said loudly, "That's the man."

"What man am I, Keating?" asked Briscoe, cheerily.

"We better explain, I guess," answered the other; and turning to his compatriot: "You tell
him, Boswell."

"Well--it's this way--" said Boswell, and came at once to an awkward pause, turning aside sheepishly
and unable to proceed.

"So that's the way of it, is it?" said the old gentleman.

Helen laughed cheerfully, and looked about her with a courageous and encouraging eye. "It is
embarrassing," she said. "Judge Briscoe, we are contemplating 'a piece of the blackest treachery
and chicanery.' We are going to give Mr. Halloway the--the go-by!" The embarrassment fell away,
and everybody began to talk at once.

"Hold on a minute," said the judge; "let's get at it straight. What do you want with me?"

"I'll tell you," volunteered Keating. "You see, the boys are getting in line again for this
convention. They are the old file that used to rule the roost before the 'Herald' got too strong
for them, and they rely on Mr. Harkless's being sick to beat Kedge Halloway with that Gaines
County man, McCune. Now, none of us here want Rod McCune I guess. We had trouble enough once
with him and his heelers, and now that Mr. Harkless is down, they've taken advantage of it
to raise a revolution: Rod McCune for Congress! He's a dirty-hearted swindler--I hope Miss
Sherwood will pardon the strong expression--and everybody thought the 'Herald' had driven him
out of politics, though it never told how it did it; but he's up on top again. Now, the question
is to beat him. We hold the committees, but the boys have been fighting the committees--call
'em the 'Harkless Ring,' and never understood that the 'Herald' would have turned us down in
a second if it thought we weren't straight. Well, we saw a week ago that Kedge Halloway was
going to lose to McCune; we figured it out pretty exactly, and there ain't a ray of hope for
Kedge. We wrote to Mr. Harkless about it, and asked him to come down--if he'd been on the ground
last Monday and had begun to work, I don't say but what his personal influence might have saved
Halloway--but a friend of his, where he's staying, answered the letter: said Mr. Harkless was
down with a relapse and was very fretful; and he'd taken the liberty of reading the letter
and temporarily suppressing it under doctor's orders; they were afraid he'd come, sick as he
was, from a sense of duty, and asked us to withdraw the letter, and referred us to Mr. Harkless's
representative on the 'Herald.' So we applied here to Miss Sherwood, and that's why we had
this meeting. Now, Halloway is honest--everybody knows that--and I don't say but what he's
been the best available material Mr. Harkless had to send to Washington; but he ain't any too
bright----"

Mr. Martin interrupted the speaker. "I reckon, maybe, you never heard that lecture of his on
the Past, Present, and Future'?"

"Besides that," Keating continued, "Halloway has had it long enough, and he's got enough glory
out of it, and, except for getting beat by Rod McCune, I believe he'd almost as soon give it
up. Well, we discussed all this and that, and couldn't come to any conclusion. We didn't want
to keep on with a losing fight if there was any way to put up a winner, though of course we
all recognized that Mr. Harkless would want us to support Kedge to the death, and that's what
he'd do if he was on the ground. But Miss Sherwood mentioned that she'd had one note since
his last illness began, and he'd entrusted her and her associates on the paper with the entire
policy, and she would take the responsibility for anything we determined on. Mr. Smith said
the only thing to do was to give up Halloway and get a man that could beat McCune; Kedge would
recognize it himself, that that was the only thing to do, and he could retire gracefully. Miss
Sherwood said she was still more or less a stranger, and asked what man we could find who was
strong enough to do it by popularity alone and who was also a man we wanted; somebody that
had worked a good deal, but had never had any office. It was to such a man she could promise
the 'Herald's' support, as for a time the paper was being operated almost independently, it
might be said, of Mr. Harkless. Well, I expect it came to all of us at the same time, but it
was Mr. Bence here that said it first."

Mr. Bence was the gentleman who had walked about saying "A glorious conception," and he now
thrust one hand into his breast and extended the other in a wide gesture, and looked as impressive
as a very young man with white eyebrows can look.

"The name of Harkless," he said abruptly, "the name of Harkless will sweep the convention like
the fire of a Western prairie; the name of Harkless will thunder over their astonished heads
and strike a peal of joy bells in every home in the district; it will re-echo in the corridors
of posterity and teem with prosperity like a mighty river. The name of Harkless will reverberate
in that convention hall, and they shall sit ashamed."

"Harkless!" exclaimed the judge. "Why didn't some one think of that long ago?"

"Then you approve?" asked Keating.

"Yes, I think I do!"

The Amo man shook hands with him. "We'll swim out," he exclaimed. "It will be the same everywhere.
A lot of the old crowd themselves will be swept along with us when we make our nomination.
People feel that that Cross-Roads business ought never to have been allowed to happen, and
they'd like to make it up to him some way. There are just two difficulties, Halloway and Mr.
Harkless himself. It's a sure thing that he wouldn't come out against Kedge and that he'd refuse
to let his name be used against him. Therefore, we've got to keep it quiet from him; the whole
thing has to be worked quietly. The McCune folks were quiet until they thought they were sure;
we've got to be quieter still. Well, we've made out a plan."

"And a plan that will operate," added Mr. Bence. "For the name of Harkless shall--" Mr. Keating
interrupted him energetically:

"We explain it to all the Halloway delegates, you see, and to all the shaky McCune people,
and interview all the undecided ones. The McCune crowd may see them afterwards, but they can't
fix men in this district against John Harkless. All we've got to do is to pass the word. It's
all kept quiet, you understand. We go into the convention, and the names of Halloway and McCune
are placed before it. Then will come a speech naming Harkless--and you want to stuff your ears
with cotton! On the first ballot Harkless gets the scattering vote that was going to nominate
McCune if we'd let things run, and Halloway is given every vote he'd have got if he'd run against
McCune alone; it's as a compliment; it will help him see how things were, afterwards; and on
the second ballot his vote goes to Harkless. There won't be any hitch if we get down to work
right off; it's a mighty short campaign, but we've got big chances. Of course, it can't be
helped that Halloway has to be kept in the dark; he won't spend any money, anyway."

"It looks a little underhanded at first glance," said Warren Smith; "but, as Miss Sherwood
said, you've got to be a little underhanded sometimes, especially when you're dealing with
as scrupulous a man as John Harkless. But it's a perfectly honest deal, and it will be all
right with him when he finds it's all over and he's nominated."

"It's a plain case," added Boswell. "We want him, and we've got to have him."

"There's one danger," Mr. Keating continued. "Kedge Halloway is honest, but I believe he's
selfish enough to disturb his best friend's deathbed for his own ends, and it's not unlikely
that he will get nervous towards the last and be telegraphing Harkless to have himself carried
on a cot to the convention to save him. That wouldn't do at all, of course, and Miss Sherwood
thinks maybe there'd be less danger if we set the convention a little ahead of the day appointed.
It's dangerous, because it shortens our time; but we can fix it for three days before the day
we'd settled on, and that will bring it to September 7th. What we want of you, judge, is to
go to the convention as a delegate, and make the nominating speech for Mr. Harkless. Will you
do it?"

"Do it?" cried the old man, and he struck the table a resounding blow with his big fist. "Do
it? I'd walk from here to Rouen and back again to do it!"

They were all on their feet at this, and they pressed forward to shake Briscoe's hand, congratulating
him and each other as though they were already victorious. Mr. Martin bent over Helen and asked
her if she minded shaking hands with a man who had voted for Shem at the first election in the Ark.

"I thought I'd rightly ort to thank you for finishin' off Kedge Halloway," he added. "I made
up my mind I'd never vote for him again, the night he killed that intellectual insect of his."

"Intellectual insect, Mr. Martin?" she asked, puzzled.

He sighed. "The recollection never quits ha'ntin' me. I reckon I haven't had a restful night
since June. Maybe you don't remember his lecture."

"Oh, but I do," she laughed; "and I remember the story of the fly, vividly."

"I never was jest what you might exactly call gushin' over Kedge," Mr. Martin drawled. "He
doesn't strike me as havin' many ideas, precisely--he had kind of a symptom of one once, that
he caught from Harkless, but it didn't take; it sloshed around in his mind and never really
come out on him. I always thought his brain was sort of syrupy. Harkless thought there was
fruit in it, and I reckon there is; but some way it never seems to jell."

"Go on," said Helen gayly. "I want to hear him abused. It helps me to feel less mean about
the way we are treating him."

"Yes; I'm slickin' over my conscience, too. I feel awnrier about it because he done me a good
turn once, in the Hayes and Wheeler campaign. I went to a meetin' to hear him speak, and he
got sick and couldn't."

Warren Smith addressed the company. "Well, is this all for the present?" he asked. "Is everything
settled?"

"Wait a minute," said Keating. "I'd like to hear from the 'Herald' about its policy, if Miss
Sherwood will tell us."

"Yes, indeed," she answered. "It will be very simple. Don't you think there is only one course
to pursue? We will advocate no one very energetically, but we will print as much of the truth
about Mr. McCune as we can, with delicacy and honor, in this case, but, as I understand it,
the work is almost all to be done amongst the delegates. We shall not mention our plan at all--but--but,
when the convention is over, and he is nominated, we will get out an extra; and I am so confident
of your success that I'll tell you now that the extra will be ready the night before the convention.
We will contrive that Mr. Harkless shall not receive his copy of the paper containing the notice
of the change of date, and I think the chance of his seeing it in any Rouen paper may be avoided.
That is all, I think."

"Thank you," said Keating. "That is certainly the course to follow." Every one nodded, or acquiesced
in words; and Keating and Bence came over to Helen and engaged her in conversation. The others
began to look about for their hats, vaguely preparing to leave.

"Wait a minute," said the judge. "There's no train due just now." And Minnie appeared in the
doorway with a big pitcher of crab-apple cider, rich and amber-hued, sparkling, cold, and redolent
of the sweet-smelling orchard where it was born. Behind Miss Briscoe came Mildy Upton with
glasses and a fat, shaking, four-storied jelly-cake on a second tray. The judge passed his
cigars around, and the gentlemen took them blithely, then hesitatingly held them in their fingers
and glanced at the ladies, uncertain of permission.

"Let me get you some matches," Helen said, quickly, and found a box on the table and handed
it to Keating. Every one sat beaming, and fragrant veils of smoke soon draped the room.

"Why do you call her 'Miss Sherwood'?" Boswell whispered in Keating's ear.

"That's her name."

"Ain't she the daughter of that old fellow over there by the window? Ain't her name Fisbee?"

"No; she's his daughter, but her legal name's Sherwood; she's an adop----"

"Great Scott! I know all about that. I'd like to know if there's a man, woman, or child in
this part of the country that doesn't. I guess it won't be Fisbee or Sherwood either very long.
She can easy get a new name, that lady! And if she took a fancy to Boswell, why, I'm a bach----"

"I expect she won't take a fancy to Boswell very early," said Keating. "They say it will be
Harkless."

"Go 'way," returned Mr. Boswell. "What do you want to say that for? Can't you bear for anybody
to be happy a minute or two, now and then?"

Warren Smith approached Helen and inquired if it would be asking too much if they petitioned
her for some music; so she went to the piano, and sang some darky songs for them, with a quaint
suggestion of the dialect--two or three old-fashioned negro melodies of Foster's, followed
by some rollicking modern imitations with the movement and spirit of a tinshop falling down
a flight of stairs. Her audience listened in delight from the first; but the latter songs quite
overcame them with pleasure and admiration, and before she finished, every head in the room
was jogging from side to side, and forward and back, in time to the music, while every foot
shuffled the measures on the carpet.

When the gentlemen from out of town discovered that it was time to leave if they meant to catch
their train, Helen called to them to wait, and they gathered about her.

"Just one second," she said, and she poured all the glasses full to the brim; then, standing
in the centre of the circle they made around her, she said:

"Before you go, shan't we pledge each other to our success in this good, home-grown Indiana
cider, that leaves our heads clear and our arms strong? If you will--then--" She began to blush
furiously and her voice trembled, but she lifted the glass high over her head and cried bravely,
"Here's to 'Our Candidate'!"

The big men, towering over her, threw back their heads and quaffed the gentle liquor to the
last drop. Then they sent up the first shout of the campaign, and cheered John Harkless till
the rafters rang.

"My friends," said Mr. Keating, as he and Boswell and the men from Gaines drove away in Judd
Bennett's omnibus, "my friends, here is where I begin the warmest hustling I ever did. I want
Harkless, everybody wants him----"

"It is a glorious idea," said Mr. Bence. "The name of Harkless----"

Keating drowned the oratory. "But that isn't all. That little girl wants him to go to Congress,
and that settles it. He goes."

That evening Minnie and her father were strolling up and down the front walk together, between
the flowered borders.

"Do you give up?" asked the judge.

"Give up what? No!" returned his daughter.

"She hasn't told you?"

"Not yet; she and Mr. Fisbee left for the office right after those men went."

"Haven't you discovered what the 'something about politics' she's doing for him is? Did you
understand what she meant by 'Our Candidate'?"

"Not exactly."

"Did you see her blush when she proposed that toast?"

"Yes. So would anybody--with all those men, and their eyes hanging out on their cheeks!"

"Pooh! She got up the whole show. Do you know why?"

"I only know it's politics."

"Politics!" He glanced over his shoulder, and then, leaning toward her, he said, in a low tone:
"I'll tell you in confidence, Minnie; she's sending him to Congress!"

"Ah!" she cried triumphantly. "If she loved him she wouldn't do that, would she?"

"Minnie!" Briscoe turned upon her sternly. "I don't want to hear any more talk like that. It's
the way with some papers to jibe at our great institutions, and you've been reading them; that's
the trouble with you. The only criticism any one has any business making against Congress is
that it's too good for some of the men we send there. Congress is our great virtue, understand;
the congressmen are our fault."

"I didn't mean anything like that," protested the girl. "I haven't been reading any papers
except the 'Herald.' I meant why should she send him away if she cared about him?"

"She'll go with him."

"They couldn't both go. What would become of the 'Herald'?"

"They'd fix that easy enough; there are plenty of smart young fellows in Rouen they could get
to run it while they are in Washington."

"Mr. Harkless is sure to be elected, is he?"

"He is, if he's nominated."

"Can't he get the nomination?"

"Get it! Nobody ever happened to think of him for it till it came into her head; and the only
thing I look to see standing in the way of it is Harkless himself; but I expect we can leave
it to her to manage, and I guess she will. She's got more diplomacy than Blaine. Kedge Halloway
is up the spout all right, but they want to keep it quiet; that's why she had them come here
instead of the office."

"She wouldn't marry him a minute sooner because he went to Congress," said Minnie thoughtfully.

"You're giving up," he exclaimed. "You know I'm right."

"Wait and see. It might--No, you're wrong as wrong can be! I wish you weren't. Don't you see?
You're blind. She couldn't do all these things for him if she loved him. That's the very proof
itself. I suppose you--well, you can't understand."

"I'll tell you one thing," he returned. "If she doesn't, the rest of it won't amount to a rip
with John Harkless."

"Yes, it will. Nobody could help liking to find himself as big a man as he'll be when he comes
back here. Besides, don't you see, it's her way of making it up to him for not liking him as
much as he wants. You give up, don't you?"

"No," he cried, with feeble violence, "I don't. She'll find out some things about herself when
she sees him again."

Minnie shook her head.

There was a sound of wheels; the buckboard drew up at the gate, and Helen, returning from her
evening's labor, jumped out lightly, and ran around to pat the horses' heads. "Thank you so
much, Mr. Willetts," she said to the driver. "I know you will handle the two delegates you
are to look after as well as you do the judge's team; and you ought to, you know, because the
delegates are men. You dears!" She stroked the sleek necks of the colts and handed them bunches
of grass.

Briscoe came out, and let the friendly animals nose his shoulder as he looked gravely down
on the piquant face beside him in the dusk. "Young lady," he said, "go East. Wait till we get
on to Washington, and sit in the gallery, and see John Harkless rise up in his place, and hear
the Speaker say: 'The Gentleman from Indiana!' I know the chills would go up and down my spine,
and I guess you'd feel pretty well paid for your day's work. I guess we all would."

"Aren't you tired, Helen?" asked Minnie, coming to her in the darkness and clasping her waist.

"Tired? No; I'm happy. Did you ever see the stars so bright?"

CHAPTER XVIII. THE TREACHERY OF H. FISBEE

An Indiana town may lie asleep a long time, but there always comes a day when it wakes up;
and Plattville had wakened in August when the "Herald" became a daily and Eph Watts struck
oil. It was then that history began to be made. The "Herald" printed News, and the paper was
sold every morning at stands in all the towns in that section of the State. Its circulation
tripled. Parker talked of new presses; two men were added to his staff, and a reporter was
brought from Rouen to join Mr. Fisbee. The "Herald" boomed the oil-field; people swarmed into
town; the hotel was crowded; strangers became no sensation whatever. A capitalist bought the
whole north side of the Square to erect new stores, and the Carlow Bank began the construction
of a new bank building of Bedford stone on Main Street. Then it was whispered, next affirmed,
that the "Herald" had succeeded in another of its enterprises, and Main Street was to be asphalted.
That was the end of the "old days" of Plattville.

There was a man who had laid the foundation upon which the new Plattville was to be built;
he who, through the quiet labor of years, had stamped his spirit upon the people, as their
own was stamped upon him; but he lay sick in his friend's house and did not care. One day Meredith
found him propped up in bed, reading a letter--reading it listlessly, and with a dull eye.

"PLATTVILLE, September 1st.

"Dear Mr. Harkless: Yours of the 30th received. Every one here is very glad to know that your
health is so far improved as to admit of your writing; and it is our strongest hope that you
will soon be completely recovered.

"New subscriptions are coming in at a slightly advanced rate since my last letter; you will
see they are distributed over several counties, when you examine the books on your return;
and I am glad to state that with our arrangement for Gainesville the 'Herald' is now selling
every morning at a prominent store in all the towns within the radius we determined on. Our
plan of offering the daily with no advance on the price of the former tri-weekly issue proves
a success. I now propose making the issue a quarto every day (at the same price) instead of
once a week. I think our experience warrants the experiment. It is my belief that our present
circulation will be increased forty per cent. Please advise me if you approve. Of course this
would mean a further increase of our working force, and we should have to bring another man
from Rouen--possibly two more--but I think we need not fear such enlargements.

"I should tell you that I have taken you at your word entrusting me with the entire charge
of your interests here, and I had the store-room adjoining the office put in shape, and offered
it to the telegraph company for half the rent they were paying in their former quarters over
the post-office. They have moved in; and this, in addition to giving us our despatches direct,
is a reduction of expense.

"Mr. Watts informs me that the Standard's offer is liberal and the terms are settled. The boom
is not hollow, it is simply an awakening; and the town, so long a dependent upon the impetus
of agriculture or its trade, is developing a prosperity of its own on other lines as well.
Strangers come every day; oil has lubricated every commercial joint. Contracts have been let
for three new brick business buildings to be erected on the east side of the Square. The value
of your Main Street frontage will have doubled by December, and possibly you may see fit to
tear away the present building and put up another, instead; the investment might be profitable.
The 'Herald' could find room on the second and third floors, and the first could be let to stores.

"I regret that you find your copy of the paper for the 29th overlooked in the mail and that
your messenger could find none for you at the newspaper offices in Rouen. Mr. Schofield was
given directions in regard to supplying you with the missing issue at once.

"I fear that you may have had difficulty in deciphering some of my former missives, as I was
unfamiliar with the typewriter when I took charge of the 'Herald'; however, I trust that you
find my later letters more legible.

"The McCune people are not worrying us; we are sure to defeat them. The papers you speak of
were found by Mr. Parker in your trunk, and are now in my hands.

"I send with this a packet of communications and press clippings indicative of the success
of the daily, and in regard to other innovations. The letters from women commendatory of our
'Woman's Page,' thanking us for various house-keeping receipts, etc., strike me as peculiarly
interesting, as I admit that a 'Woman's Page' is always a difficult matter for a man to handle
without absurdity.

"Please do not think I mean to plume myself upon our various successes; we attempted our innovations
and enlargements at just the right time--a time which you had ripened by years of work and
waiting, and at the moment when you had built up the reputation of the 'Herald' to its highest
point. Everything that has been done is successful only because you paved the way, and because
every one knows it is your paper; and the people believe that whatever your paper does is interesting
and right.

"Trusting that your recovery will be rapid, I am

"Yours truly,

"H. FISBEE."

Harkless dropped the typewritten sheets with a sigh.

"I suppose I ought to get well," he said wearily.

"Yes," said Meredith, "I think you ought; but you're chock full of malaria and fever and all
kinds of meanness, and----"

"You 'tend to your own troubles," returned the other, with an imitation of liveliness. "I--I
don't think it interests me much," he said querulously. He was often querulous of late, and
it frightened Tom. "I'm just tired. I am strong enough--that is, I think I am till I try to
move around, and then I'm like a log, and a lethargy gets me--that's it; I don't think it's
malaria; it's lethargy."

"Lethargy comes from malaria."

"It's the other way with me. I'd be all right if I only could get over this--this tiredness.
Let me have that pencil and pad, will you, please, Tom?"

He set the pad on his knee, and began to write languidly:

                                        "ROUEN, September 2d.

"Dear Mr. Fisbee: Yours of the 1st to hand. I entirely approve all arrangements you have made.
I think you understand that I wish you to regard everything as in your own hands. You are the
editor of the 'Herald' and have the sole responsibility for everything, including policy, until,
after proper warning, I relieve you in person. But until that time comes, you must look upon
me as a mere spectator. I do not fear that you will make any mistakes; you have done very much
better in all matters than I could have done myself. At present I have only one suggestion:
I observe that your editorials concerning Halloway's renomination are something lukewarm.

"It is very important that he be renominated, not altogether on account of assuring his return
to Washington (for he is no Madison, I fear), but the fellow McCune must be so beaten that
his defeat will be remembered for twenty years. Halloway is honest and clean, at least, while
McCune is corrupt to the bone. He has been bought and sold, and I am glad the proofs of it
are in your hands, as you tell me Parker found them, as directed, in my trunk, and gave them
to you.

"The papers you hold drove him out of politics once, by the mere threat of publication; you
should have printed them last week, as I suggested. Do so at once; the time is short. You have
been too gentle; it has the air of fearing to offend, and of catering, as if we were afraid
of antagonizing people against us; as though we had a personal stake in the convention. Possibly
you consider our subscription books as such; I do not. But if they are, go ahead twice as hard.
What if it does give the enemy a weapon in case McCune is nominated; if he is (and I begin
to see a danger of it) we will be with the enemy. I do not carry my partisanship so far as
to help elect Mr. McCune to Congress. You have been as non-committal in your editorials as
if this were a fit time for delicacy and the cheaper conception of party policy. My notion
of party policy--no new one--is that the party which considers the public service before it
considers itself will thrive best in the long run. The 'Herald' is a little paper (not so little
nowadays, after all, thanks to you), but it is an honest one, and it isn't afraid of Rod McCune
and his friends. He is to be beaten, understand, if we have to send him to the penitentiary
on an old issue to do it. And if the people wish to believe us cruel or vengeful, let them.
Please let me see as hearty a word as you can say for Halloway, also. You can write with ginger;
please show some in this matter.

"My condition is improved.

                    "I am, very truly yours,

                                          "JOHN HARKLESS."

When the letter was concluded, he handed it to Meredith. "Please address that, put a 'special'
on it, and send it, Tom. It should go at once, so as to reach him by to-night."

"H. Fisbee?"

"Yes; H. Fisbee."

"I believe it does you good to write, boy," said the other, as he bent over him. "You look
more chirrupy than you have for several days."

"It's that beast, McCune; young Fisbee is rather queer about it, and I felt stirred up as I
went along." But even before the sentence was finished the favor of age and utter weariness
returned, and the dark lids closed over his eyes. They opened again, slowly, and he took the
others hand and looked up at him mournfully, but as it were his soul shone forth in dumb and
eloquent thanks.

"I--I'm giving you a jolly summer, Tom," he said, with a quivering effort to smile. "Don't
you think I am? I don't--I don't know what I should have--done----"

"You old Indian!" said Meredith, tenderly.

Three days later, Tom was rejoiced by symptoms of invigoration in his patient. A telegram came
for Harkless, and Meredith, bringing it into the sick room, was surprised to find the occupant
sitting straight up on his couch without the prop of pillows. He was reading the day's copy
of the "Herald," and his face was flushed and his brow stern.

"What's the matter, boy?"

"Mismanagement, I hope," said the other, in a strong voice. "Worse, perhaps. It's this young
Fisbee. I can't think what's come over the fellow. I thought he was a rescuing angel, and he's
turning out bad. I'll swear it looks like they'd been--well, I won't say that yet. But he hasn't
printed that McCune business I told you of, and he's had two days. There is less than a week
before the convention, and--" He broke off, seeing the yellow envelope in Meredith's hand.
"Is that a telegram for me?" His companion gave it to him. He tore it open and read the contents.
They were brief and unhappy.

"Can't you do something? Can't you come down? It begins to look the other way.

"K. H."

"It's from Halloway," said John. "I have got to go. What did that doctor say?"

"He said two weeks at the earliest, or you'll run into typhoid and complications from your
hurts, and even pleasanter things than that. I've got you here, and here you stay; so lie back
and get easy, boy."

"Then give me that pad and pencil." He rapidly dashed off a note to H. Fisbee:

"September 5th.

"H. FISBEE,

"Editor 'Carlow Herald.'

"Dear Sir: You have not acknowledged my letter of the 2d September by a note (which should
have reached me the following morning), or by the alteration in the tenor of my columns which
I requested, or by the publication of the McCune papers which I directed. In this I hold you
grossly at fault. If you have a conscientious reason for refusing to carry out my request it
should have been communicated to me at once, as should the fact--if such be the case--that
you are a personal (or impersonal, if you like) friend of Mr. Rodney McCune. Whatever the motive,
ulterior or otherwise, which prevents you from operating my paper as I direct, I should have
been informed of it. This is a matter vital to the interests of our community, and you have
hitherto shown yourself too alert in accepting my slightest suggestion for me to construe this
failure as negligence. Negligence I might esteem as at least honest and frank; your course
has been neither the one nor the other.

"You will receive this letter by seven this evening by special delivery. You will print the
facts concerning McCune in to-morrow morning's paper.

"I am well aware of the obligations under which your extreme efficiency and your thoughtfulness
in many matters have placed me. It is to you I owe my unearned profits from the transaction
in oil, and it is to you I owe the 'Herald's' extraordinary present circulation, growth of
power and influence. That power is still under my direction, and is an added responsibility
which shall not be misapplied.

"You must forgive me if I write too sharply. You see I have failed to understand your silence;
and if I wrong you I heartily ask your pardon in advance of your explanation. Is it that you
are sorry for McCune? It would be a weak pity that could keep you to silence. I warned him
long ago that the papers you hold would be published if he ever tried to return to political
life, and he is deliberately counting on my physical weakness and absence. Let him rely upon
it; I am not so weak as he thinks. Personally, I cannot say that I dislike Mr. McCune. I have
found him a very entertaining fellow; it is said he is the best of husbands, and a friend to
some of his friends, and, believe me, I am sorry for him from the bottom of my heart. But the
'Herald' is not.

"You need not reply by letter. To-morrow's issue answers for you. Until I have received a copy,
I withhold my judgment.

"JOHN HARKLESS."

The morrow's issue--that fateful print on which depended John Harkless's opinion of H. Fisbee's
integrity--contained an editorial addressed to the delegates of the convention, warning them
to act for the vital interest of the community, and declaring that the opportunity to be given
them in the present convention was a rare one, a singular piece of good fortune indeed; they
were to have the chance to vote for a man who had won the love and respect of every person
in the district--one who had suffered for his championship of righteousness--one whom even
his few political enemies confessed they held in personal affection and esteem--one who had
been the inspiration of a new era--one whose life had been helpfulness, whose hand had reached
out to every struggler and unfortunate--a man who had met and faced danger for the sake of
others--one who lived under a threat for years, and who had been almost overborne in the fulfilment
of that threat, but who would live to see the sun shine on his triumph, the tribute the convention
would bring him as a gift from a community that loved him. His name needed not to be told;
it was on every lip that morning, and in every heart.

Tom was eagerly watching his companion as he read. Harkless fell back on the pillows with a
drawn face, and for a moment he laid his thin hand over his eyes in a gesture of intense pain.

"What is it?" Meredith said quickly.

"Give me the pad, please."

"What is it, boy?"

The other's teeth snapped together.

"What is it?" he cried. "What is it? It's treachery, and the worst I ever knew. Not a word
of the accusation I demanded--lying praises instead! Read that editorial--there, there!" He
struck the page with the back of his hand, and threw the paper to Meredith. "Read that miserable
lie! Save the mark!"

"What does it mean?"

"Mean! It means McCune--Rod McCune, 'who has lived under a threat for years'--my threat! I
swore I would print him out of Indiana if he ever raised his head again, and he knew I could.
'Almost overborne in the fulfilment of that threat!' Almost! It's a black scheme, and I see
it now. This man came to Plattville and went on the 'Herald' for nothing in the world but this.
It's McCune's hand all along. He daren't name him even now, the coward! The trick lies between
McCune and young Fisbee--the old man is innocent. Give me the pad. Not almost overborne. There
are three good days to work in, and, by the gods of Perdition, if Rod McCune sees Congress
it will be in his next incarnation!"

He rapidly scribbled a few lines on the pad, and threw the sheets to Meredith. "Get those telegrams
to the Western Union office in a rush, please. Read them first."

With a very red face Tom read them. One was addressed to H. Fisbee:

"You are relieved from the cares of editorship. You will turn over the management of the 'Herald'
to Warren Smith. You will give him the McCune papers. If you do not, or if you destroy them,
you cannot hide where I shall not find you.

                                    "JOHN HARKLESS."

The second was to Warren Smith: "Take possession 'Herald.' Dismiss H. Fisbee. This your authority.
Publish McCune papers so labelled which H. Fisbee will hand you. Letter follows. Beat McCune.

                                    "JOHN HARKLESS."

The author of the curt epistles tossed restlessly on his couch, but the reader of them stared,
incredulous and dumfounded, uncertain of his command of gravity. His jaw fell, and his open
mouth might have betokened a being smit to imbecility; and, haply, he might be, for Helen had
written him from Plattville, pledging his honor to secrecy with the first words, and it was
by her command that he had found excuses for not supplying his patient with all the papers
which happened to contain references to the change of date for the Plattville convention. And
Meredith had known for some time where James Fisbee had found a "young relative" to be the
savior of the "Herald" for his benefactor's sake.

"You mean--you--intend to--you discharge young Fisbee?" he stammered at last.

"Yes! Let me have the answers the instant they come, will you, Tom?" Then Harkless turned his
face from the wall and spoke through his teeth: "I mean to see H. Fisbee before many days;
I want to talk to him!"

But, though he tossed and fretted himself into what the doctor pronounced a decidedly improved
state, no answer came to either telegram that day or night. The next morning a messenger boy
stumbled up the front steps and handed the colored man, Jim, four yellow envelopes, night messages.
Three of them were for Harkless, one was for Meredith. Jim carried them upstairs, left the
three with his master's guest, then knocked on his master's door.

"What is it?" answered a thick voice. Meredith had not yet risen.

"A telegraph. Mist' Tawm."

There was a terrific yawn. "O-o-oh! Slide it--oh--under the--door."

"Yessuh."

Meredith lay quite without motion for several minutes, sleepily watching the yellow rhomboid
in the crevice. It was a hateful looking thing to come mixing in with pleasant dreams and insist
upon being read. After a while he climbed groaningly out of bed, and read the message with
heavy eyes, still half asleep. He read it twice before it penetrated:

"Suppress all newspapers to-day. Convention meets at eleven. If we succeed a delegation will
come to Rouen this afternoon. They will come.

                                          "HELEN."

Tom rubbed his sticky eyelids, and shook his head violently in a Spartan effort to rouse himself;
but what more effectively performed the task for him were certain sounds issuing from Harkless's
room, across the hall. For some minutes, Meredith had been dully conscious of a rustle and
stir in the invalid's chamber, and he began to realize that no mere tossing about a bed would
account for a noise that reached him across a wide hall and through two closed doors of thick
walnut. Suddenly he heard a quick, heavy tread, shod, in Harkless's room, and a resounding
bang, as some heavy object struck the floor. The doctor was not to come till evening; Jim had
gone down-stairs. Who wore shoes in the sick man's room? He rushed across the hall in his pyjamas
and threw open the unlocked door.

The bed was disarranged and vacant. Harkless, fully dressed, was standing in the middle of
the floor, hurling garments at a big travelling bag.

The horrified Meredith stood for a second, bleached and speechless, then he rushed upon his
friend and seized him with both hands.

"Mad, by heaven! Mad!"

"Let go of me, Tom!"

"Lunatic! Lunatic!"

"Don't stop me one instant!"

Meredith tried to force him toward the bed. "For mercy's sake, get back to bed. You're delirious,
boy!"

"Delirious nothing. I'm a well man."

"Go to bed--go to bed."

Harkless set him out of the way with one arm. "Bed be hanged!" he cried. "I'm going to Plattville!"

Meredith wrung his hands. "The doctor----"!

"Doctor be damned!"

"Will you tell me what has happened, John?"

His companion slung a light overcoat, unfolded, on the overflowing, misshapen bundle of clothes
that lay in the bag; then he jumped on the lid with both feet and kicked the hasp into the
lock; a very elegantly laundered cuff and white sleeve dangling out from between the fastened
lids. "I haven't one second to talk, Tom; I have seventeen minutes to catch the express, and
it's a mile and a half to the station; the train leaves here at eight fifty, I get to Plattville
at ten forty-seven. Telephone for a cab for me, please, or tell me the number; I don't want
to stop to hunt it up."

Meredith looked him in the eyes. In the pupils of Harkless flared a fierce light. His cheeks
were reddened with an angry, healthy glow, and his teeth were clenched till the line of his
jaw stood out like that of an embattled athlete in sculpture; his brow was dark; his chest
was thrown out, and he took deep, quick breaths; his shoulders were squared, and in spite of
his thinness they looked massy. Lethargy, or malaria, or both, whatever were his ailments,
they were gone. He was six feet of hot wrath and cold resolution.

Tom said: "You are going?"

"Yes," he answered, "I am going."

"Then I will go with you."

"Thank you, Tom," said the other quietly.

Meredith ran into his own room, pressed an electric button, sprang out of his pyjamas like
Aphrodite from the white sea-foam, and began to dive into his clothes with a panting rapidity
astonishingly foreign to his desire. Jim appeared in the doorway.

"The cart, Jim," shouted his master. "We want it like lightning. Tell the cook to give Mr.
Harkless his breakfast in a hurry. Set a cup of coffee on the table by the front door for me.
Run like the deuce! We've got to catch a train.--That will be quicker than any cab," he explained
to Harkless. "We'll break the ordinance against fast driving, getting down there."

Ten minutes later the cart swept away from the house at a gait which pained the respectable
neighborhood. The big horse plunged through the air, his ears laid flat toward his tail; the
cart careened sickeningly; the face of the servant clutching at the rail in the rear was smeared
with pallor as they pirouetted around curves on one wheel--to him it seemed they skirted the
corners and Death simultaneously--and the speed of their going made a strong wind in their faces.

Harkless leaned forward.

"Can you make it a little faster, Tom?" he said.

They dashed up to the station amid the cries of people flying to the walls for safety; the
two gentlemen leaped from the cart, bore down upon the ticket-office, stormed at the agent,
and ran madly at the gates, flourishing their passports. The official on duty eyed them wearily,
and barred the way.

"Been gone two minutes," he remarked, with a peaceable yawn.

Harkless stamped his foot on the cement flags; then he stood stock still, gazing at the empty
tracks; but Meredith turned to him, smiling.

"Won't it keep?" he asked.

"Yes, it will keep," John answered. "Part of it may have to keep till election day, but some
of it I will settle before night. And that," he cried, between his teeth, "and that is the
part of it in regard to young Mr. Fisbee!"

"Oh, it's about H. Fisbee, is it?"

"Yes, it's H. Fisbee."

"Well, we might as well go up and see what the doctor thinks of you; there's no train."

"I don't want to see a doctor again, ever--as long as I live. I'm as well as anybody."

Tom burst out laughing, and clapped his companion lightly on the shoulder, his eyes dancing
with pleasure.

"Upon my soul," he cried, "I believe you are! It's against all my tradition, and I see I am
the gull of poetry; for I've always believed it to be beyond question that this sort of miracle
was wrought, not by rage, but by the tenderer senti--" Tom checked himself. "Well, let's take
a drive."

"Meredith," said the other, turning to him gravely, "you may think me a fool, if you will,
and it's likely I am; but I don't leave this station except by train. I've only two days to
work in, and every minute lessens our chances to beat McCune, and I have to begin by wasting
time on a tussle with a traitor. There's another train at eleven fifty-five; I don't take any
chances on missing that one."

"Well, well," laughed his friend, pushing him good-humoredly toward a door by a red and white
striped pillar, "we'll wait here, if you like; but at least go in there and get a shave; it's
a clean shop. You want to look your best if you are going down to fight H. Fisbee."

"Take these, then, and you will understand," said Harkless; and he thrust his three telegrams
of the morning into Tom's hand and disappeared into the barber-shop. When he was gone, Meredith
went to the telegraph office in the station, and sent a line over the wire to Helen:

"Keep your delegation at home. He's coming on the 11.55."

Then he read the three telegrams Harkless had given him. They were all from Plattville:

"Sorry cannot oblige. Present incumbent tenacious. Unconditionally refuses surrender. Delicate
matter. No hope for K. H. But don't worry. Everything all right.

                                             "WARREN SMITH."

"Harkless, if you have the strength to walk, come down before the convention. Get here by 10.47.
Looks bad. Come if it kills you.

                                             "K. H."

"You entrusted me with sole responsibility for all matters pertaining to 'Herald.' Declared
yourself mere spectator. Does this permit your interfering with my policy for the paper? Decline
to consider any proposition to relieve me of my duties without proper warning and allowance
of time.

                                             "H. FISBEE."

CHAPTER XIX. THE GREAT HARKLESS COMES HOME

The accommodation train wandered languidly through the early afternoon sunshine, stopping at
every village and almost every country post-office on the line; the engine toot-tooting at
the road crossings; and, now and again, at such junctures, a farmer, struggling with a team
of prancing horses, would be seen, or, it might be, a group of school children, homeward bound
from seats of learning. At each station, when the train came to a stand-still, some passenger,
hanging head and elbows out of his window, like a quilt draped over a chair, would address
a citizen on the platform:

"Hey, Sam, how's Miz Bushkirk?"

"She's wal."

"Where's Milt, this afternoon?"

"Warshing the buggy." Then at the cry, "All 'board"--"See you Sunday over at Amo."

"You make Milt come. I'll be there, shore. So long."

There was an impatient passenger in the smoker, who found the stoppages at these wayside hamlets
interminable, both in frequency and in the delay at each of them; and while the dawdling train
remained inert, and the moments passed inactive, his eyes dilated and his hand clenched till
the nails bit his palm; then, when the trucks groaned and the wheels crooned against the rails
once more, he sank back in his seat with sighs of relief. Sometimes he would get up and pace
the aisle until his companion reminded him that this was not certain to hasten the hour of
their arrival at their destination.

"I know that," answered the other, "but I've got to beat McCune."

"By the way," observed Meredith, "you left your stick behind."

"You don't think I need a club to face----"

Tom choked. "Oh, no. I wasn't thinking of your giving H. Fisbee a thrashing. I meant to lean on."

"I don't want it. I've got to walk lame all my life, but I'm not going to hobble on a stick."
Tom looked at him sadly; for it was true, and the Cross-Roaders might hug themselves in their
cells over the thought. For the rest of his life John Harkless was to walk with just the limp
they themselves would have had, if, as in former days, their sentence had been to the ball
and chain.

The window was open beside the two young men, and the breeze swept in, fresh from the wide
fields, There was a tang in the air; it soothed like a balm, but there was a spur to energy
and heartiness in its crispness, the wholesome touch of fall. John looked out over the boundless
aisles of corn that stood higher than a tall man could reach; long waves rippled across them.
Here, where the cry of the brave had rung in forest glades, where the painted tribes had hastened,
were marshalled the tasselled armies of peace. And beyond these, where the train ran between
shadowy groves, delicate landscape vistas, framed in branches, opened, closed, and succeeded
each other, and then the travellers were carried out into the level open again, and the intensely
blue September skies ran down to the low horizon, meeting the tossing plumes of corn.

It takes a long time for the full beauty of the flat lands to reach a man's soul; once there,
nor hills, nor sea, nor growing fan leaves of palm shall suffice him. It is like the beauty
in the word "Indiana." It may be that there are people who do not consider "Indiana" a beautiful
word; but once it rings true in your ears it has a richer sound than "Vallombrosa."

There was a newness in the atmosphere that day, a bright invigoration, that set the blood tingling.
The hot months were done with, languor was routed. Autumn spoke to industry, told of the sowing
of another harvest, of the tawny shock, of the purple grape, of the red apple, and called upon
muscle and laughter; breathed gaiety into men's hearts. The little stations hummed with bustle
and noise; big farm wagons rattled away and raced with cut-under or omnibus; people walked
with quick steps; the baggage-masters called cheerily to the trainmen, and the brakemen laughed
good-bys to rollicking girls.

As they left Gainesville three children, clad in calico, barefoot and bareheaded, came romping
out of a log cabin on the outskirts of the town, and waved their hands to the passengers. They
climbed on the sagging gate in front of their humble domain, and laughed for joy to see the
monstrous caravan come clattering out of the unknown, bearing the faces by. The smallest child,
a little cherubic tow-head, whose cheeks were smeared with clean earth and the tracks of forgotten
tears, stood upright on a fence-post, and blew the most impudent of kisses to the strangers
on a journey.

Beyond this they came into a great plain, acres and acres of green rag-weed where the wheat
had grown, all so flat one thought of an enormous billiard table, and now, where the railroad
crossed the country roads, they saw the staunch brown thistle, sometimes the sumach, and always
the graceful iron-weed, slender, tall, proud, bowing a purple-turbaned head, or shaking in
an agony of fright when it stood too close to the train. The fields, like great, flat emeralds
set in new metal, were bordered with golden-rod, and at sight of this the heart leaped; for
the golden-rod is a symbol of stored granaries, of ripe sheaves, of the kindness of the season
generously given and abundantly received; more, it is the token of a land of promise and of
bounteous fulfilment; and the plant stains its blossom with yellow so that when it falls it
pays tribute to the ground which has nourished it.

From the plain they passed again into a thick wood, where ruddy arrows of the sun glinted among
the boughs; and, here and there, one saw a courtly maple or royal oak wearing a gala mantle
of crimson and pale brown, gallants of the forest preparing early for the October masquerade,
when they should hold wanton carnival, before they stripped them of their finery for pious gray.

And when the coughing engine drew them to the borders of this wood, they rolled out into another
rich plain of green and rust-colored corn; and far to the south John Harkless marked a winding
procession of sycamores, which, he knew, followed the course of a slender stream; and the waters
of the stream flowed by a bank where wild thyme might have grown, and where, beyond an orchard
and a rose-garden, a rustic bench was placed in the shade of the trees; and the name of the
stream was Hibbard's Creek. Here the land lay flatter than elsewhere; the sky came closer,
with a gentler benediction; the breeze blew in, laden with keener spices; there was the flavor
of apples and the smell of the walnut and a hint of coming frost; the immeasurable earth lay
more patiently to await the husbandman; and the whole world seemed to extend flat in line with
the eye--for this was Carlow County.

All at once the anger ran out of John Harkless; he was a hard man for anger to tarry with.
And in place of it a strong sense of home-coming began to take possession of him. He was going
home. "Back to Plattville, where I belong," he had said; and he said it again without bitterness,
for it was the truth. "Every man cometh to his own place in the end."

Yes, as one leaves a gay acquaintance of the playhouse lobby for some hard-handed, tried old
friend, so he would wave the outer world God-speed and come back to the old ways of Carlow.
What though the years were dusty, he had his friends and his memories and his old black brier
pipe. He had a girl's picture that he should carry in his heart till his last day; and if his
life was sadder, it was infinitely richer for it. His winter fireside should be not so lonely
for her sake; and losing her, he lost not everything, for he had the rare blessing of having
known her. And what man could wish to be healed of such a hurt? Far better to have had it than
to trot a smug pace unscathed.

He had been a dullard; he had lain prostrate in the wretchedness of his loss. "A girl you could
put in your hat--and there you have a strong man prone." He had been a sluggard, weary of himself,
unfit to fight, a failure in life and a failure in love. That was ended; he was tired of failing,
and it was time to succeed for a while. To accept the worst that Fate can deal, and to wring
courage from it instead of despair, that is success; and it was the success that he would have.
He would take Fate by the neck. But had it done him unkindness? He looked out over the beautiful,
"monotonous" landscape, and he answered heartily, "No!" There was ignorance in man, but no
unkindness; were man utterly wise he were utterly kind. The Cross-Roaders had not known better;
that was all.

The unfolding aisles of corn swam pleasantly before John's eyes. The earth hearkened to man's
wants and answered; the clement sun and summer rains hastened the fruition. Yonder stood the
brown haystack, garnered to feed the industrious horse who had earned his meed; there was the
straw-thatched shelter for the cattle. How the orchard boughs bent with their burdens! The
big red barns stood stored with the harvested wheat; and, beyond the pasture-lands, tall trees
rose against the benign sky to feed the glance of a dreamer; the fertile soil lay lavender
and glossy in the furrow. The farmhouses were warmly built and hale and strong; no winter blast
should rage so bitterly as to shake them, or scatter the hospitable embers on the hearth. For
this was Carlow County, and he was coming home.

They crossed a by-road. An old man with a streaky gray chin-beard was sitting on a sack of
oats in a seatless wagon, waiting for the train to pass. Harkless seized his companion excitedly
by the elbow.

"Tommy!" he cried. "It's Kim Fentriss--look! Did you see that old fellow?"

"I saw a particularly uninterested and uninteresting gentleman sitting on a bag," replied his
friend.

"Why, that's old Kimball Fentriss. He's going to town; he lives on the edge of the county."

"Can this be true?" said Meredith gravely.

"I wonder," said Harkless thoughtfully, a few moments later, "I wonder why he had them changed
around."

