As we have seen, their Majesties had not a numerous suite; but they were, notwithstanding,
followed by baggage-wagons filled with furniture, goods, and valuable articles, and though
their carriages were old-fashioned, they found them very comfortable--especially the king,
who was much embarrassed the day after his arrival at Bayonne, when, having been invited to
dine with the Emperor, it was necessary to enter a modern carriage with two steps.  He did
not dare to put his foot on the frail things, which he feared would break under his weight;
and the oscillating movement of the body of the carriage made him terribly afraid that it would
upset.

At the table I had an opportunity of observing at my leisure the king and queen.  The king
was of medium height, and though not strictly handsome had a pleasant face.  His nose was very
long, his voice high-pitched and disagreeable; and he walked with a mincing air in which there
was no majesty, but this, however, I attributed to the gout.  He ate heartily of everything
offered him, except vegetables, which he never ate, saying that grass was good only for cattle;
and drank only water, having it served in two carafes, one containing ice, and poured from
both at the same time.  The Emperor gave orders that special attention should be paid to the
dinner, knowing that the king was somewhat of an epicure.  He praised in high terms the French
cooking, which he seemed to find much to his taste; for as each dish was served him, he would
say, "Louise, take some of that, it is good;" which greatly amused the Emperor, whose abstemiousness
is well known.

The queen was fat and short, dressed very badly, and had no style or grace; her complexion
was very florid, and her expression harsh and severe.  She held her head high, spoke very loud,
in tones still more brusque and piercing than those of her husband; but it is generally conceded
that she had more character and better manners than he.

Before dinner that day there was some conversation on the subject of dress; and the Empress
offered the services of M. Duplan, her hairdresser, in order to give her ladies some lessons
in the French toilet.  Her proposition was accepted; and the queen came out soon after from
the hands of M. Duplan, better dressed, no doubt, and her hair better arranged, but not beautified,
however, for the talent of the hairdresser could not go as far as that.

The Prince of the Asturias, now King Ferdinand VII., made an unpleasant impression on all,
with his heavy step and careworn air, and rarely ever speaking.

Their Spanish Majesties as before brought with them the Prince de la Paix, who had not been
invited by the Emperor, and whom for this reason the usher on duty detained outside of the
dining-hall.  But as they were about to be seated, the king perceived that the prince was absent.
"And Manuel," said he quickly to the Emperor, "and Manuel, Sire!"  Whereupon the Emperor, smiling,
gave the signal, and Don Manuel Godoi was introduced.  I was told that he had been a very handsome
man; but he showed no signs of this, which was perhaps owing to the bad treatment he had undergone.

After the abdication of the princes, the king and queen, the Queen of Etruria, and the Infant
Don Franciso, left Bayonne for Fontainebleau, which place the Emperor had selected as their
residence while waiting until the chateau of Compiegne should be put in a condition to make
them comfortable.  The Prince of the Asturias left the same day, with his brother Don Carlos
and his uncle Don Antonio, for the estates of Valencay belonging to the Prince of Benevento.
They published, while passing through Bordeaux, a proclamation to the Spanish people, in which
they confirmed the transmission of all their rights to the Emperor Napoleon.

Thus King Charles, freed from a throne which he had always regarded as a heavy burden, could
hereafter give himself up unreservedly in retirement to his favorite pursuits.  In all the
world he cared only for the Prince de la Paix, confessors, watches, and music; and the throne
was nothing to him.  After what had passed, the Prince de la Paix could not return to Spain;
and the king would never have consented to be separated from him, even if the remembrance of
the insults which he had personally received had not been powerful enough to disgust him with
his kingdom.  He much preferred the life of a private individual, and could not be happier
than when allowed without interruption to indulge his simple and tranquil tastes.  On his arrival
at the chateau of Fontainebleau, he found there M. Remusat, the first chamberlain; M. de Caqueray,
officer of the hunt; M. de Lugay, prefect of the palace; and a household already installed.
Mesdames de la Rochefoucault, Duchatel, and de Lugay had been selected by the Emperor for the
service of honor near the queen.

The King of Spain remained at Fontainebleau only until the chateau of Compiegne could be repaired,
and as he soon found the climate of this part of France too cold for his health, went, at the
end of a few months, to Marseilles with the Queen of Etruria, the Infant Don Francisco, and
the Prince de la Paix.  In 1811 he left France for Italy, finding his health still bad at Marseilles,
and chose Rome as his residence.

I spoke above of the fondness of the King of Spain for watches.  I have been told that while
at Fontainebleau, he had half a dozen of his watches worn by his valet de chambre, and wore
as many himself, giving as a reason that pocket watches lose time by not being carried.  I
have also heard that he kept his confessor always near him, in the antechamber, or in the room
in front of that in which he worked, and that when he wished to speak to him he whistled, exactly
as one would whistle for a dog.  The confessor never failed to respond promptly to this royal
call, and followed his penitent into the embrasure of a window, in which improvised confessional
the king divulged what he had on his conscience, received absolution, and sent back the priest
until he felt himself obliged to whistle for him again.

When the health of the king, enfeebled by age and gout, no longer allowed him to devote himself
to the pleasures of the chase, he began playing on the violin more than ever before, in order,
he said, to perfect himself in it.  This was beginning rather late.  As is well known, he had
for his first violin teacher the celebrated Alexander Boucher, with whom he greatly enjoyed
playing; but he had a mania for beginning first without paying any attention to the measure;
and if M. Boucher made any observation in regard to this, his Majesty would reply with the
greatest coolness, "Monsieur, it seems to me that it is not my place to wait for you."

Between the departure of the royal family and the arrival of Joseph, King of Naples, the time
was passed in reviews and military fetes, which the Emperor frequently honored with his presence.
The 7th of June, King Joseph arrived at Bayonne, where it had been known long in advance that
his brother had summoned him to exchange his crown of Naples for that of Spain.

The evening of Joseph's arrival, the Emperor invited the members of the Spanish Junta, who
for fifteen days had been arriving at Bayonne from all corners of the kingdom, to assemble
at the chateau of Marrac, and congratulate the new king.  The deputies accepted this somewhat
sudden invitation without having time to concert together previously any course of action;
and on their arrival at Marrac, the Emperor presented to them their sovereign, whom they acknowledged,
with the exception of some opposition on the part of the Duke of Infantado, in the name of
the grandees of Spain.  The deputations from the Council of Castile, from the Inquisition,
and from the army, etc., submitted most readily.  A few days after, the king formed his ministry,
in which all were astonished to find M. de Cevallos, who had accompanied the Prince of the
Asturias to Bayonne, and had made such a parade of undying attachment to the person of the
one whom he called his unfortunate master; while the Duke of Infantado, who had opposed to
the utmost any recognition of the foreign monarch, was appointed Captain of the Guard.  The
king then left for Madrid, after appointing the Grand Duke of Berg lieutenant-general of the
kingdom.

CHAPTER X.

At this time it was learned at Bayonne that M. de Belloy, Archbishop of Paris, had just died
of a cold, contracted at the age of more than ninety-eight years.  The day after this sad news
arrived, the Emperor, who was sincerely grieved, was dilating upon the great and good qualities
of this venerable prelate, and said that having one day thoughtlessly remarked to M. de Belloy,
then already more than ninety-six years old, that he would live a century, the good old archbishop
had exclaimed, smiling, "Why, does your Majesty think that I have no more than four years to live?"

I remember that one of the persons who was present at the Emperor's levee related the following
anecdote concerning M. de Belloy, which seemed to excite the Emperor's respect and admiration.

The wife of the hangman of Genoa gave birth to a daughter, who could not be baptized because
no one would act as godfather.  In vain the father begged and entreated the few persons whom
he knew, in vain he even offered money; that was an impossibility.  The poor child had consequently
remained unbaptized four or five months, though fortunately her health gave no cause for uneasiness.
At last some one mentioned this singular condition of affairs to the archbishop, who listened
to the story with much interest, inquired why he had not been informed earlier, and having
given orders that the child should be instantly brought to him, baptized her in his palace,
and was himself her godfather.

At the beginning of July the Grand Duke of Berg returned from Spain, fatigued, ill, and out
of humor.  He remained there only two or three days, and held each day an interview with his
Majesty, who seemed little better satisfied with the grand duke than the grand duke was with
him, and left afterwards for the springs of Bareges.

Their Majesties, the Emperor and Empress, left the chateau of Marrac the 20th of July, at six
o'clock in the evening.  This journey of the Emperor was one of those which cost the largest
number of snuff-boxes set in diamonds, for his Majesty was not economical with them.

Their Majesties arrived at Pau on the 22d, at ten o'clock in the morning, and alighted at the
chateau of Gelos, situated about a quarter of a league from the birthplace of the good Henry
IV., on the bank of the river.  The day was spent in receptions and horseback excursions, on
one of which the Emperor visited the chateau in which the first king of the house of Bourbon
was reared, and showed how much this visit interested him, by prolonging it until the dinner-hour.

On the border of the department of the Hautes-Pyrenees, and exactly in the most desolate and
miserable part, was erected an arch of triumph, which seemed a miracle fallen from heaven in
the midst of those plains uncultivated and burned up by the sun.  A guard of honor awaited
their Majesties, ranged around this rural monument, at their head an old marshal of the camp,
M. de Noe, more than eighty years of age.  This worthy old soldier immediately took his place
by the side of the carriage, and as cavalry escort remained on horseback for a day and two
nights without showing the least fatigue.

