The shoemaker in the country, who abandons his wonted labor in the field, which is so grateful
to him, and betakes himself to his trade, in order to repair or make boots for his neighbors,
always deprives himself of the pleasant toil of the field, simply because he likes to make
boots, because he knows that no one else can do it so well as he, and that people will be grateful
to him for it; but the desire cannot occur to him, to deprive himself, for the whole period
of his life, of the cheering rotation of labor.

It is the same with the starosta [village elder], the machinist, the writer, the learned man.
To us, with our corrupt conception of things, it seems, that if a steward has been relegated
to the position of a peasant by his master, or if a minister has been sent to the colonies,
he has been chastised, he has been ill-treated.  But in reality a benefit has been conferred
on him; that is to say, his special, hard labor has been changed into a cheerful rotation of
labor.  In a naturally constituted society, this is quite otherwise.  I know of one community
where the people supported themselves.  One of the members of this society was better educated
than the rest; and they called upon him to read, so that he was obliged to prepare himself
during the day, in order that he might read in the evening.  This he did gladly, feeling that
he was useful to others, and that he was performing a good deed.  But he grew weary of exclusively
intellectual work, and his health suffered from it.  The members of the community took pity
on him, and requested him to go to work in the fields.

For men who regard labor as the substance and the joy of life, the basis, the foundation of
life will always be the struggle with nature,--labor both agricultural and mechanical, and
intellectual, and the establishment of communion between men.  Departure from one or from many
of these varieties of labor, and the adoption of special labor, will then only occur when the
man possessed of a special branch, and loving this work, and knowing that he can perform it
better than others, sacrifices his own profit for the satisfaction of the direct demands made
upon him.  Only on condition of such a view of labor, and of the natural division of labor
arising from it, is that curse which is laid upon our idea of labor abrogated, and does every
sort of work becomes always a joy; because a man will either perform that labor which is undoubtedly
useful and joyous, and not dull, or he will possess the consciousness of self-abnegation in
the fulfilment of more difficult and restricted toil, which he exercises for the good of others.

But the division of labor is more profitable.  More profitable for whom? It is more profitable
in making the greatest possible quantity of calico, and boots in the shortest possible time.
But who will make these boots and this calico?  There are people who, for whole generations,
make only the heads of pins.  Then how can this be more profitable for men?  If the point lies
in manufacturing as much calico and as many pins as possible, then this is so.  But the point
concerns men and their welfare.  And the welfare of men lies in life.  And life is work.  How,
then, can the necessity for burdensome, oppressive toil be more profitable for people? For
all men, that one thing is more profitable which I desire for myself,--the utmost well-being,
and the gratification of all those requirements, both bodily and spiritual, of the conscience
and of the reason, which are imposed upon me.