On October 26th the Constitution and Hornet sailed, touched at the different rendezvous, and
on December 13th arrived off San Salvador, where Captain Lawrence found the Bonne Citoyenne,
18, Captain Pitt Barnaby Greene. The Bonne Citoyenne was armed with 18 32-pound carronades
and 2 long nines, and her crew of 150 men was exactly equal in number to that of the Hornet;
the latter's short weight in metal made her antagonist superior to her in about the same proportion
that she herself was subsequently superior to the Penguin, or, in other words, the ships were
practically equal. Captain Lawrence now challenged Captain Greene to single fight, giving the
usual pledges that the Constitution should not interfere. The challenge was not accepted for
a variety of reasons; among others the Bonne Citoyenne was carrying home half a million pounds
in specie. [Footnote: Brenton and James both deny that Captain Greene was blockaded by the
Hornet, and claim that he feared the Constitution. James says (p. 275) that the occurrence
was one which "the characteristic cunning of Americans turned greatly to their advantage";
and adds that Lawrence only sent the challenge because "it could not be accepted," and so he
would "suffer no personal risk." He states that the reason it was sent, as well as the reason
that it was refused, was because the Constitution was going to remain in the offing and capture
the British ship if she proved conqueror. It is somewhat surprising that even James should
have had the temerity to advance such arguments. According to his own account (p. 277) the
Constitution left for Boston on Jan. 6th, and the Hornet remained blockading the Bonne Citoyenne
till the 24th, when the Montagu, 74, arrived. During these eighteen days there could have been
no possible chance of the Constitution or any other ship interfering, and it is ridiculous
to suppose that any such fear kept Captain Greene from sailing out to attack his foe. No doubt
Captain Greene's course was perfectly justifiable, but it is curious that with all the assertions
made by James as to the cowardice of the Americans, this is the only instance throughout the
war in which a ship of either party declined a contest with an antagonist of equal force (the
cases of Commodore Rodgers and Sir George Collier being evidently due simply to an overestimate
of the opposing ships.)] Leaving the Hornet to blockade her, Commodore Bainbridge ran off to
the southward, keeping the land in view.

At 9 A. M., Dec. 29, 1812, while the Constitution was running along the coast of Brazil, about
thirty miles offshore in latitude 13 deg. 6' S., and longitude 31 deg. W., two strange sail
were made, [Footnote: Official letter of Commodore Bainbridge, Jan. 3, 1813.] inshore and to
windward. These were H. B. M. frigate Java, Captain Lambert, forty-eight days out of Spithead,
England, with the captured ship William in company. Directing the latter to make for San Salvador,
the Java bore down in chase of the Constitution. [Footnote: Official letter of Lieutenant Chads,
Dec. 31, 1812.] The wind was blowing light from the N.N.E., and there was very little sea on.
At 10 the Java made the private signals, English, Spanish, and Portuguese in succession, none
being answered; meanwhile the Constitution was standing up toward the Java on the starboard
tack; a little after 11 she hoisted her private signal, and then, being satisfied that the
strange sail was an enemy, she wore and stood off toward the S.E., to draw her antagonist away
from the land, [Footnote: Log of the Constitution.] which was plainly visible. The Java hauled
up, and made sail in a parallel course, the Constitution bearing about three points on her
lee bow. The Java gained rapidly, being much the swifter.

At 1.30 the Constitution luffed up, shortened her canvas to top-sails, top-gallant sails, jib,
and spanker, and ran easily off on the port tack, heading toward the southeast; she carried
her commodore's pendant at the main, national ensigns at the mizzenpeak and main top-gallant
mast-head, and a Jack at the fore. The Java also had taken in the main-sail and royals, and
came down in a lasking course on her adversary's weather-quarter, [Footnote: Lieutenant Chads'
Address to the Court-martial, April 23, 1813.] hoisting her ensign at the mizzen-peak, a union
Jack at the mizzen top-gallant mast-head, and another lashed to the main-rigging. At 2 P. M.,
the Constitution fired a shot ahead of her, following it quickly by a broadside, [Footnote:
Commodore Bainbridge's letter.] and the two ships began at long bowls, the English firing the
lee or starboard battery while the Americans replied with their port guns. The cannonade was
very spirited on both sides, the ships suffering about equally. The first broadside of the
Java was very destructive, killing and wounding several of the Constitution's crew. The Java
kept edging down, and the action continued, with grape and musketry in addition; the swifter
British ship soon forereached and kept away, intending to wear across her slower antagonist's
bow and rake her; but the latter wore in the smoke, and the two combatants ran off to the westward,
the Englishman still a-weather and steering freer than the Constitution, which had luffed to
close. [Footnote: Log of the Constitution.] The action went on at pistol-shot distance. In
a few minutes, however, the Java again forged ahead, out of the weight of her adversary's fire,
and then kept off, as before, to cross her bows; and, as before, the Constitution avoided this
by wearing, both ships again coming round with their heads to the east, the American still
to leeward. The Java kept the weather-gage tenaciously, forereaching a little, and whenever
the Constitution luffed up to close, [Footnote: Log of Constitution.] the former tried to rake
her. But her gunnery was now poor, little damage being done by it; most of the loss the Americans
suffered was early in the action. By setting her foresail and main-sail the Constitution got
up close on the enemy's lee beam, her fire being very heavy and carrying away the end of the
Java's bowsprit and her jib-boom. [Footnote: Lieutenant Chads' letter.] The Constitution forged
ahead and repeated her former manoeuvre, wearing in the smoke. The Java at once hove in stays,
but owing to the loss of head-sail fell off very slowly, and the American frigate poured a
heavy raking broadside into her stern, at about two cables' length distance. The Java replied
with her port guns as she fell off. [Footnote: Lieutenant Chads' letter.] Both vessels then
bore up and ran off free, with the wind on the port quarter; the Java being abreast and to
windward of her antagonist, both with their heads a little east of south. The ships were less
than a cable's length apart, and the Constitution inflicted great damage while suffering very
little herself. The British lost many men by the musketry of the American topmen, and suffered
still more from the round and grape, especially on the forecastle, [Footnote: Testimony of
Christopher Speedy, in minutes of the Court-martial on board H. M. S. Gladiator, at Portsmouth,
April 23, 1813] many marked instances of valor being shown on both sides. The Java's masts
were wounded and her rigging cut to pieces, and Captain Lambert then ordered her to be laid
aboard the enemy, who was on her lee beam. The helm was put a-weather, and the Java came down
for the Constitution's main-chains. The boarders and marines gathered in the gangways and on
the forecastle, the boatswain having been ordered to cheer them up with his pipe that they
might make a clean spring. [Footnote: Testimony of James Humble, in do., do.] The Americans,
however, raked the British with terrible effect, cutting off their main top-mast above the
cap, and their foremast near the cat harpings. [Footnote: Log of Constitution.] The stump of
the Java's bowsprit got caught in the Constitution's mizzen-rigging, and before it got clear
the British suffered still more.

Finally the ships separated, the Java's bowsprit passing over the taffrail of the Constitution;
the latter at once kept away to avoid being raked. The ships again got nearly abreast, but
the Constitution, in her turn, forereached; whereupon Commodore Bainbridge wore, passed his
antagonist, luffed up under his quarter, raked him with the starboard guns, then wore, and
recommenced the action with his port broadside at about 3.10. Again the vessels were abreast,
and the action went on as furiously as ever. The wreck of the top hamper on the Java lay over
her starboard side, so that every discharge of her guns set her on fire, [Footnote: Lieut.
Chads' Address.] and in a few minutes her able and gallant commander was mortally wounded by
a ball fired by one of the American main-top-men. [Footnote: Surgeon J. C. Jones' Report.]
The command then devolved on the first lieutenant, Chads, himself painfully wounded. The slaughter
had been terrible, yet the British fought on with stubborn resolution, cheering lustily. But
success was now hopeless, for nothing could stand against the cool precision of the Yankee
fire. The stump of the Java's foremast was carried away by a double-headed shot, the mizzen-mast
fell, the gaff and spanker boom were shot away, also the main-yard, and finally the ensign
was cut down by a shot, and all her guns absolutely silenced; when at 4.05 the Constitution,
thinking her adversary had struck, [Footnote: Log of the Constitution (as given in Bainbridge's
letter).] ceased firing, hauled aboard her racks, and passed across her adversary's bows to
windward, with her top-sails, jib, and spanker set. A few minutes afterward the Java's main-mast
fell, leaving her a sheer hulk. The Constitution assumed a weatherly position, and spent an
hour in repairing damages and securing her masts; then she wore and stood toward her enemy,
whose flag was again flying, but only for bravado, for as soon as the Constitution stood across
her forefoot she struck. At 5.25 she was taken possession of by Lieutenant Parker, 1st of the
Constitution, in one of the latter's only two remaining boats.

The American ship had suffered comparatively little. But a few round shot had struck her hull,
one of which carried away the wheel; one 18-pounder went through the mizzen-mast; the fore-mast,
main-top-mast, and a few other spars were slightly wounded, and the running rigging and shrouds
were a good deal cut; but in an hour she was again in good fighting trim. Her loss amounted
to 8 seamen and 1 marine killed; the 5th lieutenant, John C. Alwyn, and 2 seamen, mortally,
Commodore Bainbridge and 12 seamen, severely, and 7 seamen and 2 marines, slightly wounded;
in all 12 killed and mortally wounded, and 22 wounded severely and slightly. [Footnote: Report
of Surgeon Amos A. Evans.]

"The Java sustained unequalled injuries beyond the Constitution," says the British account.
[Footnote: "Naval Chronicle," xxix. 452.] These have already been given in detail; she was
a riddled and entirely dismasted hulk. Her loss (for discussion of which see farther on) was
48 killed (including Captain Henry Lambert, who died soon after the close of the action, and
five midshipmen), and 102 wounded, among them Lieutenant Henry Ducie Chads, Lieutenant of Marines
David Davies, Commander John Marshall, Lieut. James Saunders, the boatswain. James Humble,
master, Batty Robinson, and four midshipmen.

In this action both ships displayed equal gallantry and seamanship. "The Java," says Commodore
Bainbridge, "was exceedingly well handled and bravely fought. Poor Captain Lambert was a distinguished
and gallant officer, and a most worthy man, whose death I sincerely regret." The manoeuvring
on both sides was excellent; Captain Lambert used the advantage which his ship possessed in
her superior speed most skilfully, always endeavoring to run across his adversary's bows and
rake him when he had forereached, and it was only owing to the equal skill which his antagonist
displayed that he was foiled, the length of the combat being due to the number of evolutions.
The great superiority of the Americans was in their gunnery. The fire of the Java was both
less rapid and less well directed than that of her antagonist; the difference of force against
her was not heavy, being about as ten is to nine, and was by no means enough to account for
the almost fivefold greater loss she suffered.

The foregoing is a diagram of the battle. It differs from both of the official accounts, as
these conflict greatly both as to time and as regards some of the evolutions. I generally take
the mean in cases of difference; for example, Commodore Bainbridge's report makes the fight
endure but 1 hour and 55 minutes, Lieutenant Chads' 2 hours and 25 minutes: I have made it
2 hours and 10 minutes, etc., etc.

The tonnage and weight of metal of the combatants have already been stated; I will give the
complements shortly. The following is the

                COMPARATIVE FORCE AND LOSS.
                                                       Relative
                       Weight   No.         Relative     Loss
                Tons.   Metal.  Men.  Loss.   Force.   Inflicted.
Constitution    1576     654    475     34     100        100
Java            1340     576    426    150      89         23

In hardly another action the war do the accounts of the respective forces differ so widely;
the official British letter makes their total of men at the beginning of the action 377, of
whom Commodore Bainbridge officially reports that he paroled 378! The British state their loss
in killed and mortally wounded at 24; Commodore Bainbridge reports that the dead alone amounted
to nearly 60! Usually I have taken each commander's account of his own force and loss, and
I should do so now if it were not that the British accounts differ among themselves, and whenever
they relate to the Americans, are flatly contradicted by the affidavits of the latter's officers.
The British first handicap themselves by the statement that the surgeon of the Constitution
was an Irishman and lately an assistant surgeon in the British navy ("Naval Chronicle," xxix,
452); which draws from Surgeon Amos A. Evans a solemn statement in the Boston Gazette that
he was born in Maryland and was never in the British navy in his life. Then Surgeon Jones of
the Java, in his official report, after giving his own killed and mortally wounded at 24, says
that the Americans lost in all about 60, and that 4 of their amputations perished under his
own eyes; whereupon Surgeon Evans makes the statement (Niles' Register, vi, p. 35), backed
up by affidavits of his brother officers, that in all he had but five amputations, of whom
only one died, and that one, a month after Surgeon Jones had left the ship. To meet the assertions
of Lieutenant Chads that he began action with but 377 men, the Constitution's officers produced
the Java's muster-roll, dated Nov. 17th, or five days after she had sailed, which showed 446
persons, of whom 20 had been put on board a prize. The presence of this large number of supernumeraries
on board is explained by the fact that the Java was carrying out Lieutenant-General Hislop,
the newly-appointed Governor of Bombay, and his suite, together with part of the crews for
the Cornwallis, 74, and gun-sloops Chameleon and Icarus; she also contained stores for those
two ships.

Besides conflicting with the American reports, the British statements contradict one another.
The official published report gives but two midshipmen as killed; while one of the volumes
of the "Naval Chronicle" (vol. xxix, p. 452) contains a letter from one of the Java's lieutenants,
in which he states that there were five. Finally, Commodore Bainbridge found on board the Constitution,
after the prisoners had left, a letter from Lieutenant H. D. Cornick, dated Jan. 1, 1813, and
addressed to Lieutenant Peter V. Wood, 22d Regiment, foot, in which he states that 65 of their
men were killed. James ("Naval Occurrences") gets around this by stating that it was probably
a forgery; but, aside from the improbability of Commodore Bainbridge being a forger, this could
not be so, for nothing would have been easier than for the British lieutenant to have denied
having written it, which he never did. On the other hand, it would be very likely that in the
heat of the action, Commodore Bainbridge and the Java's own officers should overestimate the
latter's loss. [Footnote: For an account of the shameless corruption then existing in the Naval
Administration of Great Britain, see Lord Dundonald's "Autobiography of a seaman." The letters
of the commanders were often garbled, as is mentioned by Brenton. Among numerous cases that
he gives, may be mentioned the cutting out of the Chevrette, where he distinctly says, "our
loss was much greater than was ever acknowledged." (Vol. i, p. 505, edition of 1837.)]

Taking all these facts into consideration, we find 446 men on board the Java by her own muster-list;
378 of these were paroled by Commodore Bainbridge at San Salvador; 24 men were acknowledged
by the enemy to be killed or mortally wounded; 20 were absent in a prize, leaving 24 unaccounted
for, who were undoubtedly slain.

The British loss was thus 48 men killed and mortally wounded, and 102 wounded severely and
slightly. The Java was better handled and more desperately defended than the Macedonian or
even the Guerriere. and the odds against her were much smaller; so she caused her opponent
greater loss, though her gunnery was no better than theirs.

Lieutenant Parker, prize-master of the Java, removed all the prisoners and baggage to the Constitution,
and reported the prize to be in a very disabled state; owing partly to this, but more to the
long distance from home and the great danger there was of recapture, Commodore Bainbridge destroyed
her on the 31st, and then made sail for San Salvador. "Our gallant enemy," reports Lieutenant
Chads, "has treated us most generously"; and Lieutenant-General Hislop presented the Commodore
with a very handsome sword as a token of gratitude for the kindness with which he had treated
the prisoners.

Partly in consequence of his frigate's injuries, but especially because of her decayed condition,
Commodore Bainbridge sailed from San Salvador on Jan. 6, 1813, reaching Boston Feb. 27th, after
his four months' cruise. At San Salvador he left the Hornet still blockading the Bonne Citoyenne.

In order "to see ourselves as others see us," I shall again quote from Admiral Jurien de la
Graviere, [Footnote "Guerres Maritimes," ii, 284 (Paris, 1881).] as his opinions are certainly
well worthy of attention both as to these first three battles, and as to the lessons they teach.
"When the American Congress declared war on England in 1812," he says, "it seemed as if this
unequal conflict would crush her navy in the act of being born; instead, it but fertilized
the germ. It is only since that epoch that the United States has taken rank among maritime
powers. Some combats of frigates, corvettes, and brigs, insignificant without doubt as regards
material results, sufficed to break the charm which protected the standard of St. George, and
taught Europe what she could have already learned from some of our combats, if the louder noise
of our defeats had not drowned the glory, that the only invincibles on the sea are good seamen
and good artillerists.

"The English covered the ocean with their cruisers when this unknown navy, composed of six
frigates and a few small craft hitherto hardly numbered, dared to establish its cruisers at
the mouth of the Channel, in the very centre of the British power. But already the Constitution
had captured the Guerriere and Java, the United States had made a prize of the Macedonian,
the Wasp of the Frolic, and the Hornet of the Peacock. The honor of the new flag was established.
England, humiliated, tried to attribute her multiplied reverses to the unusual size of the
vessels which Congress had had constructed in 1799, and which did the fighting in 1812. She
wished to refuse them the name of frigates, and called them, not without some appearance of
reason, disguised line-of-battle ships. Since then all maritime powers have copied these gigantic
models, as the result of the war of 1812 obliged England herself to change her naval material;
but if they had employed, instead of frigates, cut-down 74's (vaisseaux rases), it would still
be difficult to explain the prodigious success of the Americans. * * *

"In an engagement which terminated in less than half an hour, the English frigate Guerriere,
completely dismasted, had fifteen men killed, sixty-three wounded, and more than thirty shot
below the water-line. She sank twelve hours after the combat. The Constitution, on the contrary,
had but seven men killed and seven wounded, and did not lose a mast. As soon as she had replaced
a few cut ropes and changed a few sails, she was in condition, even by the testimony of the
British historian, to take another Guerriere. The United States took an hour and a half to
capture the Macedonian, and the same difference made itself felt in the damage suffered by
the two ships. The Macedonian had her masts shattered, two of her main-deck and all her spar-deck
guns disabled; more than a hundred shot had penetrated the hull, and over a third of the crew
had suffered by the hostile fire. The American frigate, on the contrary, had to regret but
five men killed and seven wounded; her guns had been fired each sixty-six times to the Macedonian's
thirty-six. The combat of the Constitution and the Java lasted two hours, and was the most
bloody of these three engagements. The Java only struck when she had been razed like a sheer
hulk; she had twenty-two men killed and one hundred and two wounded.

       *       *       *       *       *

"This war should be studied with unceasing diligence; the pride of two peoples to whom naval
affairs are so generally familiar has cleared all the details and laid bare all the episodes,
and through the sneers which the victors should have spared, merely out of care for their own
glory, at every step can be seen that great truth, that there is only success for those who
know how to prepare it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It belongs to us to judge impartially these marine events, too much exalted perhaps by a national
vanity one is tempted to excuse. The Americans showed, in the War of 1812, a great deal of
skill and resolution. But if, as they have asserted, the chances had always been perfectly
equal between them and their adversaries, if they had only owed their triumphs to the intrepidity
of Hull, Decatur, and Bainbridge, there would be for us but little interest in recalling the
struggle. We need not seek lessons in courage outside of our own history. On the contrary,
what is to be well considered is that the ships of the United States constantly fought with
chances in their favor, and it is on this that the American government should found its true
title to glory. * * * The Americans in 1812 had secured to themselves the advantage of a better
organization [than the English]."

The fight between the Constitution and the Java illustrates best the proposition, "that there
is only success for those who know how to prepare it." Here the odds in men and metal were
only about as 10 to 9 in favor of the victors, and it is safe to say that they might have been
reversed without vitally affecting the result. In the fight Lambert handled his ship as skilfully
as Bainbridge did his; and the Java's men proved by their indomitable courage that they were
excellent material. The Java's crew was new shipped for the voyage, and had been at sea but
six weeks; in the Constitution's first fight her crew had been aboard of her but five weeks.
So the chances should have been nearly equal, and the difference in fighting capacity that
was shown by the enormous disparity in the loss, and still more in the damage inflicted, was
due to the fact that the officers of one ship had, and the officers of the other had not, trained
their raw crews. The Constitution's men were not "picked," but simply average American sailors,
as the Java's were average British sailors. The essential difference was in the training.

During the six weeks the Java was at sea her men had fired but six broadsides, of blank cartridges;
during the first five weeks the Constitution cruised, her crew were incessantly practised at
firing with blank cartridges and also at a target. [Footnote: In looking through the logs of
the Constitution, Hornet, etc., we continually find such entries as "beat to quarters, exercised
the men at the great guns," "exercised with musketry," "exercised the boarders," "exercised
the great guns, blank cartridges, and afterward firing at mark."] The Java's crew had only
been exercised occasionally, even in pointing the guns, and when the captain of a gun was killed
the effectiveness of the piece was temporarily ruined, and, moreover, the men did not work
together. The Constitution's crew were exercised till they worked like machines, and yet with
enough individuality to render it impossible to cripple a gun by killing one man. The unpractised
British sailors fired at random; the trained Americans took aim. The British marines had not
been taught any thing approximating to skirmishing or sharp-shooting; the Americans had. The
British sailors had not even been trained enough in the ordinary duties of seamen; while the
Americans in five weeks had been rendered almost perfect. The former were at a loss what to
do in an emergency at all out of their own line of work; they were helpless when the wreck
fell over their guns, when the Americans would have cut it away in a jiffy. As we learn from
Commodore Morris' "Autobiography," each Yankee sailor could, at need, do a little carpentering
or sail-mending, and so was more self-reliant. The crew had been trained to act as if guided
by one mind, yet each man retained his own individuality. The petty officers were better paid
than in Great Britain, and so were of a better class of men, thoroughly self-respecting; the
Americans soon got their subordinates in order, while the British did not. To sum up: one ship's
crew had been trained practically and thoroughly, while the other crew was not much better
off than the day it sailed; and, as far as it goes, this is a good test of the efficiency of
the two navies.

The U.S. brig Vixen, 12, Lieutenant George U. Read, had been cruising off the southern coast;
on Nov. 22d she fell in with the Southampton, 32, Captain Sir James Lucas Yeo, and was captured
after a short but severe trial of speed. Both vessels were wrecked soon afterward.

The Essex, 32, Captain David Porter, left the Delaware on Oct. 28th, two days after Commodore
Bainbridge had left Boston. She expected to make a very long cruise and so carried with her
an unusual quantity of stores and sixty more men than ordinarily, so that her muster-roll contained
319 names. Being deep in the water she reached San Jago after Bainbridge had left. Nothing
was met with until after the Essex had crossed the equator in longitude 30 deg. W. on Dec.
11th. On the afternoon of the next day a sail was made out to windward, and chased. At nine
in the evening it was overtaken, and struck after receiving a volley of musketry which killed
one man. The prize proved to be the British packet Nocton, of 10 guns and 31 men, with $55,000
in specie aboard. The latter was taken out, and the Nocton sent home with Lieutenant Finch
and a prize crew of 17 men, but was recaptured by a British frigate.

The next appointed rendezvous was the Island of Fernando de Noronha, where Captain Porter found
a letter from Commodore Bainbridge, informing him that the other vessels were off Cape Frio.
Thither cruised Porter, but his compatriots had left. On the 29th he captured an English merchant
vessel; and he was still cruising when the year closed.

The year 1812, on the ocean, ended as gloriously as it had begun. In four victorious fights
the disparity in loss had been so great as to sink the disparity of force into insignificance.
Our successes had been unaccompanied by any important reverse. Nor was it alone by the victories,
but by the cruises, that the year was noteworthy. The Yankee men-of-war sailed almost in sight
of the British coast and right in the tract of the merchant fleets and their armed protectors.
Our vessels had shown themselves immensely superior to their foes.

The reason of these striking and unexpected successes was that our navy in 1812 was the exact
reverse of what our navy is now, in 1882. I am not alluding to the personnel, which still remains
excellent; but, whereas we now have a large number of worthless vessels, standing very low
down in their respective classes, we then possessed a few vessels, each unsurpassed by any
foreign ship of her class. To bring up our navy to the condition in which it stood in 1812
it would not be necessary (although in reality both very wise and in the end very economical)
to spend any more money than at present; only instead of using it to patch up a hundred antiquated
hulks, it should be employed in building half a dozen ships on the most effective model. If
in 1812 our ships had borne the same relation to the British ships that they do now, not all
the courage and skill of our sailors would have won us a single success. As it was, we could
only cope with the lower rates, and had no vessels to oppose to the great "liners"; but to-day
there is hardly any foreign ship, no matter how low its rate, that is not superior to the corresponding
American ones. It is too much to hope that our political shortsightedness will ever enable
us to have a navy that is first-class in point of size; but there certainly seems no reason
why what ships we have should not be of the very best quality. The effect of a victory is two-fold,
moral and material. Had we been as roughly handled on water as we were on land during the first
year of the war, such a succession of disasters would have had a most demoralizing effect on
the nation at large. As it was, our victorious seafights, while they did not inflict any material
damage upon the colossal sea-might of England, had the most important results in the feelings
they produced at home and even abroad. Of course they were magnified absurdly by most of our
writers at the time; but they do not need to be magnified, for as they are any American can
look back upon them with the keenest national pride. For a hundred and thirty years England
had had no equal on the sea; and now she suddenly found one in the untried navy of an almost
unknown power.

BRITISH VESSELS CAPTURED OR DESTROYED IN 1812.

   Name.      Guns. Tonnage. Remarks.
Guerriere    49    1,340
Macedonian   49    1,325
Java         49    1,340
Frolic       19      477   Recaptured.
Alert        20      323

