	It appears to me, by the accounts we have of Jesus, that he had
two distinct offices: one, as the Messias particularly promised to the
Jews;  another, as he was to be the great high priest of the world.
With respect  to the first office, he is called [Heb. 3:1] the apostle
of the Hebrews;  the [Rom. 15:8] minister of the circumcision; and says
himself, [Matt 15:24]  I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Isreal. Accordingly, when he sent out his Apostles in his
lifetime to preach, he expressly forbids
them to go to the Gentiles or Samaritans; but go, [Matt. 10:6] says he,
to the lost sheep of the House of Israel.  Christ continued in the
discharge of  this office during the time of his natural life, till he
was finally rejected by the Jews.  And it is observable, that the last
time he spoke to the people according to St. Matthew's account, he
solemnly took leave of them, and closed his commission.  He had been
long among them publishing glad tidings; but when all his preaching,
all his miracles, had proved to be in vain, the last thing he did was,
to denounce the woes they had brought on themselves. It is remarkable, that this passage, as recorded by St.
Matthew  and St. Luke, twice over, is determined, by the circumstances,
to refer to the near approach of his own death, and the extreme hatred
of the Jews to him: and therefore those words, Ye shall not see me
henceforth, are to be
dated from the time of his death, and manifestly point out the end of
his particular mission to them.  From the making this declaration, as
it stands in St. Matthew, his discourses are to his disciples, and they
chiefly relate to the miserable and wretched condition of the Jews,
which was now decreed, and soon to be accomplished. Let me now ask,
Whether, in this state of  things, any farther credentials of Christ's
commission to the Jews could  be demanded or expected?  He was
rejected, his commission was determined,
and with it the fate of the nation was determined also: what use then
of  more credentials?  As to appearing to them after his resurrection,
he could not do it consistently with his own prediction, Ye shall see
me no more, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of
the Lord. The Jews were not in this disposition after the resurrection,
nor are they in it yet.
  	The resurrection was the foundation of Christ's new
commission, which
extended to all the world.  Then it was he declared, that all power was
given unto him in heaven and in earth.  Then he gave a new commission
to his disciples, not restrained to the house of Israel, but to go and
teach all nations.  This prerogative the Jews had under this
commission, that the gospel was every-where first offered to them; but
in no other terms than it was offered to the rest of the world.  Since
then this commission, of which the resurrection was the foundation,
extended to all the world alike; what ground is there to demand special
and particular evidence to the Jews?  The Emperor and the Senate of
Rome were a much more considerable part of the world, than the chief
priests and the synagogue; why does not the Gentleman object then, that
Christ did not shew himself to Tiberius  and his senate? And since all
men have an equal right in this case, Why may not the same demand be
made for every country; nay, for every age? And then the Gentleman may
bring the question nearer home; and ask, Why Christ did not appear in
England in King George's reign? There is, to my apprehension, nothing
more unreasonable, than to neglect and despise plain and sufficient
evidence before us, and to sit down to imagine what kind of evidence
would have pleased us; and then to make the want of such evidence an
objection to the truth; which yet, if well considered, would be found
to be well established.

	The observation I have made upon the resurrection of Christ, naturally leads to another; which
will help to account for the nature of the evidence we have in this great point.  As the resurrection
was the opening a new commission, in which all the world had an interest; so the concern naturally
was, to have a proper evidence to establish this truth, and which should be of equal weight
to all.  This did not depend upon the satisfaction given to private persons, whether they were
magistrates or not magistrates; but upon the conviction of those, whose office it was to be,
to bear testimony to this truth in the world.  In this sense the Apostles were chosen to be
witnesses of the resurrection, because they were chosen to bear testimony to it in the world;
and not because they only were admitted to see Christ after his resurrection: for the fact
is otherwise. The gospel indeed, concerned to shew the evidence on which the faith of the world
was to rest, is very particular in setting forth the ocular demonstration which the apostles
had of the resurrection; and mentions others, who saw Christ after his resurrection, only accidentally,
and as the thread of the history led to it. But yet it is certain, there were many others,
who had this satisfaction, as well as the apostles.  St. Luke tells us, that when Christ appeared
to the eleven apostles, there were others with them [Luke 24:33]; who they were, or how many
there were, he says not.  But it appears in the Acts, when an apostle was to be chosen in the
room of Judas; and the chief qualification required was, that he should be one capable of being
a witness of the resurrection; that there were present an hundred and twenty so qualified [Acts
1. Compare vv.  15,21,22 together].  And Saint Paul says, that Christ after his rising was
seen by 500 at once, many of whom were living when he appealed to their evidence.  So that
the Gentleman is mistaken, when he imagines that a few only were chosen to see Christ after
he came from the grave.  The truth of the case is, that, out of those who saw him, some were
chosen to bear testimony to the world; and for that reason had the fullest demonstration of
the truth, that they might be the better able to give satisfaction to others.  And what was
there in this conduct to complain of? what to raise any jealousy or suspicion?

	As to the witnesses themselves, the first the Gentleman takes notice of, are the angels and
the women.  The mention of angels led naturally to apparitions: and the women were called poor
silly women; and there is an end to their evidence.  But to speak seriously: will the Gentleman
pretend to prove, that there are no intelligent beings between God and man; or that they are
not ministers of God; or that they were improperly employed in this great and wonderful work,
the resurrection of Christ?  Till some of these points are disproved we may be at rest; for
the angels were ministers, and not witnesses of the resurrection.  And it is not upon the credit
of the poor silly women that we believe angels were concerned, but upon the report of those
who wrote the gospels, who deliver it as a truth known to themselves, and not merely as a report
taken from the women.

