It is proper to say that at Alexander's we began to see what this pleasant and fruitful country
might be, and will be, with thrift and intelligent farming. Mr. Alexander is a well-to-do farmer,
with plenty of cattle and good barns (always an evidence of prosperity), who owes his success
to industry and an open mind to new ideas. He was a Unionist during the war, and is a Democrat
now, though his county (Greene) has been Republican. We had been riding all the afternoon through
good land, and encountering a better class of farmers. Peach-trees abounded (though this was
an off year for fruit), and apples and grapes throve. It is a land of honey and of milk. The
persimmon flourishes; and, sign of abundance generally, we believe, great flocks of turkey-buzzards--majestic
floaters in the high air--hovered about. This country was ravaged during the war by Unionists
and Confederates alternately, the impartial patriots as they passed scooping in corn, bacon,
and good horses, leaving the farmers little to live on. Mr. Alexander's farm cost him forty
dollars an acre, and yields good crops of wheat and maize. This was the first house on our
journey where at breakfast we had grace before meat, though there had been many tables that
needed it more. From the door the noble range of the Big Bald is in sight and not distant;
and our host said he had a shanty on it, to which he was accustomed to go with his family for
a month or six weeks in the summer and enjoy a real primitive woods life.

Refreshed by this little touch of civilization, and with horses well fed, we rode on next morning
towards Jonesboro, over a rolling, rather unpicturesque country, but ennobled by the Big Bald
and Butt ranges, which we had on our right all day. At noon we crossed the Nollechucky River
at a ford where the water was up to the saddle girth, broad, rapid, muddy, and with a treacherous
stony bottom, and came to the little hamlet of Boylesville, with a flour-mill, and a hospitable
old-fashioned house, where we found shelter from the heat of the hot day, and where the daughters
of the house, especially one pretty girl in a short skirt and jaunty cap, contradicted the
currently received notion that this world is a weary pilgrimage. The big parlor, with its photographs
and stereoscope, and bits of shell and mineral, a piano and a melodeon, and a coveted old sideboard
of mahogany, recalled rural New England. Perhaps these refinements are due to the Washington
College (a school for both sexes), which is near. We noted at the tables in this region a singular
use of the word fruit. When we were asked, Will you have some of the fruit? and said Yes, we
always got applesauce.

Ten miles more in the late afternoon brought us to Jonesboro, the oldest town in the State,
a pretty place, with a flavor of antiquity, set picturesquely on hills, with the great mountains
in sight. People from further South find this an agreeable summering place, and a fair hotel,
with odd galleries in front and rear, did not want company. The Warren Institute for negroes
has been flourishing here ever since the war.

A ride of twenty miles next day carried us to Union. Before noon we forded the Watauga, a stream
not so large as the Nollechucky, and were entertained at the big brick house of Mr. Devault,
a prosperous and hospitable farmer. This is a rich country. We had met in the morning wagon-loads
of watermelons and muskmelons, on the way to Jonesboro, and Mr. Devault set abundance of these
refreshing fruits before us as we lounged on the porch before dinner.

It was here that we made the acquaintance of a colored woman, a withered, bent old pensioner
of the house, whose industry (she excelled any modern patent apple-parer) was unabated, although
she was by her own confession (a woman, we believe, never owns her age till she has passed
this point) and the testimony of others a hundred years old. But age had not impaired the brightness
of her eyes, nor the limberness of her tongue, nor her shrewd good sense. She talked freely
about the want of decency and morality in the young colored folks of the present day. It was
n't so when she was a girl. Long, long time ago, she and her husband had been sold at sheriff's
sale and separated, and she never had another husband. Not that she blamed her master so much
he could n't help it; he got in debt. And she expounded her philosophy about the rich, and
the danger they are in. The great trouble is that when a person is rich, he can borrow money
so easy, and he keeps drawin' it out of the bank and pilin' up the debt, like rails on top
of one another, till it needs a ladder to get on to the pile, and then it all comes down in
a heap, and the man has to begin on the bottom rail again. If she'd to live her life over again,
she'd lay up money; never cared much about it till now. The thrifty, shrewd old woman still
walked about a good deal, and kept her eye on the neighborhood. Going out that morning she
had seen some fence up the road that needed mending, and she told Mr. Devault that she didn't
like such shiftlessness; she didn't know as white folks was much better than colored folks.
Slavery? Yes, slavery was pretty bad--she had seen five hundred niggers in handcuffs, all together
in a field, sold to be sent South.

About six miles from here is a beech grove of historical interest, worth a visit if we could
have spared the time. In it is the large beech (six and a half feet around six feet from the
ground) on which Daniel Boone shot a bear, when he was a rover in this region. He himself cut
an inscription on the tree recording his prowess, and it is still distinctly legible:

   D. BOONE CILT A BAR ON THIS TREE, 1760.

This tree is a place of pilgrimage, and names of people from all parts of the country are cut
on it, until there is scarcely room for any more records of such devotion. The grove is ancient
looking, the trees are gnarled and moss-grown. Hundreds of people go there, and the trees are
carved all over with their immortal names.

A pleasant ride over a rich rolling country, with an occasional strip of forest, brought us
to Union in the evening, with no other adventure than the meeting of a steam threshing-machine
in the road, with steam up, clattering along. The devil himself could not invent any machine
calculated to act on the nerves of a horse like this. Jack took one look and then dashed into
the woods, scraping off his rider's hat but did not succeed in getting rid of his burden or
knocking down any trees.

Union, on the railway, is the forlornest of little villages, with some three hundred inhabitants
and a forlorn hotel, kept by an ex-stage-driver. The village, which lies on the Holston, has
no drinking-water in it nor enterprise enough to bring it in; not a well nor a spring in its
limits; and for drinking-water everybody crosses the river to a spring on the other side. A
considerable part of the labor of the town is fetching water over the bridge. On a hill overlooking
the village is a big, pretentious brick house, with a tower, the furniture of which is an object
of wonder to those who have seen it. It belonged to the late Mrs. Stover, daughter of Andrew
Johnson. The whole family of the ex-President have departed this world, but his memory is still
green in this region, where he was almost worshiped--so the people say in speaking of him.

Forlorn as was the hotel at Union, the landlord's daughters were beginning to draw the lines
in rural refinement. One of them had been at school in Abingdon. Another, a mature young lady
of fifteen, who waited on the table, in the leisure after supper asked the Friend for a light
for her cigarette, which she had deftly rolled.

"Why do you smoke?"

"So as I shan't get into the habit of dipping. Do you think dipping is nice?"

The traveler was compelled to say that he did not, though he had seen a good deal of it wherever
he had been.

"All the girls dips round here. But me and my sisters rather smoke than get in a habit of dipping."

To the observation that Union seemed to be a dull place:

"Well, there's gay times here in the winter--dancing. Like to dance? Well, I should say! Last
winter I went over to Blountsville to a dance in the court-house; there was a trial between
Union and Blountsville for the best dancing. You bet I brought back the cake and the blue ribbon."

The country was becoming too sophisticated, and the travelers hastened to the end of their
journey. The next morning Bristol, at first over a hilly country with magnificent oak-trees,--happily
not girdled, as these stately monarchs were often seen along the roads in North Carolina,--and
then up Beaver Creek, a turbid stream, turning some mills. When a closed woolen factory was
pointed out to the Professor (who was still traveling for Reform), as the result of the agitation
in Congress, he said, Yes, the effect of agitation was evident in all the decayed dams and
ancient abandoned mills we had seen in the past month.

Bristol is mainly one long street, with some good stores, but generally shabby, and on this
hot morning sleepy. One side of the street is in Tennessee, the other in Virginia. How handy
for fighting this would have been in the war, if Tennessee had gone out and Virginia stayed
in. At the hotel--may a kind Providence wake it up to its responsibilities--we had the pleasure
of reading one of those facetious handbills which the great railway companies of the West scatter
about, the serious humor of which is so pleasing to our English friends. This one was issued
by the accredited agents of the Ohio and Mississippi Railway, and dated April 1, 1984. One
sentence will suffice:

"Allow us to thank our old traveling friends for the many favors in our line, and if you are
going on your bridal trip, or to see your girl out West, drop in at the general office of the
Ohio and Mississippi Railway and we will fix you up in Queen Anne style. Passengers for Dakota,
Montana, or the Northwest will have an overcoat and sealskin cap thrown in with all tickets
sold on or after the above date."

The great republic cannot yet take itself seriously. Let us hope the humors of it will last
another generation. Meditating on this, we hailed at sundown the spires of Abingdon, and regretted
the end of a journey that seems to have been undertaken for no purpose.