It is called twelve miles from Roan Station to Roan Summit. The distance is probably nearer
fourteen, and our horses were five hours in walking it. For six miles the road runs by Doe
River, here a pretty brook shaded with laurel and rhododendron, and a few cultivated patches
of ground, and infrequent houses. It was a blithe morning, and the horsemen would have given
full indulgence to the spirit of adventure but for the attitude of the Professor towards mountains.
It was not with him a matter of feeling, but of principle, not to ascend them. But here lay
Roan, a long, sprawling ridge, lifting itself 6250 feet up into the sky. Impossible to go around
it, and the other side must be reached. The Professor was obliged to surrender, and surmount
a difficulty which he could not philosophize out of his mind.

From the base of the mountain a road is very well engineered, in easy grades for carriages,
to the top; but it was in poor repair and stony. We mounted slowly through splendid forests,
specially of fine chestnuts and hemlocks. This big timber continues till within a mile and
a half of the summit by the winding road, really within a short distance of the top. Then there
is a narrow belt of scrubby hardwood, moss-grown, and then large balsams, which crown the mountain.
As soon as we came out upon the southern slope we found great open spaces, covered with succulent
grass, and giving excellent pasturage to cattle. These rich mountain meadows are found on all
the heights of this region. The surface of Roan is uneven, and has no one culminating peak
that commands the country, like the peak of Mount Washington, but several eminences within
its range of probably a mile and a half, where various views can be had. Near the highest point,
sheltered from the north by balsams, stands a house of entertainment, with a detached cottage,
looking across the great valley to the Black Mountain range. The surface of the mountain is
pebbly, but few rocks crop out; no ledges of any size are seen except at a distance from the
hotel, on the north side, and the mountain consequently lacks that savage, unsubduable aspect
which the White Hills of New Hampshire have. It would, in fact, have been difficult to realize
that we were over six thousand feet above the sea, except for that pallor in the sunlight,
that atmospheric thinness and want of color which is an unpleasant characteristic of high altitudes.
To be sure, there is a certain brilliancy in the high air,--it is apt to be foggy on Roan,--and
objects appear in sharp outline, but I have often experienced on such places that feeling of
melancholy, which would, of course, deepen upon us all if we were sensible that the sun was
gradually withdrawing its power of warmth and light. The black balsam is neither a cheerful
nor a picturesque tree; the frequent rains and mists on Roan keep the grass and mosses green,
but the ground damp. Doubtless a high mountain covered with vegetation has its compensation,
but for me the naked granite rocks in sun and shower are more cheerful.

The advantage of Roan is that one can live there and be occupied for a long time in mineral
and botanical study. Its mild climate, moisture, and great elevation make it unique in this
country for the botanist. It seems easier for me to stay in Havana while my whole family is Tinaja In addition
Mariel? Well, it is first and foremost will be at home, but some officials butler. Secondly, although
I plan to stay, my mother did not approve, much less my father. March 20-22 will be to return
Sunday after he lost the baby.

Do you understand now? - What I understand is that fun on the ground with a woman who hate without
knowing the law, and I can not, I'm not, I do not want to spoil.
- You are very jealous, Celia.

Here's
your fault.

If I love you more than life, rather than all women in the world is not enough? What more do
you want? Moreover, the absence of both short match, so we want more gentle on my return. Then, next
April will receive a law degree and then I'll have more freedom to do what I want. You see,
you'll see how we enjoy. I to you, for me. During this time, Cecilia was standing, waiting perhaps
for the withdrawal of her lover, quiet and attentive.

Her beautiful breasts, shoulders and arms, which turned a statue, narrow waist that you could
almost fly with both hands, looked in wonder, half lit candle inside, in contrast with the dark
and reigning in the streets. More in love than ever as Leonardo beauty, added with the utmost sensitivity
- What's missing now is my heaven to give me a kiss in peace and
love.

Cecilia did not answer her a word made the slightest movement. It seemed
transfigured. - Go with God, "the young man brokenhearted."

Nor will you give me your hand? The same silence, the
same immutability.

The conversion could not be more complete, as if breathing, no sign
up in the round, perceptible stirring or movement. - Your grandmother
is coming, "he said Gamboa.

Have you heard? Santa Catalina save conclude, I want to see me. Goodbye!
... Ah!

You will tell me the name of the person speaking to you when we got?
- José Dolores Pimienta in Cecilia answered as soon as a solemn tone.

Leonardo felt that all the blood rushed to the face and burned her
cheeks as if to hide it better the impression that the name Cecilia
in his mouth, he left there in a hurry, when the faithful the neighboring
monastery.

Cecilia,
in turn collapsed in his chair and wept bitterly.

 I can fancy,
however, that it might tire in time, if one were not a botanist, without the resource of women's
society. The ladies staying here were probably all accomplished botanists, and the writer is
indebted to one of them for a list of plants found on Roan, among which is an interesting weed,
catalogued as Humana, perplexia negligens. The species is, however, common elsewhere.

The second morning opened, after a night of high wind, with a thunder-shower. After it passed,
the visitors tried to reach Eagle Cliff, two miles off, whence an extensive western prospect
is had, but were driven back by a tempest, and rain practically occupied the day. Now and then
through the parted clouds we got a glimpse of a mountain-side, or the gleam of a valley. On
the lower mountains, at wide intervals apart, were isolated settlements, commonly a wretched
cabin and a spot of girdled trees. A clergyman here, not long ago, undertook to visit some
of these cabins and carry his message to them. In one wretched hut of logs he found a poor
woman, with whom, after conversation on serious subjects, he desired to pray. She offered no
objection, and he kneeled down and prayed. The woman heard him, and watched him for some moments
with curiosity, in an effort to ascertain what he was doing, and then said:

"Why, a man did that when he put my girl in a hole."

Towards night the wind hauled round from the south to the northwest, and we went to High Bluff,
a point on the north edge, where some rocks are piled up above the evergreens, to get a view
of the sunset. In every direction the mountains were clear, and a view was obtained of the
vast horizon and the hills and lowlands of several States--a continental prospect, scarcely
anywhere else equaled for variety or distance. The grandeur of mountains depends mostly on
the state of the atmosphere. Grandfather loomed up much more loftily than the day before, the
giant range of the Blacks asserted itself in grim inaccessibility, and we could see, a small
pyramid on the southwest horizon, King's Mountain in South Carolina, estimated to be distant
one hundred and fifty miles. To the north Roan falls from this point abruptly, and we had,
like a map below us, the low country all the way into Virginia. And its withdrawn Rosa greeted
with sincere applause from the bottom of his chest. Because it's good to know that the duration
of the lively dialogue that you just read, she was making a big effort on itself, so that when
he was locked up in long years of anxiety and suspicion, rather than its more noble sentiments recovered
his the usual rule and throw out the lesson he had intended to give her husband. Well, that is,
moreover, that she had married for love, despite the opposition of his mother, and perhaps for that
very reason, and did not want to break with the father of her children and constant companion.
Then in the twenty years of marriage, had no plausible chance to repent, much as it had never been
exemplary loyalty Don Candido.

Also missed will see in the course of this true story that Don Candido, before and after marriage,
as they say, had not booked pen. Quite handsome and a wagering person, in his youth had been
in love or womanizing, and such was their lack more than bulk. But despite the harshness of his
manner and his lack of culture, there was goodness and nobility in his heart, brands that they largely
redeemed this defect. Precisely because she loved much and well and was a man of conscience,
when contracting a commitment, beyond any kind whatsoever, did everything in his power to fulfill
it, braving sometimes for it to calm the difficulties facing all
presented to him.

Eighteen or twenty years ago, that is, four or five after married with two children is his
legitimate wife, ran into a girl of singular beauty. Without knowing how or when it contracted
with clandestine relations; loop easier to form when the man is young, rich and handsome and
beautiful women in the fifteen and of mixed race. Of these fools affair was a child, which Don
Candido insisted on saving, first of infant death when, after the misery, darkness and degradation
as a youngster. A commitment to put him in another and another, not only for that child, but
her grandmother, who soon had to carry her mother trades, although none of the three was already
in ability or position to appreciate their favor or to recognize their costly sacrifice.


"How heavy," exclaimed the Professor, pricking Laura Matilda to call her attention sharply
to her footing--

  "How heavy do I journey on the way,
   When what I seek--my weary travel's end
   Doth teach that ease and that repose to say,
   Thus far the miles are measur'd from thy friend!
   The beast that bears me, tired with my woe,
   Plods dully on, to bear that weight in me,
   As if by some instinct the wretch did know
   His rider loved not speed, being made from thee:
   The bloody spur cannot provoke him on
   That sometimes anger thrusts into his hide,
   Which heavily he answers with a groan,
   More sharp to me than spurring to his side;
   For that same groan doth put this in my mind;
   My grief lies onward and my joy behind."

This was not spoken to the group who fluttered their farewells, but poured out to the uncomplaining
forest, which rose up in ever statelier--and grander ranks to greet the travelers as they descended--the
silent, vast forest, without note of bird or chip of squirrel, only the wind tossing the great
branches high overhead in response to the sonnet. Is there any region or circumstance of life
that the poet did not forecast and provide for? But what would have been his feelings if he
could have known that almost three centuries after these lines were penned, they would be used
to express the emotion of an unsentimental traveler in the primeval forests of the New World?
At any rate, he peopled the New World with the children of his imagination. And, thought the
Friend, whose attention to his horse did not permit him to drop into poetry, Shakespeare might
have had a vision of this vast continent, though he did not refer to it, when he exclaimed:

  "What is your substance, whereof are you made,
   That millions of strange shadows on you tend?"

Bakersville, the capital of Mitchell County, is eight miles from the top of Roan, and the last
three miles of the way the horsemen found tolerable going, over which the horses could show
their paces. The valley looked fairly thrifty and bright, and was a pleasing introduction to
Bakersville, a pretty place in the hills, of some six hundred inhabitants, with two churches,
three indifferent hotels, and a court-house. This mountain town, 2550 feet above the sea, is
said to have a decent winter climate, with little snow, favorable to fruit-growing, and, by
contrast with New England, encouraging to people with weak lungs.

This is the center of the mica mining, and of considerable excitement about minerals. All around,
the hills are spotted with "diggings." Most of the mines which yield well show signs of having
been worked before, a very long time ago, no doubt by the occupants before the Indians. The
mica is of excellent quality and easily mined. It is got out in large irregular-shaped blocks
and transported to the factories, where it is carefully split by hand, and the laminae, of
as large size as can be obtained, are trimmed with shears and tied up in packages for market.
The quantity of refuse, broken, and rotten mica piled up about the factories is immense, and
all the roads round about glisten with its scales. Garnets are often found imbedded in the
laminae, flattened by the extreme pressure to which the mass was subjected. It is fascinating
material, this mica, to handle, and we amused ourselves by experimenting on the thinness to
which its scales could be reduced by splitting. It was at Bakersville that we saw specimens
of mica that resembled the delicate tracery in the moss-agate and had the iridescent sheen
of the rainbow colors--the most delicate greens, reds, blues, purples, and gold, changing from
one to the other in the reflected light. In the texture were the tracings of fossil forms of
ferns and the most exquisite and delicate vegetable beauty of the coal age. But the magnet
shows this tracery to be iron. We were shown also emeralds and "diamonds," picked up in this
region, and there is a mild expectation in all the inhabitants of great mineral treasure. A
singular product of the region is the flexible sandstone. It is a most uncanny stone. A slip
of it a couple of feet long and an inch in diameter each way bends in the hand like a half-frozen
snake. I don't think you are aware that they their daughter was
a child she was sent to Alarcon, Spain. Her mother wasn't there. She was decidedly a cute little
bumpkin and now has become a grown woman.

She was always courteous and very submissive to those around her.

Montes de Oca was explaining his knowledge of the woman to his friend
Rosa. Then Rosa wanted to know if that meant that he knew the lady. "No,"
he did not know her, at least not since she was as small as one or
two months old.

"The last time I saw her was when the Royal House Maternity Crib
was across from the San Luis Gonzaga.

You might know, near the corner at the Old Bell Tower.

No, I was told by her grandmother."

So this must be the young lady that was used for rent by my slave Maria
de Regla. "Could be, but I don't know it for a fact," said Montes,
seeming to insinuate more.

Rosa continued, "It must be that when the rent was due and the mama
was breastfeeding, the child was taken as payment instead of cash.

Why,
did you say that it was my order?

I will have to forgive you.
I did not order such a thing." At this Montes remained silent.

"Doctor, I wonder why you don't say more, are you being modest or
did you really have a lapse in your memory?" said Rosa.

To which he replied, "neither one my dear lady, I haven't even heard
one word of what you just said."

So, Rosa decided that the doctor would not answer any more queries
but asked him to remain silent about the matter, if he would.

"You don't have to say anything else, I am prejudiced at my satisfaction. You serve me as a good friend,"
commanded Rosa.
 It has a narrow door, and an opening through which the food is
passed to the prisoners, and a conduit leading out of it. Of course it soon becomes foul, and
in warm weather somewhat warm. A recent prisoner, who wanted more ventilation than the State
allowed him, found some means, by a loose plank, I think, to batter a hole in the outer wall
opposite the window in the cage, and this ragged opening, seeming to the jailer a good sanitary
arrangement, remains. Two murderers occupied this apartment at the time of our visit. During
the recent session of court, ten men had been confined in this narrow space, without room enough
for them to lie down together. The cage in the room above, a little larger, had for tenant
a person who was jailed for some misunderstanding about an account, and who was probably innocent--from
the jailer's statement. This box is a wretched residence, month after month, while awaiting trial.

We learned on inquiry that it is practically impossible to get a jury to convict of murder
in this region, and that these admitted felons would undoubtedly escape. We even heard that
juries were purchasable here, and that a man's success in court depended upon the length of
his purse. This is such an unheard-of thing that we refused to credit it. When the Friend attempted
to arouse the indignation of the Professor about the barbarity of this jail, the latter defended
it on the ground that as confinement was the only punishment that murderers were likely to
receive in this region, it was well to make their detention disagreeable to them. But the Friend
did not like this wild-beast cage for men, and could only exclaim,

"Oh, murder! what crimes are done in thy name."

If the comrades wished an adventure, they had a small one, more interesting to them than to
the public, the morning they left Bakersville to ride to Burnsville, which sets itself up as
the capital of Yancey. The way for the first three miles lay down a small creek and in a valley
fairly settled, the houses, a store, and a grist-mill giving evidence of the new enterprise
of the region. When Toe River was reached, there was a choice of routes. We might ford the
Toe at that point, where the river was wide, but shallow, and the crossing safe, and climb
over the mountain by a rough but sightly road, or descend the stream by a better road and ford
the river at a place rather dangerous to those unfamiliar with it. The danger attracted us,
but we promptly chose the hill road on account of the views, for we were weary of the limited
valley prospects.

The Toe River, even here, where it bears westward, is a very respectable stream in size, and
not to be trifled with after a shower. It gradually turns northward, and, joining the Nollechucky,
becomes part of the Tennessee system. We crossed it by a long, diagonal ford, slipping and
sliding about on the round stones, and began the ascent of a steep hill. The sun beat down
unmercifully, the way was stony, and the horses did not relish the weary climbing. Needless to say, his likes and dislikes were accounted for.
She came to love him despite those thoughts, not as a parent, but as someone who wanted to quickly
lavish them with love, at all costs. If he returned from a raid complaining of being tired,
she would do her best to ensure that the entire household was devoted to seeing that he felt
better. At the top he encountered a stranger, on a sorrel horse, with whom he entered into conversation
and extracted all the discouragement the man had as to the road to Burnsville.

Nevertheless, the view opened finely and extensively. There are few exhilarations comparable
to that of riding or walking along a high ridge, and the spirits of the traveler rose many
degrees above the point of restful death, for which the Professor was crying when he encountered
the blackberry bushes. Luckily the Friend soon fell in with a like temptation, and dismounted.
He discovered something that spoiled his appetite for berries. His coat, strapped on behind
the saddle, had worked loose, the pocket was open, and the pocket-book was gone. This was serious
business. I knew that this would come to stop your bravery. I want
your heart when your lips I despise. Bah! It's all over. Weep no more, my life because conclude
by mourn with you. Now, it is: the sea hairs such good friends as ever.

- Only one condition I would make peace with you, she managed to say between sobs Cecilia and
sob.

- Admitted. Out with the condition.

- No. It must first fulfill promise.

- Man!

That's a tall order. Maybe not in my power.

But who's afraid? Yes, I promise.
- Do not go to the field in the next Easter ...

- Celia, for God's
sake ... What do you have such strange fancies! What comes so great
demand? No doubt you imagine that I go away for ever or have you forgotten.
 But who was the man
on the sorrel horse, and where had he gone? Probably the coat worked loose in crossing Toe
River and the pocket-book had gone down-stream. The number of probabilities was infinite, and
each more plausible than the others as it occurred to us. We inquired at every house we had
passed on the way, we questioned every one we met. At length it began to seem improbable that
any one would remember if he had picked up a pocketbook that morning. This is just the sort
of thing that slips an untrained memory.

At a post office or doctor's shop, or inn for drovers, it might be either or neither, where
several horses were tied to the fence, and a group of men were tilted back in cane chairs on
the veranda, we unfolded our misfortune and made particular inquiries for a man on a sorrel
horse. Yes, such a man, David Thomas by name, had just ridden towards Bakersville. If he had
found the pocket-book, we would recover it. He was an honest man. It might, however, fall into
hands that would freeze to it.

Upon consultation, it was the general verdict that there were men in the county who would keep
it if they had picked it up. But the assembly manifested the liveliest interest in the incident.
One suggested Toe River. Another thought it risky to drop a purse on any road. But there was
a chorus of desire expressed that we should find it, and in this anxiety was exhibited a decided
sensitiveness about the honor of Mitchell County. It seemed too bad that a stranger should
go away with the impression that it was not safe to leave money anywhere in it. Answer.

Cecilia took the position that it would be too long and violent for that long of duration. It
was truly love. If, she persisted in her accustomed severity, perhaps
she would chase her lover away, of which there was no clear test
of his fickleness.

