I shall first ask your attention to the history of the profession, which shows that a paid
advocacy is the only practical system, and to the rules of conduct to which lawyers must be
held in order that such a system shall promote justice. I cannot claim to have any peculiar
knowledge upon this subject other than that derived from a somewhat brief practice of five
years at the Bar, from an experience of eleven years on the Bench of trial and appellate courts,
from a somewhat varied experience in the responsibility of government, not only in this country,
but in those far-distant isles of the Pacific in which the United States has been grafting
the principles of free government upon a civilization inherited from Spain.

CONTENTS

                                        PAGE

I.   History of the Profession of Law.    1

II.  Legal Ethics                        19

III. The Executive Power                 37

IV.  The Signs of the Times              65

V.   More Signs of the Times             83

CHAPTER I

HISTORY OF THE PROFESSION OF LAW

It is not too much to say that the profession of the law is more or less on trial. It is certain
that there is a crisis in the life of our courts, and that a great political issue is being
forced upon the people, for they must decide whether the courts are to continue to exercise
the power they now have, and what character of service they shall be required to render. Judges
are lawyers. They ought to be trained practitioners and learned in the profession of the law
before they ascend the Bench, and generally they are. Therefore, our courts, as they are now
conducted, and our profession, which is the handmaid of justice, are necessarily so bound together
in our judicial system that an attack upon the courts is an attack upon our profession, and
an attack upon our profession is equally an attack upon the courts.

We have all noted on the stage and in the current literature the flippant and sarcastic references
to the failures of the administration of justice, and we are familiar with the sometimes insidious
and too often open impeachments of the courts, which appear in the press and upon the hustings.
They are charged with failure to do justice, with bad faith, with lack of intelligent sympathy
for socially progressive movements, with a rigid and reactionary obstruction to the movement
toward greater equality of condition, and with a hidebound and unnecessarily sensitive attitude
of mind in respect to the rights of property. One count that looms large in the wide range
of the indictment against our judicial system is the immoral part that lawyers are said necessarily
to play in the perversion of justice by making the worse appear the better reason. Such a public
agitation and such an issue in politics lead to a consideration of the fundamental reasons
for the existence of our profession in the past, and a further inquiry as to the need for it
in the future, as preliminary to a discussion of the rules of conduct that should govern its
practice.

There are those who intimate that we can learn nothing from the past. They don't say so in
so many words, but they proceed on the theory that man, under the elevating influences with
which they propose to surround him, is suddenly to become a different creature, prompted by
different motives. But those of us who have been fortunate in having an education permeated
with an atmosphere of common sense, and an idea of how to deal with human nature as it is,
realize that the world is not to be reformed tomorrow or in a month or a year or in a century,
but that progress is to be made slowly and that the problems before us are not so widely different
from those which were presented to our ancestors as far back as the Christian era. Nor can
we fail to derive some benefit from a consideration of such troubles, tribulations and triumphs
of our profession in the past as suggest rules of conduct for lawyers in the future. I do not
mean that we are not to aspire for better things. Nor do I wish to deny us the happiness of
hope for reasonable and real progress toward higher ideals. I simply insist that we ought not
to ignore the lessons of experience when we deal with conditions as they are and as everybody
who is familiar with them knows them to be.

The three civilizations in which we may most profitably study the growth and development of
the legal profession are the Jewish, the Roman and the English. Among the Jews, the Mosaic
law, which went into the smallest details of personal life, was the guide to their rule of
action. As it had religious sanction, the high priests became the actual ministers of justice
and the preservation of religion and law was united in them. Acting as their assistants, and
as assessors in the tribunals of which the high priests were the head, were the Scribes. They
were learned in the law; had a religious and priestly character themselves; interpreted the
Mosaic law with a view to its application to the various facts and issues which arose; and
were in addition the teachers of law. It was to them that the rabbinical injunction was made
"to make the knowledge of the law neither a crown wherewith to make a show, nor a spade wherewith
to dig." And again it was said, "He who uses the crown of the law for external aims fades away."

In describing the principles of non-remuneration to the Scribes, the learned German Professor
Schurer says: "In Christ's censures of the Scribes and Pharisees, their covetousness is a special
object of reproof. Hence, even if their instruction was given gratuitously, they certainly
knew how to compensate themselves in some other way." And it is because of this evasion of
this rule that we find those passages in the eleventh chapter of Luke, the 46th and 52d verses,
which read:

     Verse 46.

The line between the judicial and advisory functions of the Hebrew Scribes was not closely
or clearly drawn. They were evidently supposed to occupy a disinterested position toward those
who consulted them and to be in a sense the associates of the judges. Since the motive which
prompted their study of particular cases was supposed to be only that of vindicators of general
justice, the rules which nominally guided their action, as announced by the lawgivers, required
that their services should always be gratuitous. But quite naturally their consultation with
private litigants prompted such litigants to influence their view of the law, and command their
skill in debate. And so to evade the rule which prevented remuneration they established the
custom of giving presents in advance. These presents given in advance to secure the kindly
favor of the Scribes are interesting as the precursors of that institution dear to every English
barrister, and not unknown--nor even objectionable--to American lawyers, to wit, the Retainer.
In fact it was the impossibility of finding men who could remain judicial in their attitude
when the thought of remuneration moved them to advocate the cause of one of the litigants,
that put the Scribes of those days in an indefensible position and led to the attacks upon
them that we find in the New Testament.

And so it was in Rome. There the progenitor of the lawyer was first the priest, the Pontifex,
mingling judicial and advisory functions, and then the patronus or the orator, a man of wealth
and high standing in the community, who had gathered about him freed men and Plebeians as his
supporters. The latter were known as his clientes, from which term our word is derived. When
one of his clients became involved in a lawsuit, the patronus appeared to advise the judge--a
magistrate acting only as vindicator of general justice and often not learned in the principles
of law--and was not supposed to receive any compensation. Less than the patronus, but exercising
similar functions, was the advocatus--who, though perhaps not so learned in the law, nor so
formidable as a person, was able to assist the patronus before the tribunal on behalf of others.
There was in addition a body of men called "jurist consults," learned in the law and able to
advise, who came to be recognized as the members of a select profession in the time of Augustus.

In the year 200 before Christ, the Cincian law was enacted, requiring that service of the patronus
and the advocate should be gratuitous, but it was soon evaded even as the Jewish laws had been.
Again presents were made to secure the skilled advocacy of men learned in the law and acute
in debate. These gifts like the Hebrew ones were paid in advance and were called "honorariums,"
another term which suggests the modern retainer. Neither an advocatus nor a patronus could
sue for such honorarium at law because it was a violation of law, but once paid, the honorarium
could not be recovered. Cicero boasted that he never violated the Cincian law, but historians
of his period intimate that by secret loans and testamentary gifts his practice proved to be
very profitable. And it is certain, at least, that many of his contemporaries were made very
rich by professional remuneration. Augustus directed the passage of another law forbidding
compensation to orators and advocates, but it was disregarded and subsequent emperors contented
themselves with fixing limits for the fees to be charged. In the golden age of the Roman law,
therefore, the payment of the profession became recognized as legitimate and the profession
itself became a definite body with clearly understood functions.

In England, for two hundred years after the Conquest, the priests were the only learned men,
and they, too, like the Scribes, acted as judges and advisers of litigants. Even as late as
the time of Henry VIII, as we know, the Keeper of the King's Conscience and the head of the
Court of Equity, was an Ecclesiastic in the formidable person of Cardinal Woolsey. About the
reign of King John, laymen became lawyers, and in Henry III's time the Pope forbade priests
to fit themselves in civil law or to act as advisers in respect to it. We may properly say
that the profession of the Bar, as a recognized English institution, had its beginnings in
the struggle for individual rights by which the English race forced the great charter from
King John. We find that in the history of the early English administration of justice, bailiffs,
undersheriffs, clerical attachés and the underlings of the courts had gone into the business
of acting as attorneys, of cheating their clients, and of stirring up litigation. While statutes
were directed against their abuses, I cannot find that there was any English statute forbidding
lawyers to receive compensation for their services, although the action of the Pope in forbidding
his priests to study and practice law in England may indicate some such abuses. It is certain
that legal services were not regarded as creating a debt due from the client to the lawyer
who had served him. By statute, now, attorneys and solicitors in England are entitled to fixed
fees for professional services. But in the case of barristers, down to the present time, while
they may demand a retainer for their services in advance, they still cannot recover by suit
if the services are rendered without receiving it. This may possibly be derived from the early
Roman and Jewish view of the professional relation and suggests the probability that early
in English history professional services were deemed to be gratuitous.

The grant of Magna Charta by King John, in response to the demand of the Barons at Runnymede,
gave birth to the Bar in its modern character. Articles 17 and 18 of that instrument provided
that Common Pleas should not follow the court of the King, but should be held in a certain
place, and that trials upon certain writs should not be taken outside of their proper counties.
It provided further that the King or the Chief Justice should send two justiciaries into each
county, four times in the year, to hold certain assizes within the county, with four knights
of the county, chosen by it, on the day, and at the place appointed. The 45th article promised
that the King would not make Justiciaries, Constables, or Bailiffs excepting of such as knew
the laws of the land and were well disposed to observe them. The result of this provision by
which Common pleas courts came to be held at Westminster, while regular assizes were held in
the counties, was the establishment of the four Inns of Court, so-called, Lincoln's Inn, the
Inner and the Middle Temple, and Gray's Inn, together with a number of others known as Chancery
Inns, which have of late years disappeared. Henry III took these Inns under his especial protection
and prohibited the study of law anywhere in London save in the Inns of Court. They were the
homes of the Bar, for within their walls lawyers had their offices, and there students of the
law received their education. In fact, they may be said to constitute the foundation of the
modern profession of the law in the English-speaking race.

The Inns of Court were at first an aristocratic institution, and only men of good blood were
permitted to practice in them. Indeed, that was the case in the early days in Rome. Pliny reports
that no one could become a jurist consult, an advocatus or a patronus except he be of the Patrician
class. But soon after the Empire began, this rule broke down and the Roman Bar became open
to all. So, too, in the English Bar at first admission was controlled by the Benchers or governing
bodies of the Inns of Court and the students were chosen only from good families. It was probably
this that led to their unpopularity and to the denunciation which they received in Wat Tyler's
day, in the fourteenth century, and from Jack Cade's followers whom Shakespeare makes wish
to kill all the lawyers in the next century. Their exclusive spirit passed away, however, and
while aristocratic class distinctions were rigidly maintained in English society, the Bar became
most democratic through the avenue to positions of highest influence on the Bench and in politics
which it freely offered to able men from the people. And, indeed, there is no part of English
history that is so full of interest as the stories of her great lawyers, who, beginning in
the humblest conditions of life, fought their way by real merit into positions of control in
the government and thus gave ability and strength to the aristocracy of which they became a part.

In the three centuries or more after the establishment of the Inns of Court, no division appeared
in the profession of the law, and it was not until about 1556 that the profession became separated
into attorneys at law and solicitors in chancery, on the one hand, and barristers on the other.
The former dealt directly with clients and performed the preliminary work of drafting documents
and preparing briefs, while the latter, the barristers, drafted the pleadings and presented
the causes in court. A similar division of functions prevailed in the Roman Bar. I shall have
occasion later to comment on the advantages and disadvantages of this division, but this summary
reference is sufficient for my present purpose in tracing the history of the Bar in England.
During this period, after the establishment of the Inns of Court, the unpopularity of the Bar
manifested itself in the enactment of statutes forbidding the election of lawyers to Parliament.
This gave rise to the noted Parliament known as the "Dunces Parliament," because everybody
who knew anything about the law, and therefore about the framing or the operation of statutes,
was excluded from membership.

In his interesting history of the American Bar, Mr. Charles Warren, of the Boston Bar, says:

     "Lawyers, as the instruments through which the subtleties and
     iniquities of the Common Law were enforced, were highly unpopular
     as a class in England during the period of Cromwell and Milton."

As examples of a lawyer's reputation in London in the seventeenth century, Mr. Warren cites
the titles of the following tracts printed at that time: "The Downfall of Unjust Lawyers";
"Doomsday Drawing Near with Thunder and Lightning for Lawyers"; "A Rod for Lawyers who are
Hereby declared Robbers and Deceivers of the Nation"; "Essay where is Described the Lawyers,
Smugglers and Officers Frauds."

I note these facts as I progress to indicate and reinforce my original statement that the present
time is not the only time in the history of civilization when lawyers have received the condemnation
of their fellow subjects or fellow citizens. Yet not only has the profession survived such
movements but its usefulness has been recognized in succeeding crises.

I need hardly mention that most of the progress toward individual liberty in English history
was made through the successful struggle of the lawyers against the assertion of the divine
right of Kings and through the defence of privilege by members of our profession. Lawyers like
Lord Coke and Lord Hale stand out in the profession for their maintenance of the independence
of the judiciary and their support of the liberties of subjects. The great charters, the Petition
of Right, the Habeas Corpus Act, the Bill of Rights, and the Acts of Settlement, establishing
the judiciary independent of Royal control, were obtained at the instance of lawyers who knew
better than any other class the absolute necessity for such reforms in the maintenance of free
institutions.

The evolution of the Bar in this country during colonial times--especially in New England--was
a curious counterpart of the history of the English Bar three centuries before. The founders
of New England came here to escape a persecution for their religious beliefs and law was closely
connected in their minds with the injustices, the inequalities and the rigid hardships of the
common law as administered by judges appointed and removable at the will of the Tudors and
Stuarts. At that time lawyers exercising their profession were the instruments of a system
that had become non-progressive. They had lost the principles of justice in technicalities
and had become mere political tools in the hands of tyrants. But in England, the law soon lost
its narrowing, hard and inflexible character through the intervention of courts of equity and
through the genius and broad views of great judges of common law like Mansfield. It was modified
further by the civil law and by the needs of a developing world commerce, and after the action
of the Long Parliament and the Revolution it was no longer used as an instrument of tyranny.

In this country, however, the Puritans and the Pilgrims approved of neither the common law
nor the English judicial system, and as lawyers were only part of that system, they considered
the abolition of the profession from their society as an end devoutly to be wished for and
promptly sought. Among the Pilgrim fathers there was not a single lawyer, while among the Puritans
there were only four or five who had been educated as lawyers and even they had never practiced.
The consequence was that during the seventeenth century and far into the eighteenth, lawyers
had little place in the social or political institutions of the colonies. In New England there
was a theocracy. The judges--none of them lawyers--were all either ministers or directly under
the influence of the clergy. A colonial common law grew up among them, based on a theological
reasoning and was really administered without lawyers. In the Massachusetts body of liberties,
it was provided that a man unfit to plead might employ a person not objectionable to the Court
to plead for him, on condition that he give him no fee or reward. In 1663 a usual or common
attorney was prohibited from sitting in the general court.

As society progressed, however, as commerce and trade increased, as wealth grew, as business
transactions became more extended and as learning spread from the clergy to other persons,
opportunity and inducement were furnished for the study of the law, and professional training
became more general. The crying need for a learned and honorable profession of the law was
made manifest by the growth of a class of advocates and advisers whose influence was most pernicious.
Litigants needed guidance in the presentation of their cases and no learned profession being
available, the underbailiffs, undersheriffs, clerks and other underlings of the administration
of justice began to practice, without real knowledge. Greedy and lacking in principle, they
developed trickery and stirred up litigation for their own profit, just as their predecessors
had done three hundred years before in England. Colonial statutes were then passed, forbidding
such underlings of the court to practice law at all. But lawyers were not popular in colonial
days even after the Bar became able and respectable. In fact a bitter spirit was manifested
against lawyers even as late as Shays's Rebellion after the Revolutionary War.

Between the years 1750 and 1775, more than a hundred and fifty young men from the colonies
were admitted to one of the four Inns of Court and became educated lawyers with the purpose
of entering the profession in their native colonies. How far the presence of such a class of
educated lawyers through the colonies contributed to the resentment against the stupidity and
injustice of the English colonial policy which brought about the Revolution, cannot be estimated
exactly; but certain it is that the preparation of the lawyers who were then in their prime
appears to have been Providential interference in behalf of the people of the United States.
Never in history has the profession of the law received so great a harvest of profound students
of the constitutional principles of government as did our country at this time. Our lawyers
signed the Declaration of Independence, served in the Continental Congress, acted as delegates
to the Constitutional Convention, and met in the various conventions called by the states to
consider the ratification of that great instrument. They not only knew that common law, but
they had studied closely the political history of Greece and Rome, and were familiar with the
principles of government as set forth by Montesquieu and Adam Smith.

It was the American Bar that gave to the people of the United States such lawyers as Alexander
Hamilton, John Jay, James Madison, George Mason, Thomas Jefferson, Patrick Henry, John Adams,
James Otis, Samuel Chase, Samuel Adams, Roger Sherman, Oliver Ellsworth, James Wilson, Edmund
Randolph and many others not less learned and brilliant, to establish their liberties, frame
the limitations of their government and care for the protection of individual rights. The same
Bar furnished a little later that lawyer and judge, John Marshall, whose interpretation of
the Constitution was as important in its beneficent effect as its original framing. That Bar
not only helped largely in constructing the ship of state but it was also most instrumental
in launching it on a triumphant and useful course through a century and a quarter. The profound
gratitude of succeeding generations owing to such a Bar ought never to be dimmed by partisan
or misguided diatribes upon lawyers and judges.

CHAPTER II

LEGAL ETHICS

I have heard the utility of legal ethics denied. It is said that the rules in legal ethics
are the same as the moral rules that govern men in every branch of society and in every profession--except
as there may be certain conventions as to professional etiquette--and that if a man is honest,
there ought to be no difficulty in his following the right course in the discharge of his professional
duties. If a man is lacking in probity of character, it is said the discussion of legal ethics
will do him no particular good, because if he is tempted to a crooked path or an unjust act
by his pecuniary interest, he will yield, and neither lectures on ethics nor the establishment
of an ethical code will make him good; whereas the upright man will either not be so tempted,
or should he be, he will clearly perceive the necessity for resisting the temptation.

In the course of my consideration of this subject, I looked into a text-book on moral philosophy
and the general system of ethics with the hope that I might find something there that would
suggest, by analogy, a proper treatment of the subject in hand. I consulted Paulsen's "A System
of Ethics." The analogy between moral philosophy and legal ethics is not very close, but I
found a passage or two bearing on this very issue, which it seems to me might not be inappropriately
quoted here. In the conclusion of his introduction, Paulsen says:

     "Let me say a word concerning the practical value of ethics. Can
     ethics be a practical science, not only in the sense that it deals
     with practice, but that it influences practice? This was its
     original purpose. 'It is the function of ethics,' says Aristotle,
     'to act, not only to theorize.'"

Paulsen refers to the fact that Schopenhauer takes a different view:

     "All philosophy," he says, "is theoretical. Upon mature reflection
     it ought finally to abandon the old demand that it become
     practical, guide action, and transform character, for here it is
     not dead concepts that decide, but the innermost essence of the
     human being, the demon that guides him. It is as impossible to
     teach virtue as it is to teach genius. It would be as foolish to
     expect our moral systems to produce virtuous characters and saints
     as to expect the science of æsthetics to bring forth poets,
     sculptors and musicians." To this view Paulsen replies:

     "I do not believe that ethics need be so faint-hearted. Its first
     object, it is true, is to understand human strivings and modes of
     conduct, conditions and institutions, as well as their effects upon
     individual and social life. But if knowledge is capable of
     influencing conduct--which Schopenhauer himself would not deny--it
     is hard to understand why the knowledge of ethics alone should be
     fruitless in this respect.... Moral instruction, however, can have
     no practical effect unless there be some agreement concerning the
     nature of the final goal--not a mere verbal agreement, to be sure,
     but one based upon actual feeling.... It will be the business of
     ethics to invite the doubter and the inquirer to assist in the
     common effort to discover fixed principles which shall help the
     judgment to understand the aims and problems of life."

What is here said concerning the usefulness of an investigation of fixed ethical principles
has application to a consideration of what rules of conduct should prevail in the legal profession.
The high social purpose of the profession, its beneficial function, and the limitations upon
its action that should be self-enforced in order to make the calling an advantage and not a
detriment to the public weal, should be understood. Indeed, the profession of the law, if it
serves its high purpose, and vindicates its existence, requires a double allegiance from those
who have assumed its obligations, first, a duty toward their clients, and second, a duty toward
the court. And though the two sometimes seem to conflict, they must be reconciled in the way
which will best promote the effective administration of justice and the peace of society. The
path to be followed in achieving this golden mean in the intricacies of professional relations
is not as manifest as the rule of honesty and morality in ordinary life. The great problem
of government that is never completely solved and that is changing with changing conditions
is how to reconcile the protection of individual rights, helpful to the pursuit of happiness
and the welfare of society, with the necessary curtailment of those rights and freedom, by
governmental restriction, to achieve the same object. So the adjustment of the duties of the
lawyer toward his client and toward the court in the interest of society, are not always easily
distinguishable and an attempt to make them clear, therefore, is justified.

An understanding between the client and his representative that remuneration is a proper incident
to their relation insures a greater confidence in the activity and devotion of his lawyer to
his interest on the part of the client and stimulates industry and sincere effort on the part
of the lawyer. It is far better that the employment on a pecuniary basis should be understood
by all men, by the courts and by the parties, than that some secret arrangements should exist
unknown to the court and the opposing party. But it is said that to give to counsel, skilled,
learned and familiar with the arts of advocacy and the preparation of cases, a pecuniary motive
to make the worse appear the better reason, necessarily leads him to an attempt to influence
the court against a just result. For since one or the other conclusion must be unjust, one
of the paid attorneys arguing the cause before the court must be arguing for the unjust side
and in favor of wrong. Hence, it is claimed, the system of paid advocacy must in every case
tend to an effort on one side or the other to pervert justice and mislead the judges into inequity
and wrong.

It may be agreed that if there were not certain limitations upon the means which counsel may
take to maintain the justice of their clients' cause, if they were justified in suborning witnesses,
and coaching them to testify to an unfounded state of facts, if they were permitted to misstate
the evidence after it has been adduced, if it were regarded as proper for them to accept employment
in the prosecution of a cause which they knew to be brought only for a wrong purpose and without
any just foundation, or if in a civil cause they were retained to make a defence which they
were advised was false and wrong, then it might be that advocacy under such freedom from limitation
would not aid the judges in avoiding wrong conclusions and unjust judgments. But there are
limitations upon the duty of counsel to their clients. There are also limitations upon a lawyer's
action which he cannot violate without a breach of his duty to the court of which he is an
officer and to the public interest in the maintenance of the proper administration of justice.
We find, therefore, that the goal to be reached in reference to the ethical duty of an attorney
in the discharge of the functions assigned to him by the law, is the reconciliation of his
duty to his client, with his duty to the court. To mark out this line in advance is easier
than to determine each special duty in a concrete way, yet neither is free from difficulty
and each requires a calm and clear understanding of the function of counsel as an instrument
in the machinery of justice. This is the main object of legal ethics. It covers other fields
and is important in those fields, but no other is of such primary importance.

Courts sit to hear controversies between parties over facts and law. Rules of procedure are
for the purpose of reducing the issues of fact and law in such controversies to a form as narrow
and concrete as possible. Men who are able to present a clear statement of the evidence and
who are learned in the principles of the law and their application to the facts as they are
developed are in a position to assist the judge to a quick and thorough understanding of the
exact question which he is to decide. The real enthusiasm of advocacy which is necessarily
developed by the relation of attorney and client would doubtless have a tendency to mislead
the court if exerted in behalf of one side only, but where both sides are represented, where
the same earnestness in the proceeding of each side is present, it is the best method within
human ken to reach a sound conclusion both as to the facts and as to the law. No one who has
had experience on the Bench in reaching judicial conclusions and who has thereafter been obliged
in an executive position to reach important, and it may be final, conclusions upon questions
involving both fact and law, can fail to recognize and acknowledge the powerful influence for
justice that honorable and learned members of the law exert in the causes which they present
to a court. The counsel who argues the losing side of a case contributes quite as much to the
assistance of the court as the successful advocate. The friction of counsel's argument against
counsel's argument develops every phase of possible error in a conclusion and thereby enables
a just, intelligent, acute and experienced court to see clearly what is the right which should
be embodied in its judgment.

The practical value of argument by paid counsel on both sides is shown in many ways. In the
first place, it is well understood in weighing legal precedents that there is little authority
in the decision of a court which has been reached without the benefit of the argument of counsel.
In some states, courts are required to answer questions from the legislature as to the constitutionality
of proposed laws. The best authorities hold that opinions given under such circumstances are
merely advisory, since they lack opposing arguments made by counsel whom the spirit of professional
advocacy arouses to industry in the search for precedent. They go so far as to say that answers
so given should not conclude the same court in a litigated case arising subsequently. An earnest
and commendable desire to win leads the counsel to search not only libraries but his own brain
for the strongest reasons that he can summon upon which to base a judgment in behalf of his
client. Why is it that a great Bar makes a great court? Though it may seem a truism, I repeat,
it is because the great Bar furnishes to the court all the reasons that can possibly be urged
in each case and enables it to select from among all the reasons developed by the ingenuity
and intense interest of men skilled in the law.

Counsel ought to decline to conduct a civil cause or to make a defence when convinced that
it is intended merely to harass the opposite party or to work oppression. His appearance in
court should, therefore, be deemed equivalent to an assertion on his honor that in his opinion
his client's case is a debatable one and one proper for judicial determination. He should know
that under a proper code of ethics, no lawyer is obliged to act either as adviser or as advocate
for every person who may wish to become his client; that he has the right to decline employment,
and that each lawyer on his own responsibility must decide what business he will accept as
counsel, what causes he will bring into court for plaintiffs, and what suits he will contest
in court for defence. The court knows that the responsibility for bringing questionable suits
or for urging questionable defences, is the lawyer's responsibility. He can not escape it by
urging as an excuse that he is only following his client's instruction. The judge knows that
no honorable lawyer would coach a witness to testify falsely, and that in dealing with the
court each lawyer is required to act with entire candor and fairness in the statements upon
which he invokes its action. The judge knows that it would not be candid or fair for the lawyer
knowingly to misquote the contents of a paper, the testimony of a witness, the argument of
opposing counsel, the language of a decision, or the wording of a text-book. He may fairly
rely on a lawyer not to cite a decision that he knows has been overruled, or a statute that
he knows has been repealed. He may properly rely on the counsel's not asserting a fact that
has not been proven.

Yet he knows that lawyers owe entire devotion to the interest of the client, and warm zeal
in the maintenance of his rights and that they will exert their utmost ability lest anything
be taken or be withheld from him, save by the rules of law, legally applied. He knows that
counsel has the right to proceed in the view that his client is entitled to the benefit of
every remedy and defence authorized by the law of the land and that the lawyer is expected
to assert every such remedy or defence. But it is steadfastly to be borne in mind that the
great trust to the lawyer is to be formed within and not without the bounds of the law. The
office of a lawyer does not permit, much less does it demand of him, violation of law or any
manner of fraud for any client. He must obey his own conscience and not that of his client.
These limitations are binding upon the lawyer as a sworn officer of the court, and compliance
with them is the true reconciliation of the primary duty of fidelity to the client, with the
constant and ever present duty owing to the minister of justice in the person of the judge.
These statements of the duty of the lawyer to the court in the advocacy of causes and in the
presentation of his client's case, are taken from the Code of Legal Ethics, which was approved
by the American Bar Association. I think that all lawyers and judges will agree that when lawyers
live up to them, the danger of injustice from the enthusiasm, skill or eloquence of their advocacy
is quite remote.

I don't mean to say that lawyers do not differ in the force of their statements, in their logical
faculty, in their method of arranging arguments, in their fluency and in the cogency with which
they present the cause of their respective clients. Of course the man who is fortunate enough
to engage the abler lawyer enjoys the advantage of those gifts with which nature has endowed
his representative, but that element of inequality can hardly be eliminated from the administration
of justice. It has more weight in a jury trial than it has before a court, for the lawyers
before a court are matching their acuteness and learning not alone with the counsel for the
other side, but with the cold scrutiny of a calm, intellectual and judicial mind, trained to
consider argument, and experienced in the elimination of the irrelevant, the emotional and
the illogical.

