It was not alone tambour and fine needlework, as we shall see later, that was taught by the
Moravian Sisters, but the ribbon work, crêpe work, and flower embroidery, and picture production
upon satin. These pictures, however important as performances, were not the most common form
of needlework taught by the Sisters. Flower embroidery was the usual form of practice, and
it was of a quality which made each one a wonder of execution and skill. The materials were
satin of a superb quality for the background, or Eastern silk of softness and strength, and
the silks used in the stitchery were generally "slack twisted" silk threads of very pure quality,
and in certain cases, where they would not be likely to fray, lustrous flosses of Eastern make.
The stitch used in these flower pieces was an over-and-over stitch, or what was called satin-stitch,
which was without the lap of Kensington stitch. There was in every piece of embroidery done
under the instruction of the accomplished and devoted Sisters certain virtues, certain effects
of conscientious and patient work, mingled with the love of good and beautiful art, which were
plainly visible. It had in all its flower pieces, and they were many, the quality of beautiful
charm. The ministry of nature may have had something to do with this, since the lives of the
executants were open to its influences.

One can make a mental picture of those early days beside the peaceful "Lehi," where the Sisters
taught and nurtured the young girls of very young America, and trained them in such beautiful
and womanly accomplishments. The scattered bits of needlework which remain to us are so fine,
so clear, so thoroughly exhaustive of all excellence in technique, that they are to the art
of embroidery what the ivory miniature is to painting. We cannot but hail the memory of the
Sisters of Bethlehem with respect and admiration.

I became familiar with the work of this community when I was arranging an historic exhibition
of American Embroidery for the Bartholdi Fair in 1883. Few people may remember that, among
the means for the installation of the Bartholdi Statue of Liberty which welcomes the world
at the entrance to the harbor of New York, was an effort called the Bartholdi Fair, held in
the then almost new and very popular Academy of Design at the northwestern corner of Fourth
Avenue and Twenty-third Street. Knowing the value of Bethlehem work, I made an effort to secure
a representative collection, with the result of gathering a most interesting group of specimens,
mainly by the interest and help of Mr. Henry Baldwin of Lehigh University, to whom I was referred
for assistance in my purpose. I have before me now the correspondence which ensued, a most
painstaking, kind and patient one on his part, giving me much interesting history of the Bethlehem
mission, as well as its life and progress. Among the legends is one--that during our Revolutionary
war, Pulaski recruited some of his Legion at Bethlehem, and ordered a banner, which was carried
by his troops until he fell in the attack upon Savannah. This banner is now in the rooms of
the Maryland Historical Society, and I find the question of its having been an order from Count
Pulaski, or a gift to the Legion, is one of very lively interest in the community.

This exhibit of 1883 was as complete an historical collection of American needlework as was
possible, and I have a list of ten articles loaned from collections in Bethlehem, which reads
as follows:

1. Embroidered pocketbook of black silk with flowers in bright colors. Former property of Bishop
Bigler.

2. Embroidered needlebook of white satin with bright flowers, date 1800.

3. Embroidered needlebook of white satin with bright flowers and vines, dated 1786.

4. Sampler, dated 1740.

5. Yellow velvet bag embroidered with ribbon work.

6. Black velvet bag embroidered in crêpe work with flowers.

7. White satin workbag embroidered in fine tracery of vines.

8. A box with embroidered pincushion on top.

9. A blue silk pocketbook with very fine ribbon work.

10. A paper box done with needle in filigree.

It will be seen by this list how varied were the forms of needlework taught at Bethlehem. The
crêpe work mentioned in No. 6 is, probably owing to the perishable character of its material,
very rare, but was extremely beautiful in effect. Bits of colored crêpe were gathered into
flower petals and sewed upon satin, roses laid leaf upon leaf and built up to a charming perfection,
while the stems and foliage were partially or wholly embroidered in silk.

The ribbon embroidery of No. 5, has been revived by the New York Society of Decorative Art
and practiced with great success. The flower embroideries, in the specimens exhibited, were
of two sorts--the small groups being done with fine twisted silks in a simple "over and over"
stitch, called at that time "satin stitch," alike on both sides, except that on the right side
the flowers and leaves were raised from the surface by an under thread of cotton floss called
"stuffing." This did not prevent, as it might easily have done, an unvarying regularity and
smoothness, which was like satin itself, thread laid beside thread as if it were woven instead
of sewed.

In the larger flowers, the sewing silk had been split into flosses, or perhaps the prepared
flosses were used in the "tent stitch," which is now known as "Kensington." The colors of all
these specimens were as fresh as natural flowers, speaking eloquently in praise of early processes
of dyeing.

These things seem to fairly exhale gentility, that quality-compact of everything superior in
the life of early American womanhood. I have especially in mind one cushion where flowers,
apparently as fresh in color as when the cushion was young, are laid upon a ground of silk
of the pinky-ash color, once known as "ashes of roses." The real charm of the thing, that which
lends it a tender romance, is the legend worked upon the back of the cushion in brown silk
stitches which are easily mistaken for the round-hand copperplate writing of the period--"Wrought
where the peaceful Lehi flows." One seems to breathe the very air of the secluded valley, peopled
by brethren and sisters set apart from the strenuous duties of the builders of a new nation,
and distinguished for learned and devoted effort toward the perfection of moral, and spiritual,
rather than the conquests of material, life.

The Sisters had many orders from the outside world, as well as from visitors, and the profit
upon these helped to maintain the school. Many of these orders were in the shape of pocketbooks,
pincushions, bags, etc., having a bunch, or wreath, or cluster of flowers on one side, wonderfully
wrought in silken flosses or sewing silks, and on the other, some pretty sentiment or legend
done in dark brown floss in the most perfect of "round-hand"; so perfect, in fact, that it
would require the closest scrutiny to decide that it was not handwritten script.

These plentiful orders for things were induced by the several attractions of the situation,
the remoteness from warlike and political disturbances, and the relationship of so many young
girl lives, as well as the interest which attached to the school and community, making a constant
demand in the shape of small articles of use or luxury, decorated by the skillful fingers of
the Sisters.

Parallel with this fine practice of flower embroidery, was a period of far more important needlework,
which we may call Picture Embroidery. This also owed its introduction to the Moravian School
of Bethlehem, although it was probably of early English origin, going back to that period when
English embroidery was the wonder of the world; and the opus plumarium, or feather-pen stitch,
or tent stitch, or Kensington stitch, as it has been known in succeeding ages, first attracted
attention as a medium of art.

Passing from England to Germany it became purely ecclesiastical, and even now one occasionally
finds in Germany, and less often in England, bits of ecclesiastical embroidery of unimaginable
fineness, commemorating Christ's miracles and other incidents of Bible history. I know of one
small specimen of ancient English art, covering a space of five by seven inches, where the
whole Garden of Eden with its weighty tragedy is represented by inch-long figures of Adam and
Eve, and a man-headed snake, discussing amicably the advantages of eating or not eating the
forbidden fruit.

Such elaboration in miniature embroidery made good the claim of English needlework to its first
place in the world, since nothing more wonderful had or has been produced in the whole long
history of needlework art. It was undoubtedly from this school, filtered through generations
of secular practice, that the Moravian picture embroidery came to be a general American inheritance.

To adapt this wonderful method to the uses of social life was an admirable achievement, and
whether by the sisters of the Moravian school, or the growth of pre-American influence and
time, we do not certainly know, the fact remains, however, that it was here so cunningly adapted
to the circumstances and spirit of colonial and early American days as to seem to belong entirely
to them, and it would seem quite clear that Bethlehem was the source of the most skillful needlework
art in America. It was there that the fine ladies of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries, who sat at the embroidery frame in the intervals when they were not "sitting at
the harp," acquired their skill.

It was the romantic period of embroidery that makes a very telling contrast to the earlier
crewel and later muslin embroidery of the New England states. The pieces were seldom larger
than eighteen or twenty inches square, the size probably governed by the width of the superb
satin which was so often used as a background. Not invariably, however, for I have seen one
or two pieces worked upon gray linen where the surface was entirely covered by stitchery, landscape,
trees, and sky showing an unbroken surface of satiny texture. Pictures from Bible subjects
are frequent, and these have the air of having been copied from prints; in fact, I have seen
some where the print appears underneath the stitches, showing that it was used as a design.
These Scripture pieces seem to have employed a lower degree of talent than those having original
design, and were probably the somewhat perfunctory work of young girls whose interests were
elsewhere. One picture which I have seen was treasured as a record of a very romantic elopement--the
lover in the case, riding gayly away with his beloved sitting on a pillion behind him, and
no witnesses to the deed but a small sister, standing at the gate of the homestead with outstretched
hands and staring eyes.

The most important picture which I have seen in portrait needlework came to light at the Baltimore
Exhibition, and was a piazza group of five figures, a burly sea-captain seated in a rocking
chair in a nautical dress and his own grayish hair embroidered above his ruddy face, his wife
in a white satin gown seated beside him, and his three daughters of appropriately different
ages grouped around, while the ship Constance was tied closely to the edge of the blue water
which bordered the foreground of the picture. The composition of this picture was evidently
the work of some experienced artist, for its incongruous elements kept their places and did
not greatly clash. Taken as a whole it was an astonishing performance, quite too ambitious
in its grasp for the novel art of needlework, and yet a thing to delight the hearts of the
descendants, or even casual possessors.

The Moravian teaching and practice spread the principles of needlework art so widely that it
developed in many different directions. The wonderful silk embroidery applied to flowers was,
like the arts of drawing and painting, capable of being used in copying all forms of beauty.
It was sometimes, not always, successfully applied to landscape representation, and grew at
last into a scheme of needlework portraiture, in this form perpetuating family history. It
was sometimes used in conjunction with painting, the faces of a family group being done in
water color upon cardboard by professional painters who were members of the art guild, who
wandered from one social circle to another, supplying the wants of embroideresses ambitious
of distinction in their accomplishments. The small painted faces were cut from the cardboard
upon which they had been painted and worked around, often with the actual hair of the original
of the portrait. I have seen one picture of a Southern beauty, where the golden hair had been
wound into tiny curls, and sewn into place, and the lace of the neckwear was so cleverly simulated
as to look almost detachable. Of course such pictures were the result of individual experiment
on the part of some very able and ambitious needlewoman.

One can imagine that the effect of them in social life was to add greatly to the vogue of the
art of needlework. The most numerous of these relics were called "mourning pieces"--bits of
memorial embroidery--the subject of the picture being generally a monument surmounted by an
urn, overhung with the sweeping branches of a willow, while standing beside the monument is
a weeping female figure, the face discreetly hidden in a pocket handkerchief. The inscriptions,
"Sacred to the memory," etc., were written or printed upon the satin in India ink, and often
the letters of the name were worked with the hair of the subject of the memorial.

In these pieces it is rather noticeable that the mourning figure is always draped in white,
which leads to the conclusion that it is a purely emblematic figure of an emotion, rather than
a real mourner. The shading of the monument was generally done in India ink, so that the actual
embroidery was confined to the trunk and long branches of weeping willow, and the dress of
the figure, and the ground upon which willow and monument and figure stand. The faces being
always hidden by the handkerchief, and a tinted satin serving for the sky, the execution of
these memorial pictures was comparatively simple. They certainly bear an undue proportion to
those happy family portraits where mother and children, or husband and wife, sit in love and
simplicity before the pillared magnificence of the family mansion.

Perhaps the greater simplicity and ease of execution of the mourning pieces had something to
do with their greater number. They may have been the first spelling of the difficult art of
pictorial embroidery. The best of these picture embroideries were certainly wonderful creations
as far as the use of the needle was concerned, and I fancy were done in the large leisure of
some colonial home where early distinction in the art of needlework must have gone hand in
hand with the skill of the traveling portrait painter. These dainty productions, with their
delicately painted faces and hands, are far more often found than those with embroidered flesh.
In some of these, faces painted with real miniature skill upon bits of parchment have been
inserted or superimposed upon the satin, the edges, as I have said, carefully covered by embroidery,
done with single hair threaded into the needle instead of silk. In one case which I remember,
the yellow hair of a child was knotted into a bunch of solid looking curls covering the head
of a small figure, while the face of the mother was surmounted by bands of a reddish brown.
This little touch of realism gave a curious note of pathos to the picture of a life separated
from the present by time and outgrown habits, but linked to it by this one tangible proof of
actual existence.

The drawing or plan of these pictures was evidently done directly upon the satin ground, as
one often finds the outlines showing at the edge of the stitches; but in the few specimens
I have found where they were worked upon linen it had been covered with a tracing on strong
thin paper, and the entire design worked through and over both paper and canvas. Those which
were done upon linen seemed to belong to an earlier period than those worked on satin, which
was perhaps an American adaptation of the earlier method. Certainly the soft thick India satin,
which was the ground of so many of them, made a delightful surface for embroidery, and blended
with its colors into a silvery mass where work and background were equally effective. Two of
these have survived the century or more of careful seclusion which followed the proud éclat
of their production. One of the fortunate heirs to many of these exhibited treasures told me
of a package or book containing heads in water color, evidently to be used as copies for the
faces which might be found necessary for efforts in embroidery. The painting of these was perhaps
a part of the education or accomplishment considered necessary to girls of prominent and successful
families of the day.

Under favorable circumstances, such as a convenient relation between artist and needlework,
this art would have developed into needlework tapestry. The groups would have outgrown their
frames, and left their picture spaces on the walls, and, stretching into life-size figures,
have become hangings of silken broidery, such as we find in Spain and Italy, from the hands
of nuns or noble ladies.

The influence of the Bethlehem teaching lasted long enough to build up a very fine and critical
standard of embroidery in America. It would be difficult to overestimate the importance of
the influence of this school of embroidery upon the needlework practice of a growing country.
Its qualities of sincerity, earnestness, and respect for the art of needlework gave importance
to the work of hands other than that of necessary labor, and these qualities influenced all
the various forms of work which followed it. The first divergence from the original work was
in its application, rather than its method, for instead of having a strictly decorative purpose
its application became almost exclusively personal. Flower embroidery of surpassing excellence
was its general feature. The materials for the development of this form of art were usually
satin, or the flexible undressed India silk which lent itself so perfectly to ornamentation.
Breadths of cream-white satin, of a thickness and softness almost unknown in the present day,
were stretched in Chippendale embroidery frames, and loops and garlands of flowers of every
shape and hue were embroidered upon them. They were often done for skirts and sleeves of gowns
of ceremony, giving a distinction even beyond the flowered brocades so much coveted by colonial
belles.

This beautiful flower embroidery was, like its predecessor, the rare picture embroidery, too
exacting in its character to be universal. It needed money without stint for its materials,
and luxurious surroundings for its practice. Some of the beautiful old gowns wrought in that
day are still to be seen in colonial exhibitions, and are even occasionally worn by great-great-granddaughters
at important mimic colonial functions.

