Non ti scordar di mi!"  The voice rang out with passionate stealthy sweetness, finding its
way into far recesses of human feeling.  Women of perfect poise and with the confident look
of luxury and social fame dropped their eyes abstractedly on the opera-glasses lying in their
laps, or the programmes they mechanically fingered, and recalled, they knew not why--for what
had it to do with this musical narration of a tragic Italian tale!--the days when, in the first
flush of their wedded life, they had set a seal of devotion and loyalty and love upon their
arms, which, long ago, had gone to the limbo of lost jewels, with the chaste, fresh desires
of worshipping hearts.  Young egotists, supremely happy and defiant in the pride of the fact
that they loved each other, and that it mattered little what the rest of the world enjoyed,
suffered, and endured--these were suddenly arrested in their buoyant and solitary flight, and
stirred restlessly in their seats.  Old men whose days of work were over; who no longer marshalled
their legions, or moved at a nod great ships upon the waters in masterful manoeuvres; whose
voices were heard no more in chambers of legislation, lashing partisan feeling to a height
of cruelty or lulling a storm among rebellious followers; whose intellects no longer devised
vast schemes of finance, or applied secrets of science to transform industry--these heard the
enthralling cry of a soul with the darkness of eternal loss gathering upon it, and drew back
within themselves; for they too had cried like this one time or another in their lives.  Stricken,
they had cried out, and ambition had fled away, leaving behind only the habit of living, and
of work and duty.

"And what is our failure here but a triumph's evidence?  Was it then so? The long weeks which
had passed since that night at Hamley, when she had told Eglington the truth about so many
things, had brought no peace, no understanding, no good news from anywhere.  The morning after
she had spoken with heart laid bare.  Eglington had essayed to have a reconciliation; but he
had come as the martyr, as one injured.  His egotism at such a time, joined to his attempt
to make light of things, of treating what had happened as a mere "moment of exasperation,"
as "one of those episodes inseparable from the lives of the high-spirited," only made her heart
sink and grow cold, almost as insensible as the flesh under a spray of ether.  He had been
neither wise nor patient.  She had not slept after that bitter, terrible scene, and the morning
had found her like one battered by winter seas, every nerve desperately alert to pain, yet
tears swimming at her heart and ready to spring to her eyes at a touch of the real thing, the
true note--and she knew so well what the true thing was!  Their great moment had passed, had
left her withdrawn into herself, firmly, yet without heart, performing the daily duties of
life, gay before the world, the delightful hostess, the necessary and graceful figure at so
many functions.

Even as Soolsby had done, who went no further than to tell Eglington his dark tale, and told
no one else, withholding it from "Our Man"; as Sybil Lady Eglington had shrunk when she had
been faced by her obvious duty, so Hylda hesitated, but from better reason than either.  To
do right in the matter was to strike her husband--it must be a blow now, since her voice had
failed.  To do right was to put in the ancient home and house of Eglington one whom he--with
anger and without any apparent desire to have her altogether for himself, all the riches of
her life and love--had dared to say commanded her sympathy and interest, not because he was
a man dispossessed of his rights, but because he was a man possessed of that to which he had
no right.  The insult had stung her, had driven her back into a reserve, out of which she seemed
unable to emerge.  How could she compel Eglington to do right in this thing--do right by his
own father's son?

Meanwhile, that father's son was once more imperilling his life, once more putting England's
prestige in the balance in the Soudan, from which he had already been delivered twice as though
by miracles.  Since he had gone, months before, there had been little news; but there had been
much public anxiety; and she knew only too well that there had been 'pourparlers' with foreign
ministers, from which no action came safe- guarding David.

Many a human being has realised the apathy, the partial paralysis of the will, succeeding a
great struggle, which has exhausted the vital forces. Many a general who has fought a desperate
and victorious fight after a long campaign, and amid all the anxieties and miseries of war,
has failed to follow up his advantage, from a sudden lesion of the power for action in him.
He has stepped from the iron routine of daily effort into a sudden freedom, and his faculties
have failed him, the iron of his will has vanished.  So it was with Hylda.  She waited for
she knew not what. Was it some dim hope that Eglington might see the right as she saw it? That
he might realise how unreal was this life they were living, outwardly peaceful and understanding,
deluding the world, but inwardly a place of tears.  How she dreaded the night and its recurrent
tears, and the hours when she could not sleep, and waited for the joyless morning, as one lost
on the moor, blanched with cold, waits for the sun-rise! Night after night at a certain hour--the
hour when she went to bed at last after that poignant revelation to Eglington--she wept, as
she had wept then, heart-broken tears of disappointment, disillusion, loneliness; tears for
the bitter pity of it all; for the wasting and wasted opportunities; for the common aim never
understood or planned together; for the precious hours lived in an air of artificial happiness
and social excitement; for a perfect understanding missed; for the touch which no longer thrilled.

But the end of it all must come.  She was looking frail and delicate, and her beauty, newly
refined, and with a fresh charm, as of mystery or pain, was touched by feverishness.  An old
impatience once hers was vanished, and Kate Heaver would have given a month's wages for one
of those flashes of petulance of other days ever followed by a smile.  Now the smile was all
too often there, the patient smile which comes to those who have suffered. "General Jackson--General
Longstreet, General Ambrose Powell Hill."

The four sat down, Jackson resting his sabre across his knees. He had upon him the dust of three
counties; he was all one neutral hue like a faded leaf, save that his eyes showed through,
grey-blue, intense enough, though quiet. He was worn to spareness.

Longstreet spoke in his heavy voice. "Well, general, Fate is making of your Valley the Flanders of this
war."

"God made it a highway, sir. We must take it as we find it."

"Well," said A. P. Hill, smiling, "since we have a Marlborough for that Flanders--"

Jackson shifted the sabre a little. "Marlborough is not my beau ideal. He had circumstances too
much with him."

An inner door opened. "The artillery near Cold Harbour--" said a voice, cadenced and manly.
In a moment Lee entered. The four rose. He went straight to Stonewall Jackson, laid one hand on his
shoulder, the other on his breast. The two had met, perhaps, in Mexico; not since. Now they
looked each other in the eyes. Both were tall men, though Lee was the tallest; both in grey,
both thin from the fatigue of the field. Here the resemblance ended. Lee was a model of manly
beauty. His form, like his character, was justly proportioned; he had a great head, grandly based,
a face of noble sweetness, a step light and dauntless. There breathed about him something knightly,
something kingly, an antique glamour, sunny shreds of the Golden Age. "You are welcome, General Jackson,"
he said; "very welcome! You left Frederickshall--?"

"Last night, sir."

"The army is there?"

"It is there, sir."

"You have become a name to conjure with, general! I think that your Valley will never forget
you." He took a chair beside the table. "Sit down, gentlemen.

I have called this council, and now the sun is sinking and General Jackson has far to ride, and
we must hasten. Here are the maps."

The major-generals drew about the table. Lee pinned down a map with the small objects upon the board,
then leaned back in his chair. "This is our first council with General Jackson. We wait but
for the Army of the Valley to precipitate certainly one great battle, perhaps many battles.
I think that the fighting about Richmond will be heavier than all that has gone before." An aide
entered noiselessly with a paper in his hand. "From the President, sir," he said. Lee rose
and took the note to the window. The four at table spoke together in low tones.

"It is the most difficult ground in the world," said A. P. Hill. "You'll have another guess-time
of it than in your Valley, general! No broad pike through the marshes of the Chickahominy!"

"Are
there good maps?"

"No," said Longstreet; "damned bad."

Jackson
stiffened. D. H. Hill came in hastily. "It's rather difficult to draw
them accurately with a hundred and ten thousand Yankees lying around
loose. They should have been made last year."

Lee returned. "Yes,
the next ten days will write a page in blood." He sighed. "I do not
like war, gentlemen. Now, to begin again! We are agreed that to defend
Richmond is imperative. When Richmond falls the Confederacy falls.
It is our capital and seat of government. Here only have we railroad
communications with the far South. Here are our arsenals and military
manufactories, our depots of supply, our treasury, our hospitals,
our refugee women and children. The place is our heart, and arm and
brain must guard it. Leave Richmond and we must withdraw from Virginia.
Abandon Virginia, and we can on our part no longer threaten the northern
capital. Then General Jackson cannot create a panic every other day,
nor will Stanton then withdraw on every fresh alarm a division from
McClellan."

He leaned his head on his hand, while with the firm fingers
of the other he measured the edge of the table. "No! It is the game
of the two capitals, and the board is the stretch of country between.
To the end they will attempt to reach Richmond. To the end we must
prevent that mate. Let us see their possible roads. Last year McDowell
tried it by Manassas, and he failed. It is a strategic point,--Manassas.
There may well be fighting there again. The road by Fredericksburg
... they have not tried that yet, and yet it has a value.  This
she had known; this had been; and though the image of the sacred thing had been defaced, yet
the shrine was not destroyed.

For she believed that each had kept the letter of the law; that, whatever his faults, he had
turned his face to no other woman.  If she had not made his heart captive and drawn him by
an ever-shortening cord of attraction, yet she was sure that none other had any influence over
him, that, as he had looked at her in those short-lived days of his first devotion, he looked
at no other.  The way was clear yet.  There was nothing irretrievable, nothing irrevocable,
which would for ever stain the memory and tarnish the gold of life when the perfect love should
be minted.  Whatever faults of mind or disposition or character were his-- or hers--there were
no sins against the pledges they had made, nor the bond into which they had entered.  Life
would need no sponge.  Memory might still live on without a wound or a cowl of shame.

It was all part of the music to which she listened, and she was almost oblivious of the brilliant
throng, the crowded boxes, or of the Duchess of Snowdon sitting near her strangely still, now
and again scanning the beautiful face beside her with a reflective look.  The Duchess loved
the girl--she was but a girl, after all--as she had never loved any of her sex; it had come
to be the last real interest of her life.  To her eyes, dimmed with much seeing, blurred by
a garish kaleidoscope of fashionable life, there had come a look which was like the ghost of
a look she had, how many decades ago.

Presently, as she saw Hylda's eyes withdraw from the stage, and look at her with a strange,
soft moisture and a new light in them, she laid her fan confidently on her friend's knee, and
said in her abrupt whimsical voice: "You like it, my darling; your eyes are as big as saucers.
You look as if you'd been seeing things, not things on that silly stage, but what Verdi felt
when he wrote the piece, or something of more account than that."

"Yes, I've been seeing things," Hylda answered with a smile which came from a new-born purpose,
the dream of an idealist.  "I've been seeing things that Verdi did not see, and of more account,
too.  .  .  . Do you suppose the House is up yet?"

A strange look flashed into the Duchess's eyes, which had been watching her with as much pity
as interest.  Hylda had not been near the House of Commons this session, though she had read
the reports with her usual care.  She had shunned the place.

"Why, did you expect Eglington?" the Duchess asked idly, yet she was watchful too, alert for
every movement in this life where the footsteps of happiness were falling by the edge of a
precipice, over which she would not allow herself to look.  She knew that Hylda did not expect
Eglington, for the decision to come to the opera was taken at the last moment.

"Of course not--he doesn't know we are here.  But if it wasn't too late, I thought I'd go down
and drive him home."

The Duchess veiled her look.  Here was some new development in the history which had been torturing
her old eyes, which had given her and Lord Windlehurst as many anxious moments as they had
known in many a day, and had formed them into a vigilance committee of two, who waited for
the critical hour when they should be needed.

"We'll go at once if you like," she replied.  "The opera will be over soon.  We sent word to
Windlehurst to join us, you remember, but he won't come now; it's too late.  So, we'll go,
if you like."

She half rose, but the door of the box opened, and Lord Windlehurst looked in quizzically.
There was a smile on his face.

"I'm late, I know; but you'll forgive me--you'll forgive me, dear lady," he added to Hylda,
"for I've been listening to your husband making a smashing speech for a bad cause."

Hylda smiled.  "Then I must go and congratulate him," she answered, and withdrew her hand from
that of Lord Windlehurst, who seemed to hold it longer than usual, and pressed it in a fatherly
way.

"I'm afraid the House is up," he rejoined, as Hylda turned for her opera- cloak; "and I saw
Eglington leave Palace Yard as I came away."  He gave a swift, ominous glance towards the Duchess,
which Hylda caught, and she looked at each keenly.

"It's seldom I sit in the Peers' Gallery," continued Windlehurst; "I don't like going back
to the old place much.  It seems empty and hollow.  But I wouldn't have missed Eglington's
fighting speech for a good deal."

"What was it about?" asked Hylda as they left the box.  She had a sudden throb of the heart.
Was it the one great question, that which had been like a gulf of fire between them?

"Oh, Turkey--the unpardonable Turk," answered Windlehurst.  "As good a defence of a bad case
as I ever heard."

"Yes, Eglington would do that well," said the Duchess enigmatically, drawing her cloak around
her and adjusting her hair.  Hylda looked at her sharply, and Lord Windlehurst slyly, but the
Duchess seemed oblivious of having said anything out of the way, and added: "It's a gift seeing
all that can be said for a bad cause, and saying it, and so making the other side make their
case so strong that the verdict has to be just."

"Dear Duchess, it doesn't always work out that way," rejoined Windlehurst with a dry laugh.
"Sometimes the devil's advocate wins."

"You are not very complimentary to my husband," retorted Hylda, looking him in the eyes, for
she was not always sure when he was trying to baffle her.

"I'm not so sure of that.  He hasn't won his case yet.  He has only staved off the great attack.
It's coming--soon."

"What is the great attack?  What has the Government, or the Foreign Office, done or left undone?"
"Well, my dear--" Suddenly Lord Windlehurst remembered himself, stopped, put up his eyeglass,
and with great interest seemed to watch a gay group of people opposite; for the subject of
attack was Egypt and the Government's conduct in not helping David, in view not alone of his
present danger, but of the position of England in the country, on which depended the security
of her highway to the East.  Windlehurst was a good actor, and he had broken off his words
as though the group he was now watching had suddenly claimed his attention.  "Well, well, Duchess,"
he said reflectively, "I see a new nine days' wonder yonder."  Then, in response to a reminder
from Hylda, he continued: "Ah, yes, the attack!  Oh, Persia--Persia, and our feeble diplomacy,
my dear lady, though you mustn't take that as my opinion, opponent as I am.  That's the charge,
Persia--and her cats."

The Duchess breathed a sigh of relief; for she knew what Windlehurst had been going to say,
and she shrank from seeing what she felt she would see, if Egypt and Claridge Pasha's name
were mentioned.  That night at Harnley had burnt a thought into her mind which she did not
like.  Not that she had any pity for Eglington; her thought was all for this girl she loved.
No happiness lay in the land of Egypt for her, whatever her unhappiness here; and she knew
that Hylda must be more unhappy still before she was ever happy again, if that might be.  There
was that concerning Eglington which Hylda did not know, yet which she must know one day--and
then!  But why were Hylda's eyes so much brighter and softer and deeper to-night?  There was
something expectant, hopeful, brooding in them.  They belonged not to the life moving round
her, but were shining in a land of their own, a land of promise.  By an instinct in each of
them they stood listening for a moment to the last strains of the opera. The light leaped higher
in Hylda's eyes.

"Beautiful--oh, so beautiful!" she said, her hand touching the Duchess's arm.

The Duchess gave the slim warm fingers a spasmodic little squeeze.  "Yes, darling, beautiful,"
she rejoined; and then the crowd began to pour out behind them.

Their carriages were at the door.  Lord Windlehurst put Hylda in.  "The House is up," he said.
"You are going on somewhere?"

"No--home," she said, and smiled into his old, kind, questioning eyes. "Home!"

"Home!" he murmured significantly as he turned towards the Duchess and her carriage.  "Home!"
he repeated, and shook his head sadly.

"Shall I drive you to your house?" the Duchess asked.

"No, I'll go with you to your door, and walk back to my cell.  Home!" he growled to the footman,
with a sardonic note in the voice.

As they drove away, the Duchess turned to him abruptly.  "What did you mean by your look when
you said you had seen Eglington drive away from the House?"

"Well, my dear Betty, she--the fly-away--drives him home now.  It has come to that."

"To her house--Windlehurst, oh, Windlehurst!"

She sank back in the cushions, and gave what was as near a sob as she had given in many a day.
Windlehurst took her hand.  "No, not so bad as that yet.  She drove him to his club.  Don't
fret, my dear Betty."

Home!  Hylda watched the shops, the houses, the squares, as she passed westward, her mind dwelling
almost happily on the new determination to which she had come.  It was not love that was moving
her, not love for him, but a deeper thing.  He had brutally killed love--the full life of it--those
months ago; but there was a deep thing working in her which was as near nobility as the human
mind can feel.  Not in a long time had she neared her home with such expectation and longing.
Often on the doorstep she had shut her eyes to the light and warmth and elegance of it, because
of that which she did not see.  Now, with a thrill of pleasure, she saw its doors open.  It
was possible Eglington might have come home already. Lord Windlehurst had said that he had
left the House. His theme is the corrupting influence of the upper upon the lower class. He has
in this book made some appalling, soul-searching studies in the pathology as well as the psychology
of vice.

Kielland's third novel, "Skipper Worse," marked a distinct step in his development. It was
less of a social satire and more of a social study. It was not merely a series of brilliant,
exquisitely finished scenes, loosely strung together on a slender thread of narrative, but
was a concise and well-constructed story, full of beautiful scenes and admirable portraits.
The theme is akin to that of Daudet's "L'Évangéliste;" but Kielland, as it appears to me,
has in this instance outdone his French confrère, as regards insight into the peculiar character
and poetry of the pietistic movement. He has dealt with it as a psychological and not primarily as a pathological
phenomenon. A comparison with Daudet suggests itself constantly in reading Kielland. Their methods
of workmanship and their attitude toward life have many points in
common.

The charm of style, the delicacy of touch, and felicity of phrase, are in both cases pre-eminent. Daudet
has, however, the advantage (or, as he himself asserts, the disadvantage) of working in a flexible
and highly finished language, which bears the impress of the labors
of a hundred masters; while Kielland has to produce his effects of
style in a poorer and less pliable language, which often pants and
groans in its efforts to render a subtle thought.

     To have polished this tongue and sharpened its capacity for refined
     and incisive utterance, is one--and not the least--of his merits.

Though
     he has by nature no more sympathy with the pietistic movement than
Daudet, Kielland yet manages to get psychologically closer to his
problem.

His pietists are more humanly interesting than those of Daudet, and the little drama which they
set in motion is more genuinely pathetic. Two superb figures--the lay preacher Hans Nilsen and
Skipper Worse--surpass all that the author had hitherto produced in depth of conception and
brilliancy of execution.

The marriage of that delightful, profane old sea-dog Jacob Worse with the pious Sara Torvestad,
and the attempts of his mother-in-law to convert him, are described not with the merely superficial
drollery to which the subject invites, but with a sweet and delicate humor which trembles
on the verge of pathos. In the Christmas tale, "Elsie," Kielland has produced a little classic
of almost flawless perfection. With what exquisite art he paints the life of a small Norwegian
coast-town in all its vivid details! While Björnson, in "The Heritage of the Kurts," primarily
emphasizes the responsibility of the individual to society, Kielland
chooses to emphasize the responsibility of society to the individual.

The former selects a hero with vicious inherited tendencies, redeemed by wise education and favorable
environment; the latter portrays a heroine with no corrupt predisposition,
destroyed by a corrupting environment.

Elsie could not be good, because the world was once so constituted that girls of her kind were
not expected to be good. Temptations, perpetually thronging in her way, broke down the moral
bulwarks of her nature; resistance seemed in vain

.
  The two men had not met for a long time, and the retired official had been
one of Lord Windlehurst's own best appointments in other days.  The Duchess had the carriage
wait in consequence.

The ex-official could hear little, but he had cultivated the habit of talking constantly and
well.  There were some voices, however, which he could hear more distinctly than others, and
Lord Windlehurst's was one of them--clear, well-modulated, and penetrating.  Sipping brandy
and water, Lord Windlehurst gave his latest quip.  They were all laughing heartily, when the
butler entered the room and said, "Lady Eglington is here, and wishes to see your Grace."

As the butler left the room, the Duchess turned despairingly to Windlehurst, who had risen,
and was paler than the Duchess.  "It has come," she said, "oh, it has come!  I can't face it."

"But it doesn't matter about you facing it," Lord Windlehurst rejoined. "Go to her and help
her, Betty.  You know what to do--the one thing." He took her hand and pressed it.

She dashed the tears from her eyes and drew herself together, while her brother watched her
benevolently.

He had not heard what was said.  Betty had always been impulsive, he thought to himself, and
here was some one in trouble--they all came to her, and kept her poor.

"Go to bed, Dick," the Duchess said to him, and hurried from the room. She did not hesitate
now.  Windlehurst had put the matter in the right way.  Her pain was nothing, mere moral cowardice;
but Hylda--!

She entered the other room as quickly as rheumatic limbs would permit. Hylda stood waiting,
erect, her eyes gazing blankly before her and rimmed by dark circles, her face haggard and
despairing.

Before the Duchess could reach her, she said in a hoarse whisper: "I have left him--I have
left him.  I have come to you."

With a cry of pity the Duchess would have taken the stricken girl in her arms, but Hylda held
out a shaking hand with the letter in it which had brought this new woe and this crisis foreseen
by Lord Windlehurst. "There--there it is.  He goes from me to her--to that!"  She thrust the
letter into the Duchess's fingers.  "You knew--you knew!  I saw the look that passed between
you and Windlehurst at the opera.  I understand all now.  He left the House of Commons with
her--and you knew, oh, you knew! All the world knows--every one knew but me."  She threw up
her hands. "But I've left him--I've left him, for ever."

Now the Duchess had her in her arms, and almost forcibly drew her to a sofa.  "Darling, my
darling," she said, "you must not give way.  It is not so bad as you think.  You must let me
help to make you understand."

Hylda laughed hysterically.  "Not so bad as I think!  Read--read it," she said, taking the
letter from the Duchess's fingers and holding it before her face.  "I found it on the staircase.
I could not help but read it."  She sat and clasped and unclasped her hands in utter misery.
"Oh, the shame of it, the bitter shame of it!  Have I not been a good wife to him?  Have I
not had reason to break my heart?  But I waited, and I wanted to be good and to do right. 
And to-night I was going to try once more--I felt it in the opera.  I was going to make one
last effort for his sake.  It was for his sake I meant to make it, for I thought him only hard
and selfish, and that he had never loved; and if he only loved, I thought--"

She broke off, wringing her hands and staring into space, the ghost of the beautiful figure
that had left the Opera House with shining eyes.

The Duchess caught the cold hands.  "Yes, yes, darling, I know.  I understand.  So does Windlehurst.
He loves you as much as I do.  We know there isn't much to be got out of life; but we always
hoped you would get more than anybody else."

Hylda shrank, then raised her head, and looked at the Duchess with an infinite pathos.  "Oh,
is it always so--in life?  Is no one true?  Is every one betrayed sometime?  I would die--yes,
a thousand times yes, I would rather die than bear this.  What do I care for life--it has cheated
me!  I meant well, and I tried to do well, and I was true to him in word and deed even when
I suffered most, even when--"

The Duchess laid a cheek against the burning head.  "I understand, my own dear.  I understand--altogether."

"But you cannot know," the broken girl replied; "but through everything I was true; and I have
been tempted too when my heart was aching so, when the days were so empty, the nights so long,
and my heart hurt--hurt me. But now, it is over, everything is done.  You will keep me here--ah,
say you will keep me here till everything can be settled, and I can go away --far away--far--!"

She stopped with a gasping cry, and her eyes suddenly strained into the distance, as though
a vision of some mysterious thing hung before her. The Duchess realised that that temptation,
which has come to so many disillusioned mortals, to end it all, to find quiet somehow, somewhere
out in the dark, was upon her.  She became resourceful and persuasively commanding.

"But no, my darling," she said, "you are going nowhere.  Here in London is your place now.
And you must not stay here in my house.  You must go back to your home.  Your place is there.
For the present, at any rate, there must be no scandal.  Suspicion is nothing, talk is nothing,
and the world forgets--"

"Oh, I do not care for the world or its forgetting!" the wounded girl replied.  "What is the
world to me!  I wanted my own world, the world of my four walls, quiet and happy, and free
from scandal and shame.  I wanted love and peace there, and now .  .  .  !"

"You must be guided by those who love you.  You are too young to decide what is best for yourself.
You must let Windlehurst and me think for you; and, oh, my darling, you cannot know how much
I care for your best good!"

"I cannot, will not, bear the humiliation and the shame.  This letter here--you see!"

"It is the letter of a woman who has had more affaires than any man in London.  She is preternaturally
clever, my dear--Windlehurst would tell you so.  The brilliant and unscrupulous, the beautiful
and the bad, have a great advantage in this world.  Eglington was curious, that is all. It
is in the breed of the Eglingtons to go exploring, to experiment."

Hylda started.

"I have only been married three years," she moaned.  "Yes, yes, my darling; but much may happen
after three days of married life, and love may come after twenty years.  The human heart is
a strange thing."

"I was patient--I gave him every chance.  He has been false and shameless.  I will not go on."

The Duchess pressed both hands hard, and made a last effort, looking into the deep troubled
eyes with her own grown almost beautiful with feeling --the faded world-worn eyes.

"You will go back to-night-at once," she said firmly.  "To-morrow you will stay in bed till
noon-at any rate, till I come.  I promise you that you shall not be treated with further indignity.
Your friends will stand by you, the world will be with you, if you do nothing rash, nothing
that forces it to babble and scold.  But you must play its game, my dearest. I'll swear that
the worst has not happened.  She drove him to his club, and, after a man has had a triumph,
a woman will not drive him to his club if--my darling, you must trust me!  If there must be
the great smash, let it be done in a way that will prevent you being smashed also in the world's
eyes.  You can live, and you will live.  Is there nothing for you to do?  Is there no one for
whom you would do something, who would be heart-broken if you--if you went mad now?"

Suddenly a great change passed over Hylda.  "Is there no one for whom you would do something?"
Just as in the desert a question like this had lifted a man out of a terrible and destroying
apathy, so this searching appeal roused in Hylda a memory and a pledge.  "Is there no one for
whom you would do something?"  Was life, then, all over?  Was her own great grief all?  Was
her bitter shame the end?

She got to her feet tremblingly.  "I will go back," she said slowly and softly.

"Windlehurst will take you home," the Duchess rejoined eagerly.  "My carriage is at the door."

A moment afterwards Lord Windlehurst took Hylda's hands in his and held them long.  His old,
querulous eyes were like lamps of safety; his smile had now none of that cynicism with which
he had aroused and chastened the world.  The pitiful understanding of life was there and a
consummate gentleness.  He gave her his arm, and they stepped out into the moonlit night. 
"So peaceful, so bright!" he said, looking round.

"I will come at noon to-morrow," called the Duchess from the doorway.

A light was still shining in Eglington's study when the carriage drove up.  With a latch-key
Hylda admitted herself and her maid.

The storm had broken, the flood had come.  The storm was over, but the flood swept far and wide.

CHAPTER XXXVII

THE FLYING SHUTTLE

Hour after hour of sleeplessness.  The silver-tongued clock remorselessly tinkled the quarters,
and Hylda lay and waited for them with a hopeless strained attention.  In vain she tried devices
to produce that monotony of thought which sometimes brings sleep.  Again and again, as she
felt that sleep was coming at last, the thought of the letter she had found flashed through
her mind with words of fire, and it seemed as if there had been poured through every vein a
subtle irritant.  Just such a surging, thrilling flood she had felt in the surgeon's chair
when she was a girl and an anesthetic had been given.  But this wave of sensation led to no
oblivion, no last soothing intoxication.  Its current beat against her heart until she could
have cried out from the mere physical pain, the clamping grip of her trouble.  She withered
and grew cold under the torture of it all--the ruthless spoliation of everything which made
life worth while or the past endurable.

About an hour after she had gone to bed she heard Eglington's step.  It paused at her door.
She trembled with apprehension lest he should enter. It was many a day since he had done so,
but also she had not heard his step pause at her door for many a day.  She could not bear to
face it all now; she must have time to think, to plan her course--the last course of all. 
For she knew that the next step must be the last step in her old life, and towards a new life,
whatever that might be.  A great sigh of relief broke from her as she heard his door open and
shut, and silence fell on everything, that palpable silence which seems to press upon the night-watcher
with merciless, smothering weight.

How terribly active her brain was!  Pictures--it was all vivid pictures, that awful visualisation
of sorrow which, if it continues, breaks the heart or wrests the mind from its sanity.  If
only she did not see!  But she did see Eglington and the Woman together, saw him look into
her eyes, take her hands, put his arm round her, draw her face to his!  Her heart seemed as
if it must burst, her lips cried out.  With a great effort of the will she tried to hide from
these agonies of the imagination, and again she would approach those happy confines of sleep,
which are the only refuge to the lacerated heart; and then the weapon of time on the mantelpiece
would clash on the shield of the past, and she was wide awake again.  At last, in desperation,
she got out of bed, hurried to the fireplace, caught the little sharp-tongued recorder in a
nervous grasp, and stopped it.

As she was about to get into bed again, she saw a pile of letters lying on the table near her
pillow.  In her agitation she had not noticed them, and the devoted Heaver had not drawn her
attention to them.  Now, however, with a strange premonition, she quickly glanced at the envelopes.
The last one of all was less aristocratic-looking than the others; the paper of the envelope
was of the poorest, and it had a foreign look.  She caught it up with an exclamation.  The
handwriting was that of her cousin Lacey.

She got into bed with a mind suddenly swept into a new atmosphere, and
opened the flimsy cover.  Shutting her eyes, she lay still for a moment
--still and vague; she was only conscious of one thing, that a curtain
had dropped on the terrible pictures she had seen, and that her mind was
in a comforting quiet.  Presently she roused herself, and turned the
letter over in her hand.  It was not long--was that because its news was
bad news?  The first chronicles of disaster were usually brief!  She
smoothed the paper out-it had been crumpled and was a little soiled-and
read it swiftly.  She outclasses Mexico as a
     "precious example" in this respect.  You needn't go looking for
     trouble in Mexico; it's waiting for you kindly.  If it doesn't find
     you to-day, well, manana.  But here it comes running like a native
     to his cooking-pot at sunset in Ramadan.  Well, there have been
     "hard trials" for the Saadat.  His cotton-mills were set on fire-
     can't you guess who did it?  And now, down in Cairo, Nahoum runs
     Egypt; for a messenger that got through the tribes worrying us tells
     us that Kaid is sick, and Nahoum the Armenian says, you shall, and
     you shan't, now.  Which is another way of saying, that between us
     and the front door of our happy homes there are rattlesnakes that
     can sting--Nahoum's arm is long, and his traitors are crawling under
     the canvas of our tents!

     I'm not complaining for myself.  I asked for what I've got, and,
     dear Lady Cousin, I put up some cash for it, too, as a man should.
     No, I don't mind for myself, fond as I am of loafing, sort of
     pottering round where the streets are in the hands of a pure police;
     for I've seen more, done more, thought more, up here, than in all my
     life before; and I've felt a country heaving under the touch of one
     of God's men--it gives you minutes that lift you out of the dust and
     away from the crawlers.  And I'd do it all over a thousand times for
     him, and for what I've got out of it.  I've lived.  But, to speak
     right out plain, I don't know how long this machine will run.
     There's been a plant of the worst kind.  Tribes we left friendly
     under a year ago are out against us; cities that were faithful have
     gone under to rebels.  Nahoum has sowed the land with the tale that
     the Saadat means to abolish slavery, to take away the powers of the
     great sheikhs, and to hand the country over to the Turk.  Ebn Ezra
     Bey has proofs of the whole thing, and now at last the Saadat knows
     too late that his work has been spoiled by the only man who could
     spoil it.  The Saadat knows it, but does he rave and tear his hair?
     He says nothing.  He stands up like a rock before the riot of
     treachery and bad luck and all the terrible burden he has to carry
     here.  If he wasn't a Quaker I'd say he had the pride of an
     archangel.  You can bend him, but you can't break him; and it takes
     a lot to bend him.  Men desert, but he says others will come to take
     their place.  And so they do.  It's wonderful, in spite of the holy
     war that's being preached, and all the lies about him sprinkled over
     this part of Africa, how they all fear him, and find it hard to be
     out on the war-path against him.  We should be gorging the vultures
     if he wasn't the wonder he is.  We need boats.  Does he sit down and
     wring his hands?  No, he organises, and builds them--out of scraps.
     Hasn't he enough food for a long siege?  He goes himself to the
     tribes that have stored food in their cities, and haven't yet
     declared against him, and he puts a hand on their hard hearts, and
     takes the sulkiness out of their eyes, and a fleet of ghiassas comes
     down to us loaded with dourha.  The defences of this place are
     nothing.  Does he fold his hands like a man of peace that he is,
     and say, 'Thy will be done'?  Not the Saadat.  He gets two soldier-
     engineers, one an Italian who murdered his wife in Italy twenty
     years ago, and one a British officer that cheated at cards and had
     to go, and we've got defences that'll take some negotiating.  That's
     the kind of man he is; smiling to cheer others when their hearts are
     in their boots, stern like a commander-in-chief when he's got to
     punish, and then he does it like steel; but I've seen him afterwards
     in his tent with a face that looks sixty, and he's got to travel a
     while yet before he's forty.  None of us dares be as afraid as we
     could be, because a look at him would make us so ashamed we'd have
     to commit suicide.  He hopes when no one else would ever hope.  The
     other day I went to his tent to wait for him, and I saw his Bible
     open on the table.  A passage was marked.

     I'd like to see Nahoum with that cup of trembling in his hand, and
     I've got an idea, too, that it will be there yet.  I don't know how
     it is, but I never can believe the worst will happen to the Saadat. People
     had almost forgotten that great things had been expected of him,
     and some fancied perhaps that he had been spoiled by prosperity.
     Remembering him, as I did, as the most brilliant and notable personality
     among my university friends, I began to apply to him Mallock's epigrammatic
     damnation of the man of whom it was said at twenty that he would do
     great things, at thirty that he might do great things, and at forty
     that he might have done great things.
     
     This was the frame of mind of those who remembered Alexander Kielland
     (and he was an extremely difficult man to forget), when in the year
     1879 a modest volume of "Novelettes" appeared, bearing his name. It
     was, to all appearances, a light performance, but it revealed a sense
     of style which made it, nevertheless, notable. No man had ever
     written the Norwegian language as this man wrote it. There was a lightness
     of touch, a perspicacity, an epigrammatic sparkle, and occasional flashes
     of wit which seemed altogether un-Norwegian. It was obvious
     that this author was familiar with the best French writers, and had
     acquired through them that clear and crisp incisiveness of utterance
     which was supposed, hitherto, to be untransferable to any other tongue.

As
     regards the themes of these "Novelettes," it was remarked at the
     time of their first appearance that they hinted at a more serious
     purpose than their style seemed to imply. Who can read, for instance,
     "Pharaoh" (which in the original is entitled "A Ball Mood") without
     detecting the revolutionary note that trembles quite audibly through
     the calm and unimpassioned language? There is, by the way, a little
     touch of melodrama in this tale which is very unusual with Kielland.
     "Romance and Reality," too, is glaringly at variance with conventional
     romanticism in its satirical contrasting of the prematrimonial and
the postmatrimonial view of love and marriage.

     The same persistent tendency to present the wrong side as well as the
     right side--and not, as literary good manners are supposed to prescribe,
     ignore the former--is obvious in the charming tale, "At the Fair,"
     where a little spice of wholesome truth spoils the thoughtlessly festive
     mood; and the squalor, the want, the envy, hate, and greed which prudence
     and a regard for business compel the performers to disguise to the
     public, become the more cruelly visible to the visitors of the
     little alley-way at the rear of the tents. In "A Good Conscience"
     the satirical note has a still more serious ring; but the same admirable
     self-restraint which, next to the power of thought and expression,
     is the happiest gift an author's fairy godmother can bestow upon him,
     saves Kielland from saying too much--from enforcing his lesson by
     marginal comments, á la George Eliot. But he must be obtuse indeed
     to whom this reticence is not more eloquent and effective than a
page of philosophical moralizing.

                    

                                        

     "Hope's Clad in April Green" and "The Battle of Waterloo" (the first
     and the last tale in the Norwegian edition) are more untinged with
     a moral tendency than any of the foregoing. The former is a mere jeu
     d'esprit, full of good-natured satire on the calf-love of very young
people, and the amusing over-estimate of our importance to which we
are all, at that age, peculiarly liable.

As an organist with vaguely melodious hints foreshadows in his prelude
the musical motifs which he means to vary and elaborate in his fugue,
so Kielland lightly touched in these "Novelettes" the themes which
in his later works he has struck with a fuller volume and power.  Even now it might be too late.  She must have strength
for what she meant to do.  She put the room in darkness, and resolutely banished thought from
her mind.

The sun had been up for hours before she waked.  Eglington had gone to the Foreign Office.
The morning papers were full of sensational reports concerning Claridge Pasha and the Soudan.
A Times leader sternly admonished the Government.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

JASPER KIMBER SPEAKS

That day the adjournment of the House of Commons was moved "To call attention to an urgent
matter of public importance"--the position of Claridge Pasha in the Soudan.  Flushed with the
success of last night's performance, stung by the attacks of the Opposition morning papers,
confident in the big majority behind, which had cheered him a few hours before, viciously resenting
the letter he had received from David that morning, Eglington returned such replies to the
questions put to him that a fire of angry mutterings came from the forces against him.  He
might have softened the growing resentment by a change of manner, but his intellectual arrogance
had control of him for the moment; and he said to himself that he had mastered the House before,
and he would do so now. Apart from his deadly antipathy to his half-brother, and the gain to
himself--to his credit, the latter weighed with him not so much, so set was he on a stubborn
course--if David disappeared for ever, there was at bottom a spirit of anti-expansion, of reaction
against England's world- wide responsibilities.  He had no largeness of heart or view concerning
humanity.  He had no inherent greatness, no breadth of policy.  With less responsibility taken,
there would be less trouble, national and international--that was his point of view; that had
been his view long ago at the meeting at Heddington; and his weak chief had taken it, knowing
nothing of the personal elements behind.

The disconcerting factor in the present bitter questioning in the House was, that it originated
on his own side.  It was Jasper Kimber who had launched the questions, who moved the motion
for adjournment.  Jasper had had a letter from Kate Heaver that morning early, which sent him
to her, and he had gone to the House to do what he thought to be his duty.  He did it boldly,
to the joy of the Opposition, and with a somewhat sullen support from many on his own side.
Now appeared Jasper's own inner disdain of the man who had turned his coat for office.  It
gave a lead to a latent feeling among members of the ministerial party, of distrust, and of
suspicion that they were the dupes of a mind of abnormal cleverness which, at bottom, despised
them.

With flashing eyes and set lips, vigilant and resourceful, Eglington listened to Jasper Kimber's
opening remarks.

By unremitting industry Jasper had made a place for himself in the House. The humour and vitality
of his speeches, and his convincing advocacy of the cause of the "factory folk," had gained
him a hearing.  Thickset, under middle size, with an arm like a giant and a throat like a bull,
he had strong common sense, and he gave the impression that he would wear his heart out for
a good friend or a great cause, but that if he chose to be an enemy he would be narrow, unrelenting,
and persistent.  For some time the House had been aware that he had more than a gift for criticism
of the Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs.

His speech began almost stumblingly, his h's ran loose, and his grammar became involved, but
it was seen that he meant business, that he had that to say which would give anxiety to the
Government, that he had a case wherein were the elements of popular interest and appeal, and
that he was thinking and speaking as thousands outside the House would think and speak.

He had waited for this hour.  Indirectly he owed to Claridge Pasha all that he had become.
The day in which David knocked him down saw the depths of his degradation reached, and, when
he got up, it was to start on a new life uncertainly, vaguely at first, but a new life for
all that. He knew, from a true source, of Eglington's personal hatred of Claridge Pasha, though
he did not guess their relationship; and all his interest was enlisted for the man who had,
as he knew, urged Kate Heaver to marry himself--and Kate was his great ambition now.  Above
and beyond these personal considerations was a real sense of England's duty to the man who
was weaving the destiny of a new land.

"It isn't England's business?" he retorted, in answer to an interjection from a faithful soul
behind the ministerial Front Bench.  "Well, it wasn't the business of the Good Samaritan to
help the man that had been robbed and left for dead by the wayside; but he did it.  As to David
Claridge's work, some have said that--I've no doubt it's been said in the Cabinet, and it is
the thing the Under-Secretary would say as naturally as he would flick a fly from his boots--that
it's a generation too soon. Who knows that?  I suppose there was those that thought John the
Baptist was baptising too soon, that Luther preached too soon, and Savonarola was in too great
a hurry, all because he met his death and his enemies triumphed--and Galileo and Hampden and
Cromwell and John Howard were all too soon.  Who's to be judge of that?  God Almighty puts
it into some men's minds to work for a thing that's a great, and maybe an impossible, thing,
so far as the success of the moment is concerned.  Well, for a thing that has got to be done
some time, the seed has to be sown, and it's always sown by men like Claridge Pasha, who has
shown millions of people--barbarians and half-civilised alike--what a true lover of the world
can do.  God knows, I think he might have stayed and found a cause in England, but he elected
to go to the ravaging Soudan, and he is England there, the best of it.  And I know Claridge
Pasha--from his youth up I have seen him, and I stand here to bear witness of what the working
men of England will say to-morrow.  Right well the noble lord yonder knows that what I say
is true.  He has known it for years.  Claridge Pasha would never have been in his present position,
if the noble lord had not listened to the enemies of Claridge Pasha and of this country, in
preference to those who know and hold the truth as I tell it here to-day. I don't know whether
the noble lord has repented or not; but I do say that his Government will rue it, if his answer
is not the one word 'Intervention!'  Mistaken, rash or not, dreamer if you like, Claridge Pasha
should be relieved now, and his policy discussed afterwards.  I don't envy the man who holds
a contrary opinion; he'll be ashamed of it some day.  But"--he pointed towards Eglington--"but
there sits the minister in whose hands his fate has been.  Let us hope that this speech of
mine needn't have been made, and that I've done injustice to his patriotism and to the policy
he will announce."

"A set-back, a sharp set-back," said Lord Windlehurst, in the Peers' Gallery, as the cheers
of the Opposition and of a good number of ministerialists sounded through the Chamber.  There
were those on the Treasury Bench who saw danger ahead.  There was an attempt at a conference,
but Kimber's seconder only said a half-dozen words, and sat down, and Eglington had to rise
before any definite confidences could be exchanged.  One word only he heard behind him as he
got up.  It was the word, "Temporise," and it came from the Prime Minister.

Eglington was in no mood for temporising.  Attack only nerved him.  He was a good and ruthless
fighter; and last night's intoxication of success was still in his brain.  He did not temporise.
He did not leave a way of retreat open for the Prime Minister, who would probably wind up the
debate.  He fought with skill, but he fought without gloves, and the House needed gentle handling.
He had the gift of effective speech to a rare degree, and when he liked he could be insinuating
and witty, but he had not genuine humour or good feeling, and the House knew it.  In debate
he was biting, resourceful, and unscrupulous.  He made the fatal mistake of thinking that intellect
and gifts of fence, followed by a brilliant peroration, in which he treated the commonplaces
of experienced minds as though they were new discoveries and he was their Columbus, could accomplish
anything.  He had never had a political crisis, but one had come now.

In his reply he first resorted to arguments of high politics, historical, informative, and,
in a sense, commanding; indeed, the House became restless under what seemed a piece of intellectual
dragooning.  Signs of impatience appeared on his own side, and, when he ventured on a solemn
warning about hampering ministers who alone knew the difficulties of diplomacy and the danger
of wounding the susceptibilities of foreign and friendly countries, the silence was broken
by a voice that said sneeringly, "The kid-glove Government!"

Then he began to lose place with the Chamber.  He was conscious of it, and shifted his ground,
pointing out the dangers of doing what the other nations interested in Egypt were not prepared
to do.

"Have you asked them?  Have you pressed them?" was shouted across the House.  Eglington ignored
the interjections.  "Answer!  Answer!" was called out angrily, but he shrugged a shoulder and
continued his argument.  If a man insisted on using a flying-machine before the principle was
fully mastered and applied--if it could be mastered and applied--it must not be surprising
if he was killed.  Amateurs sometimes took preposterous risks without the advice of the experts.
If Claridge Pasha had asked the advice of the English Government, or of any of the Chancellories
of Europe, as to his incursions into the Soudan and his premature attempts at reform, he would
have received expert advice that civilisation had not advanced to that stage in this portion
of the world which would warrant his experiments.  It was all very well for one man to run
vast risks and attempt quixotic enterprises, but neither he nor his countrymen had any right
to expect Europe to embroil itself on his particular account.

At this point he was met by angry cries of dissent, which did not come from the Opposition
alone.  His lips set, he would not yield.  The Government could not hold itself responsible
for Claridge Pasha's relief, nor in any sense for his present position. You will not be offended
if I tell you the truth?

KING. No; my word on it.

PRINCESS. I could never have listened to your love.

KING (rising hastily).

Am I then so ugly, so horrible, so vile, that even if your heart were not engaged elsewhere
you could not have listened to me?

PRINCESS. You are neither horrible nor vile, King Cophetua; but again promise me secrecy, and
I will tell you the whole truth.

KING. I promise.

PRINCESS. You are loved by a maiden far more beautiful than I; she
is dying of love for your sake!

She has suffered much for her love; she is suffering still.

KING. Who is this maiden?

PRINCESS. Ah!

She is but a beggar-maid; she lives on charity, the songs she sings, and the flowers she sells
in the streets. And now she is poorer than ever, for your royal mother has caused her to be
driven out of the city.

Here the King weeps--he is supposed to be deeply touched by the Princess's account of the wrongs
done to the beggar-maid--and it is finally arranged between him and
the Princess that they shall pretend to have come to some violent
misunderstanding, and that, in their war of words, they shall insult
each other's parents so grossly that all possibilities of a marriage
will be for ever at an end. Throwing aside a chair so as to bring
the Queen within ear-shot, the King declares that his royal neighbour
is an old dunce, and that there is not enough money in his treasury
to pay the Court boot-maker; the Princess retaliates by saying that
the royal mother of the crowned head she is addressing is an old cat,
who paints her face and beats her maids-of-honour.

The play that
up to this point had been considered a little tedious now engaged
the attention of the audience, and when the Queen entered she was
greeted with roars of laughter. The applause was deafening. Olive
played her part better than had been expected, and all the white frocks
trembled with excitement. The youths in the left-hand corner craned
their heads forward so as not to lose a syllable of what was coming;
the Bishop recrossed his legs in a manner that betokened his entire
satisfaction; and, delighted, the mammas and papas whispered together.
But the faces of the nuns betrayed the anxiety they felt.  He found Hylda in the library with an evening paper in her hands.  She had
read and reread his speech, and had steeled herself for "the inevitable hour," to this talk
which would decide for ever their fate and future.

Eglington entered the room smiling.  He remembered the incident of the night before, when she
came to his study and then hurriedly retreated. He had been defiant and proudly disdainful
at the House and on the way home; but in his heart of hearts he was conscious of having failed
to have his own way; and, like such men, he wanted assurance that he could not err, and he
wanted sympathy.  Almost any one could have given it to him, and he had a temptation to seek
that society which was his the evening before; but he remembered that she was occupied where
he could not reach her, and here was Hylda, from whom he had been estranged, but who must surely
have seen by now that at Hamley she had been unreasonable, and that she must trust his judgment.
So absorbed was he with self and the failure of his speech, that, for a moment, he forgot the
subject of it, and what that subject meant to them both.

"What do you think of my speech, Hylda?" he asked, as he threw himself into a chair.  "I see
you have been reading it.  Is it a full report?"

She handed the paper over.  "Quite full," she answered evenly.

He glanced down the columns.  "Sentimentalists!" he said as his eye caught an interjection.
"Cant!" he added.  Then he looked at Hylda, and remembered once again on whom and what his
speech had been made.  He saw that her face was very pale.

"What do you think of my speech?" he repeated stubbornly.

"If you think an answer necessary, I regard it as wicked and unpatriotic," she answered firmly.

"Yes, I suppose you would," he rejoined bitingly.  She got to her feet slowly, a flush passing
over her face.  "If you think I would, did you not think that a great many other people would
think so too, and for the same reason?" she asked, still evenly, but very slowly.  "Not for
the same reason," he rejoined in a low, savage voice.

"You do not treat me well," she said, with a voice that betrayed no hurt, no indignation. 
It seemed to state a fact deliberately; that was all.

"No, please," she added quickly, as she saw him rise to his feet with anger trembling at his
lips.  "Do not say what is on your tongue to say. Let us speak quietly to-night.  It is better;
and I am tired of strife, spoken and unspoken.  I have got beyond that.  But I want to speak
of what you did to-day in Parliament."

"Well, you have said it was wicked and unpatriotic," he rejoined, sitting down again and lighting
a cigar, in an attempt to be composed.

"What you said was that; but I am concerned with what you did.  Did your speech mean that you
would not press the Egyptian Government to relieve Claridge Pasha at once?"

"Is that the conclusion you draw from my words?" he asked.

"Yes; but I wish to know beyond doubt if that is what you mean the country to believe?"

"It is what I mean you to believe, my dear."

She shrank from the last two words, but still went on quietly, though her eyes burned and she
shivered.  "If you mean that you will do nothing, it will ruin you and your Government," she
answered.  "Kimber was right, and--"

"Kimber was inspired from here," he interjected sharply.

She put her hand upon herself.  "Do you think I would intrigue against you?  Do you think I
would stoop to intrigue?" she asked, a hand clasping and unclasping a bracelet on her wrist,
her eyes averted, for very shame that he should think the thought he had uttered.

"It came from this house--the influence," he rejoined.

"I cannot say.  It is possible," she answered; "but you cannot think that I connive with my
maid against you.  I think Kimber has reasons of his own for acting as he did to-day.  He speaks
for many besides himself; and he spoke patriotically this afternoon.  He did his duty."

"And I did not?  Do you think I act alone?"

"You did not do your duty, and I think that you are not alone responsible.  That is why I hope
the Government will be influenced by public feeling."  She came a step nearer to him.  "I ask
you to relieve Claridge Pasha at any cost.  He is your father's son.  If you do not, when all
the truth is known, you will find no shelter from the storm that will break over you."

"You will tell--the truth?"

"I do not know yet what I shall do," she answered.  "It will depend on you; but it is your
duty to tell the truth, not mine.  That does not concern me; but to save Claridge Pasha does
concern me."

"So I have known."

Her heart panted for a moment with a wild indignation; but she quieted herself, and answered
almost calmly: "If you refuse to do that which is honourable--and human, then I shall try to
do it for you while yet I bear your name. Before he had yet written a single book, except a volume
of flamboyant verse, Björnson said of him in a public speech: "His friends know that he only
has to plunge his landing-net down into himself in order to bring it up full."

[12] Pronounced Lee.

The man who, in anticipation of his achievements, impressed Björnson so deeply with his genius,
was, however, by others, who felt themselves to be no less entitled to an opinion, regarded as an
"original," not to say a fool. That he was decidedly queer, his biography
by Arne Garborg amply testifies.

"Two souls, alas, abide within my
breast, The one forever strives against the other,"

says Faust; and
Jonas Lie's life and literary activity are apparently, in a very real
sense, the result of a similar warfare.  You will relieve Claridge Pasha, you will do what Governments choose not to do; you
will do what your husband chooses not to do--Well, I say that you will do what your husband
chooses to do, or take the consequences."

"I think I will take the consequences," she answered.  "I will save Claridge Pasha, if it is
possible.  It is no boast.  I will do it, if it can be done at all, if it is God's will that
it should be done; and in doing it I shall be conscious that you and I will do nothing together
again--never!  But that will not stop me; it will make me do it, the last right thing, before
the end."

She was so quiet, so curiously quiet.  Her words had a strange solemnity, a tragic apathy.
What did it mean?  He had gone too far, as he had done before.  He had blundered viciously,
as he had blundered before.

She spoke again before he could collect his thoughts and make reply.

"I did not ask for too much, I think, and I could have forgiven and forgotten all the hurts
you have given me, if it were not for one thing. You have been unjust, hard, selfish, and suspicious.
Suspicious--of me! No one else in all the world ever thought of me what you have thought. I
have done all I could.  I have honourably kept the faith.  But you have spoiled it all.  I
have no memory that I care to keep.  It is stained. My eyes can never bear to look upon the
past again, the past with you-- never."

She turned to leave the room.  He caught her arm.  "You will wait till you hear what I have
to say," he cried in anger.  Her last words had stung him so, her manner was so pitilessly
scornful.  It was as though she looked down on him from a height.  His old arrogance fought
for mastery over his apprehension.  What did she know?  What did she mean? In any case he must
face it out, be strong--and merciful and affectionate afterwards.

"Wait, Hylda," he said.  "We must talk this out."

She freed her arm.  "There is nothing to talk out," she answered. "So far as our relations
are concerned, all reason for talk is gone." She drew the fatal letter from the sash at her
waist.  "You will think so too when you read this letter again."  She laid it on the table
beside him, and, as he opened and glanced at it, she left the room.

He stood with the letter in his hand, dumfounded.  "Good God!" he said, and sank into a chair.

CHAPTER XXXIX

FAITH JOURNEYS TO LONDON

Faith withdrew her eyes from Hylda's face, and they wandered helplessly over the room.  They
saw, yet did not see; and even in her trouble there was some subconscious sense softly commenting
on the exquisite refinement and gentle beauty which seemed to fill the room; but the only definite
objects which the eyes registered at the moment were the flowers filling every corner.  Hylda
had been lightly adjusting a clump of roses when she entered; and she had vaguely noticed how
pale was the face that bent over the flowers, how pale and yet how composed--as she had seen
a Quaker face, after some sorrow had passed over it, and left it like a quiet sea in the sun,
when wreck and ruin were done.  It was only a swift impression, for she could think of but
one thing, David and his safety. She had come to Hylda, she said, because of Lord Eglington's
position, and she could not believe that the Government would see David's work undone and David
killed by the slave-dealers of Africa.

Hylda's reply had given her no hope that Eglington would keep the promise he had made that
evening long ago when her father had come upon them by the old mill, and because of which promise
she had forgiven Eglington so much that was hard to forgive.  Hylda had spoken with sorrowful
decision, and then this pause had come, in which Faith tried to gain composure and strength. His
manly bearing, however, and the friendship of several of the professors saved him from the consilium
abeundi cum infamia, with which he was threatened. Instead of that he was appointed docent in
æsthetics, Secretary to the Faculty of Philosophy, and Assistant
University Librarian.

His summer vacations he spent at Rämen with the Myhrmans. His playmate, Miss Anna, was now
sixteen years of age, and had undergone that miraculous transformation,
which never loses its delightful mystery, from childhood into young
womanhood.

He went away one day and bade good-by to an awkward kangaroo-like girl in short skirts, and returned
in a few months to greet a lovely, blushingly dignified young lady, who probably avowed no more
her fondness for him with the same frank heedlessness as of old. But she would have been more
than woman if she could have resisted the wooing of the beautiful youth upon whom nature had
showered so many rare gifts.

A stone has been found up in the woods above Rämen which yet shows under its coating of moss
the initials of E. T. and A. M. It requires but little imagination to fill out the story of
the brief and happy courtship; and two cantos in "Frithjof's Saga" ("Frithof's Wooing" and
"Frithjof's Happiness") supply an abundance of hints which have a charmingly autobiographical
tinge:

"He sat by her side and pressed her soft hand, And he felt a fond pressure, responsive and bland,
Whilst his love-dreaming gaze Was returned as the sun's in the moon's placid rays.

"They spoke of days bygone, so gladsome and gay, When the dew was yet fresh on life's new-trodden
way; For on memory's page Youth traces its roses; its briers old age.

"She brought him a greeting from dale and from wood, From the bark-graven
runes and the brook's silver flood; From the dome-crownèd cave Where
oaks bravely stream o'er a warrior's grave."[27]

[27] Strong's translation.

But
here, happily, Tegnér's life ceased to supply material for that of
his hero.  There might come
a time when this wise and tender soul might be taken into the innermost chambers, when all
the truth might be known; but the secret of David's parentage was Eglington's concern most
of all, and she would not speak now; and what was between Nahoum and David was David's concern;
and she had kept his secret all these years.  No, Faith might not know now, and might not come
with her. On this mission she must go alone.

Hylda rose to her feet, still keeping hold of Faith's hand.  "Go back to Hamley and wait there,"
she said, in a colourless voice.  "You can do nothing; it may be I can do much.  Whatever can
be done I can do, since England will not act.  Pray for his safety.  It is all you can do.
It is given to some to work, to others to pray.  I must work now."

She led Faith towards the door; she could not endure more; she must hold herself firm for the
journey and the struggle before her.  If she broke down now she could not go forward; and Faith's
presence roused in her an emotion almost beyond control.

At the door she took both of Faith's hands in hers, and kissed her cheek. "It is your place
to stay; you will see that it is best.  Good-bye," she added hurriedly, and her eyes were so
blurred that she could scarcely see the graceful, demure figure pass into the sunlit street.

That afternoon Lord Windlehurst entered the Duchess of Snowdon's presence hurried and excited.
She started on seeing his face.

"What has happened?" she asked breathlessly.  "She is gone," he answered.  "Our girl has gone
to Egypt."

The Duchess almost staggered to her feet.  "Windlehurst--gone!" she gasped.

"I called to see her.  Her ladyship had gone into the country, the footman said.  I saw the
butler, a faithful soul, who would die--or clean the area steps--for her.  He was discreet;
but he knew what you and I are to her.  It was he got the tickets--for Marseilles and Egypt."

The Duchess began to cry silently.  Big tears ran down a face from which the glow of feeling
had long fled, but her eyes were sad enough.

"Gone--gone!  It is the end!" was all she could say.  Lord Windlehurst frowned, though his
eyes were moist.  "We must act at once.  You must go to Egypt, Betty.  You must catch her at
Marseilles.  Her boat does not sail for three days.  She thought it went sooner, as it was
advertised to do.  It is delayed--I've found that out.  You can start to-night, and-- and save
the situation.  You will do it, Betty?"

"I will do anything you say, as I have always done."  She dried her eyes.

"She is a good girl.  We must do all we can.  I'll arrange everything for you myself.  I've
written this paragraph to go into the papers to-morrow morning: 'The Duchess of Snowdon, accompanied
by Lady Eglington, left London last night for the Mediterranean via Calais, to be gone for
two months or more.'  That is simple and natural.  I'll see Eglington.  He must make no fuss.
He thinks she has gone to Hamley, so the butler says. There, it's all clear.  Your work is
cut out, Betty, and I know you will do it as no one else can."

"Oh, Windlehurst," she answered, with a hand clutching at his arm, "if we fail, it will kill me."

"If she fails, it will kill her," he answered, "and she is very young. What is in her mind,
who can tell?  But she thinks she can help Claridge somehow.  We must save her, Betty."

"I used to think you had no real feeling, Windlehurst.  You didn't show it," she said in a
low voice.  "Ah, that was because you had too much," he answered.  "I had to wait till you
had less."  He took out his watch.

