THE LITTLE HOUSE IN THE FAIRY WOOD

by

ETHEL COOK ELIOT

    TO TORKA AND NORTHWIND

CONTENTS

 I. MAGIC IN A MIST
 II. THE BRIGHT HOUSE
 III. FIRELIGHT
 IV. THE GOSSIP
 V. WORLD STORIES
 VI. AT THE HEART OF A TREE
 VII. TREE MOTHER AND THE DROWSY BOAT
 VIII. A WITCH AT THE WINDOW
 IX. THE WIND HUNT
 X. ON THE GRAY WALL
 XI. THE BEAUTIFUL WICKED WITCH
 XII. IVRA'S BIRTHDAY
 XIII. NORA'S GRANDCHILDREN
 XIV. SPRING COMES
 XV. SPRING WANDERING
 XVI. OVER THE TREE TOPS
 XVII. THE JUNE MOON
 XVIII. THE DEEPEST PLACE IN THE WOOD
 XIX. MORE MAGIC IN A MIST

CHAPTER I

MAGIC IN A MIST

That morning began no differently from any morning, though it was to be the beginning of all
things new for Eric. He was awakened early by Mrs. Freg's rough hand shaking him by the arm,
and her rough voice in his ears: "Get up, lazy-bones! All you boys pile out, this very minute!
It's six o'clock already!" Then she reached over Eric and shook the other two boys in the bed
with him, repeating and repeating "Wake up, wake up! It's six o'clock already!" When she was
sure the three boys in the bed were awake and miserable, she crossed the room with a hurried,
heavy tread and clumped, clumped down the stairs into the kitchen.

Though it happened just that way every morning, and it had happened so this morning, this day
was to be very different from any other in Eric's life. But Eric could not know that; so he
crawled farther down under the few bedclothes he had managed to keep to himself, and shut his
eyes again just for a minute.

The night had been a cold one, and the other two boys in the bed, because they were older and
stronger, had managed to keep most of the bedding wrapped tightly around them, while little
Eric shivered on the very edge. So he had not slept at all in the way little boys of nine usually
sleep,--that is, when they have a bed to themselves, and their mother has left a kiss with
them. When he had slept, he had dreamed he was wading in icy puddles out in the street.

But it was only a minute that he huddled there, trying to come really awake, and then he sprang
out, and without thought of a bath, was into his clothes in a minute. The two older boys followed
him more slowly, yawning, growling, and quarreling.

Breakfast was served in the kitchen by Mrs. Freg. The room was bare and ugly like the rest
of the house, and the food was far from satisfying. As the older boys got most of the bedding
for themselves, so they got most of the breakfast, while Mr. and Mrs. Freg laughed at them,
and praised them for fine, hearty boys who knew what they wanted and would get it.

"You will succeed in the world, both of you," said Mrs. Freg with mother-pride gleaming in
her eyes, when they had managed to seize and divide between them little Eric's steaming cup
of coffee,--the only hot thing he had hoped for that morning.

"Will I be a success, too?" asked Eric in a faint but hopeful voice.

"You!" said the harsh woman. "You, young man, had better be thankful to work on at the canning
instead of starving in the streets. That's the fate of most orphans. Success indeed! Now hurry
along, all of you. It's quarter to seven."

But right here is where the day began to differ from other days. Eric did not hurry along.
He threw down his spoon and cried, "I'd just as soon starve in the streets, and wade in its
icy puddles, too, as live here with you and your nasty boys and work in that old canning factory!
I just wonder how you'd feel if I went out this morning and never, never came back! I'd like
to do that!"

Mrs. Freg laughed, and her laugh was not a nice mother-laugh at all, for she was not Eric's
mother, and had never pretended that she was.

"Why, little spitfire, it wouldn't matter a bit except to make one less mouth to feed. But
you won't be so silly as that. You don't want to starve."

"All right," said little Eric, snatching his cap from its peg. "You said it wouldn't matter
to you. You won't see me again, any of you. I hate you all, and everything in the world. I
hate you. You've made me hate you hard!"

Then he suddenly ran out into the street.

In a minute he was in a flood of people, men, women and children moving towards the canning
factory, a big brick building on the outskirts of the city. Eric had worked in that factory
from the day he was seven. There is no need to tell you what he did there, for this is not
the story of the canning factory Eric,--the queer, hating Eric who had waked up that morning.

But how he did hate! His eyes were full of hating tears, and they were running down his face,
making horrid white streaks on his dirty cheeks. He was hating so hard that he did not even
care if people saw his tears. He lifted his face straight up and dropped his arms straight
down at his side and walked right along, no matter how fast the tears came.

Now he had often hated before, but never quite like this. Before, it had been a frightened
hate, a gnawing, hurting thing deep down in his heart. But to-day it was a flaring hate, a
burning thing right up in his head. It was big, too, because it included everything that he
knew, Mrs. Freg, her boys, the street, the people jostling him, and hottest and wildest of
all the canning factory. How terrible to go in there in the morning, when the sun was only
just up, and not to come out again until it was quite down! Eric knew little about play, but
he did know that if he could only be let stay out in the sunshine he would find things to do
there. If they'd only let him try it once!

So he walked along in the direction the others were going, the hating tears in his eyes and
on his face. But no one laughed at him, and no one asked him what was the matter, even the
other children. For he was not crying in the usual way with little boys. He was walking along
with his head up. So people did not bother him.

He had reached the outskirts of the town, and was almost in the shadow of the big, cruel factory,
when the Magic began to work. For there was magic in this day that had started so badly. It
was only waiting for Eric to see it before it would take hold of him and carry him away into
happiness. It had waited for him at the door of the dull, bare little house that had never
been home to him, but his tears would not let him see it. So it had followed along beside him
all the way to the factory, waiting for him to feel, even if he could not see. And he did feel,--just
in time to let the Magic work.

He felt that the day that had begun so freezingly was warm, strangely warm. He wiped the tears
from his eyes away to the side of his face with his sleeve, and looked about. The sun was very
bright, but in a mild, pleasant way. And a tree on the other side of the street was showering
softly, softly, softly, yellow autumn leaves, until they covered the cobblestones all around.
Eric did not think about being late. The Magic was pulling him now. He went across and stood
under the tree, and felt the leaves showering on his head and shoulders, and caught a few in
his hands.

All the people passed, and soon the last one was hidden behind the heavy factory door. Eric
gave the door a glance or two, but did not go. Over the roof of the factory he saw the tops
of tall trees waving. He had never looked so high above the factory before. But he knew there
was a wood on the other side, a wood he had always been too tired to think of exploring, even
on holidays. Now he saw the tops of the tall trees beckoning him in a golden mist. "The mist
is the yellow leaves they're dropping," thought Eric. With every beckon the golden mist of
leaves grew brighter and brighter, until he could not see the beckoning any more, but only
the mist. Still he knew the beckoning was going on behind the mist.

"If I'm to live in the streets at night," he thought to himself, "there's no need to live in
the factory by day. I'll just go and see what those trees want of me."

Very slowly, with little firm steps, he went by the factory door, and then around under its
windows to the wood at the back.

It was Indian Summer. That was why the golden leaves were showering in a mist, and why the
sun was so warm.

Eric dropped his ragged coat and cap on the edge of the wood,--it was so warm,--and went in.

A little girl had been watching him from her place at one of the factory windows where she
was sorting cans. She had seen him before, working at the factory, day after day, and they
had played together sometimes in the noon half hour. Now she wondered what he was doing out
there. Had they sent him, perhaps, to do a different kind of work that could only be done in
the woods? But as he walked away in under the trees farther and farther, the golden mist that
was over the wood drew in about him; and although she leaned far forward over the cans at a
great risk of knocking over dozens and setting them rolling,--he was lost in it. It had dropped
down behind him like a curtain.

CHAPTER II

THE BRIGHT HOUSE

Eric knew nothing of the little girl and her thoughts. He was walking in a golden mist, but
he could see quite perfectly, and even far ahead down long tree aisles. At first the trees
did not grow very close together, and there was little underbrush. Several narrow paths started
off in different directions,--straight little paths made by people who knew where they were
going. But Eric did not know where he was going, so he struck off in a place where there was
no sign of a path. Soon the trees drew closer and closer together, until their branches locked
fingers overhead and shook the yellow leaves down for each other. The leaves showered softly
and steadily. Eric's feet rustled loudly in them.

Soon he stopped and took off his worn shoes and stockings. He left them where he took them
off and went on, barefoot. Now that he was only in his shirt and trousers he began to run and
leap. He leapt for the drifting leaves, and he ran farther and farther into the happy stillness.

The trees crowded and crowded, and the mist of leaves grew brighter and brighter. No birds
sang, for they had all flown away for the winter, and there were no flowers. But the drifting
leaves hid the bareness, and magic covered everything.

After Eric had run and leapt and waded in the crackling pools of leaves for a long time, he
grew hungry. "But there is no food here," he thought; "and anyway it doesn't matter. It's much
better to be hungry here than in the dirty streets."

He decided to go to sleep and forget about it. So he lay down in the leaves. They fell over
him, a steady, gentle shower, and he slept long, and without dreaming anything.

But when he woke he was cold. And worse than that, the golden mist had faded. It was almost
twilight. The light was cold and still and gray. While he slept Indian Summer had vanished
and its magic with it.

Now no matter how fast Eric ran, or how high he jumped, he was chilly through and through.
But he did not think of trying to find the way out of the wood. The streets would be as cold
as the forest, and never, never, never, if he starved and froze, was he going back to that
house in the village where he had lived but never belonged. So he went on until the gray light
faded, and the soft rustle of falling leaves changed to the noise of wind scraping in bare
branches. When he was very cold, and ready to lie down and sleep again to forget, he came quite
suddenly on an opening in the trees. In the dim light he saw a little garden closed in with
a hedge of baby evergreens. The wind was rustling through the stalks of dead flowers in the
garden. But in the middle of it was a little low house, and the windows and doors were glowing
like new, warm flowers.

Yes, it was a house and a garden away there in the wood, but no path led to it through the
forest, and there was a strangeness about it as about no house or garden Eric had ever seen.

Although no path led through the wood to the house, a path did run through the garden to the
low door stone. Eric went up it and stood looking in at the door, which was open.

The glow of the house came from a leaping, jolly fire in a big stone fire-place, and from half
a dozen squat candles set in brackets around the walls. It was the one lovely room that Eric
had ever seen. It was so large that he knew it must occupy the whole of the little house. But
in spite of all the brightness, the comers were dim and far.

There were two strange people there, or they were strange to Eric because they were so different
from any people he had ever known. One was a young woman who sat sewing cross-legged on a settle
at the side of the fire-place. About her the strangest thing was her hair. It was not like
most women's,--long and twisted up on her head. It was short, and curled back above her ears
and across her forehead like flower-petals. It was the color of the candle-flames. But her
face was brown, and her neck and long hands were brown, as though she had lived a long time
in the sun. Her eyes that were lifted and scarcely watching the work in her hands, were very
quiet and gray.

She was watching and talking to a little girl who was skipping back and forth between a rough
tea-table set near the fire and an open cupboard-door in the wall. She was carrying dishes
to the table, and now and then stopping to stir something good-smelling which hung over the
fire in a pewter pot, with a strong bent twig for a handle.

The child was strange in a very different way from her mother. The mother, one could see, was
merry in spite of her quiet eyes. But the child was pale. Her face was pale and little and
round. Her hair was pale, too, the color of ashes, and braided in two smooth little braids
hanging half way down her back. She moved with almost as much swiftness as the fire-shadows,
and as softly too.

Both mother and daughter were dressed in rough brown smocks, with narrow green belts falling
loosely,--strange garments to Eric. And their feet were bare.

But stranger than the house, stranger than the people in it, was the fact that the mother was
talking to the little girl just as people of the same age talk to each other; and though Eric
was shaking with cold and aching with hunger, he could still wonder deeply at that.

"It's a long way 'round by the big pine," she was saying; "but you see I am home in time for
supper. Suppose I had not come until after dark. What would you have done, Ivra?"

The little girl stopped in her busy-ness to stand on one foot and think a second. "Why, I'd
have put the supper over the fire, lighted the candles, and run out to meet you."

"Oh, but you wouldn't know which way to run. I might come from any direction."

"I'd follow the wind," cried Ivra, lifting her serious face and rising to her tiptoes, one
arm outstretched, as though she were going to follow the wind right then and there.

It was at that minute they noticed the door had blown open, and that a little boy was standing
in it, looking at them.

But they neither stared nor exclaimed. Ivra ran to him, her arms still outstretched in the
flying gesture, and drew him in. His dirty face was streaked with tears, and his legs and feet
were blue with the cold. They knew it was not question-time, but comfort-time, so the mother
folded an arm about him, and Ivra skipped more rapidly than ever between the cupboard and the
table. Almost at once supper was ready, and the table set for three. As the last thing, Ivra
brought all the candles and set them in the middle of the table. They sat down,--Eric with
his back to the fire. It warmed him through and through, but their friendly faces warmed him more.

Very little was said, but when the meal was nearly over Ivra asked him how long he was going
to stay with them. Immediately he stopped eating and dropped his spoon. His eyes filled with
tears. He had utterly forgotten about his plight until then,--how he was homeless, workless
and bound to starve and freeze sooner or later. Ivra's mother saw the misery in his face and
quietly spoke, "We hope for a long time. As long as you want to, anyway. Three in a wood will
be merrier than two in a wood. . . . If you like me I will be your mother."

Ivra clapped her hands. "Stay always," she cried. "I will be your playmate. There will be many
playmates besides, too, and I will help you find them."

Eric glowed. The hatred that had been flaring in his head suddenly faded, and the heavy thing
that had been his heart for as long as he could remember, became light as thistledown. He looked
at the mother and the kindness in her eyes made him tremble. "I will stay and be your child,"
he said.

CHAPTER III

FIRELIGHT

When supper was done the three put away the supper things, carried the table back to its place
in the corner, and set the candles in their brackets about the walls. Then almost at once the
mother said it was bath-time and bed-time.

Bath-time! Baths had been rare in Eric's life, and when they did happen were unhappy adventures,--cold
water in a hand basin in the kitchen sink, a scratchy sponge, and a towel too small. So if
Mrs. Freg had said "bath-time and bed-time" to him now, he might have run away. But if Ivra's
mother said it, it must be. She was his mother too, now, and he loved her and thought her beautifully
strange.

A surprise was waiting for him. The bath was a deep basin set in the wall. There was a fountain
in it that one had only to turn on to have the basin fill with clear water. Eric slipped out
of his ragged shirt and trousers and climbed up into it. The fountain came splashing down on
his dusty, shaggy head, falling in rivulets down his back and breast. He was like a bird taking
a bath; there was such happy splashing and dipping.

But no bird had ever the gentle soft drying, or was wrapped in such a warm night gown as the
mother found for Eric. It was one of Ivra's night gowns, but quite large enough. Then she tucked
him into a narrow couch far from the fire. It was the first time Eric could ever remember having
slept alone.

Ivra was already in a bed against the opposite wall. Before the mother got into hers, which
was open and ready for her, she blew out all the candles and opened the door and windows.

"Good night, my lambs," she said, and a very few minutes afterwards Eric could see by the firelight
that his mother and playmate were asleep.

How cold the wind felt as it blew over his face! But how warm and snug his body was, there
in the soft, clean night gown between the light, warm blankets! How fine to be there so warm
in bed while his cheeks grew red in the cold air and burned deliciously. How could he ever
sleep? He was too happy!

He looked at the fire. And then he looked harder. It was not a fire at all, but a young girl,
all bright and golden, sitting with her head drowsily bent forward on her knees and her arms
wrapped close about her legs. But as he watched she slowly lifted her bright head, and looked
quietly about the room. Then she gradually and beautilully rose and stepped out of the fireplace
onto the floor. Slowly she moved across to the mother's couch and stood still as though looking
down at her. Slowly she bent and drew the bed-clothes higher about her shoulders, and kissed
the flower-petal hair curled back on the pillow.

She moved then to Ivra's couch, still slowly and very beautifully, and Eric could see her smile
at the little one huddled there, half on her face, one arm thrown up over her head. Gently
the fire-girl rolled her into a relaxed position on her side, tucked in the flung arm, and
kissed the closed eyelids.

Then she stood a minute, looking away, Eric did not know where. But his heart began to ache
with wonder and longing. Would she come to him too--or was he only a stranger?

He lay still, watching her from his dark corner. At last she stopped looking away, and came
across the floor to him. She brought all the brightness of the room with her, and her feet
made no sound on the boards. When she stood above him he shut his eyes, though he wanted very
much to look up into her face. She bent down and her hands smoothed his covers, warmed his
pillow and lay still for a minute like sunlight on his cheek.

When he opened his eyes again, she had gone back to the fireplace, all her brightness with
her, and was resting there, a drowsy, golden girl, her head bent forward on her knees and her
slim arms wrapped close about her legs.

Eric lay and watched her for many sleepy minutes while her light fell dimmer and dimmer, lower
and lower. When it was just a tiny flicker he dropped to sleep.

CHAPTER IV

THE GOSSIP

He slept long and deeply, for when he woke he felt rested. But he did not open his eyes. "It
must be time for Mrs. Freg to shake me," he was thinking. "Until she does I'll just stay as
I am and pretend it wasn't a dream, but real." For although he remembered very well all that
had happened to him yesterday, he could not believe it was true.

So he lay still in his snug bed, wondering that Mrs. Freg's boys had left him so much of the
bed-clothes. "How fine to have a little time to pretend a dream!" he said to himself. But Mrs.
Freg did not come and did not come, until at last he opened his eyes, just in wonderment. "It
must be six o'clock!"

When he saw where he was, and that the dream was true, his heart almost stood still for joy.
He was indeed far away in the woods, safe and snug and warm in this bright house, and Mrs.
Freg could never reach him here. And he would not go to the canning factory that day, nor the
next, nor the next, nor ever again. The new mother had said so. His happiness brought him up
in bed wide awake, and then he got out. He had not learned to bound out yet, but that came.

The fire was burning merrily. All was in order, the beds made and pushed back against the wall,
the hearth swept, and some clusters of bright red berries arranged above the fireplace. But
where were Ivra and Helma?--Ivra had called her mother "Helma" last night, and so it was that
Eric already called her and thought of her. There was not the tiniest sign of them.

Oh, but yes. There on the floor near the hearth lay a little brown sandal, one of its strings
pulled out and making a curlycue on the floor. That must belong to Ivra. The fire, the red
berries, and the little, worn sandal, seemed to be wishing Eric a good morning and a happy
day. There was plenty of mush in the pot swinging over the fire, and on the table drawn up
to it, a wooden spoon, a bowl, and a jug of rich cream. So they had not forgotten him. They
had only let him sleep as long as he would. They must have stolen about like mice, getting
breakfast, clearing up, and tidying the room; and then closed the door very softly behind them
when they went out.

And wonder of wonders! After yesterday's Indian Summer, outside it was a wild winter day. Gusts
of snow were hurling against all the windows of the house, and blowing a fine spray under the
door. Eric with his face against a windowpane could see only as far as the evergreen hedge
because the trees beyond were wreathed in whirling snowclouds. The dead flowers in the garden
were hidden under the blowing snow. The little straight walk up to the door was lost in it,
and the footprints Ivra and Helma must have made when they went away were hidden too.

Something red blew against the hedge. For a minute Eric thought it was a big bird. But it found
the opening and came through, and then he saw it was a little old woman. She came briskly up
to the house, a red cape blowing about her, sometimes right up over her head, for because of
the jug she was carrying she could not hold it down. She walked in without stopping to knock
and was as surprised to see Eric there as he was to see her. But she got over it at once.

"Good morning," she said cheerfully, going across the room, whisking a pitcher out of the cupboard
and emptying her jug of milk into it. "This is the milk for them, and it's as much as ever
that I got here with it. The wind is in a fine mood-pushed me here and there all the way through
the wood, and tried to steal my cape from me, say nothing of Helma's milk! Perhaps some of
the Wind Creatures wanted them, or it might be old Tree Man himself, looking for a winter cape
for his daughter. But I said, 'No, no. The milk is for Helma and little Ivra! I take it to
them every morning and I'll take it this morning whether or no, so pull all you like--cape
or milk you'll not get. The cape has a good clasp, and I've a good hold of the jug. Pull away!"

Here the old woman--the pitcher put away, and the cupboard door closed--dropped down on the
settle and waited for Eric to speak. She was a jolly little old woman, one could see at a glance.
Her face was the color of a good red apple, and just as round and shiny. Her eyes were beady
black, bright and quick, and surrounded by a hundred finest wrinkles, that all the smiles of
her life had made. Her mouth was pursed up like a button, out of which her words came shooting,
quick and bright and merry.

Eric stood looking at her, not thinking to say anything. So after the briefest pause she went
on, peeping into the pot.

"I see you have some mush here, so as I've come all the way from the farm and am ready for
a second breakfast after my tussle with the wind, I'll share it with you. Or perhaps you have
had yours already."

"No, no," cried Eric, suddenly remembering how hungry he was and hoping she would not take
it all. "I have just waked up."

"So. Then we'll breakfast together," and away she flew to the cupboard again and brought out
a second bowl and spoon. Then she stirred the mush round and round a few times and dished it
up. Eric noticed that she divided it exactly evenly. She flooded both bowls with cream, and
together they sat down to it. What a good breakfast that was, and how fast the little old woman
talked!

But in spite of all her talking and flying around she had looked Eric up and down and through
and through, and made up her mind what kind of a person he was. What she saw was a pale little
boy of nine in a ragged shirt and trousers, and barefooted. His hair was shaggy and unbrushed
but tossed back from a wide brow. His mouth was sullen. But she forgot all about shabby clothes,
unbrushed hair, and sullen mouth when she came to his eyes. They were wide and clear, and returned
the old woman's keen glance with a gaze of steady interest. Sullen and pale, but clear-eyed--she
liked the little stranger. And so she went on talking.

"I bring them milk every day. It's a long way here from my farm, but not too far when it's
for them. Helma's gone into the village, hasn't she? When I came to Little Pine Hill this morning
the snow stopped whirling for a minute, and I caught a glimpse of her a-striding across the
fields. It's a fine way of walking she has--like the bravest of Forest People! When I reached
the Tree Man's the wind didn't stop for me, but I spied that child, Ivra, just where I knew
she'd be,--racing and chasing and dancing with the Snow Witches out at the edge of the wood.
'It's a pity she can't go with her mother,' I said to myself when I saw her, 'and not be wasting
her time like that. The Snow Witches are no good to any one. But--'"

Eric interrupted there, having finished his mush and pricking up his cars at the mention of
witches.

"Are they really witches?" he cried. "And have you seen them yourself?"

"What else would they be?" asked the old woman. "They're the creatures that come out in windy,
snowy weather, to dance in the open fields and run along country roads. Ordinary people are
afraid of them and stay indoors when they're about. Their streaming white hair has a way of
lashing your face as they rush by, and then they never look where they're going. They care
nothing about running into you and knocking the breath out of you. Then, they're so cruel to
children!"

"But Ivra isn't afraid of them!" wondered Eric.

"Not she," said the old woman. "She runs with them instead of away from them. When I saw them
back there they had all taken hands and were leaping in a circle around her. She was jumping
and dancing in the center as wild and lawless as they, and just as high, too. . . . But it's
a pity she isn't with her mother all the same, going on decent errands in the village. Only
of course it's not her fault, poor child! She daren't go into the village."

"Why daren't she?" asked Eric.

"How dare she?" cried the old woman. "She'd be seen, for she's only part fairy, of course.
But hush, hush!"

She clapped her hands over her mouth. "What am I telling you,--one of the secrets of the forest,
and you a stranger here? You must forget it all. Ivra's a good child. Now don't ask me any
more questions, or I might tell you more."

But Eric had begun to wonder. What did it mean, that Ivra was part fairy? And why wasn't it
safe for her to be seen in the village? And were there really witches, and was she playing
with them out there in the wild day?

The old woman was talking on, but he heard no more.

Then the door blew open in a snowy gust of wind, and there stood Helma, the mother, her arms
full of bundles, her cheeks ruddy from the wind, and her short hair crisp and blown.

CHAPTER V

WORLD STORIES

Now Eric learned that the old woman's name was Nora, for that was what Helma called her, and
seemed glad to find her there. She stayed on only long enough to see what Helma had brought
in her bundles, and then started out for the farm, drawing her red cape closely about her this
time, and not blowing much as she walked briskly to the gap in the hedge. Once through she
disappeared quickly in the high drifting snow. Hardly had she gone her way when Ivra came from
another, jumping the hedge and reaching the door in three bounds.

Helma had bought a good deal of thick brown cloth in the village and a strip of brown leather.
It was all for Eric. She had noticed his lack of shoes and stockings last night, and that his
worn clothes were much too poor and thin for winter in the forest. To-day, while she sewed
for him, he would have to stay in. That was a pity, for it is such fun out in a storm. By night,
though, all would be finished.

"And that is good!" exclaimed Ivra. "For to-night the Tree Man has asked us to a party. We're
going to roast chestnuts and play games, and there's to be a surprise, too. The Tree Girl called
it all out to me as I passed just now. She put only her head through the door, for the snow
came so suddenly it caught her without a single white frock,--only a bonnet. But that was pretty.
It has five points like a star, mother."

"The Tree Girl," said Eric. "What a queer name! But how did she know about me to ask me too?
Did she ask me?"

"I told her about you. And of course she asked you. You are my playmate!"

Helma pulled a table to the settle and sat down with all the brown cloth before her, a work-basket,
and shears. But first she measured Eric for his new clothes.

"You may make the leggins, if you want to," she said to Ivra, "and when you come to a hard
place tell me and I will help. You may even measure them yourself.... We're the only Forest
People, Eric, who wear anything but white in the winter. Most Forest People like to be the
color of their world. They often laugh at us. But I like brown. Ivra makes me think of a brown,
blown leaf, and now here will be two of them! You can blow together all over the forest."

Eric's eyes swam in sudden, happy tears, but he only said, "Nora wore red."

"Oh, she's not one of us," laughed Helma. "But she's lived close to us so long, she is able
to see us. We aren't afraid of her. She's a good neighbor."

But why might they be afraid of such a nice old woman, Eric wondered. He was to learn sometime,
and much beside, for this was the beginning of new things for him, and his mother, Helma, and
Ivra were strange people. But how he loved them!

"Now that we are settled at our work, and nothing to interrupt, what shall it be?" asked Helma.
She and Ivra were sewing briskly, one in each corner of the settle. Eric was stretched on the
floor, looking now into the blaze, and now up at the windows where the snow tapped and swirled;
for to-day,--Helma had said,--was to be a rest day for him. It was the first rest day he could
remember, and how good it was! To know he could lie there with no cans to sort or label for
hours, and no Mrs. Freg to boss him about when work was over! There were to be no more cans
for him forever, and no more Mrs. Freg. Helma had said that quite firmly. He believed her and
was so happy that he trembled. And so, it being true that never again should he go back to
that unchildlike life that had frightened him so, and tired him so, all the breaths he drew
felt like sighs of relief, and he turned his shaggy little head on his arm, crooked under it,
and watched Helma's flying brown fingers with glad eyes.

"What shall it be?" asked Helma.

"Oh, World Stories, please," said Ivra, drawing her feet up under her as she bent over her sewing.

"Eric probably knows very few of the World Stories," said Helma. "So sometime I shall have
to go back to the beginning and tell them all over for him."

"And I'll stay and hear them over again too!" cried Ivra, dropping her work to clasp her hands.
"I love to hear stories over."

"Why, better than that, you might tell them yourself. Would you like that?"

"Oh, yes--if I can. Do you suppose I can, mother Helma? I shall begin at the very beginning,
way back before men were in the world at all, or fairies even. He'd like to hear about the
big animals. And you will listen, mother, to see that I get it all right?"

Now these World Stories of Helma's were wonderful stories, but all true. They began way back
when the Earth was young. There were stories about the Earth itself, how it hung in space and
turned, making day and night. When the strange, great animals that by-and-by appeared on the
Earth and have since gone from it first came into the stories, and then, later, the floods
and glaciers, and at last the first man,--any child might have listened with delight and wonder.
Ivra had listened so ever since she was a tiny girl, old enough to understand at all. And with
man, and the wonderful happenings that came along with him, Ivra had begged for the stories
day and night, and never could have enough of them. For then in a great procession came the
stories of cities and nations, of great men and women, of explorations and adventures. They
led in turn to stories of languages and writing, of painting and geometry, of music and of
life. The names of these things may not promise good stories to you, but that is only because
you do not know them as stories. If you could listen to Helma telling them, by the fire, or
out in the starlight, deep in the wood, or swinging in a tree-top,--then no other stories you
might ever hear would satisfy you quite. So perhaps it is as well you do not know now just
where Helma's little house is standing deep in the wood under the snow.

Ivra always said that the nicest thing about the stories was the interruptions. Helma never
minded them, and she answered all the questions Ivra asked. She answered them by making things
that Ivra could see with her own eyes, by drawing pictures on the ground or in the ashes, building
with earth or snow, playing with wind and water, and in a hundred other ways. Sometimes the
answer to a question would take up the playtime of a whole day.

But now Eric was to hear his first story, World Story or any other kind. Can you imagine how
it would feel if to-day you were to hear the first story of your life?

"All ready?" asked Helma.

The silence in the room said plainer than words that all was ready for the World Story. Find it
on the map.

EXERCISES

1. Examine the map of North America in 1541. What parts of North America were known? What parts
were unknown? Can you see why the explorers would search each bay or inlet or great river?

2.
Find how far into the continent of North America the French explored the St. Lawrence river,
that is, the distance from Newfoundland to Montreal by using the
scale of miles on a map in one of your geographies.

Important Date: 1565. The founding of St. Augustine.

CHAPTER XX

THE ENGLISH AND THE DUTCH TRIUMPH OVER SPAIN

CRUEL TREATMENT OF THE NETHERLANDERS. Two years after the cruel massacre of the Huguenot colony
in Florida, Philip II, the King of Spain, decided to put an end to the obstinacy of the Netherlanders,
and sent an army from Spain commanded by the Duke of Alva, who was
as pitiless as Menendez.

Alva began by seizing prominent nobles, and he would have arrested the Prince of Orange, but he escaped
into Germany. A court was set up which condemned many persons to
death, including the greatest nobles of the land.

The people nicknamed it the Council of Blood. Alva also turned the merchants against him by
compelling them to pay the "tenth penny," that is, one tenth of the price of the goods every
time these were either bought or sold.

Alva made himself so thoroughly hated that even Philip decided to
call him back to Spain.

THE BEGGARS OF THE SEA. Just then something happened which gave Coligny and the Huguenots their
chance for vengeance.

The men who were resisting the king's officers in the Netherlands had been nicknamed the "Beggars."
When they were driven from the cities they took to the sea. The "Beggars of the Sea" sometimes
found a port of refuge in La Rochelle, a Huguenot town on the western coast of France, and sometimes
they put into friendly English harbors. From these places they would sail out and attack Spanish
vessels.

When Queen Elizabeth in 1572 ordered a fleet of these "Beggars" to leave, they crossed over
to their own shores and drove the Spanish garrison out of Brille. This success encouraged the
Dutch and many of the southern Netherlanders to rise and expel the
Spanish soldiers from their towns.

THE FRENCH PROMISE AID.

As soon as Coligny heard the news he urged the French king to send
an army into the Netherlands and take vengeance not only for the massacre
at Fort Caroline, but also for all the wrongs that he and his father
and his grandfather had ever received at the hands of the Spaniards.

The French king agreed and wrote a letter to the Netherlanders promising aid.

MASSACRE OF HUGUENOTS IN PARIS. The plan was never carried out. While Coligny and many other Huguenots
were in Paris, his enemies attempted to kill him. When the attempt failed these enemies, including
the king's mother, persuaded the king that Coligny and the Huguenots were plotting against him,
and goaded the king into ordering the murder of all the Huguenots in Paris and the other cities
of France. Thousands of Huguenots perished. When the Netherlanders heard of what had befallen
Coligny and his followers, they were crushed with grief.

Coligny had missed the chance of vengeance. But the Spanish king was soon to have other enemies
besides the Huguenots who were ready to help the Dutch. These new enemies were the English.

THE ENGLISH DRAWN INTO THE CONFLICT. The religious troubles in England had been growing more
serious. Two or three plots were made to assassinate Elizabeth in
order to put on the throne Queen Mary of Scotland, who was the next
heir.

Philip began to encourage these plotters, especially after the pope in 1570 had excommunicated
Elizabeth and forbidden her subjects to obey her as queen. She was sure to be dragged into
the struggle in the Netherlands sooner or later.

We have seen that she had once sheltered the "Beggars of the Sea." The murder of Coligny and
his followers frightened the English and made many of them anxious to join in the conflict
before their friends on the Continent, the French Huguenots and the Dutch Calvinists, were utterly
destroyed.

GROWTH OF ENGLISH TRADE. If England should be drawn into war, her safety would depend mainly upon
her ships. Englishmen had always taken to the sea, as was natural for men whose shores were washed
by the Atlantic, the Channel and the North Sea, but they were slow
in building fleets of ships either for trade or for war.

The trade of the country with other peoples in the Middle Ages was carried on mostly by foreigners.
Yet since the days of Elizabeth's father and grandfather a change had taken place. English
merchants found their way to all markets.

They also made new things to sell. Refugees driven by the religious troubles from France and
the Netherlands brought their skill to England and taught the English how to weave fine woolens
and silks.

THE NEW ENGLISH NAVY. The English navy was growing.

One of the new ships, The Triumph, carried 450 seamen, 50 gunners, and 200 soldiers. Besides harquebuses
for the soldiers, there were many kinds of cannon with strange names, such as culverins, falconets,
sakers, serpentines, and rabinets. Four of the cannon were large enough to shoot a cannon-ball
eight inches in diameter. But it was on the skill and courage of her men rather than upon
the size of her ships that England relied for victory.

SIR FRANCIS DRAKE. One of these men was Francis Drake. He was son of a chaplain in the navy
and as a boy played in the rigging of the great ships-of-war, as
other boys play in the streets.

In time young Drake was apprenticed to the skipper of a small trading vessel. Fortune smiled
on the lad early in life. His master died, and out of love for the apprentice who had served
him so well, left him the vessel.

Francis Drake became thus a shipmaster on his own account, and in time the most popular of
Queen Elizabeth's sea-captains.

SLAVE-TRADERS. He often went with his cousin, John Hawkins, on voyages to Africa. They bought
negro slaves from slave-traders along the coast, or kidnaped negroes whom they found, and
carried them to the Spanish planters of the West Indies. Hawkins and Drake were as devout and
humane as other men of their time.

They simply could not see any wrong in enslaving the heathen black men in Africa. Besides, they
enjoyed the wild life of the slave-trader with its dangers and rich rewards.

WHY DRAKE HATED THE SPANIARDS. The king of Spain tried to keep the trade in slaves for his
own merchants, and attempted to prevent the trade of the English slavers with the West Indies. Spanish
ships-of-war ruined one of the voyages from which Hawkins and Drake hoped for large profits.
The Spaniards won thereby the undying hatred of Drake.

THE DRAGON OF THE SEAS. It was a time, too, when Drake's countrymen at home shared his intense
hatred of the Spaniard. While England and Spain were not at war with one another, English
and Spanish traders fought whenever they met on the high seas. The English made the Spanish
settlements in America their special prey. At certain times of the year Spanish ships, called
government ships, carried to Spain gold and silver--the royal share of the products of America.
Drake, like many another of his countrymen, lay in wait to rob these ships of their precious cargoes.
He managed to gather a fortune by his cunning and courage.

More than once he was forced to bury his treasures in the sand to
lighten his ships that they might sail the faster, and escape his
pursuers.

The Spaniards came to know and to fear Drake as the Dragon of the Seas.

DRAKE'S VENTURE. Drake once formed the plan to take a fleet into the Pacific Ocean in order
to plunder the treasure ships where they would be less on their guard.

A fleet of five ships was made ready. Contributions from wealthy merchants and powerful nobles,
perhaps a gift from Queen Elizabeth herself, gave him the means for unusual luxuries in the
equipment of his fleet. Skilful musicians and rich furniture were taken on board Drake's own
ship, the Pelican, or the Golden Hind as he afterwards christened it. The brilliant little fleet
left Plymouth in 1577. One after another of the ships turned back or was destroyed on the long
voyage of twelve months across the Atlantic and through the Strait of Magellan.

BEYOND THE STRAIT OF MAGELLAN.

The Golden Hind alone remained to carry out the original project.

As it entered the Pacific Ocean a furious storm drove the little
vessel southward beyond Cape Horn to the regions where the oceans
meet.

No one before had sailed so far south.

THE FIRST PRIZES. Drake regained control of his ship when the storm had passed, and sailed northward
along the coast, plundering and robbing as he went.

  Once, as a land-party was searching
    along the shore for fresh water,
  it came upon a Spaniard asleep with
    thirteen bars of silver beside him.
  His nap was disturbed long enough
    to take away his burden.

  Further on they met another Spaniard
    and an Indian boy driving a train of Peruvian sheep laden with eight
hundred pounds of silver.

The Englishmen took their place, and merrily drove the sheep to their
boats.

A treasure ship, nicknamed the Spitfire, on the way to Panama, was captured after a long chase
of nearly eight hundred miles. Drake obtained from it unknown quantities of gold and silver.
With such a rich load, his thoughts turned to the homeward voyage.

DRAKE'S VOYAGE AROUND THE WORLD. By this time a host of Spanish war-ships were on Drake's track.
They expected to capture him on his return through the Strait of
Magellan.

Drake, now confronted with real danger, cunningly outwitted his enemies. He and many other Englishmen
of his day were sure a passage would be found somewhere through North America between the Atlantic
and the Pacific. Spanish, French, and English explorers had all carried
on the search for this passage.

Drake decided to return by such a route, if it were possible. He followed the coast of California,
and probably passed that of Oregon and Washington as far as Vancouver

When it grew colder and the coast turned to the westward, he gave up the search.

After making some needed repairs in a small harbor a few miles above
the modern San Francisco, Drake set out boldly across the Pacific
to return home, as Magellan's men had done before him, by going around
the world.

He touched at the Philippines, visited the Spice Islands, and slowly worked his way around
the Cape of Good Hope. The Golden Hind, long since given up as lost, reached England in the
fall of 1580, after nearly three years' absence. For a second time a ship had sailed around the
world. Drake was the first Englishman to gain the honor.

DRAKE'S REWARD. Queen Elizabeth liked the story Drake told of outwitting and plundering Spaniards.
Arrayed in her most gorgeous robes she visited his ship, where a
banquet had been prepared.

While Drake knelt at her feet she made him a knight.

And so it was that the man whom the Spaniards called with good reason the Master Thief of the
Seas, the English called by a new title, Sir Francis Drake, and praised
as the greatest sea-captain of the age.

His ship, the Golden Hind, was ordered to be preserved forever.

THE DUTCH STRUGGLE AGAINST SPAIN. A few years after Drake returned the English took a deeper
interest in the struggle between Philip and the Dutch.

Although the Dutch had lost hope of help from the French Huguenots, they resisted Philip's
generals more boldly than ever.

The Spanish soldiers treated the towns which surrendered so savagely that the other towns decided
it was better to die fighting than to yield. The siege of Leyden became famous because, after
food had given out and the inhabitants were starving their friends
cut the great dikes in order that the boats of the "Beggars of the
Sea" loaded with provisions might be floated up to the very walls
of the city.

This unexpected flood also drove away the Spaniards.

Fortunately after the rescue of the city a strong wind arose and drove back the waves so that
the dikes could again be replaced.

THE DEATH OF WILLIAM OF ORANGE. King Philip had come to the conclusion that unless William of
Orange were killed the Dutch could not be conquered, and so he put a price on Prince William's
head, offering a large sum of money to any one who should kill him. The first attempts failed,
but finally in 1584 he was shot.

SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.

The murder of William alarmed the English for Elizabeth's life, especially as Philip had already
aided men who were plotting against her. She sent an army into the Netherlands to aid the Dutch,
although she had not made up her mind to attack Philip directly.

The army did not give much help to the Dutch, but it is remembered because a noble English poet,
Sir Philip Sidney, was mortally wounded in one of the battles.

The story is told that while Sidney was riding back, tortured by
his wound, he became very thirsty, as wounded men always do, and begged
for a drink of water.

Looking up when it was brought to him he saw on the ground a common
soldier more sorely wounded than he.

He immediately sent the water to the soldier saying, "Thy necessity is greater than mine."

THE
INVINCIBLE ARMADA. The king of Spain now decided that he could not subdue the Dutch until he had
thoroughly punished the English.

He even planned to put himself upon the English throne, claiming
that he was the heir of one of the early kings of England.

Months were spent in preparing a great fleet, an "Invincible Armada"
which was to sail up the Channel, take on board the Spanish army in
the Netherlands, and cross over to England.

While these preparations were being made with Philip's usual care, Sir Francis Drake swooped
down on Cadiz and burnt so much shipping and destroyed so many supplies that the voyage had
to be postponed a year. This Drake called "singeing the king of Spain's beard."

THE ARMADA IN THE CHANNEL. It was July, 1588, before the "Invincible Armada" appeared off Plymouth
in the English Channel. Many of the Spanish ships were larger than the English ships, but they
were so clumsy that the English could outsail them and attack them from any direction they chose.
Moreover, the Spaniards needed to fight close at hand in order that
the soldiers armed with ordinary guns might join in the fray.

The English kept out of range of these guns and used their heavy cannon.

DESTRUCTION OF THE ARMADA. With the English ships clinging to the flanks and rear of the Armada,
the Spaniards moved heavily up the Channel.

In the narrower waters between Dover and Calais the English attacked more fiercely, and sank several
Spanish vessels. Soon the others were fleeing into the North Sea, driven by a furious gale.
Many sought to reach Spain by sailing around Scotland and Ireland, and some of these ships were
dashed on the rocky shores. Only a third of Philip's proud fleet returned to Spain.

EFFECT OF THE DEFEAT OF THE ARMADA ON SPAIN. This was the last attempt Philip made to attack
the English, because Spain had been exhausted in the effort to collect
money and supplies for the Invincible Armada.

The war dragged on for many years, and the English attacked and plundered Spanish vessels wherever
they found them.

THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE DUTCH. The ruin of the Armada also meant that
the Dutch would succeed in becoming independent of the Spanish king.

Seven of the northern provinces had already formed a union and had
begun to call themselves the United Netherlands.

They were growing richer while their neighboring provinces on the south, which had decided to return
to their allegiance to Spain, grew poorer.

FIRST VOYAGE OF THE DUTCH TO THE EAST. Even while the fight was going on the Dutch traded in
places where Philip had not permitted them to trade while he could control them. One of these
places was Lisbon, the capital of Portugal. Here the Dutch obtained spices which the Portuguese
brought from the East Indies. But in 1580 Philip seized Portugal, and the Dutch could no longer
go to Lisbon. This made them anxious to find their way to the East. In 1595 the first fleet set
out. This voyage was unsuccessful, but other fleets followed, until soon the Dutch had almost
driven the Portuguese, now subjects of the king of Spain, from the Spice Islands. Soon also
Dutch sailors ventured across the Atlantic to the shores of America.

QUESTIONS

1. What country in northern Europe did Spain rule?

What name was given to those who resisted the Spanish officers in the Netherlands? Why were
they given this name?

2. What promise did Coligny make to the people of the Netherlands? Why was he unable to carry it
out? What other people were ready to help the Dutch? Can you give one reason at least why the
English were willing to help the Dutch against Spain?

3. Why had English trade grown important? Did this help to make a navy?

4. Why did English sailors like Drake specially hate the Spaniards? What was Drake's method of making
a living?

How did he come to go around the world in 1577-1580? How long was it since Magellan made his
voyage?

5. What did the English think of Drake? What did the Spaniards think
of him? Why did each people think as it did?

6. Why did Philip of
Spain have William of Orange killed? Why did this make the conquest
of the Dutch even harder?

7. Why did Philip, king of Spain, try to
conquer England and make himself king of that country? How did he
try to carry out his plan? Why were the English victorious in the
great battle with the Armada? Where was the battle fought?

8. How
did the defeat of the Armada affect Spain's war in the Netherlands?
Did all of the Netherlands become independent of Spain?

9. What trade
did the Dutch begin to carry on before their war with Spain ended?

10.
What new people became rivals of the Spaniards and French for trade
and settlements in America?

EXERCISES

1. What parts of North America
did Drake visit on his famous voyage around the world?

2. What effect
did the quarrels in Europe described in Chapters 19 and 20 have upon
the progress in exploring and settling America?

3. Find out whether
the people of the northern Netherlands and the southern Netherlands
are still separate countries to-day.

CHAPTER XXI

THE ENGLISH PEOPLE
ATTEMPT TO SETTLE AMERICA

ENGLISH INTEREST IN AMERICA AWAKENED. Voyages
like those made by Sir Francis Drake awakened a desire throughout
England to learn more about the New World. Until this time even the
great discoveries of Columbus and the Cabots had failed to stir the
English people to take part in the exploration and settlement of the
Americas. The principal reason was because their attention was occupied
by the struggle between their monarchs and the popes to decide whether
king or pope should govern the English Church. This continued until
Queen Elizabeth had been on the throne some years.

Other sea-captains,
hearing of Drake's success, now turned their ships toward the Americas.
Many went to the West Indies, as he had done, mainly to seize the
rich plunder to be found on board the ships of Spain bound homeward.
Some of them explored the coast of North America, hoping to find valuable
regions that had not fallen into the possession of the Spaniards.

THE
NORTHWEST PASSAGE. Martin Frobisher made three voyages, the last in
1578, in search of a passage through North America to China. He entered
the bay which bears his name, and the strait which was later called
after Hudson, but failed to find a passage.

Very soon Eric became drowsy against his will. His eyelids dropped like curtains shutting out
the stars. But he roused when the boat stopped, hovered, and sank down like a bird until it
rested on the crusted snow in the middle of a tiny village of tiny moss houses; only now, of
course, the houses were covered with snow, and looked like baby Eskimo huts. The Forest Children
crept sleepily out of the boat, kissing the Tree Mother good-by as though in a dream. Not a
word was spoken. There was the creak of their little feet on the cold snow,--that was all.
Each child went alone into his little house. They were lighted and looked warm through the
doors, and Tree Mother nodded as though that were well. But before the air-boat had risen out
of sight, the lights were all out, and the Forest Children sound asleep, snuggled into their
moss beds.

From then on stops were frequent, and Eric woke at each one. At every Bird Fairy nest at which
they stopped, the Tree Mother leaned from the boat and scooped the crusted snow out of the
nest. Then when the Bird Fairy was settled down, she powdered the snow with her fingers until
it was soft, and heaped it over the little creature, who was already asleep.

Wild Star was left in the tip of the tallest tree in the forest. There he lay without covering,
his face up to the cold sky, his arms flung back above his head, his wings folded tight. He
half opened his slumbrous eyes on the Tree Mother as the boat floated away, but before the
smile in them faded he was asleep.

There was straight, sure, even flying then to Helma's little house, set in its snowy garden,--and
down they sank to the door stone. The Tree Mother carried Ivra, who was fast asleep, in in
her arms. The fire leapt when they entered, until the walls and floor danced with light. The
Tree Mother undressed Ivra, who never once opened her eyes, and tucked her into bed. Then she
helped Eric, who was fumbling and missing buttons in a sleepy way. But he was awake enough
to kiss her good-night. And that was the end of everything until morning.

CHAPTER VIII

A WITCH AT THE WINDOW

When the children woke the next morning, there was no Helma. Her bed had not been slept in.
They had been too sleepy the night before to wonder at her absence, but now they could hardly
believe their eyes. The room was strange and lonely without her. The fire had died in the night.
They sat up in their beds and talked about it.

"She always comes back before bedtime," said Ivra. "She has never stayed away before."

Eric said, "Perhaps that is why the Tree Mother brought you in and undressed you--perhaps she
knew our mother had not come back. She looked wise, as though she knew everything."

"She does know everything,--at least everything in the forest. But did she bring me in, right
here in her arms, Eric!"

"And undressed you while you were sound asleep."

Ivra laughed with delight, and clasped her hands. "Truly, truly? The dear Tree Mother undressed
me? Are you sure? Did she kiss me good-night?--" But suddenly she grew solemn. "Yes, she knew
that mother was not here. She only takes care of those who have no one else. Well, we will
have to wait for mother, that is all. She will surely come this morning."

But she did not come that morning, nor that day, nor for many days. You shall hear it all.

The children laid the fire, together,--shivering but hopeful. Ivra got the breakfast, teaching
Eric, so that next time he could help. They chattered and played a good deal, and really had
quite a merry time over it. It was only at first that Ivra was solemn over Helma's disappearance.
Soon her good sense told her that Helma loved them both, and nothing could keep her long from
her children.

After breakfast they washed and put away the dishes. Then they tidied the room. They hurried
over it a little, perhaps, for it was a bright winter day, and all the forest was waiting to
be played in. Before they ran out, they put a log on the fire that it took both of them to
lift. If Helma should come back while they were away, she must find a warm house. Ivra skipped
back after they were outside to set out a bowl and spoon for her, and stand the cream jug beside
them.

Then away they fled, running and jumping in the frosty morning air. Ivra taught Eric some games
that could be played by two alone. They were running games, climbing games, hiding games, jumping
games. Ivra was swift and strong and unafraid. Her cheeks reddened like apples in the cold.
She was a fine playfellow.

Not until they were hungry did they think of home. Then they ran, hand in hand at last, jumping
the garden hedge like deer, their hearts beating with the expectation of running straight into
Helma's arms. But no Helma was there. Nora had come with the milk, left it, eaten the rest
of the porridge, and gone away again without waiting for a word with any one. The children
wished she had stayed. They needed some one to talk with about their mother. Of course they
knew she would come back, all in her good time. Ivra made Eric understand that. But the room
seemed even emptier without her than it had in the morning. They cheered each other as best
they could, drank a lot of the fresh milk and ate some nuts. They wanted to get away into the
forest again and forget the empty house, so they did not try to cook anything.

They played hard all the afternoon. Towards twilight it grew warmer and began to snow, great
wet flakes. They ran home, leaping the hedge again. The house was still empty. Helma was not there.

They stirred up the fire, and sat down on the floor in front of it to talk over what they should
do. Then it happened,--the strange, the beautiful, the frightful thing! Eric saw a face at
the window. It was so perfectly beautiful, that face, that he wanted to shut his eyes against
it. It almost hurt. It was the face of a young woman, very pale, but when her eyes met Eric's
they filled with dancing laughter. Her hair under her peaked, white hood glistened blue-black
like a river in the snow. She lifted a small white hand and tapped on the window pane, nodding
to him merrily.

Ivra turned at the sound of the little fingers on the glass. When she saw the face, she started
to her feet with a frightened cry, and rushing to the door, drew the bolt.

"She can't get in. She can't get in, Eric. Don't be afraid. We are safe." But the poor little
girl did not believe her own words. She was trembling.

"Why, I'm not afraid," said Eric, running to the window. The merry eyes drew him. Now her mouth
danced into smiles with her eyes. She made pretty signs to him to open the window and let her in.

But Ivra pulled him back. "Don't you know? It's the Beautiful Wicked Witch!" she whispered.

But Eric was impatient. "How can she be wicked when she's so beautiful!" he exclaimed. He was
so little used to beautiful people in his life that now he was fascinated and delighted.

The Beautiful Wicked Witch looked at Ivra then, and Ivra saw how her eyes were dancing, great
black eyes full of splendor and fun. She caught her breath. She laughed back at the Beautiful
Wicked Witch. She could not help herself. But her hands flew to her mouth to stop the laugh.

"Shut your eyes, Eric. That must be best, not to look at her at all. That is what mother did
when she came before. She bolted the door and then we sat down in front of the fire and never
looked at the window once, while she told me a long, lovely World Story about Psyche and her
little playmate Eros. Then when we had forgotten all about the Beautiful Wicked Witch, we looked
at the window by accident and she was gone. Come, I'll tell you a World Story now, the same one."

But Eric hardly heard what she was saying. He moved nearer and nearer to the window. Ivra followed
him, charmed by the laughing face there too. Then together they unbolted the windowpane and
opened it outward. The Beautiful Wicked Witch stepped in.

"How silly to be afraid of me, children," she laughed. "I have only come to play with you."

"Oh goody!" cried both of the children together. For now that she was in the room all their
fear and wonder had vanished.

It was dusk, and so they lighted all the candles and poked the fire, before they turned to
entertain their guest. But the candles did not burn very well, very faintly and flickeringly,--and
the fire fell lower and lower, instead of growing higher and higher as they nursed it.

"Don't mind about that," laughed the Beautiful Wicked Witch. "There's enough light from the
window for us to play together in. We won't bother with the stubborn old fire and the silly
little copy-cat candles. Come, what shall we play?"

But the children had been playing hard all day, and their bodies were tired. "Oh, tell us a
story instead of playing," begged Ivra. "This is the time when mother tells her very best stories."

"Well, I am not mother," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch; "but I will tell you the best stories
I can. Come sit near the window where the light is stronger. That fire will never burn while
I am here. I am brighter than it, and the old thing is jealous."

The children laughed at her joke. But it was true,--she was very bright. Her eyes seemed to
light the room, or perhaps it was her gown, like an opal fire, blue and pink and purple, changing
and glowing, and made of the softest silk.

Ivra nestled close to her knee where she could stroke the gleaming silk. Eric sprawled on the
floor at her feet, his face upturned to hers.

Then she told them a story. It was not like any of Helma's World Stories, but the children
liked it. It was all about a gorgeous bird she had at home in her tree-house. She told how
she had heard it singing one morning in early spring, high up in the branches of her tree,
and how she had watched it day after day flying back and forth in the forest, its yellow breast
flashing among the green leaves. It had a long golden bill, and its tail was black as jet;
and its wings were the softest gray in the world with a feather of jet in either one. Its song
was the clearest, the highest, the purest of all the bird songs in the forest. It was a wonderful
bird, and she wanted it for her own.

Then she told the children how she had set traps for it, and how it had escaped every time.
But at last she had made a dear little cage, all woven of spring flowers and leaves, and put
food in it. Still the bird escaped, pulling the food out with its long bill and never getting
inside the door. And finally she told them how she did capture that wild, shy bird by learning
its song and singing it sitting in her tree-house with the window open, until the bird heard
and came flying in wonder to find what other bird was calling it. Then she had closed the window
and the bird was hers. It hung now in the pretty cage in her prettiest room, and sometimes
sang in the middle of the night.

Eric liked the story, and all the better because it was a true story. And the Beautiful Wicked
Witch said he could see the bird himself if he would come to her house. He could stroke its
bright breast, and it would sing perhaps. Then there were other things caged in her house,
cunning little animals, and some big ones, worth any boy's seeing.

But Ivra answered for Eric, shaking her head hard. "No, no. Mother doesn't want us to visit you."

But Eric said, "May I open the cage door and the window and see the bird flash away? I should
like that."

"No. Well, perhaps," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch. "Will you come then?"

"I can't, I suppose, if Mother Helma doesn't want me to. Are you sure she doesn't, Ivra?"

Ivra was sure.

The Beautiful Wicked Witch laughed then. "Of course, if you tell her she won't let you come.
But if you came without telling, how could she mind?"

"That sounds true,--but someway it can't be," said Ivra. And that seemed to end it.

But after a little the Beautiful Wicked Witch began another story. This one was about a frock
she had made, a wonderful thing all of cobwebs and violet petals, with tiniest rosebuds around
the neck. If Ivra were to slip that frock over her head, and unbraid her funny little pigtails,
she would look as pretty as any fairy in the world.

Ivra was not too young to want to be pretty. If she would only go to the Beautiful Wicked Witch's
house, she could try on that dress, and wear it for one whole day if she liked. Ivra clasped
her hands. But then she thought, and asked a question. "Could I play in it, and run and climb?
Would I be as free as in this little old brown smock?"

The Beautiful Wicked Witch raised her hands in horror. "My cobweb frock! Why, it would be ruined!
It would be in shreds! How can you even think of treating it so!"

So Ivra shook her head until her funny little pigtails flopped from side to side. "I don't
want to wear it then for even a minute. What fun would there be?"

"Well, think about it anyway," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch, and rose to go away. "It's
the fir, you know, beyond the white birch."

"Thank you for the stories," said the children.

"Good-by," said the Beautiful Wicked Witch. "Perhaps Eric will remember and come. It's a gorgeous
bird, and I haven't said he couldn't free it."

Then she slipped out into the snow flakes, turning to give them one dancing look over her shoulder
before the door swung to.

Up flamed the candles, clear high flames when she was gone, and the fire crackled again, and
took on new life, reaching higher and higher.

They got their supper together rather silently. But just before going to sleep Ivra roused
herself to say, "Let's promise each other we won't go to the Beautiful Wicked Witch's fir until
mother comes home,--and we can tell her how jolly the Witch is, and what good stories she told us."

"I don't want to go anyway," answered Eric, "unless I can free the bird."--But you see, he
had not promised.

After a while, "Did you notice how pale her face was when she wasn't laughing?" asked Eric.

"Yes, and not so beautiful then. Mother may come in the night, and we never know it till morning!"

Soon they were asleep, a tired, but happy little girl and boy.

I think the Tree Mother sank down in her air-boat to look in at them and open the door wide,
which they had forgotten, so they would have fresh air all night; but it was dark, and the
room was shadowy, so perhaps it was only the wind.

CHAPTER IX

THE WIND HUNT

After all, Mother Helma was not there the next morning,--nor the next, nor the next. She did
not come back for days and days and days. Much happened before she returned, and much happened
after. I will tell you.

During the days the children roamed the forest looking for their mother. They asked every one
they could find whether he had seen her. The Tree Man, his daughter, the Bird Fairies, and
the Forest Children, not one of them had seen or heard of her since she went away. But they
all said with one accord that she would surely come back in her own time. It was not wise to
go seeking her so. She loved them. She would return.

"Wait and be patient," they said. "Time will bring Helma."

But they were Forest People, who live long, long lives, and see far. Eric was an Earth Child,
and Ivra was not all a Forest Child. So they found it hard to be wise and wait and do nothing
but trust Helma and know she would return.

So they went wandering all the day. They did not go home for meals, even, after a while, but
ate with the Tree Man and his daughter or the Forest Children. Sometimes as they walked through
the forest, looking all about, even up into the trees for their mother, they would suddenly
burst into play. "Tag," Ivra would cry, tapping Eric on the shoulder, and away she would fly,
he after her, in a race that grew merrier and merrier as it ran on. Ivra darted and twisted
away when Eric thought he had her, rolling down little hills on the snow crust, climbing trees,
jumping brooks until he was lucky enough to catch her by one of her pigtails at last, or snatch
her flying skirt. "Tag!" Then away he sped, and the game would go on for a happy while.

But sooner or later they always stopped running, stopped laughing, and remembered why they
were wandering the wood alone. Then they would call for Helma. Ivra's voice was shrill and
sweet, and rang through the bare woods like a birdsong. Eric's wavered a little uncertainly,
as though he doubted whether Helma knew it well enough to answer. "Helma, Helma, Helma! Ohh
Helma! Helmaa-a!"

No Helma answered. Sometimes a Forest Child came running to say, "We haven't seen her yet,
Ivra. But we are watching." The Bird Fairies fluttered at the call and nodded their little
heads uneasily. Children's voices calling for their mother was a sad sound, and made the kindly
little creatures restless. One or two of them would fly to nestle in Ivra's neck and whisper,
"Give her time. Do not hurry her so. She will come back."

But the children were losing faith. They went calling, seeking and playing through the woods
all the hours of daylight. At night Ivra told Eric World Stories, World Story after World Story
until sleep made them forget.

The fifth morning of their search dawned blue and clear and windy.

"The Wind Creatures will be happy to-day," said Ivra when she opened her eyes and heard the
wind pushing at all the windows of the house and saw the blue morning sky. "Wild Star will
be circling the world."

"Why, then he will see Helma somewhere!" cried Eric.

Ivra sprang from her bed. "Eric, how splendid! We must go with him! Why didn't I think of it
at the very first!"

They did not stop for breakfast, but were into their coats and ready for the day's search in
a twinkling. Neither of them had bothered to undress the night before. Ivra's hair had gone
unbrushed for two days. Things like that are apt to slip when one's mother is away. So her
little pigtails were no longer smooth and glossy, but frowsy and loose, and the rest of her
hair was ruffled until it looked something like the Bird Fairies' soft plumage. Eric's head,
too, was shaggier than ever, and a smudge from firebuilding had darkened one of his cheeks
since the morning before. They had not bathed in the "bird bath" since Helma had gone away.
They never seemed to have time, or else they were too sleepy.

Now they no more thought of baths than they thought of breakfast. Eric followed Ivra, who knew
all the ways in the forest, to the spot where Wild Star was most likely to be, if he was to
be found at all on such a windy, perfect day. They ran earnestly, never slackening to skip
or play. And soon they came in sight of some giant cedar trees near the edge of the forest.
There were several Wind Creatures standing there, laughing in shrill, glad voices, pointing
with their arms, and flapping their purple wings. Wind Creatures are growing-up boys and girls
with fairy-hearts and strong, never-tiring purple wings, remember. Wild Star was among them.

But before the children had come up to them, the Wind Creatures suddenly joined hands,--as
they do just before flying,--and started running down the sloping hill that ended the forest.

For a minute Ivra was in despair. "Now they are gone for the day to circle the world, and I
shall never find mother," she thought. But she did not waste any more breath running. She stopped
short and lifted her voice, clear and insistent, "Wild Star! Wild Star! I need you! Don't run
away. Wild Star!"

The Wind Creatures had reached the foot of the hill, running swiftly hand in hand, and their
wings were already lifted for flying. But Wild Star, at the sound of Ivra's voice, leaned back
suddenly on the hands he was holding, almost throwing his comrades on their faces, and breaking
the line. He turned right about, swinging the others with him, and came leaping and running back.

"What is the matter, little comrade?" he asked. "What is the matter?"

"In all your flying 'round the world, Wild Star, you must have seen my mother Helma. She is
lost. Oh, can't you tell us where she is?"

"Yes, of course. But I didn't know she was lost. I thought she was visiting Earth-friends."

"Truly, truly?" Ivra's eyes shone with joy, and Eric grabbed his cap from his head and threw
it up in the air shouting, "Hurrah!"

"Oh, will you bring her to us right away?" Ivra begged.

Wild Star looked doubtful. "Perhaps she wouldn't want to come."

Ivra laughed merrily at that. "Then take us to her," she said, "and you will see how she wants
to come when we ask her."

"Give us your hands, then!"

They held out their hands. Ivra's was grasped by Wild Star's and Eric's by another Wind Creature.
With their free hands they clasped each other's. So the four started running down the hill,
while the rest of the Wind Creatures flew off over their heads.

Wild Star and his comrade ran faster and faster, until Eric wondered how it was that he and
Ivra were ever keeping up with them. Soon he realized that his feet were scarcely touching
the ground. At the foot of the hill stood a little group of birches, and they were running
right upon it. He did not see how they could either turn out or stop themselves at that speed.
Almost as soon as he had seen the birches, though, they were beyond them. They had not turned
out, they had jumped right over the birches, and they were much higher than Eric's head! They
were running so swiftly now that only their toes ever touched the ground,--if they did.

What fun it was to run like that, the wind at their backs, and the Wind Creatures drawing them
strongly forward faster and faster and faster until they were really flying just above the snow.

Across white fields they skimmed,--over fences and frozen streams, bushes and banks, through
orchards and meadows, on, on, on, until they came to the town.

There Ivra pulled back for a minute, and the Wind Creatures slowed down. Eric knew why Ivra
was afraid of the town. She had told him all about it while they played in the wood. Helma,
her mother, was a human, but she hated the town and loved the fairies and their ways. That
was why she had run away to live by herself in the wood. But Ivra was neither fairy nor human;
she was both.

Now the fairies are afraid of humans because humans look right through them and do not see
them. That upsets the fairies and makes them uncomfortable. Of course Helma and Eric were exceptions,
for because they had no shadows in their eyes they could see them and play with them. So the
fairies accepted those two as one of themselves. Ivra was different. Because she was only half
fairy, any human could see her whether his eyes were shadowed or not if he would only look
hard enough. The dreadful part was that when a human did see her, he was likely not to believe
in her. He would just think he was day-dreaming, and that the little girl with the soft eyes,
the ash-colored pigtails, and the quick feet was just a piece of his day-dream. Not to be seen
is bad enough. But it is much worse to be seen and not believed in. That was why Ivra was afraid
of the town. People saw her there and either rubbed their eyes and looked another way, or laughed.

But now she was going for her mother, and she could bear anything, even that. She did not hold
back long. They ran past the canning factory, and Eric did not give a glance to it. A little
girl looking out over a pile of cans saw him, however, and wondered at his warm suit of brown
cloth, his leggins, sandals and the cap with wings. She remembered him in rags. She saw Ivra
too, and did not rub her eyes and think her a dream. But she did not call to any one in the
factory or point, for she knew they would think it a dream.

Through the crooked narrow streets, past the crooked narrow houses,--one of them Mrs. Freg's,--they
sped faster than the wind! On, on, on,--up the wide avenue through the "residential section"
where big houses eyed them from proud terraces,--out into the country again they raced.

There they came to a high gray stone wall, blocking their way, and stood still.

"You must climb," said Wild Star. "She is in there."

CHAPTER X

ON THE GRAY WALL

It was a very high wall that hid their mother, and at first glance it seemed impossible that
they could ever climb it. But Ivra did not stop to wonder. She ran up and down, hunting for
a foothold. At last she reached the end of the wall and disappeared around the corner. Eric
and the Wind Creatures followed. When they came up to her she had already found a place where
the stones were laid a bit unevenly, one on the other, and was half way to the top, clinging
with toes and fingers.

"Bravo!" cried the Wind Creatures. Eric went up after her, often slipping back and bruising
and scratching his hands and knees, but as resolute as his playmate. At last they gained the
top. The Wind Creatures had flown up and were waiting for them there, sitting cross-legged
with their purple wings folded down their backs.

The wall enclosed the garden of a very rich family. It was a formal garden with straight walks,
trellises, fountains, benches and neat flower beds laid out in squares and circles, now piled
high with blossoming snow.

Just as the children reached the top of the wall, the door into the garden from the stern gray
mansion behind it opened and through it came three people. First was a very tall lady all wrapped
up in furs,--tails and heads of the poor animals that had been slain to make them hanging from
her shoulders and down her back. Even the children could see that her face was sour in spite
of all its smiling. Then came a young man in a stiff, funny hat, carrying a cane, beating up
the snow flowers with it as he passed the flower beds. And behind them walked--Helma, with
her gaze on the ground. That is why they did not know her at first, that and her very strange
clothes. She was dressed all in velvet and fur, and her arms up to her elbows were hidden in
a huge white muff. She swayed as she walked on weird little high heels and the toes of her
boots drew out to long points, almost like a goblin's. Her hat was a velvet affair, so awkward
and heavy it seemed to weigh down her head, and her candleflame hair was smothered under it.
Is it any wonder that they did not know her like that!

But when she walked close under the wall and they heard her voice they knew her, and the Wind
Creatures had to hold Ivra from jumping down and throwing herself into her arms. "Wait," they
whispered.

From their high place on the wall they could look down on the heads of the three people, and
hear all they were saying. They had never learned that it is not fair to listen that way.

From all Helma said they could plainly see she was a prisoner. She was pleading with the old
woman. She was saying, "No, never, never, never, in a thousand days and years will I ever be
happy here. My place is in the forest. Oh, how these heels bother!"

"Silly girl!" cried the old woman, smiling more than ever, and looking more disagreeable than
ever at the same time. "Your place is where you were born-in a fine house and wearing clothes
like other people. Heels indeed! Did you expect them to do any thing else but bother? Mine
have bothered for sixty years, but you haven't heard me complain."

"Neither would I," Helma said, "if I didn't know about other kinds of shoes that don't hurt.
Those sandals I wore when you caught me didn't hurt. Why can't I wear those, at least when
I walk in the garden?"

"Well, you might," began the old woman, a little more kindly, and smiling less, "if you promise
always to put on the high heels before coming into the drawing room--"

"No," said the young man sharply. "Let her once into the garden in her sandals and she'll climb
the wall and be off. I say that we give her no chance to escape. After she has been to a hundred
or so balls and worn these beautiful and appropriate clothes long enough she'll be glad of
her luck, and nothing could drag her into the forest. Believe me!"

Now Helma stopped pleading, and laughed at the young man. "Do you think high heels, or even
a hat that weighs down my head like this horrid one can keep me much longer from my little
daughter, and that dear new little boy? What they are doing without me all this time--I wonder!"
She stopped laughing to sigh.

The old woman took her hand not unkindly. "My poor, dear girl," she said, "how many times must
I tell you it is only a dream, that house in the woods and the little girl and boy? They aren't
really there at all, you know. You have dreamed them. Come, cheer up. Be a brave girl. We have
parties and good times enough here, if you will only get into the spirit of them, to make up
for all your forest foolishness."

Helma answered in a low even voice, that showed well enough how sure she was of the truth of
what she was saying--"No, they are realer than you. Ivra is realer than all the people in that
mansion put together, cousins, uncles, aunts, guests, servants and all. She is my little fairy
daughter."

"No," said the young man.

The wings of the Wind Creatures on the top of the wall rustled just then in a gust of cold
north wind. Helma threw up her head as at a familiar sound, and her eyes slowly lifted to the
faces of the children looking down. For a minute she looked steadily at them without believing,
and then it was as though her pale face suddenly burst into song. But the old woman and the
young man were not looking at her and so they noticed nothing. The young man said, "The neighbors
have talked about us enough already for all your queer ideas and doings. So you'll wear no
sandals, no, nor sleep with your skylight open, as you're always asking, nor go one step outside
the wall until you have come to your senses and are more like other people. So there!"

But Helma laughed, her head thrown back, so that the children could look into her happy eyes
and see the glow of her short hair under her grotesque hat.

"Keep your keys, cousin," she said, "and your old skylight keep shut tight as tight. I shall
find a way out. But my children must be patient, and Ivra must teach Eric to keep his face
and body clean. They must not forget meal-times, and when anything goes wrong, or they think
it is going wrong, they must ask the Tree Man's advice. I will find a way to them soon. They
must keep happy and wait."

She said all that slowly and distinctly, her eyes smiling into theirs.

"What silly talk," laughed the sour old lady. "Just as though you were making a speech. Well,
it must be luncheon time now, and high time we were changing our frocks. Wear your gray velvet,
Helma, and don't forget to put on stockings to match. There's to be strawberry ice to-day,--and
goose to begin with of course. Cook says she has never seen a tenderer--"

The old lady went on talking about the wonderful luncheon they were to have until they were
out of hearing. But the children on the gray wall could see that Helma was going in differently
from the way she had come out. Her head was high, and she stepped out in her funny high heeled
boots as though she were walking in sandals. At the little door into the mansion she turned
and waved her queer great muff to the children and the Wind Creatures, and they heard her laugh.

But when she was gone, and the door was shut and locked--they heard the great key scrape--Eric
turned joyfully to Ivra. She was staring intently at the closed door, her face very pale. Suddenly
she buried her head in her arms and burst into sobs, hoarse, jerky sobs, the first and the
last time Eric was ever to hear her cry. Eric and the Wind Children sat cross-legged and waited.
Soon she stopped and wiped her face on her sleeve.

"She is locked in, but she will find a way home," she said, almost laughing. "How glad and
how surprised she was to see us! It was almost as though she had begun to believe all their
talk about dreams, until she heard the Wind Creatures' wings!"

The Wind Creatures took them back to the forest. Under the giant cedars they said good-by and
left them. The children went straight to the Tree Man's to tell him the news. He gave them
deep bowls of warm milk to drink, and took off their sandals so that their toes might spread
and warm in front of the fire.

Then the Tree Girl begged for a story, and Ivra told a World Story about the rivers,--how they
go in search of their mother, the ocean, day and night, around mountains and through mountains,
and across whole continents, and never stop until they find her,--and of the myriad presents
they carry to her,--of the things they see and the things they do, as they flow searching.

It was a long story. And almost before the end the little story teller had fallen asleep with
her head tipped back against the Tree Man's chest.

They spent that night in the tree, and that was good, for a storm had risen outside, and it
was bitter cold in the forest.

CHAPTER XI

THE BEAUTIFUL WICKED WITCH

The next morning before Eric woke Ivra slipped away to play with the Forest Children.

"On such wild days as this they usually play indoors, for they're little things and the Snow
Witches love to tease them," said the Tree Man.

"Perhaps she'll be telling them World Stories," thought Eric, and so he decided to go to the
little moss village, too, for though Ivra had told him dozens of World Stories by now, he always
wanted to hear more. So after breakfast with the Tree Man and his pretty, shy daughter, he
ran out in search of Ivra.

It was indeed a cold morning, blustering and raw. Eric felt chilled almost as soon as he was
out of doors. Very soon he lost his way, for he had not been in the forest long enough to grow
familiar with landmarks. Just when he was beginning to be a bit hopeless and pinched with the
cold he came to the big fir where the Beautiful Wicked Witch lived. It stood green and comforting
among all the bare trees of winter.

Eric stopped to look, for now he remembered the Beautiful Wicked Witch and the bird she had
caged in there. He saw a door in the tree trunk ajar, and swinging to and fro with tiny tinkling
music. He peeped in, and between the swingings caught glimpses of little blue and yellow flowers
arranged in tight bunches in hanging vases. He could smell their sweetness even out there in
the cold air.

Then high up in the tree trunk a window opened, and he heard the bird singing. The Beautiful
Wicked Witch's face appeared at the window, looking down at him. Her black eyes were sparkling
and she nodded good-morning to him as though he were a prince, or at least a grown-up. He could
not help nodding back. He liked her very much, she was so beautiful and so friendly.

"Come in and get warm," she called, "and I'll show you my pretty bird."

Eric remembered Ivra's warnings, but he wanted to go in so much that he found himself doing
it. The door tinkled louder music when he touched it, and he pushed his way through, as a bee
pushes his way into a flower.

The Witch came running twinklingly down a spiral stairway. She kissed his mouth, took off his
winged cap and coat, threw them somewhere out of sight, and then he had time to look at her well.

Her gown was green satin, the color of the fir boughs, and her little sandals were green satin,
too. A green fir frond bound her forehead; and her black hair hung loose, soft and electric
to her waist. Eric had never seen a prettier person in the world, nor one more kind.

She took his two hands and began to whirl in a happy dance. Eric danced, too, for joy and good
comradeship. Round and round the room they whirled until their breath was spent.

Then the Beautiful Wicked Witch took him up the spiral staircase to show him the bird. Up and
up they went, until they came to a little room high in the tree. The floor was carpeted with
yellow satin, and yellow curtains hung at the window. Deep blue mirrors lined the walls, and
they reflected Eric and the Beautiful Wicked Witch dozens of times over.

The pretty bird cage, all made of flowers and leaves, hung in the very middle of the room.
Eric stood by it a long time. He put his fingers through the bars, and stroked the bird's soft
feathers. But the gorgeous bird paid no attention to him, and did not sing.

"Why doesn't it hop about?" he asked the Beautiful Wicked Witch.

The Witch frowned and pouted. "It ought to, I'm sure. I like to see it hopping. But it would
rather sulk. It thinks all the time about the forest, and its mate who is out there somewhere.
Sometimes it sings, though. Its voice is wonderful."

"Oh, let's open the cage and free him," cried Eric.

But the Beautiful Wicked Witch seized his hand. "No, no, no! It is mine. I have caged it in
my pretty cage. And it fits into the room, don't you think?"

"I don't know what you mean," said Eric.

"Why, you fit into it, too," said the Witch, looking hard at him. "Your yellow hair and blue
eyes match the yellow and blue flowers. Would you like me to make a pretty cage for you and
put you into it?"

"No, no!" Eric was suddenly afraid of the Beautiful Wicked Witch.

But she laughed at his fear, and danced a little dance, humming to herself, around the room.
Then Eric noticed other cages. The walls were lined with them. Some hung from the ceiling,
and some stood in corners. In every cage was a bird or animal. The one standing nearest to
him held a pretty gray squirrel, running 'round and 'round on a wheel. He stopped every now
and then to peer out through the bars with quick, bright eyes. In the cage next was a tiny
brown field mouse. But he had given up running and playing long ago, and was huddled in the
farthest and darkest corner of his cage, his little beady eyes open and watchful.

Eric walked around the room, looking at all the poor little animals and birds. One and all
peered through their bars with watchful and fearful eyes. Eric remembered himself in the canning
factory and pitied them more than he could ever have done had he not once been a caged little
creature too. How he longed to open their doors and the window, and see them scamper and fly away!

But the Witch had stopped her dancing by the bird cage in the middle of the room, and her little
hands were between the bars stroking the bright bird-breast. She was saying, "Sing for us,
bird. Sing your nicest song for us. Little Eric wants to hear it."

The bird began to beat its wings and breast against the bars. Again and again its bright breast
struck the door. But it did not fly open.

"It does not want to sing," laughed the Beautiful Wicked Witch; "but it must. Sing, bird, sing!
It does you no good to struggle. You can't get away. Sing, sing!"

Then the bird sang. Its song was truly wonderful, high and clear, as Eric had heard it from
outside. But now that he could see the bird caged he did not like the song so well. It was
all too sad.

Eric wanted to go away then, out of the tree, and never, never see the Witch again. He would
find Ivra and the Forest Children and forget all about these cages. So he said good-by to the
Witch and ran down the spiral staircase. But he could not find the door out. He went round
and round the wall, but there was no sign of a door. It was indeed as though a flower had let
him in and then closed its petals tight.

The little posies swung in their cases, the bird sang up stairs, and the Beautiful Wicked Witch
played and danced, and laughed at all his searching. She would do nothing to help him find
the door.

All that day he wandered up stairs and down stairs, or stood at the window looking down through
the green fir branches to the free forest-floor. Once the Witch offered to tell him stories.
But he wanted no stories of caged things, and those were all the stories she knew. The Witch
did not mind his short answers and dark face. She seemed perfectly able to have a good time
with herself, and needed no comrades.

At last night fell. The rooms blossomed with candlelight. In the yellow room up stairs the
Beautiful Wicked Witch paraded back and forth before the mirrors, loving her own reflection,
smiling at herself, courtesying, frowning, looking back over her shoulder,--lifting her hair
to let it fall again in electric waves. Eric stood by the window, thoroughly weary of his search
and loneliness, and watched her. The bird sat in the cage and watched her. All the little bright
eyes of animals watched her. The candles burned steadily.

How Eric longed for Ivra now, and their own big friendly room. He imagined Ivra in the room
there all alone getting her supper over the fire, bathing in the fountain bath, opening the
windows, and at last falling softly to sleep before the firelight faded.

Oh, if there were only a window open here! How hot it was, and how over-sweetly scented! The
Beautiful Wicked Witch went on posing and preening before the mirrors, and seemed to have forgotten
all about her new little prisoner.

So he pulled back the yellow satin curtain, and looked out. It was clear, cold starlight. He
pressed his face against the window pane and stared down into the shadows beneath the fir.
And there, standing erect in the shadow, her face lifted like a pale little moon, stood Ivra.

She saw him, but did not wave. She only nodded, as though she knew now what she had come to
make sure of. She stood still for a few minutes, until Eric almost thought she was frozen in
the cold. But at last she moved and disappeared under the fir.

Music tinkled through the house. The Beautiful Wicked Witch poised on her toes, surprisedly
looking into the reflection of her own eyes.

"Some one has come in, for that was the door," she said. "It opens inward with music."

Eric's heart stood still. Had Ivra come into the Witch's house, Ivra who was so afraid of the
Witch? He ran down the stairs and the Witch followed him. Yes, Ivra stood there in the middle
of the warm, flower-hung room, like a little cold star beam.

But she did not look at the quaint flowers in their golden vases. And when the Witch ran to
her and kissed her she did not even look at her. She looked only at Eric, and her eyes said,
"I have come to free you."

"Oh, so you did want to try on the pretty frock after all," cried the Witch, and drew her up
the stairs. Eric followed to the yellow room. "No," said Ivra. But the Witch brought it out
and tried to slip it over her head. It was sheerest gossamer web, and shimmered like moonlight.
And the little rosebuds seemed to make it belong to Ivra.

Eric forgot all about being a prisoner, and forgot the little caged creatures around the wall.
He was delighted with the frock being pushed down on Ivra's shoulders. "How beautiful you'll
be!" he cried. But Ivra wriggled away from it and stood clear. Her rudely made brown frock
and worn sandals looked odd in that satin room. "I didn't come to see the frock," she said,
shaking her head till her pigtails bobbed. "I came to get Eric."

The Beautiful Wicked Witch laughed. "Get him if you can," she said. Then she turned her back
on the children and began to braid her black hair among the mirrors.

They went to the window and waited there, watching her.

"The door doesn't open out,--only in, I think," Eric whispered. "So we can't get out."

"Mother has told me how it would be," Ivra whispered back. "We'll have to wait until she's
asleep and then find a way."

Then Ivra sat down on the floor and began to rock back and forth and sing a lullaby. It was
a lullaby her mother had sung to her all her babyhood, Ivra sang in a very little voice, almost
a murmur only, but by listening Eric and the Beautiful Wicked Witch could catch the words.
She sang the same words over and over and over.

  Night is in the forest,
    Tree Mother is nigh.
  By-abye, by-abye-bye.

  Sleep is in the forest--
    His feathers brush your eye.
  By-abye, by-abye-bye.

  Mother's arms are holding you,
    Forest dreams are folding you.
  By-abye, by-abye--bye.

The Beautiful Wicked Witch sat down before the mirrors after a while, still watching her reflection,
but listening to the song, too. Her head gradually sank lower and lower, first resting chin
in hand and at last right down on her arm stretched along the floor. Her face lay turned towards
the children, and they saw the mirth slowly fade in her great black eyes, the lids drop lower
and lower,--and then she was asleep suddenly. Now she looked almost as young as themselves,
and like a pale child who has fallen to sleep at its play.

But the children did not stop to look at her. Once they were sure she was asleep they were
off searching for the door. Up and down the stairs and all around the rooms they ran on tiptoes.
But it was no use, and at last they came back to the window.

"We must jump," whispered Ivra.

Eric looked down, and wondered. It was a long way to the ground!

"The snow is soft beneath the crust," Ivra said. "It will only cut us a little."

"Let's take the bird," Eric said. Ivra ran to it, and opened the cage door. It hopped onto
her finger eagerly, and she held its bill so that it would not sing.

Eric opened the window. "I'll jump first," he whispered.

But Ivra said, "Oh, let's hold hands and jump together."

The Beautiful Wicked Witch felt the cold night air from the window on her face, and stirred
in her sleep. Her eyelids quivered. So the children did not wait a minute more. They climbed
up onto the window sill, Ivra still holding the bird. "One, two, three," she whispered, and
they jumped.

Out and down they went like two shooting stars and plunked through the snowcrust. They were
up in a second. Their wrists and elbows were a little bruised and cut, but they were not really
hurt at all. But strange and strange, the bird had fluttered near Ivra's hand for that second,
and then flew straight back up and into the open window. It had been caged so long it did not
really want its freedom after all. Eric cried out with regret.

But Ivra seized his hand, and they ran home together through the cold, starlit forest. Before
they leapt the hedge into their own garden Eric saw the firelight blossoming in the windows.
But he stood still outside the door, after Ivra had gone in, for a time, breathing the cold
air and the clear silence right down into his toes.

CHAPTER XII

IVRA'S BIRTHDAY

"To-morrow is the shortest day in the year," Ivra told Eric one night after they were in bed.
He did not answer, for he was very sleepy. But after a minute she spoke again. "It's my birthday
too!"

Then he opened his eyes and sat up, for her voice sounded very queer and far away. He saw that
she too was sitting up, her hands folded under her chin. "Mother always had a party for me,"
she said. "Such fun!"

"Perhaps one will happen to-morrow even with her away," Eric comforted. "Oh, goody! I do hope so!"

"Perhaps. Anyway I'm going to pretend there's a party waiting for me to-morrow. You pretend
too, Eric, and then even if it doesn't come true we will have had the pretending at least."

Eric agreed to pretend. It was one of his favorite games. And very soon the two children nestled
down under their covers and drifted into sleep and dreams of a party.

They were roused early in the morning by something tapping lightly on the doors and windows.
Eric was out of bed first, and saw the Wind Creatures, half a dozen or more of them, looking
in and beckoning. Their purple wings gleamed gold in the early morning sun. Wild Star was standing
in the open door.

"Happy birthday!" he cried and tossed a snow ball into Ivra's bed. She popped to her knees,
laughing and rosy with sleep. But then she was grave in a minute. "There's to be no party,
Wild Star," she said. "Mother's not back yet. Are you all here for that?"

"Yes, we're here for that, and there is to be a party, an all day one too. Your Forest Friends
have seen to that."

The children were radiant with joy. And Ivra whispered to Eric, "We had our pretending, too!"

The Wind Creatures would not come in to breakfast, for of course they do not like in-doors
at all, and besides, they need very little food. So they played in the garden while the children
dressed and ate. Very soon the children were done, though, and came leaping out ready for a
day's joy.

The Wind Creatures led them then out through the forest. The Tree Girl was watching for them
at her door. It was plain to be seen, when she joined them, that she carried something in her
arms very secretly under her white cloak. But no one mentioned it. Ivra knew it must be a surprise
for her birthday. Where the party was to be no one told her, and she did not ask. She liked
surprises.

They came to the Forest Children's little moss village. The youngest Forest Child of all was
the only one up so early. He was busily breaking dead twigs from bushes to build his morning
fire and making up a little rhymeless song about Ivra's birthday as he worked.

  This is her birthday,
  Spring's little daughter--
  Spring's little daughter--
  This is her birthday.

  Wake now, wake now,
  All you Forest Children,
  Wake for her birthday
  And tie your sandals on.

When he saw them he cried, "Hurrah! Happy birthday, Ivra!"

At his cry all the little windows in the little moss houses opened and there were the tousled
heads of the Forest Children, their eyes blinking sleepily against the gilded morning light.

"Thank you, thank you," Ivra cried back to the youngest Forest Child. "Hurry and follow."

Before they had gone on their way five minutes more the Forest Children were up with them,
tugging at buckles and sandal strings as they ran, begging not to be left behind. Soon they
came to Big Pine Hill, a hill deep in the forest with no trees but a giant pine at the top.
The Wind Creatures had built a slide there by brushing away the snow and leaving a broad track
of shining blue ice. Up under the pine were sleds enough for every one, made all of woven hemlock
branches. They needed no runners for the ice was so slippery and the hill so steep anything
would go down it fast enough. Ivra's Forest Friends must have worked all the day before to
make those sleds--and now her shining face and clasped hands were reward enough.

She was the first to try the hill. She threw herself on her sled and down she flashed. At the
bottom she tumbled off, and still on her knees shouted up to Eric and the others at the top,
"Oh, it's splendid! Come on!"

Then the hill was covered with speeding sleds. The Bird Fairies had none of their own, for
they were so little they might have come to harm on that hill. But they had just as good a
time for all of that, catching rides with the others, clinging to shoulders or heads or feet
as it happened.

Every one was there, even the Snow Witches who had not been invited. They came whirling and
dancing through the forest almost as soon as the sliding had begun. Ivra gave them glad welcome
in spite of their rough ways and stinging hair. For she, the only one of all who were there,
liked them very well and had made them her comrades often and often on windy winter days. And
they, who cared for nobody, cared for her. "She is not like anybody," they explained it to
each other. "She is a great little girl."

But they would not take Ivra's sled as she wanted them to. They had not come to spoil her fun.
Instead they raced down the hill behind her or before her, pushing and pulling, their stinging
hair in her face. But that only made her cheeks very red, and she did not mind them at all.
Then she tried sliding down on her feet, with the long line of witches pushing from behind,
their hands on each other's shoulders. That was the best fun of all, and almost always ended
in a tumble before the bottom was reached. Though the others avoided the witches as much as
they could they admired Ivra for such hardy comrading.

Before noon every one was very hungry. Then the littlest Forest Child said, "Follow me. The
Tree Girl has gone ahead."

It was true, she had slipped away when no one noticed.

The littlest Forest Child led them away to a little valley-place where hemlock boughs had been
spread to make a floor and raised on three sides to make a shelter. When they had come close
enough for Ivra to see what it was perched so big and white in the middle of the hemlock floor
she stopped and sighed with joy while she clasped her hands.

It was a beautiful frosted birthday cake with nine brave candles of all colors and burning
steadily, just the kind of cake her mother had always baked for her birthdays.--Only last year
there had been eight candles. She had not hoped for this final delight. She ran quickly forward
and was the first to kneel down by it. The Tree Girl was there waiting, and now Ivra knew it
was the cake that she had been carrying so secretly under her cloak.

The Snow Witches did not follow into that shelter. They have a great fear of shelters, you
must know, for when forced into them they quickly lose their fierceness, and their fierceness
is their greatest pride. But before they left the party one of them came close to Eric, so
close that tears were whipped into his eyes and quickly froze on his lashes. "Take this to
your little comrade," shes said, thrusting a box made of pine cones into his hands. "It's for
her to keep her paper dolls in. We witches made it."

Then all the witches went screeching and swirling away through the forest, and Ivra, Eric and
the others settled down to the business of eating the birthday cake.

But first the Tree Girl, who is very sensible, insisted that they eat some nuts and apples.
Indeed, she would allow no one a bite of the wonderful cake until he had eaten at least one
apple and twenty nuts.

Before Ivra cut the cake the others blew out the candles, one after another, and made her a
wish in turn for every candle. The Tree Girl wished her a bright new year, the Bird Fairies
that her mother would soon return, the Wind Creatures that she would keep her gay heart forever,
the Forest Children that she would become the most famous story teller in the Forest World.

And then it was Eric's turn. He had never been to a birthday party before, and never had he
made a wish for some one else. So he was a little puzzled. But at last he had an idea and cried,
"I wish that your hair will grow golden and curly before to-morrow morning." All princesses
Ivra had ever told him about had curly golden hair, and though she had never said it, Eric
had suspected for some time that Ivra would like that kind of hair herself. Then he puffed
his cheeks and blew out his candle, a fat green one. Ivra laughed.

"The Snow Witches would never let me keep curly hair," she said. "They'd whip it straight in
an hour."

That reminded Eric of the pine cone box and he gave it to her and told her about it. She was
almost as delighted with that as with the cake.

What a wonderful cake it was! Such food Eric had never dreamed of, and he was a great dreamer!
The frosting was over an inch thick.

Then, of course, Ivra must tell them stories. All the Forest People loved her stories. They
built a fire to keep from freezing. The Wind Creatures sat a little way off where it was cool
enough for their comfort, but not too far to hear Ivra's clear voice. This time she told all
she knew about the birthday of this Earth, one of the most magical and splendid and strange
of her stories.

But it was the shortest day in the year, Ivra's birthday, and night fell all too soon. Then
the Tree Girl, who seldom forgot to be sensible, said they had better go home. The littlest
Forest Child was already asleep, curled close by the fire. They roused him gently. Good-nights
were called and a few minutes after, the shelter was deserted, and the fire out. And by starlight
could be seen many footprints leading away in the white snow out into all parts of the Forest.

Eric and Ivra walked toward home hand in hand. They had to pass the morning's slide on the
way. When they came in sight of it they began to walk more quickly and quietly and to look
intently. The blue ice shone bluer than ever in starlight, but more than the ice shone. Shining
people were using the sleds and the hill was covered with them.

"Why, they must be Star People," Ivra cried excitedly.

When they were quite near they stood to watch.

The strange Star folk were very silent, never calling and laughing as those who had slid there
in the morning had done. Two, a little boy and a young girl, came spinning down on the same
sled and stopped so near that Ivra and Eric might have touched them by leaning forward. But
the Star-two must have thought the Forest-two shadows, for they paid no attention to them at all.

Now that they were so near Eric could see that their hair was blue, like the shadows on snow,
and their faces a beautiful shining white. Their straight short garments were blue like shadows,
too, and their arms, legs and feet were bare. But they did not seem conscious of the cold.
Eric did not hear them speak, but they looked at each other as though they were speaking, and
then suddenly the little boy laughed merrily, as though the young girl had just told him something
very amusing.

Soon the girl turned and ran away up the hill. But the little boy was as quick as she and threw
himself on the sled while she never slackened her pace, but drew him straight and fast up the
steep slope.

"I have never seen them before," Ivra whispered to Eric. "But mother has told me of them. They
don't talk as we do you see. They don't have to. They know each other's thoughts. They almost
never leave their Stars. Do you think--perhaps, to-night they saw our slide shining, and wondered
so much about it they had to come down? Even mother has never seen them. It was Tree Mother
told her."

Eric was very silent, for he had never seen such beautiful people. The little boy had had a
face like a star, and great shining eyes. The young girl had been clear like the day, and without
smiling her face had been brimmed with happiness.

But now he felt Ivra trembling. She whispered again, "You know, Eric, it is wonderful for us
to see them like this. Some day, mother says, we may get to be like them!"

"And speak without words?" Eric asked wondering.

"Yes, and more than that. We may be as alive as they. Now we're only Forest people, and not
all that even--almost dreams. They are real!"

Then she took his hand and drew him away. "I cannot look any more," she said; "can you? They
are too beautiful!"

Eric put his fingers to his eyes as he walked. "Yes, it's hard to see the ground now. My eyes
ache a little."

But how the children wished their mother were waiting for them in the little house to hear
the tale!

CHAPTER XIII

NORA'S GRANDCHILDREN

One afternoon Eric and Ivra started out for the Forest Children's moss village to play with
them. But when they got there they found all the little houses deserted: not a Forest Child
was to be found. They must have gone into some other part of the forest to play. So Ivra and
Eric wandered on and on, a little lonely, a little tired of just each other for comrades, till
at last they came to the very edge of the forest,--and there was Nora's farm, a rambling red
brick house, with a barn twice its size behind it. Down in the pasture by the house half a
dozen Snow Witches were dancing in a circle, now near, now far, all over the pasture, and sometimes
right up to the farm-house windows.

Ivra clapped her hands and bounded forward. Eric did not follow. He stood to watch. When the
Snow Witches saw Ivra running to them they rushed to meet her. For a minute she was lost in
a cloud of blown snow, and then there she was dancing in their circle back and forth across
the pasture, and then away, away, away! But before she frolicked quite out of sight she turned
to look for her playfellow, and beckoned to him.

"Come on," she called. "We're going to slide on the brook below the cornfield."

But Eric did not follow. He did not like the Snow Witches. And just as Ivra and the Witches
drifted out of sight, he thought he heard the Forest Children laughing. The sound came from
the barn. So Eric ran to the door. It was a big sliding door, and now stood open on a crack
just large enough for a child to slip through. Eric went in.

The barn was tremendously big, a great dusty place full of the smell of hay. Ahead of him were
two stalls, with a horse in one. But Eric was most interested in the empty stall, for it was
from there the laughter seemed to come. He stood looking and listening, and then right down
through the ceiling of the stall shot a child, and landed laughing and squealing in the hay
in the manger. She sat up, saw Eric and stared. She was a little girl about his own age, freckle-faced,
snub-nosed and red-haired. She had the jolliest, the nicest face in the world.

Eric opened his mouth to say, "Hello," but kept it open, silent in amazement, for another child
had shot through the ceiling and landed beside the girl. This was a boy. He was red-headed,
too, freckle-faced and snub-nosed. He looked even jollier than the girl.

Before Eric had closed his mouth on his amazement, "Whoop!" and down came another boy. This
boy was red-haired, freckle-faced and snub-nosed, and he looked jollier than the other two
put together, if that were possible, for his red hair curled in saucy, tight little ringlets,
and his mouth was wide with smiles.

It was this last one who said, "Hello, who are you?"

"Eric,--who are you?"

"Nora's grandchildren, of course. Come up. We're having sport."

The three children ran across the barn to a ladder and scrambled up and disappeared through
a trap door at the top. Eric followed. The attic was full of hay in mountains and little hills,--hay
and hay and hay. He followed the children around the biggest mountain, through a tunnel--and
there they vanished!

He found the hole in the stable ceiling and looked down. Not very far below him was the manger
full of hay and red-headed children. "Look out down there! Whoop!" cried Eric, and dropped,
landing among them.

Then the four laughed heartily together and ran across the barn again, up the ladder, around
the hay mountain and dropped down the hole. They did that dozens of times until they were tired
of it.

Then they played hide-and-go-seek in the hay country, and after that Blind Man's Buff in the
barn below. The little girl was Blind Man first. They tied a red handkerchief tight over her
eyes. Then they ran about, dodging her, calling her, laughing at her groping hands and hesitating
steps. But after a few minutes she became accustomed to the darkness and ran and jumped about
after them until they had to be very wary and swift indeed. Soon she caught Eric and then he
was Blind Man.

By and by they played tag, just plain tag, and Eric liked that best of all. Back and forth
across the great room they raced,--up the ladder, over the hay, through the hole into the stable,
round and round, in and out, up and down until they were too tired and hot for any more.

Then they lay up in the hay where there was a little window, looking far out across the meadows.

Eric saw Ivra out there in the first field, wandering around alone and now and then looking
up at the barn. She must have heard their shouts and laughter. He pointed her out to the other
children. "That is my playmate out there," he said. "Let's open the window and call to her
to come up. She'll tell us stories."

The children looked out eagerly. "But there's nobody there," they said.

Eric laughed. "No, look!" He pointed with his finger. "Over there by the white birch. Look!
She sees us." He waved. "Quick, help me open the window."

He could not find the catch. The window was draped with cobwebs and dusty with the dust of
years. It looked as though it had never been opened.

The little red-headed girl put her hand on his arm. She was laughing. "Don't be silly," she
said. "There's no one by the white birch. You're imagining."

"Why, look! Of course she's there!" Eric was impatient. "She's moving now, waving to us. Of
course you see her!"

"Yes," said the jolliest of the boys. "We do see it--faintly. We've seen it before too,--a
kind of a shadow on the snow. But father says it's nothing to mind. Imaginings. Nothing real,
just spots in our eyes or something."

Then Eric remembered all that Ivra had told him. She was half fairy. People could see her if
they looked hard enough. But they were not apt to believe their own eyes when they had looked.
That was dreadful for her. She had not said so, but he had guessed it from her face when she
told him. Well, well, now he understood a little better. These were Earth Children, with shadows
in their eyes. Ivra could never be their playmate.

But he could see her well enough because his eyes were clear. And presently he would run out
to her and they would go home together. But just now it was jolly and cozy here in the barn,
and these Earth Children were good fun. He hoped she would wait for him, but if she did not
he would find his way alone easily enough.

"You don't really believe in it, do you?" the red-headed girl was asking. "If you do,--better
not. Grown-ups will laugh at you."

"Nora, your grandmother, won't laugh," said Eric. "She knows Ivra well enough, and Helma, too."

"Oh, yes," said the jolliest boy. "But she is queer. We love her, and she's a fine grandmother,
I can tell you. And she tells the best stories. But she's queer just the same, and she can't
fool us."

"Let's go in and get some cookies from her," said the other boy. "They must be done by now."

So up they hopped, and without another look towards the shadow out on the snow by the white
birch, jumped down the hole, and ran out of the barn into the kitchen.

Nora was there knitting by a table, two big pans of cookies just out of the oven cooling in
front of her.

How good they smelled! Eric had never tasted hot ginger cookies before, and when Nora gave
him one, a big round one all for his own, he almost danced with delight. He perched on the
edge of the table and ate that one and many another before he was done.

"This boy, grandma," began the red-headed girl.

"His name is Eric," interrupted Nora, handing him another cookie. "I know him very well."

"Well, he saw It while we were looking out of the barn window! And he said It was real and
his playmate, and he wanted to call It in to tell us stories!"

"Don't say 'It,'" said Nora. "Her name is 'Ivra.' But of course you can't play with her. She
isn't an Earth Child. She's a fairy. So don't say anything about it to your father when he
comes home to-night. It would make him cross."

"But it doesn't make you cross," laughed the jolliest boy. "And so won't you tell us some stories
about it now. You know,--the little house in the wood, the Tree Man, the Forest Children, Helma,
Ivra and all the rest of it."

"Do tell us a story," begged the other two.

So Nora put down her knitting, and taking the cat on her lap, a great sleepy white fellow who
had been purring by the stove, she began to tell them stories.

She told stories about Helma and Ivra, the Wind Creatures, the Snow Witches and many more.
The children listened eagerly, clapping their hands now and then, and at the end of every story
asking for more.

But Eric was lost in wonder. The children thought the stories were not true,--just fairy stories
told them by a grandmother. And Nora had evidently long ago given up expecting them to believe.
Her black eyes twinkled knowingly when they met Eric's puzzled ones.

And all the time Eric had only to turn his head to see Ivra walking out there around in the
field, looking at the farm house, waiting for him. But gradually, as the stories went on the
little figure out there grew more and more to look like just a blue shadow on the snow, paler
and paler. Finally he had to strain his eyes to see it at all.

Then he jumped down from the table and said he must go home. His heart was beating a little
wildly. For he was afraid Ivra might fade away from him altogether. These red-headed children
were fine playfellows. He liked them,--oh, so much! He wished he could stay and play with them
for--a week. Yes. But he must go now. That blue shadow on the snow seemed lonely.

"Take her some cookies," said Nora, filling his pockets. The children laughed at the top of
their voices. "Yes, take some cookies to the fairy. But you can eat them yourself and pretend
it is the fairy eating them," they cried.

Nora laughed with them, and so after a minute Eric joined in. But he and Nora looked at each
other through their laughter and nodded understanding.

When Ivra saw him at last come out of the farm house door, she didn't wait longer, but ran
away into the wood. He overtook her a long way in, walking rapidly.

"Did you have a good time with the witches?" he asked.

"Why didn't you come, too?" she said

"Oh, it was too cold. Nora's grandchildren are awfully good fun. We played hide-and-go-seek,
just as we played it at the Tree Man's party."

"Did they laugh at me?"

" . . . No, they laughed at me. They thought I was a funny boy."

"To have me for a playmate?"

Then Eric began to think that Ivra was not very happy. Perhaps she had been lonely.

"You're always running off with the Snow Witches," he said. "But I won't play with Nora's grandchildren
any more unless they'll let you play too. I won't, truly!"

Ivra laughed. And it was like spring coming into winter. "Yes, play with them all you like!
I love them, too. I've often watched them. The littlest boy, the one with the funny curls,
laughs at me and stares and stares. But the other two . . . they just give me a glance and
then forget all about me. They don't think I'm real. But they are awfully jolly. You play with
them and when you tell me about it afterwards I'll pretend I was there playing too."

Then the two clasped hands and went skipping home.

CHAPTER XIV

SPRING COMES

One morning when Ivra woke up she knew spring had come before her eyes were open. But Eric
had to go outdoors to make sure. He was sure enough when he smelled the ground, a good earth
smell. Snow still clung to the garden in spots here and there, but the warm sun promised it
would not be for long. Something in the sky, something in the air, a smell of earth, and a
stirring in his own heart told him it was true. Spring had come!

Ivra had felt and known it before her eyes were open, and now that they were open, those eyes
of hers looked like two blue spring flowers just awake. She hopped about in the garden poking
and prodding the earth with a stick, looking for her violets, her anemones, her star flowers.
Not a green leaf was pushing through yet, but oh, how soon there would be!

Suddenly she stopped and stood still looking away into the forest. Then she ran to Eric on
the door stone. She cried, "Mother will come now. Don't you feel it? She will come with the
spring!"

Eric did feel it. For there was magic in the day. The magic came to him in the air, in the
smell of the earth, in the new warm wind and said, "Everything is yours that you want. Joy
is coming." And Mother Helma was what he wanted. So he felt sure she was on the way.

"She must have found the key,--or do you suppose she climbed the gray wall?" wondered Ivra.

"Shall we go to meet her?" asked Eric.

"No, no. We must get the house clean and ready for her. We must hurry."

And then such a house-cleaning was begun as you or I have never seen. The Forest Children had
been up at dawn to greet the spring, and now they came running to tell Ivra and Eric about
it. When they heard that Helma was at last coming back and the house was to be cleaned they
wanted to help. First it was decided to wash the floor. Pail after pail of water from the fountain
they splashed on it. Streamlets of water flowed into the fireplace and out over the door stone.
Out and in ran the Forest Children trying to help, and with every step making foot prints on
the wet floor, muddy little foot prints, dozens of them and finally hundreds of them.

Then the windows were washed. And because the Forest Children could not run on those they were
made bright and clear. But soon the Forest Children pressed their faces against the panes to
watch for Helma, and as the minutes passed breath-clouds formed there, spreading and deepening
until the glass sparkled no more. But no one noticed. No one cared. For now they were shining
up the dishes, polishing them with cloths, and setting them in neat rows in the cupboard.

Then Wild Star appeared, his hands full of spring flowers that he had found deep in the forest
in the sunniest and most protected place, the very first spring flowers. "Helma must have gotten
past that wall, now it's spring," he said; "and here are some flowers to greet her. See, I
left the roots on, the way she likes them. Let's plant them by the door stone."

They dug up the earth with their hands, Forest Children's hands, Wild Star's hands, Eric's
and Ivra's,--and planted the flowers all about the door stone. Then Wild Star flew away a little
languidly.

Ivra looked after him. "He'll soon find the deepest, darkest, coolest place," she said, "make
himself a nest of smooth leaves and dream away the summer. Fall and winter are his flying times.
We shall see him at no more parties for a while."

"And the Snow Witches? What will become of them?" asked Eric.

"They will get into hollows of old trees and under rocks, draw in their skirts and their hair,
curl up and sleep."

"Good news!" thought Eric. But he did not say it for he knew Ivra liked the Snow Witches almost
best of all to play with and would miss them.

Now the Tree Girl came through the gap in the hedge. She was wearing a green frock, green sandals,
and pussy willow buds made a wreath in her hair.

"Spring, spring!" she cried as she came up the path. "We heard the sap running in our tree
all night. Father has gone on a spring wandering, and I shall stay within tree no longer for
a while."

"We know, we know!" crowed Ivra. "I knew before my eyes were open this morning. Eric had to
smell the ground first. Imagine! We have been cleaning house. Mother will surely come now.
Don't you feel it?"

The Tree Girl lifted her face up in the new warm wind. Her soft hair floated feather-like.
"Yes, I feel it. She is on the way. Spring brings everything."

A bird flashed from the trees. It lighted on the hedge for a second and was away again. But
Eric had had time to recognize the beautiful bird he had seen caged in the Witch's fir.

"The caged bird!" he cried to Ivra. "It is free! It is flying away."

The Bird Fairies were flying away, too. They were going to meet the birds corning up from the
south and teach them their songs as they flew. They came to say good-by to the children.

"Look for us next winter," they called back, as they fluttered off in a silvery cloud.

And finally, at high noon, just as Ivra had known she would since early morning, Helma came,--running
through the forest, jumping the hedge, and gathering Ivra and Eric into her arms.

They three knelt on the ground by the spring flowers embracing each other for a long, long minute.

"Did you find the key to that gate?" Eric asked when his breath came back, "Or did they let
you come at last."

"I didn't have to find the key, and they didn't let me come. They would never have done that.
But the minute I had on a light spring frock I found I could climb the wall easily enough,
and so I came running all the way. And now they shall never get me back behind doors again.
I am free! I am as free as you, my children!"

She held them off and looked into their eyes.

She was dressed in a brown silk gown, all torn and stained from her wall-climbing and rush
through the bushes. Her feet were bare, for she had kicked off her funny high-heeled city boots
the minute she had reached the forest. Her hair had grown to her shoulders and looked more
like flower petals than ever. But her face was not brown and serene, as Eric had first seen
it. It was pale and wild.

"They don't believe in you, children," she said. "They don't believe in me, not the me that
I am. And from morning to night they made me a slave. They made me wear such ugly, hurting
things, and then they made me dance! Every night we danced in hot rooms and ate strange bad-tasting
food. They called dancing like that a party. But I could only remember our forest parties,
and our dancing here under the cool moon.

"The only glimpse of the forest I had was your Snow Witches, Ivra. Sometimes I saw them from
my bedroom window, 'way out in the fields, whirling and scudding in mad games. And then at
last one morning some Wind Creatures flew by, above the garden wall! But when I called Wild
Star back and tried to ask him about you, children, as he perched on the wall, they came rushing
into the garden and dragged me away. They said it was time for luncheon, and I must change
my frock. But let us forget. I am here! It is spring!"

She jumped up and stood just as the Tree Girl had stood earlier that morning, her face lifted
in the wind. Slowly that face grew calm and warm color flooded it.

"How nicely cleaned the house is!" she exclaimed when at last they went in. Seventy of the British
fell. But the want of the field-piece left behind with Singleton, and the failure of their
ammunition, not a charge of which remained with the Americans at
the close of the fight, saved the enemy, whose infantry alone, according
to Sumter, was superior to his whole force.

The Americans attacked them with half their number. But Coates held his position, and tidings of the
approach of Rawdon, who had left Orangeburg, prompted Sumter to retreat
across the Santee.

His expedition had not been successful.

It does not concern us to inquire by whose errors or defects it failed.

Enough, that, in all things, where Marion and his men were concerned, they acquitted themselves
in a manner calculated to sustain their former reputation. The attack upon Coates at the house,
we are told, was made against Marion's opinion, who blamed Sumter
for wasting the lives of his men.

Without a field-piece, it was scarcely possible that an inferior should have succeeded against
a superior force, in a strong position. Sumter was courageous to rashness. His spirit could
not be restrained in sight of the enemy. With a brave force at his command, he was not satisfied
to be idle, and his courage was frequently exercised at the expense of his judgment. The men of
Marion complained that they had been exposed unnecessarily in the
conflict.

It is certain that they were the only sufferers. Had Sumter but waited for his artillery, and
simply held the enemy in check, the victory must have been complete, and this victory was of
the last importance to the Americans. It would have involved the loss of one entire British regiment,
at a moment when, two others having been required at New York from South Carolina, the force
remaining with Rawdon would have been barely adequate to the retention of Charleston. This necessity
would have withdrawn the latter general at once from Orangeburg, and the subsequent bloody battle
of Eutaw would have been averted accordingly.

Greene, speaking of this combat, writes:--"The affair was clever, but by no means equal to
what it ought to have been. The whole regiment of six hundred men would have been captured,
if General Sumter had not detailed too much, and had not mistaken
a covering party for an attack."

It may be added, that the party actually engaged in the attack on
Coates, were almost exclusively South Carolina militia.

Under favorite leaders they had betrayed no such apprehensions as
are natural enough to men who lack confidence in themselves and captains.

They had shown the courage of veterans, though they may have failed of that entire success which
is usually supposed to follow from a veteran experience.

After the battle of Quinby the joint forces of Sumter and Marion were separated. The former retired
up the Congaree; the latter took charge of the country on the Santee;
while Greene placed himself in a camp of rest at the High Hills in
the district which has since taken the name of Sumter.

His troops were in a wretched state of incapacity, in consequence
of sickness.

The region to which he retired was famous for its salubrity, and the intense heat of the season
effectually forbade much military activity.

The opposing generals were content to watch each other. It was while he held this position
that Col. Hayne, of the militia, was executed as a traitor by the
British.

The case of this gentleman was that of many in the State.

He had taken parole at a time when the country was overrun by the
enemy.

This parole was subsequently withdrawn by the conquerors, when they supposed the people to have been
subdued, and desired their services as militia. But the British were in turn driven from the field. The
Americans acquired the ascendant.

The section of the country in which Hayne resided was overrun by a detachment of Marion, under
Col. Harden, and Hayne availed himself of the occasion to take up
arms for his country.

He was a popular gentleman, and soon gathered a strong party of militia. His career was distinguished
by some small successes, and, with a party of Col. Harden's horse, by a sudden dash in the vicinity
of Charleston, he succeeded in taking prisoner General Williamson, formerly of the Americans,
whose life was forfeited to the country.

The capture of Williamson put all the available cavalry of the British into activity, and by
an unfortunate indiscretion, Hayne suffered himself to be overtaken. His execution soon followed
his capture. This was a proceeding equally barbarous and unjustifiable--neither sanctioned by policy
nor propriety. It took place after a brief examination, and without any trial. The proceeding
was equally unauthorized by civil and martial law.

It was not long before this, as the reader will remember, that Marion, in consequence of the
execution of some of his men by the British, had threatened them with retaliation. Greene,
who knew the decisive character of Marion, and was apprehensive that this wanton crime would
render him as prompt as he was fearless, in avenging it, thus writes
to prevent him: "Do not take any measures in the matter towards retaliation,
for I do not intend to retaliate upon the TORY officers, but the BRITISH.

It is my intention to demand the reasons of the Colonel's being put to death; and if they are
unsatisfactory, as I am sure they will be, and if they refuse to make satisfaction, as I expect they
will, to publish my intention of giving no quarter to British officers, of any rank, that fall
into our hands. Should we attempt to retaliate upon their militia officers, I am sure they would
persevere in the measure, in order to increase the animosity between
the Whigs and Tories, that they might stand idle spectators, and see
them butcher each other.

As I do not wish my intentions known to the enemy but through an official channel, and as this
WILL BE DELAYED FOR SOME FEW DAYS TO GIVE OUR FRIENDS IN ST. AUGUSTINE TIME TO GET OFF, I wish
you not to mention the matter to any mortal out of your family."

Weems represents Marion as being greatly averse to this measure of retaliation, and as having
censured those officers of the regular army who demanded of Greene
the adoption of this remedy.

But the biographer wrote rather from his own benevolent nature than from the record. Marion had
no scruples about the necessity of such a measure in particular cases; and, however much he might
wish to avoid its execution, he was yet fully prepared to adopt it whenever the policy of the
proceeding was unquestionable. Fortunately, the decisive resolutions which were expressed by the
Americans, their increasing successes, the fact that they had several
British officers of reputation in their hands,--all conspired to produce,
in the minds of the enemy, a greater regard to the rights of justice
and humanity.

As retaliation in such cases is justifiable only as a preventive
and remedial measure, it now ceased to be necessary; and, with proper
views of the affair, the resolves of Greene and Marion were suffered
to remain unexpunged, in proof of their indignation, rather than their
purpose.

But a few days had elapsed after the execution of Hayne when a party of Marion's men, under
Captain Ervine, fell in with and captured a favorite British officer, Captain Campbell, with
two subalterns, in charge of a convoying detachment.

They were at once committed to the provost guard, and soon communicated their apprehensions
to Charleston. A meeting of British officers was held, and their dissatisfaction at this new
feature, introduced into the warfare of the country, was expressed
in such terms, as contributed, along with the prompt proceedings of
the Americans, to bring Balfour, the commandant of Charleston, under
whose authority the execution of Hayne had taken place, to a better
sense of mercy and prudence.

We shall have no farther occasion to refer to these proceedings. It is enough that the threat
of retaliation, followed up by such decided movements as left no doubt of the resolution of the
Americans, produced all the beneficial effects which could have accrued from its execution.

The
incursion of Sumter and Marion into the low country, drew Lord Rawdon from Orangeburg, with
five hundred men, to Charleston, from which place, after lingering just long enough to witness
the death of Hayne, he sailed for New York. He left Lieut.-Col. Stewart in command at Orangeburg.
From this post, Stewart moved to McCord's ferry, on the Congaree,
on the south side of which he took post, amidst the hills near the
confluence of the Wateree and Congaree.

Greene's camp lay directly opposite, and the fires of the mutual armies were distinctly seen
by each other. The heat of the weather suspended all regular military operations. Two large rivers
intervening secured each from sudden attack, and their toils were
confined to operating in small detachments, for foraging or convoy.

In this service, on the American side, Col. Washington was detached--as soon as the course
of Stewart was ascertained--down the country across the Santee; Lee
was sent upward, along the north bank of the Congaree; the latter
to operate with Col. Henderson, then in command of Sumter's brigade,
at Fridig's ferry, and the former to strike at the communication between
the enemy and Charleston, and to cooperate with Marion and Mayham,
in covering the lower Santee.

Col. Harden, at the same time, with a body of mounted militia, had it in charge to straiten
the enemy upon the Edisto.

The activity of these several parties and their frequent successes, were such that Stewart was
compelled to look for his supplies to the country below him. This necessity caused him to
re-establish and strengthen the post at Dorchester, in order to cover the communication by Orangeburg;
and to place a force at Fairlawn, near the head of the navigation
of Cooper river, from which supplies from Charleston were transported
to headquarters over land.

As this route was watched by Marion, Washington and Mayham, the British commander was compelled,
in order to secure the means of communication with the opposite bank of the Congaree and to draw
supplies from thence, to transport boats adapted to the purpose, on wagon-wheels, from Fairlawn
to the Congaree.

Such were the relative positions of the two armies until the 22d of August, when Greene, calling
in all his detachments except those under Marion, Mayham and Harden, broke up his camp at the High
Hills and proceeded to Howell's ferry, on the Congaree, with the intention immediately to
cross it and advance upon Stewart. That officer, on hearing of the movement of the Americans,
fell back upon his reinforcements and convoys, and took up a strong
position at the Eutaw Springs.

Meanwhile, Marion disappeared from the Santee on one of those secret
expeditions in which his wonderful celerity and adroit management
conducted his men so frequently to success.

His present aim was the Pon-Pon. Col. Harden was at this time in that quarter, and closely pressed
by a superior British force of five hundred men. Detaching a party of mounted militia to the
neighborhood of Dorchester and Monk's Corner, as much to divert the enemy from his own movements
as with any other object, he proceeded with two hundred picked men on his secret expedition.

By
a forced march, he crossed the country from St. Stephen's to the Edisto--passing through both lines
of the enemy's communication with Charleston, and reached Harden--a
distance of one hundred miles--in season for his relief.

His approach and arrival were totally unsuspected by the enemy, for whom he prepared an ambush
in a swamp near Parker's ferry.

A small body of his swiftest horse were sent out to decoy the British into the snare. A white
feather, rather too conspicuously worn by one of his men in ambush,
had nearly defeated his design.

Some Tories passing, discovered this unnecessary plumage, and one of them fired upon the wearer.
This led to an exchange of shots; but Major Frazier, by whom the British were commanded, assuming
the party thus concealed to be that of Harden, whom it was his aim to find, pursued the horsemen
whom Marion had sent out to entice him to the ambuscade.

His cavalry was led at full charge within forty yards of the concealed
riflemen.

A deadly fire was poured in, under which the British recoiled; attempting
to wheel and charge the swamp, they received a second; and, closely
wedged as their men were upon the narrow causeway over which they
came, every shot bore its warrant.

There was no retreating, no penetrating the ambush, and the British cavalry had but to go forward,
along the road to the ferry, thus passing the entire line of the ambuscade. The corps was most
effectually thinned by the time it got beyond rifle reach; and still more fatal would have been
the affray to the advancing infantry of Frazier--a large body, with a field-piece--but for
one of those lamentable deficiencies of materiel, which so frequently
plucked complete success from the grasp of the Americans.

The ammunition of our partisan failed him, and he was compelled to
yield the ground to the enemy, who was otherwise wholly in his power.

The British loss was unknown. Twenty-seven dead horses were counted
on the field the day after; the men had all been buried.

As Marion's men fired with either a ball or heavy buck-shot, and
as none would aim at horses, the loss of the British must have been
very great.

Nine days after, at the battle of Eutaw, they had few cavalry in the field.

But, though the victory was incomplete, Marion had attained his object. He had rescued Harden,
without loss to himself.

He had traversed more than two hundred miles of country, through
a region held by the enemy; returned by the same route,--delivered
his prisoners to the care of Mayham,--returned twenty miles below
the Eutaw, in order to watch the communication between that place
and Fairlawn--then, at the call of Greene, made a circuit and passed
the British army, so as to reach a position on the south side of the
Santee, in the track of Greene's advance; and all this in the brief
compass of six days.

Yet, of these movements, which merited and received the particular
thanks of Congress, we are without any data in our records.

The complimentary resolution of Congress fixes the battle at Parker's
ferry on the 31st August.

Seventeen miles from Eutaw Springs, at Lauren's plantation, Marion effected a junction with the
commander-in-chief. Greene was pressing forward to a meeting with
Stewart.

Of this object the latter seemed to have been profoundly ignorant up to this moment. But the
day before, he knew that Marion was twenty miles below him, and did not conjecture that, by marching
the whole night, he had thrown himself above him to join with Greene. Without this junction he
had no apprehension that the latter, with an inferior force, would venture an attack upon him,
in the strong position which he held. On the afternoon of the 7th September, the army reached
Burdell's tavern on the Congaree road, seven miles from the Eutaws. The force under Greene amounted
to two thousand men, all told. That under General Stewart was probably about the same. It is estimated
to have been two thousand three hundred.
 But the Earth People looked right through the Blue
Water Children, or thought they were shadows perhaps.

One of the men put his hands to his mouth like a megaphone and called to Helma, asking her
if she did not want to be picked up. They thought her being there in that wild place with a
little boy, alone, and barefooted, very singular. They thought she might have been shipwrecked.
But Helma shook her head, and so they had to take their wonder away with them. The boat swept by.

Ivra ran out into the waves waist deep to watch the strange thing. She had never seen a steam
launch before, or anything like it. A baby, held in his nurse's arms, caught sight of her and
waved tiny dimpled hands, calling and cooing. She saw his sparkling eyes, his light fuzzy hair,
his little white dress and socks. She ran farther into the water, waving back to him and throwing
him dozens of kisses. But no one else in the boat saw her, and after a minute the baby's attention
turned to a sea gull flying overhead.

Ivra returned to shore, her face shining. There had been no doubt of it--the baby had seen
her at once, and had had no doubts. He had laughed and reached his hands to her. The little
Fairy Child almost hugged herself with delight. . . .

They built themselves shelters of drift wood when night fell. Eric's was just large enough
for him to crawl into and lie still. One whole side of it was open to the sea. Soft fir boughs
made his bed, and Helma had left a kiss with him. But he did not sleep for a long while. He
lay on his side looking out over the star-sprinkled water and up at the star-flowering sky.
And he could not have told how or from where the command had come, but he knew as he looked
that he must cross that sea and go into the new world beyond it and see all things for himself.
World Stories were good. But they were not enough.

How he was to go, or how live when he got there--he did not once think of that. Just that he
was to go filled his whole mind. He forgot that he had said he would not go without Helma and
Ivra. He did not think of them at all. He just lay still listening to the sea's command to
go beyond and beyond.

CHAPTER XVI

OVER THE TREE TOPS

He was waked by Ivra's joyous cries just at dawn, and rolled out of his shelter, rubbing his
eyes and stretching his arms and legs. But as soon as his eyes were well open he jumped up
and uttered a cry of joy himself. For hanging just above the water on the edge of the sea was
a great blue sea-shell air-boat with blue sails; and the Tree Mother stood in it, talking to
Helma and Ivra who had run down to the water's edge.

The boat and the sails were blue. Tree Mother's gown was blue. The sea and the sky were blue.
Tiny white caps feathered the water. Tiny white clouds feathered the sky. And Tree Mother's
hair was whiter and more feathery than either. Her eyes were dark like the Tree Man's, only
keener and softer, both. And in spite of her being a grandmother her face was brown and golden
like a young out-of-door girl's, and she was slim and quick and more than beautiful. Eric stood
beside Ivra, his face lifted up to the Tree Mother's, aglow and quivering.

"She is going to take us home," Ivra said softly.

Then Tree Mother turned the boat, and it drifted in and down on the sand. The children and
Helma climbed in. The Tree Mother said very little on the long ride, but her presence was enough.
The three were almost trembling for joy, for the Tree Mother's companionship is rare, and one
of the splendidest things that can happen to a Forest Person.

The minute they were in the boat, it shot up and away towards home.

"Where are the Blue Water Children?" Eric cried, suddenly remembering their playmates of yesterday.

"Have you been playing with Blue Water Children?" asked Tree Mother. "They are gypsy-folk and
you never know where you will find them next. They are probably miles away by now."

"Faster, faster, Tree Mother," begged Ivra, who was hanging over the side of the boat and losing
herself in joy with the motion and height.

"Faster?" said the Tree Mother. "Then take care! Hold on!"

The boat shot forward with a sudden rush. The spring air changed from cool feathers to a sharp
wing beating their faces. Eric and Ivra slipped to the floor and lay on their backs. They dared
not sit up for fear of being swept overboard. They could see nothing but the sky from where
they lay, but they loved the speed, and clapped their hands, and Ivra cried, "Faster, faster!"

The Tree Mother laughed. "These are brave children," she thought. "Shut your eyes then," she
said, "and don't try too hard to breathe."

They swept on more swiftly than a wild-goose, so swiftly that soon the children could neither
hear, speak nor see. And then at last they were traveling so fast that it felt as though the
boat were standing perfectly still in a cold dark place.

Gradually light began to leak through their shut eyelids, the wing of the wind beat away from
them, and the boat rocked slower and slower in warm, spring-scented air. But in that brief
time, they had traveled many, many miles.

Now when the children leaned over the side, they saw that they were sailing slowly over their
own Forest. The tree tops were like a restless green sea just a little beneath them. They flew
low enough to hear bird calls and the voices of the streams.

It was then they suddenly noticed that the littlest of the Forest Children was there curled
up fast asleep at Tree Mother's feet. Ivra cried to him in surprise, and he woke slowly, stretching
his little brown legs, shaking his curly head, and lifting a sleepy face. He was puzzled at
seeing others beside Tree Mother in the boat. He had been riding and awake with her all night
up near the stars, and had dropped to sleep as the stars faded.

She bent now and took his hand. "I picked these wanderers up at dawn," she said, "and now we
are all going back together. We are well on the way."

They had left the forest roof and were sailing over open country,--a short cut, Tree Mother
explained.

"Oh, look," cried Ivra excitedly, almost tumbling over the edge in her endeavor to see better,
"isn't that the gray wall off there?"

Yes, it was the gray wall, the gray wall that had prisoned their mother all winter. The boat
went slower and slower as they neared it and then almost hung still over the garden. The garden
was full of people, having some kind of a party, for many little tables were set there with
silver and glass that shone brilliantly in the sun. Servants were hurrying back and forth carrying
trays and their gilt buttons sparkled almost as much as the silver.

But how strange were the people! Eric and Ivra and the littlest Forest Child laughed aloud.
They were standing about so straight and stiff, holding their cups and saucers, and their voices
rising up to the air-boat in confusion sounded like a hundred parrots.

"Why don't they sit down on the grass to eat?" wondered the littlest Forest Child. "And why
don't they wash their feet in the fountain? They look so very hot and walk as though it hurt!"

"Sitting on the grass and washing their feet in the fountain is against the law there," Helma said.

But neither Ivra nor the littlest Forest Child knew what "against the law" meant. Eric knew,
however, for he had lived nine years, remember, where most everything a little boy wanted was
against the law.

"But why do they stay?" Eric asked.

Helma looked a little grave. "Why did you stay, dear, for nine long years?"

He thought a minute. "I hadn't seen the magic beckoning," he answered then.

"Neither have they," she said, "and perhaps never will, for their eyes are getting dimmer all
the time."

"But how can they help seeing it?" cried the littlest Forest Child. "See, all around the garden!"

It was true. All around the garden the tall trees stood and beckoned with their high fingers,
beckoned away and away with promise of magic beyond magic. But the people in the garden never
lifted their eyes to see it. They were looking intently into their tea cups as though it might
be there magic was waiting.

"They are prisoners," said Tree Mother, "just as you were, Helma, with this one difference.
You were locked in, but they have locked themselves in and carry their keys like precious things
next their hearts."

Helma sighed and laughed at once. Then she leaned far out and tossed a daffodil she was carrying
down on the heads in the garden, shaking her short, flower petal hair as she did it--she had
cut it before starting on the adventure--in a free, glad way.

No one looked up to see where the flower had dropped from. The people down there were not interested
in offerings from the heavens. So the boat sailed on. Away and away over the canning factory
they drifted, where the little girl looked out from her window and up, and waved her hands.
"What are you waving at like that?" a man asked who was working near. "Oh, just a white summer
cloud," she said. For she knew very well he did not want the truth. And I might as well tell
you here that that pale little girl was a prisoner who had not turned the lock herself, and
did not carry the key next her heart. Others had done that before she was born. And she had
seen the beckoning in spite of the lock and now was only waiting a little while to answer it.

The children were glad to find the forest roof beneath them again. It was noon when they sank
down in the garden at their own white door stone. Tree Mother left them there and flew away
with the littlest Forest Child, the one who liked to wander alone by himself.

Nora was in the house when they ran in. She had cleaned it with a different cleaning from what
it had had for Helma's first return. There were no little foot prints on the floor now, and
the window panes shone like clear pools in sunlight. Three dishes of early strawberries and
three deep bowls of cream were standing on the table before the open door. And then besides
there was a big loaf of golden-brown bread.

"I thought you would be hungry," said Nora, pointing to the feast.

They were hungry indeed, for they had had nothing at all to eat since yesterday's lunch of
chocolate. They very soon finished the strawberries and cream, and a jug of milk besides.

"You are a good neighbor, Nora," Helma said gratefully.

All Nora wanted in return for her labor and kindness was the story of their adventure. She
listened eagerly to every word. "I shall tell this to my grandchildren," she said when the
story was done, "and they will think it just a fairy tale. They'll never believe it's fairy
truth! Oh, if they would only stop pretending to be so wise they themselves might some time
get the chance of a ride over the tree tops with Tree Mother. But they never will. Come play
with them again sometime, Eric. They often talk about you."

"I'll come to-day and bring Ivra if they'll play with her, too!"

But Nora shook her head as she went away. "They don't believe in Ivra. How could they play
with her? Their grandmother can teach them nothing. But they'll like the story of this adventure
none the less for not believing it."

When she was gone the three took the dishes into the house and washed them. Then they went
out and worked in the garden until dusk.

CHAPTER XVII

THE JUNE MOON

Now every day Eric was becoming acquainted with strange Forest People: those who had hidden
away from winter in trees, and those who were wandering up from the south along with the birds,
and Blue Water People, of course, all along the Forest streams. The Forest teemed with new
playmates for him and Ivra.

Hide-and-go-seek was still the favorite game. And now it was more fun to be "It" than to be
hiding almost, for one was likely to come upon strangers peeping out of tree hollows, swimming
under water, or swinging in the tree tops, any minute. When the person who was "It" came across
one of these strangers he would simply say, "I spy, and you're It." Then he would draw the
stranger away to the goal, where he usually joined the game and was as much at home as though
he had been playing in it from the very first.

The day that Eric found Wild Thyme so was the best of all,--or rather she was the best of all.
And that was strange, for when he first spied her he did not like her at all. Her dress was
a purple slip just to her knees, with a big rent in the skirt. Her hair was short and bushy
and dark. And her face was soberer than most Forest People's faces. She was sitting out at
the edge of the Forest on a flat rock, her chin in her hands, and she did not look eager to
make friends with any one.

But he cried, "I spy! You're It!" just the same. She did not lift her eyes. She only said,
"You must catch me first. I am Wild Thyme, and that will be hard!"

Eric laughed, for she was not a yard away from him. And he sprang forward as he laughed. But
she was quicker than he. She had been at perfect rest on the rock, her chin in her hands, and
not looking at him, but the instant he jumped she was off like a flash, a purple streak across
the field.

But Eric did not let his surprise delay him. He ran after her just as fast as he could, and
that was very, very fast, for running with Ivra had taught him to run faster than most Earth
Children ever dream of running. Soon, Wild Thyme slowed down a little, and faced him, running
backward, her bushy hair raised from her head in the wind of her running, her little brown
face and great purple eyes gleaming mischievously. Eric sprang for her. She dodged. He sprang
again. She dodged again. He cried out in vexation and sprang again, straight and sure. He caught
her by her bushy hair as she turned to fly.

And a strange thing happened to him in that second, the second he caught her hair. Instead
of Wild Thyme and the sunny field, he was looking at the sea. He was standing on the shore,
looking away and away, almost to foreign lands. Now ever since that spring night on the shore
he had been thinking of the sea and longing with all his might to cross it and see foreign
lands for himself. Only that had seemed impossible, and something he must surely wait till
he was grown up to do. But now, in a flash, as his fingers closed on Wild Thyme's hair, he
knew that he could indeed do that, and anything else he really set his heart on.

No girl, even a fairy, likes to have her hair pulled. So Wild Thyme was angry. She pinched
Eric's arm with all her strength. Then he was angry. And so they stood holding each other,
he her by the hair, and she him by the arm, staring hotly into each other's faces. But slowly
they relaxed, and becoming their own natural selves again, broke into laughter.

"You'll play with us, won't you?" Eric asked.

"Of course," she said, "and I am It!" And away they ran to find the others, Ivra, the Tree
Girl, the Forest Children, and Dan and Nan. When those saw who it was Eric had captured they
ran to meet her, shouting gayly, "Wild Thyme! Goody! Goody! Hello, Wild Thyme!" They seemed
to have known her always. She and Ivra threw their arms about each other's shoulders and danced
away to the goal.

Wild Thyme was a wonderful playfellow. She was so wild, so free, so strong, so mischievous.
And when the game was ended she invited them to a dance that very night. "It's to be around
the Tree Man's Tree," she said. "And all come--come when the moon rises."

 . . . Perhaps Eric's good times in the Forest reached their very height
that June night of the dance. He had never been to a dance before, and
just at first he did not think there would be much fun in it. But Ivra
wanted him to go, and offered to show him about the dances. So they ran
away from the others to the edge of the field where Eric had discovered
Wild Thyme, and there on the even, grassy ground Ivra showed him how to
dance. It was very easy,--not at all like the dances Earth Children
dance. It was much more fun, and much livelier. The dances were just
whirling and skipping and jumping, each dancer by himself, but all in a
circle. Eric liked it as well as though it had been a new game.

Late that afternoon Helma and Ivra and Eric gathered ferns and flowers to deck themselves for
the evening. They put them on over the stream, which was the only mirror in the Forest.

Helma made a girdle of brakes for herself, and a dandelion wreath for her hair. She wove a
dear little cap of star flowers for Ivra, and a chain of them for her neck. Eric crowned himself
with bloodroot and contrived grass sandals for his feet. But the sandals, of course, wore through
before the end of the first dance and fell off.

They had a splendid supper of raspberries and cream, which they sat on the door stone to eat,
and then told stories to each other, while they waited for the moon to rise. It came early,
big and round and yellow, shining through the trees, flooding the aisles of the Forest with
silver light until they looked like still streams, and the trees like masts of great ships
standing in them.

Then the three hurried away to the Tree Man's. They ran hand in hand through the forest aisles,
their faces as bright to each other as in daylight. But before they even came in sight of the
tree they heard music.

"Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmm, thrummmmmmmmmmmm." Very soft, very insistent, very simple and
strangely thrilling. When they came to the tree, there were the Forest Children, who had come
early, whirling around in a circle, and the Tree Girl in the center of the circle making music
with a tiny instrument she held in one hand and touched with the fingers of the other.

Soon Forest People began arriving from every direction. There were the Blue Water Children,
bright pebbles around their necks, and white sea shells in their blue hair. The Forest Children
were crowned with maidenhair fern. The Tree Girl was the most beautiful of all in her silver
cobweb frock and her cloudy hair. The Tree Man stood still in the shadow, but his long white
beard gleamed out, and his deep eyes. Wild Thyme wore a rope of the flower that is named for
her around her neck, but there was a new rent in her purple frock and her legs were scratched
as though she had remembered her dance only the last minute and come plunging the shortest
way through bushes, which was true.

Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmmm.

Every one except the Tree Man was dancing, bewitched in the moonlight, all over the grassy
space around the great tree. The grass was cool and refreshing under Eric's bare feet, and
he often dug his bare toes into the soft earth at its roots as he leapt or ran just to make
sure he was on earth at all. For he felt as though he were swimming in moonlight, or at least
treading it.

Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmmm.

When the Tree Girl's music stopped between dances, then it would go on in Eric's head. It was
just the sound of the night after all. Once Eric noticed that the Beautiful Wicked Witch was
dancing next to him in the circle but he was not afraid of her there with the others, and in
bright moonlight. And she was plotting no ill. Her face was sparkling with delight and she
had utterly forgotten herself in the dance.

When the great moon hung just above them, and shadows were few and far between, the Tree Mother
came walking through the Forest, quieter and more beautiful than the moon. Wild Thyme ran to
her and laid her bushy head against her breast. For Wild Thyme only of all the Forest People
loved her without awe. The Tree Mother put her hand on Wild Thyme's head and stood to watch
the dancing. Her robe gleamed like frost, and her hair was a pool of light above her head.

Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmm.

Wild Thyme jumped back into the dance and the Tree Mother stood alone. But although she stood
as still as a moonbeam under the tree, she made Eric think of dancing more than all the others
put together. It was her eyes. The thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmmmm was in them, and the
rest of that night Eric felt as though the music-instrument the Tree Girl was swinging was
silent, and that all the music flowed from Tree Mother.

But Eric, after all, was only an Earth Child, and his legs got very tired in spite of the music
and the moonlight. So at last he slipped out of the circle, and stumbling with weariness and
sleepiness went to Tree Mother. She picked him up in her arms, and the minute his head touched
her shoulder he was sound asleep, the music at last hushed in his head.

When he woke it was summer dawn. The birds were flitting above in the tree-boughs and making
high singing. He was alone, lying beneath a silver birch, his head among the star flowers.

He knew that Helma and Ivra had not wanted to wake him, but had gone home when the moon set,
and were waiting breakfast for him there now. So he jumped up and ran home through the dew.

CHAPTER XVIII

THE DEEPEST PLACE IN THE WOOD

It was on the hottest day of all the hot days of summer that Eric found the deepest place in
the Forest. He wandered into it while he was looking for Wild Thyme. Ivra had been no good
to him that day. She was usually ready to play in any weather; but on this, the hottest day
of the year, she stayed indoors, where it was a little cooler, and lying on the settle she
drew paper dolls on birch bark, and afterwards cut them out. Yes, even fairy children love
paper dolls and Ivra loved them more than most. Eric wanted her to go swimming in the stream,
but he teased her to in vain, for she was entranced with the dolls and would hardly lift her
eyes from them.

Helma was swinging in a vine swing she had made for herself high in a tree above the garden.
One of the Little People was perched on a leaf just over her head, and they were chattering
together like equals. Their eager voices floated down to Eric standing disconsolate near the
door stone. But Helma usually knew when her children were in trouble, no matter how tiny the
trouble, and so before Eric had stood there long or dug up more than a bushel of earth with
his bare toes, she leaned over the nest and called to him.

"Why don't you go and play with Wild Thyme? She doesn't mind the heat. Every one else is staying
quiet till sundown."

Wild Thyme was a happy thought, and Eric walked away in search of her. But she was in the very
last place he would have thought to look on such a scorching day, and that is how he missed
her. She was lying full length on the hot burnt grass in the field at the Forest's edge, loving
the heat and sunshine, which covered her like a mantle. If Eric had seen her it is probable
he would not have known her or stopped to look twice. He would have thought her just a little
patch of the flower that is named for her.

So he wandered on and on, looking high and low and all about for her, and he went deeper and
deeper into the Forest. The deeper he went the cooler it became, for the forest roof kept out
the sunshine. The light grew dimmer and dimmer too. Eric had never been so far in before and
everything was strange to him.

He saw no Forest People except a little brown goblin who peered at him from some underbrush
and then scuttled away into the darkness of denser brush. Eric had never seen a goblin before,
but he had no fear of goblins, and so this one did not bother him at all. He heard others scuttling
and squeaking, and one threw a chunk of gray moss at him. He stopped and picked it up and threw
it back with a laugh in the direction it had come from.

"Come out and play, why don't you?" he called. "I know where there's a fine swimming pool."
But there was no answer to his invitation. Instead there was sudden and utter silence. He was
disappointed, for he did want a playmate, and he had almost given up looking for Wild Thyme.

After walking for a long while he came at last to one of the windings of the Forest stream,
and gratefully stepped into the shallow, clear water, dark with shadows. His feet were burning,
and his head was hot. So he drank a long drink of the cold, delicious water, ducked his head,
and finally washed his face. Then he waded on with no purpose in mind now but just to keep
his feet in the water.

It was so he came to the deepest place; where not even Ivra had ever been. It was almost cool
there, and more like twilight than early afternoon. And right in the deepest place, in a nest
of smooth leaves, with his feet in the water, lay Wild Star. When Eric first caught sight of
him he thought he was asleep, for his wings were lying on the leaves half folded and dropped,
and his knees were higher than his head. But when Eric went close enough to see his eyes he
knew that he was very wide awake, for they were wide open, watchful and intent,--and purple
like the early morning. Such wide-awake eyes were startling in such a sleepy, still place.
Eric expected him to spread his wings in a flash and dart away. But the wings stayed half open,
purple shadows on the leaves, and Wild Star did not even raise his head. Only his eyes greeted
Eric.

But Eric knew without words that Wild Star was glad to see him. So he stepped up out of the
water and stretched himself on a mound of silvery moss near by. With his chin resting in his
palms and his elbows supporting, he faced the Wind Creature, his clear blue eyes open to the
intent purple ones.

It was Wild Star who spoke first.

"I thought, little Eric, you would have crossed the sea before this, and be out of the Forest.
I expected to find you next fall on the other side of the world."

Eric was amazed, for he had not said one word of his dream about that to any one. "How did
you know I wanted to go?" he cried.

"Oh, you are an Earth Child, after all, and I knew you would want to be going on, as soon as
you saw the sea."

"But why do I want to go on?" asked Eric, his face clouding with the puzzle of it. "I am so
happy here, and Helma is my mother now. There can't be another mother across the sea for me.
And if there were I wouldn't want her,--not after Helma! No, Helma is my only mother, and Ivra
is my comrade. And still I want to leave them,--and go on and away over there. It is very funny."

"No," said Wild Star. "It isn't funny. You are a growing Earth Child, not a fairy. It is your
own kind calling you. It is the music of your human life."

"I don't know what you mean," said Eric.

"It is like this: you know when you begin to sing a song, you go on and on to the end without
thinking about it at all. It is the theme that carries you. Well, a human life is made like
a song,--it carries itself along. You do not stop to think why. It can't stop in the middle,
on one chord, for long. Yours now is resting, on a chord of happiness. But soon it will go
on again. You want it to. Life in the Forest, though, isn't like that. Here it is music without
any theme, like the music we dance to. Thrum, thrum, thrum, thrummmmmmmm. But there is more
than that to an Earth Child's life. It runs on like this stream. The stream is happy here in
the Forest, too, but it goes on seeking the sea just the same."

There was a long stillness while Eric looked down into the green depths of the water. At last
he asked, "But how could I ever get across the sea? No farther necessity appearing for the longer stay of Marion on the
Pedee, he prepared to return to his former range along the rivers
Cooper and Santee.

His absence from this region afforded an opportunity for the enemy to renew their depredations
from Charleston. Marion had left Colonel Ashby in command of his infantry, when, at the head
of Mayham's horse, he hurried to encounter Gainey, and quell his insurrection. Ashby, pressed
by a superior British force, had been compelled to yield before it, and this intelligence left
our partisan no moment of respite after quelling the commotions on
the Pedee, before he was required to return and cover the country
which had so long been indebted to his vigilance for protection.

In leaving the Pedee, with still some doubts of the newly converted loyalists of that quarter,
he left Col. Baxter with one hundred and fifty trusty men, to maintain the ascendency which he
had just acquired.

This object was of the last importance, not only with reference to the doubtful 'personnel' of
the country, but the valuable 'materiel', cattle and provisions, which might have been carried
off to the enemy. Suspicious of the fidelity of the loyalists, there was every reason to fear
that it might be too strongly tested. The British were known to be preparing a fleet of small
vessels for some enterprises directed northwardly, and no object of importance seemed more obvious
than that of renewing the disturbances on the Pedee and possessing
themselves of the immense plunder which that region of country might
still afford.

 Wild Star shouted after him.

It was twilight when he reached home. Helma and Ivra were sitting on the door stone, hand in
hand. They made room for Eric. But he did not snuggle up. He stayed erect, his face lifted
towards the first dim stars, and told Helma all about his wanting to go away from them out
through the Forest and across the sea, and all that Wild Star had said about music and Earth
People's lives. And he told her, too, of the vision of success he had had when he caught Wild
Thyme that first day by her bushy hair.

Helma listened quietly, and said nothing for many minutes after he was through. But at last
she spoke, putting a hushing hand on Eric's dreamful head.

"I understand," she said. "I knew you would want to go on sometime. And I have a friend across
there who will help us. He has a school for boys and I got to know him very well behind the
gray stone wall. He asked me about the Forest and you children. And he said that Eric sometime
would surely want to go back to humans, and when he did he would help him. He understands boys.
It is to him you had better go, Eric, and when you are really ready I will tell you how, and
start you on your way."

Eric sighed with contentment, and leaned his head against Helma's shoulder.

But Ivra stayed at her mother's other side, as still and silent as a shadow. Soon the fireflies
began their nightly dance in the garden. But Ivra did not go darting after them as usual to
make their dance the swifter. And Eric's head was too full of dreams and his eyes too full
of visions of the sea to notice them at all.

CHAPTER XIX

MORE MAGIC IN A MIST

Indian summer had come round again before Eric really made up his mind to go. The flowers were
asleep in the garden, and there was a steady, gentle shower of yellow leaves down the Forest.
That morning when he woke the little house seemed suspended in a golden mist. As he stood in
the doorway he felt as though it might drift away up over the trees and into space any minute.
But after a little he knew it was not Helma's little forest house that was to go swinging away
into space and adventure,--it was himself. And suddenly he wanted to go then,--to the sea and
over and beyond. He called the news in to Helma and Ivra, who were still within doors. Helma
came swiftly out to him.

"The trees are beckoning again, mother," he cried. "The way they did a year ago when I first
came here. Now it is just as Wild Star said. The music is beginning to go on. There's magic
out to-day. Oh, what made Wild Star know so much?"

"Sit down," said Helma. She took his hand and drew him down beside her on the door stone. Then
she held it firmly while very slowly and distinctly, but once only, she gave him directions
about how to go, where to go and what to do, so that he might follow the magic.

Eric sat and listened attentively, in spite of the high beating of his heart, and the magic
working in his head. As soon as she was done, he wanted to go right away that minute. For even
in his happiness he knew that saying good-by to all his friends in the Forest would be too
sad a task. They did not say good-by when they went on long adventures, or followed summer
south. They simply disappeared one day, and those who stayed behind forgot them until next
season. So Eric would do as they.

Only last week Helma had made him a warm brown suit for the coming winter. The new strong sandals
on his feet he had made himself. His cap was new, too, and Helma had stuck two new little brown
feathers in it as in the old one; so he still had a look of flying. There was really nothing
to delay his departure further. Helma called to Ivra, and she came out slowly. There was no
need to explain things to her, for she had heard everything.

Helma lifted Eric's chin in her palms and looked long and earnestly at the child she was letting
go away from her all alone out into the queer world of Earth People. She picked him up in her
strong arms then, as though he were a very little boy, and kissed him. She ran with him to
the opening in the hedge and set him down there, laughing.

"Run along now 'round the world," she said. "And when you come back bring a hundred new World
Stories with you!"

Eric laughed too, and promised and stood on tiptoes to kiss her again. He stroked her short
flower petal hair, and kissed her cool brown cheek over and over. But he did not cling to her.
And he did not say another word, but ran to catch up with Ivra who was to walk with him until
noon and had gone on ahead.

The children did not scuffle through the banks of leaves, or jump and run and burst into play
as they were used to doing. They walked steadily forward, saying very little, neither hurrying
nor delaying their steps. Once when Eric's sandal came untied Ivra knelt to fix it, for she
was still more skillful with knots than he.

But when the sun showed that it was noon, Ivra's steps grew slower and slower, dragged and
dragged, until at last she stood still in a billow of leaves.

"I have to go back now," she said.

In a flash all the magic swept out of the day for Eric. He knew he could never say good-by
to Ivra, so he stayed silent, looking ahead into the fluttering, golden forest. But even as
he looked the trees began to beckon with their high fingers, and 'way away, down long avenues
of trees he almost glimpsed the sea.

Ivra threw her arms about his neck and kissed him. "Good-by, comrade," was all she said.

He kissed her cheeks. "I'll come back," he promised. But before he had gone many steps he turned
to see her again. She was standing in the billow of leaves, a lonely-looking little girl, her
face paler than it had been even on that day of the wind-hunt. He wanted to run back to her
and tell her he would be her playmate always, and never leave the Forest. But he wanted, too,
to go on and across the sea and into foreign lands. He stayed irresolute.

And then quite suddenly, standing just behind Ivra, he saw Tree Mother. She was not looking
at him at all, but at Ivra, and her eyes were kind stars. When Ivra turned to go home she must
walk right into Tree Mother's arms and against her breast. So Eric was happy again, Ivra could
not be lonely with dear Tree Mother. Perhaps she would take her up in her air-boat high above
the falling leaves, where she could look down on the magic. One of the newspapers of the day
has the following:--"Things bear a better prospect than they did. Colonel Thomson has defeated
General Marion in South Carolina, killed one hundred men, and Marion
was drowned, attempting to escape."

 Then a shower of fluttering leaves came between
the playmates.

When it was clear again Eric had run on out of sight, and was lost to Ivra in the Forest. On
and on and on through the showers of golden leaves he went, magic at his elbow and around him,
and beckoning ahead of him. And after long walking and many thoughts, at last he did see the
sea, gleaming blue and white sparkles between the golden trees.

