To the naturalist this country holds out many invitations. Birds, though not remarkably numerous,
are in great variety, and of the most exquisite beauty of plumage, among which are the cockatoo,
lory, and parroquet; but the bird which principally claims attention is, a species of ostrich,
approaching nearer to the emu of South America than any other we know of. One of them was shot,
at a considerable distance, with a single ball, by a convict employed for that purpose by the
Governor; its weight, when complete, was seventy pounds, and its length from the end of the
toe to the tip of the beak, seven feet two inches, though there was reason to believe it had
not attained its full growth. On dissection many anatomical singularities were observed: the
gall-bladder was remarkably large, the liver not bigger than that of a barn-door fowl, and
after the strictest search no gizzard could be found; the legs, which were of a vast length,
were covered with thick, strong scales, plainly indicating the animal to be formed for living
amidst deserts; and the foot differed from an ostrich's by forming a triangle, instead of being
cloven.

Goldsmith, whose account of the emu is the only one I can refer to, says, "that it is covered
from the back and rump with long feathers, which fall backward, and cover the anus; these feathers
are grey on the back, and white on the belly." The wings are so small as hardly to deserve
the name, and are unfurnished with those beautiful ornaments which adorn the wings of the ostrich:
all the feathers are extremely coarse, but the construction of them deserves notice--they grow
in pairs from a single shaft, a singularity which the author I have quoted has omitted to remark.
It may be presumed, that these birds are not very scarce, as several have been seen, some of
them immensely large, but they are so wild, as to make shooting them a matter of great difficulty.
Though incapable of flying, they run with such swiftness, that our fleetest greyhounds are
left far behind in every attempt to catch them. The flesh was eaten, and tasted like beef.

Besides the emu, many birds of prodigious size have been seen, which promise to increase the
number of those described by naturalists, whenever we shall be fortunate enough to obtain them;
but among these the bat of the Endeavour River is not to be found. In the woods are various
little songsters, whose notes are equally sweet and plaintive.

Of quadrupeds, except the kangaroo, I have little to say. The few met with are almost invariably
of the opossum tribe, but even these do not abound. To beasts of prey we are utter strangers,
nor have we yet any cause to believe that they exist in the country. And happy it is for us
that they do not, as their presence would deprive us of the only fresh meals the settlement
affords, the flesh of the kangaroo. This singular animal is already known in Europe by the
drawing and description of Mr. Cook. To the drawing nothing can be objected but the position
of the claws of the hinder leg, which are mixed together like those of a dog, whereas no such
indistinctness is to be found in the animal I am describing. It was the Chevalier De Perrouse
who pointed out this to me, while we were comparing a kangaroo with the plate, which, as he
justly observed, is correct enough to give the world in general a good idea of the animal,
but not sufficiently accurate for the man of science.

Of the natural history of the kangaroo we are still very ignorant. We may, however, venture
to pronounce this animal, a new species of opossum, the female being furnished with a bag,
in which the young is contained; and in which the teats are found. These last are only two
in number, a strong presumptive proof, had we no other evidence, that the kangaroo brings forth
rarely more than one at a birth. But this is settled beyond a doubt, from more than a dozen
females having been killed, which had invariably but one formed in the pouch. Notwithstanding
this, the animal may be looked on as prolific, from the early age it begins to breed at, kangaroos
with young having been taken of not more than thirty pounds weight; and there is room to believe
that when at their utmost growth, they weigh not less than one hundred and fifty pounds. A
male of one hundred and thirty pounds weight has been killed, whose dimensions were as follows:

     ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                             Feet.             Inches.
     Extreme length                            7                  3
     Ditt of the tail                          3                  4 1/2
     Ditto of the hinder legs                  3                  2
     Ditto of the fore paws                    1                  7 1/2
     Circumference of the tail of the root     1                  5
     ------------------------------------------------------------------

After this perhaps I shall hardly be credited, when I affirm that the kangaroo on being brought
forth is not larger than an English mouse. It is, however, in my power to speak positively
on this head, as I have seen more than one instance of it.

In running, this animal confines himself entirely to his hinder, legs, which are possessed
with an extraordinary muscular power. Their speed is very great, though not in general quite
equal to that of a greyhound; but when the greyhounds are so fortunate as to seize them, they
are incapable of retaining their hold, from the amazing struggles of the animal. The bound
of the kangaroo, when not hard pressed, has been measured, and found to exceed twenty feet.

At what time of the year they copulate, and in what manner, we know not: the testicles of the
male are placed contrary to the usual order of nature.

When young the kangaroo eats tender and well flavoured, tasting like veal, but the old ones
are more tough and stringy than bullbeef. They are not carnivorous, and subsist altogether
on particular flowers and grass. Their bleat is mournful, and very different from that of any
other animal: it is, however, seldom heard but in the young ones.

Fish, which our sanguine hopes led us to expect in great quantities, do not abound. In summer
they are tolerably plentiful, but for some months past very few have been taken. Botany Bay
in this respect exceeds Port Jackson. The French once caught near two thousand fish in one
day, of a species of grouper, to which, from the form of a bone in the head resembling a helmet,
we have given the name of light horseman. To this may be added bass, mullets, skait, soles,
leather-jackets, and many other species, all so good in their kind, as to double our regret
at their not being more numerous. Sharks of an enormous size are found here. One of these was
caught by the people on board the Sirius, which measured at the shoulders six feet and a half
in circumference. His liver yielded twenty-four gallons of oil; and in his stomach was found
the head of a shark, which had been thrown overboard from the same ship. The Indians, probably
from having felt the effects of their voracious fury, testify the utmost horror on seeing these
terrible fish.

Venomous animals and reptiles are rarely seen. Large snakes beautifully variegated have been
killed, but of the effect of their bites we are happily ignorant. Insects, though numerous,
are by no means, even in summer, so troublesome as I have found them in America, the West Indies,
and other countries.

The climate is undoubtedly very desirable to live in. In summer the heats are usually moderated
by the sea breeze, which sets in early; and in winter the degree of cold is so slight as to
occasion no inconvenience; once or twice we have had hoar frosts and hail, but no appearance
of snow. The thermometer has never risen beyond 84, nor fallen lower than 35, in general it
stood in the beginning of February at between 78 and 74 at noon. Nor is the temperature of
the air less healthy than pleasant. Those dreadful putrid fevers by which new countries are
so often ravaged, are unknown to us: and excepting a slight diarrhoea, which prevailed soon
after we had landed, and was fatal in very few instances, we are strangers to epidemic diseases.

On the whole, (thunder storms in the hot months excepted) I know not any climate equal to this
I write in. Ere we had been a fortnight on shore we experienced some storms of thunder accompanied
with rain, than which nothing can be conceived more violent and tremendous, and their repetition
for several days, joined to the damage they did, by killing several of our sheep, led us to
draw presages of an unpleasant nature. Happily, however, for many months we have escaped any
similar visitations.

CHAPTER XVI.

The Progress made in the Settlement; and the Situation of Affairs at the Time of the Ship,
which conveys this Account, sailing for England.

For the purpose of expediting the public work, the male convicts have been divided into gangs,
over each of which a person, selected from among themselves, is placed. It is to be regretted
that Government did not take this matter into consideration before we left England, and appoint
proper persons with reasonable salaries to execute the office of overseers; as the consequence
of our present imperfect plan is such, as to defeat in a great measure the purposes for which
the prisoners were sent out. The female convicts have hitherto lived in a state of total idleness;
except a few who are kept at work in making pegs for tiles, and picking up shells for burning
into lime. For the last time I repeat, that the behaviour of all classes of these people since
our arrival in the settlement has been better than could, I think, have been expected from them.

Temporary wooden storehouses covered with thatch or shingles, in which the cargoes of all the
ships have been lodged, are completed; and an hospital is erected. Barracks for the military
are considerably advanced; and little huts to serve, until something more permanent can be
finished, have been raised on all sides. Notwithstanding this the encampments of the marines
and convicts are still kept up; and to secure their owners from the coldness of the nights,
are covered in with bushes, and thatched over.

The plan of a town I have already said is marked out. And as freestone of an excellent quality
abounds, one requisite towards the completion of it is attained. Only two houses of stone are
yet begun, which are intended for the Governor and Lieutenant Governor. One of the greatest
impediments we meet with is a want of limestone, of which no signs appear. Clay for making
bricks is in plenty, and a considerable quantity of them burned and ready for use.

In enumerating the public buildings I find I have been so remiss as to omit an observatory,
which is erected at a small distance from the encampments. It is nearly completed, and when
fitted up with the telescopes and other astronomical instruments sent out by the Board of Longitude,
will afford a desirable retreat from the listlessness of a camp evening at Port Jackson. One
of the principal reasons which induced the Board to grant this apparatus was, for the purpose
of enabling Lieutenant Dawes, of the marines, (to whose care it is intrusted) to make observations
on a comet which is shortly expected to appear in the southern hemisphere. The latitude of
the observatory, from the result of more than three hundred observations, is fixed at 33 deg
52 min 30 sec south, and the longitude at 151 deg 16 min 30 sec east of Greenwich. The latitude
of the south head which forms the entrance of the harbour, 33 deg 51 min, and that of the north
head opposite to it at 33 deg 49 min 45 sec south.

Since landing here our military force has suffered a diminution of only three persons, a serjeant
and two privates. Of the convicts fifty-four have perished, including the executions. Amidst
the causes of this mortality, excessive toil and a scarcity of food are not to be numbered,
as the reader will easily conceive, when informed, that they have the same allowance of provisions
as every officer and soldier in the garrison; and are indulged by being exempted from labour
every Saturday afternoon and Sunday. On the latter of those days they are expected to attend
divine service, which is performed either within one of the storehouses, or under a great tree
in the open air, until a church can be built.

Amidst our public labours, that no fortified post, or place of security, is yet begun, may
be a matter of surprise. Were an emergency in the night to happen, it is not easy to say what
might not take place before troops, scattered about in an extensive encampment, could be formed,
so as to act. An event that happened a few evenings since may, perhaps, be the means of forwarding
this necessary work. In the dead of night the centinels on the eastern side of the cove were
alarmed by the voices of the Indians, talking near their posts. The soldiers on this occasion
acted with their usual firmness, and without creating a disturbance, acquainted the officer
of the guard with the circumstance, who immediately took every precaution to prevent an attack,
and at the same time gave orders that no molestation, while they continued peaceable, should
be offered them. From the darkness of the night, and the distance they kept at, it was not
easy to ascertain their number, but from the sound of the voices and other circumstances, it
was calculated at near thirty. To their intentions in honouring us with this visit (the only
one we have had from them in the last five months) we are strangers, though most probably it
was either with a view to pilfer, or to ascertain in what security we slept, and the precautions
we used in the night. When the bells of the ships in the harbour struck the hour of the night,
and the centinels called out on their posts "All's well," they observed a dead silence, and
continued it for some minutes, though talking with the greatest earnestness and vociferation
but the moment before. After having remained a considerable time they departed without interchanging
a syllable with our people.

CHAPTER XVII.

Some Thoughts on the Advantages which may arise to the Mother Country from forming the Colony.

The author of these sheets would subject himself to the charge of presumption, were he to aim
at developing the intentions of Government in forming this settlement. But without giving offence,
or incurring reproach, he hopes his opinion on the probability of advantage to be drawn from
hence by Great Britain, may be fairly made known.

If only a receptacle for convicts be intended, this place stands unequalled from the situation,
extent, and nature of the country. When viewed in a commercial light, I fear its insignificance
will appear very striking. The New Zealand hemp, of which so many sanguine expectations were
formed, is not a native of the soil; and Norfolk Island, where we made sure to find this article,
is also without it. So that the scheme of being able to assist the East Indies with naval stores,
in case of a war, must fall to the ground, both from this deficiency, and the quality of the
timber growing here. Were it indeed possible to transport that of Norfolk Island, its value
would be found very great, but the difficulty, from the surf, I am well informed, is so insuperable
as to forbid the attempt. Lord Howe Island, discovered by Lieut. Ball, though an inestimable
acquisition to our colony, produces little else than the mountain cabbage tree.

Should a sufficient military force be sent out to those employed in cultivating the ground,
I see no room to doubt, that in the course of a few years, the country will be able to yield
grain enough for the support of its new possessors. But to effect this, our present limits
must be greatly extended, which will require detachments of troops not to be spared from the
present establishment. And admitting the position, the parent country will still have to supply
us for a much longer time with every other necessary of life. For after what we have seen,
the idea of being soon able to breed cattle sufficient for our consumption, must appear chimerical
and absurd. From all which it is evident, that should Great Britain neglect to send out regular
supplies, the most fatal consequences will ensue.

Speculators who may feel inclined to try their fortunes here, will do well to weigh what I
have said. If golden dreams of commerce and wealth flatter their imaginations, disappointment
will follow: the remoteness of situation, productions of the country, and want of connection
with other parts of the world, justify me in the assertion. But to men of small property, unambitious
of trade, and wishing for retirement, I think the continent of New South Wales not without
inducements. One of this description, with letters of recommendation, and a sufficient capital
(after having provided for his passage hither) to furnish him with an assortment of tools for
clearing land, agricultural and domestic purposes; possessed also of a few household utensils,
a cow, a few sheep and breeding sows, would, I am of opinion, with proper protection and encouragement,
succeed in obtaining a comfortable livelihood, were he well assured before he quitted his native
country, that a provision for him until he might be settled, should be secured; and that a
grant of land on his arrival would be allotted him.

That this adventurer, if of a persevering character and competent knowledge, might in the course
of ten years bring matters into such a train as to render himself comfortable and independent,
I think highly probable. The superfluities of his farm would enable him to purchase European
commodities from the masters of ships, which will arrive on Government account, sufficient
to supply his wants. But beyond this he ought not to reckon, for admitting that he might meet
with success in raising tobacco, rice, indigo, or vineyards (for which last I think the soil
and climate admirably adapted), the distance of a mart to vend them at, would make the expense
of transportation so excessive, as to cut off all hopes of a reasonable profit; nor can there
be consumers enough here to take them off his hands, for so great a length of time to come,
as I shall not be at the trouble of computing.

Should then any one, induced by this account, emigrate hither, let him, before he quits England,
provide all his wearing apparel for himself, family, and servants; his furniture, tools of
every kind, and implements of husbandry (among which a plough need not be included, as we make
use of the hoe), for he will touch at no place where they can be purchased to advantage. If
his sheep and hogs are English also, it will be better. For wines, spirits, tobacco, sugar,
coffee, tea, rice, poultry, and many other articles, he may venture to rely on at Teneriffe
or Madeira, the Brazils and Cape of Good Hope. It will not be his interest to draw bills on
his voyage out, as the exchange of money will be found invariably against him, and a large
discount also deducted. Drafts on the place he is to touch at, or cash (dollars if possible)
will best answer his end.

To men of desperate fortune and the lowest classes of the people, unless they can procure a
passage as indented servants, similar to the custom practised of emigrating to America, this
part of the world offers no temptation: for it can hardly be supposed, that Government will
be fond of maintaining them here until they can be settled, and without such support they must
starve.

Of the Governor's instructions and intentions relative to the disposal of the convicts, when
the term of their transportation shall be expired, I am ignorant. They will then be free men,
and at liberty, I apprehend, either to settle in the country, or to return to Europe. The former
will be attended with some public expense; and the latter, except in particular cases, will
be difficult to accomplish, from the numberless causes which prevent a frequent communication
between England and this continent.

POSTSCRIPT

Sydney Cove, Port Jackson, New South Wales.

October 1st, 1788. Little material has occurred in this colony since the departure of the ships
for England, on the 14th July last. On the 20th of that month His Majesty's ship Supply, Captain
Ball, sailed for Norfolk Island, and returned on the 26th August. Our accounts from thence
are more favourable than were expected. The soil proves admirably adapted to produce all kinds
of grain, and European vegetables. But the discovery which constitutes its value is the New
Zealand flax, plants of which are found growing in every part of the island in the utmost luxuriancy
and abundance. This will, beyond doubt, appear strange to the reader after what has been related
in the former part of my work: and in future, let the credit of the testimony be as high as
it may, I shall never without diffidence and hesitation presume to contradict the narrations
of Mr. Cook. The truth is, that those sent to settle and explore the island knew not the form
in which the plant grows, and were unfurnished with every particular which could lead to a
knowledge of it. Unaccountable as this may sound, it is, nevertheless, incontestably true.
Captain Ball brought away with him several specimens for inspection, and, on trial, by some
flax-dressers among us, the threads produced from them, though coarse, are pronounced to be
stronger, more likely to be durable, and fitter for every purpose of manufacturing cordage,
than any they ever before dressed.

Every research has been made by those on the island to find a landing-place, whence it might
be practicable to ship off the timber growing there, but hitherto none has been discovered.
A plan, however, for making one has been laid before the Governor, and is at present under
consideration, though (in the opinion of many here) it is not such an one as will be found
to answer the end proposed.

Lieut. King and his little garrison were well when the 'Supply' left them: but I am sorry to
add, that, from casualties, their number is already five less than it originally was. A ship
from hence is ready to sail with an increase of force, besides many convicts for the purpose
of sawing up timber, and turning the flax-plant to advantage.

So much for Norfolk. In Port Jackson all is quiet and stupid as could be wished. We generally
hear the lie of the day as soon as the beating of the Reveille announces the return of it;
find it contradicted by breakfast time; and pursue a second through all its varieties, until
night, welcome as to a lover, gives us to sleep and dream ourselves transported to happier climes.

