A SENTIMENTAL JOURNEY THROUGH FRANCE AND ITALY

They order, said I, this matter better in France.--You have been in France? said my gentleman,
turning quick upon me, with the most civil triumph in the world.--Strange! quoth I, debating
the matter with myself, That one and twenty miles sailing, for 'tis absolutely no further from
Dover to Calais, should give a man these rights: -- I'll look into them:  so, giving up the
argument,--I went straight to my lodgings, put up half a dozen shirts and a black pair of silk
breeches,--"the coat I have on," said I, looking at the sleeve, "will do;"--took a place in
the Dover stage; and the packet sailing at nine the next morning,--by three I had got sat down
to my dinner upon a fricaseed chicken, so incontestably in France, that had I died that night
of an indigestion, the whole world could not have suspended the effects of the droits d'aubaine;--my
shirts, and black pair of silk breeches,--portmanteau and all, must have gone to the King of
France;--even the little picture which I have so long worn, and so often have told thee, Eliza,
I would carry with me into my grave, would have been torn from my neck!--Ungenerous! to seize
upon the wreck of an unwary passenger, whom your subjects had beckoned to their coast!--By
heaven!  Sire, it is not well done; and much does it grieve me, 'tis the monarch of a people
so civilized and courteous, and so renowned for sentiment and fine feelings, that I have to
reason with! -

But I have scarce set a foot in your dominions. -

CALAIS. 

"Father knows all about it; why repeat it?" She evidently felt that the factual history of one
short incarnation was beneath notice.

I laughed, gently repeating my question.
"Father, there is little to tell." She spread her graceful hands
in a deprecatory gesture. As I acknowledged this, I felt a suffusion of a finer
kind upon my cheek--more warm and friendly to man, than what Burgundy (at least of two livres
a bottle, which was such as I had been drinking) could have produced.

- Just God! said I, kicking my portmanteau aside, what is there in this world's goods which
should sharpen our spirits, and make so many kind-hearted brethren of us fall out so cruelly
as we do by the way?

When man is at peace with man, how much lighter than a feather is the heaviest of metals in
his hand! he pulls out his purse, and holding it airily and uncompressed, looks round him,
as if he sought for an object to share it with.--In doing this, I felt every vessel in my frame
dilate,--the arteries beat all cheerily together, and every power which sustained life, performed
it with so little friction, that 'twould have confounded the most physical precieuse in France;
with all her materialism, she could scarce have called me a machine. -

I'm confident, said I to myself, I should have overset her creed.

The accession of that idea carried nature, at that time, as high as she could go;--I was at
peace with the world before, and this finish'd the treaty with myself. -

- Now, was I King of France, cried I--what a moment for an orphan to have begg'd his father's
portmanteau of me!

THE MONK.  CALAIS.

I had scarce uttered the words, when a poor monk of the order of St. Francis came into the
room to beg something for a his convent. No man cares to have his virtues the sport of contingencies--or
one man may be generous, as another is puissant;--sed non quoad hanc-- or be it as it may,--for
there is no regular reasoning upon the ebbs and flows of our humours; they may depend upon
the same causes, for aught I know, which influence the tides themselves: 'twould oft be no
discredit to us, to suppose it was so:  I'm sure at least for myself, that in many a case I
should be more highly satisfied, to have it said by the world, "I had had an affair with the
moon, in which there was neither sin nor shame," than have it pass altogether as my own act
and deed, wherein there was so much of both.

- But, be this as it may,--the moment I cast my eyes upon him, I was predetermined not to give
him a single sous; and, accordingly, I put my purse into my pocket--buttoned it--set myself
a little more upon my centre, and advanced up gravely to him; there was something, I fear,
forbidding in my look:  I have his figure this moment before my eyes, and think there was that
in it which deserved better.

The monk, as I judged by the break in his tonsure, a few scattered white hairs upon his temples,
being all that remained of it, might be about seventy;--but from his eyes, and that sort of
fire which was in them, which seemed more temper'd by courtesy than years, could be no more
than sixty: --Truth might lie between--He was certainly sixty-five; and the general air of
his countenance, notwithstanding something seem'd to have been planting-wrinkles in it before
their time, agreed to the account.

It was one of those heads which Guido has often painted,--mild, pale--penetrating, free from
all commonplace ideas of fat contented ignorance looking downwards upon the earth;--it look'd
forwards; but look'd as if it look'd at something beyond this world.--How one of his order
came by it, heaven above, who let it fall upon a monk's shoulders best knows:  but it would
have suited a Bramin, and had I met it upon the plains of Indostan, I had reverenced it.

The rest of his outline may be given in a few strokes; one might put it into the hands of any
one to design, for 'twas neither elegant nor otherwise, but as character and expression made
it so: it was a thin, spare form, something above the common size, if it lost not the distinction
by a bend forward in the figure,--but it was the attitude of Intreaty; and, as it now stands
presented to my imagination, it gained more than it lost by it.

THE MONK.  CALAIS.

- 'Tis very true, said I, replying to a cast upwards with his eyes, with which he had concluded
his address;--'tis very true,--and heaven be their resource who have no other but the charity
of the world, the stock of which, I fear, is no way sufficient for the many GREAT CLAIMS which
are hourly made upon it.

As I pronounced the words GREAT CLAIMS, he gave a slight glance with his eye downwards upon
the sleeve of his tunic: --I felt the full force of the appeal--I acknowledge it, said I: --a
coarse habit, and that but once in three years with meagre diet,--are no great matters; and
the true point of pity is, as they can be earn'd in the world with so little industry, that
your order should wish to procure them by pressing upon a fund which is the property of the
lame, the blind, the aged and the infirm;--the captive who lies down counting over and over
again the days of his afflictions, languishes also for his share of it; and had you been of
the ORDER OF MERCY, instead of the order of St. Francis, poor as I am, continued I, pointing
at my portmanteau, full cheerfully should it have been open'd to you, for the ransom of the
unfortunate.--The monk made me a bow.--But of all others, resumed I, the unfortunate of our
own country, surely, have the first rights; and I have left thousands in distress upon our
own shore.--The monk gave a cordial wave with his head,--as much as to say, No doubt there
is misery enough in every corner of the world, as well as within our convent- -But we distinguish,
said I, laying my hand upon the sleeve of his tunic, in return for his appeal--we distinguish,
my good father! betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of their own labour-- and those
who eat the bread of other people's, and have no other plan in life, but to get through it
in sloth and ignorance, FOR THE LOVE OF GOD.

The poor Franciscan made no reply:  a hectic of a moment pass'd across his cheek, but could
not tarry--Nature seemed to have done with her resentments in him;--he showed none: --but letting
his staff fall within his arms, he pressed both his hands with resignation upon his breast,
and retired.

THE MONK.  CALAIS.

My heart smote me the moment he shut the door--Psha! said I, with an air of carelessness, three
several times--but it would not do: every ungracious syllable I had utter'd crowded back into
my imagination:  I reflected, I had no right over the poor Franciscan, but to deny him; and
that the punishment of that was enough to the disappointed, without the addition of unkind
language.--I consider'd his gray hairs--his courteous figure seem'd to re-enter and gently
ask me what injury he had done me?--and why I could use him thus?--I would have given twenty
livres for an advocate.--I have behaved very ill, said I within myself; but I have only just
set out upon my travels; and shall learn better manners as I get along.

THE DESOBLIGEANT.  CALAIS.

When a man is discontented with himself, it has one advantage however, that it puts him into
an excellent frame of mind for making a bargain.  Now there being no travelling through France
and Italy without a chaise,--and nature generally prompting us to the thing we are fittest
for, I walk'd out into the coach-yard to buy or hire something of that kind to my purpose:
an old desobligeant in the furthest corner of the court, hit my fancy at first sight, so I
instantly got into it, and finding it in tolerable harmony with my feelings, I ordered the
waiter to call Monsieur Dessein, the master of the hotel: --but Monsieur Dessein being gone
to vespers, and not caring to face the Franciscan, whom I saw on the opposite side of the court,
in conference with a lady just arrived at the inn,--I drew the taffeta curtain betwixt us,
and being determined to write my journey, I took out my pen and ink and wrote the preface to
it in the desobligeant.

PREFACE.  IN THE DESOBLIGEANT.

It must have been observed by many a peripatetic philosopher, That nature has set up by her
own unquestionable authority certain boundaries and fences to circumscribe the discontent of
man; she has effected her purpose in the quietest and easiest manner by laying him under almost
insuperable obligations to work out his ease, and to sustain his sufferings at home.  It is
there only that she has provided him with the most suitable objects to partake of his happiness,
and bear a part of that burden which in all countries and ages has ever been too heavy for
one pair of shoulders.  'Tis true, we are endued with an imperfect power of spreading our happiness
sometimes beyond HER limits, but 'tis so ordered, that, from the want of languages, connections,
and dependencies, and from the difference in education, customs, and habits, we lie under so
many impediments in communicating our sensations out of our own sphere, as often amount to
a total impossibility.

It will always follow from hence, that the balance of sentimental commerce is always against
the expatriated adventurer:  he must buy what he has little occasion for, at their own price;--his
conversation will seldom be taken in exchange for theirs without a large discount,--and this,
by the by, eternally driving him into the hands of more equitable brokers, for such conversation
as he can find, it requires no great spirit of divination to guess at his party -

This brings me to my point; and naturally leads me (if the see-saw of this desobligeant will
but let me get on) into the efficient as well as final causes of travelling -

Your idle people that leave their native country, and go abroad for some reason or reasons
which may be derived from one of these general causes:-

Infirmity of body, Imbecility of mind, or Inevitable necessity.

The first two include all those who travel by land or by water, labouring with pride, curiosity,
vanity, or spleen, subdivided and combined ad infinitum.

The third class includes the whole army of peregrine martyrs; more especially those travellers
who set out upon their travels with the benefit of the clergy, either as delinquents travelling
under the direction of governors recommended by the magistrate;--or young gentlemen transported
by the cruelty of parents and guardians, and travelling under the direction of governors recommended
by Oxford, Aberdeen, and Glasgow.

There is a fourth class, but their number is so small that they would not deserve a distinction,
were it not necessary in a work of this nature to observe the greatest precision and nicety,
to avoid a confusion of character.  And these men I speak of, are such as cross the seas and
sojourn in a land of strangers, with a view of saving money for various reasons and upon various
pretences:  but as they might also save themselves and others a great deal of unnecessary trouble
by saving their money at home,--and as their reasons for travelling are the least complex of
any other species of emigrants, I shall distinguish these gentlemen by the name of

Simple Travellers.

Thus the whole circle of travellers may be reduced to the following HEADS:-

Idle Travellers, Inquisitive Travellers, Lying Travellers, Proud Travellers, Vain Travellers,
Splenetic Travellers.

Then follow:

The Travellers of Necessity, The Delinquent and Felonious Traveller, The Unfortunate and Innocent
Traveller, The Simple Traveller,

And last of all (if you please) The Sentimental Traveller, (meaning thereby myself) who have
travell'd, and of which I am now sitting down to give an account,--as much out of NECESSITY,
and the besoin de Voyager, as any one in the class.

I am well aware, at the same time, as both my travels and observations will be altogether of
a different cast from any of my forerunners, that I might have insisted upon a whole nitch
entirely to myself;--but I should break in upon the confines of the VAIN Traveller, in wishing
to draw attention towards me, till I have some better grounds for it than the mere NOVELTY
OF MY VEHICLE.

It is sufficient for my reader, if he has been a traveller himself, that with study and reflection
hereupon he may be able to determine his own place and rank in the catalogue;--it will be one
step towards knowing himself; as it is great odds but he retains some tincture and resemblance,
of what he imbibed or carried out, to the present hour.

The man who first transplanted the grape of Burgundy to the Cape of Good Hope (observe he was
a Dutchman) never dreamt of drinking the same wine at the Cape, that the same grape produced
upon the French mountains,--he was too phlegmatic for that--but undoubtedly he expected to
drink some sort of vinous liquor; but whether good or bad, or indifferent,--he knew enough
of this world to know, that it did not depend upon his choice, but that what is generally called
CHOICE, was to decide his success:  however, he hoped for the best; and in these hopes, by
an intemperate confidence in the fortitude of his head, and the depth of his discretion, Mynheer
might possibly oversee both in his new vineyard; and by discovering his nakedness, become a
laughing stock to his people.

Even so it fares with the Poor Traveller, sailing and posting through the politer kingdoms
of the globe, in pursuit of knowledge and improvements.

Knowledge and improvements are to be got by sailing and posting for that purpose; but whether
useful knowledge and real improvements is all a lottery;--and even where the adventurer is
successful, the acquired stock must be used with caution and sobriety, to turn to any profit:
--but, as the chances run prodigiously the other way, both as to the acquisition and application,
I am of opinion, That a man would act as wisely, if he could prevail upon himself to live contented
without foreign knowledge or foreign improvements, especially if he lives in a country that
has no absolute want of either;--and indeed, much grief of heart has it oft and many a time
cost me, when I have observed how many a foul step the Inquisitive Traveller has measured to
see sights and look into discoveries; all which, as Sancho Panza said to Don Quixote, they
might have seen dry-shod at home.  It is an age so full of light, that there is scarce a country
or corner in Europe whose beams are not crossed and interchanged with others.--Knowledge in
most of its branches, and in most affairs, is like music in an Italian street, whereof those
may partake who pay nothing.--But there is no nation under heaven--and God is my record (before
whose tribunal I must one day come and give an account of this work)--that I do not speak it
vauntingly,--but there is no nation under heaven abounding with more variety of learning,--where
the sciences may be more fitly woo'd, or more surely won, than here,--where art is encouraged,
and will so soon rise high,--where Nature (take her altogether) has so little to answer for,--and,
to close all, where there is more wit and variety of character to feed the mind with: --Where
then, my dear countrymen, are you going? -

We are only looking at this chaise, said they.--Your most obedient servant, said I, skipping
out of it, and pulling off my hat.--We were wondering, said one of them, who, I found was an
Inquisitive Traveller,--what could occasion its motion.--'Twas the agitation, said I, coolly,
of writing a preface.--I never heard, said the other, who was a Simple Traveller, of a preface
wrote in a desobligeant.--It would have been better, said I, in a vis-a-vis.

- As an Englishman does not travel to see Englishmen, I retired to my room.

CALAIS.

I perceived that something darken'd the passage more than myself, as I stepp'd along it to
my room; it was effectually Mons. Dessein, the master of the hotel, who had just returned from
vespers, and with his hat under his arm, was most complaisantly following me, to put me in
mind of my wants.  I had wrote myself pretty well out of conceit with the desobligeant, and
Mons. Dessein speaking of it, with a shrug, as if it would no way suit me, it immediately struck
my fancy that it belong'd to some Innocent Traveller, who, on his return home, had left it
to Mons. Dessein's honour to make the most of.  Four months had elapsed since it had finished
its career of Europe in the corner of Mons. Dessein's breast, I would inevitably make a point
of getting rid of this unfortunate desobligeant;--it stands swinging reproaches at you every
time you pass by it.

Mon Dieu! said Mons. Dessein,--I have no interest--Except the interest, said I, which men of
a certain turn of mind take, Mons. Dessein, in their own sensations,--I'm persuaded, to a man
who feels for others as well as for himself, every rainy night, disguise it as you will, must
cast a damp upon your spirits: --You suffer, Mons. Dessein, as much as the machine -

I have always observed, when there is as much sour as sweet in a compliment, that an Englishman
is eternally at a loss within himself, whether to take it, or let it alone:  a Frenchman never
is:  Mons. Dessein made me a bow.

C'est bien vrai, said he.--But in this case I should only exchange one disquietude for another,
and with loss:  figure to yourself, my dear Sir, that in giving you a chaise which would fall
to pieces before you had got half-way to Paris,--figure to yourself how much I should suffer,
in giving an ill impression of myself to a man of honour, and lying at the mercy, as I must
do, d'un homme d'esprit.

The dose was made up exactly after my own prescription; so I could not help tasting it,--and,
returning Mons. Dessein his bow, without more casuistry we walk'd together towards his Remise,
to take a view of his magazine of chaises.

IN THE STREET.  CALAIS.

It must needs be a hostile kind of a world, when the buyer (if it be but of a sorry post-chaise)
cannot go forth with the seller thereof into the street to terminate the difference betwixt
them, but he instantly falls into the same frame of mind, and views his conventionist with
the same sort of eye, as if he was going along with him to Hyde-park corner to fight a duel.
For my own part, being but a poor swordsman, and no way a match for Monsieur Dessein, I felt
the rotation of all the movements within me, to which the situation is incident;--I looked
at Monsieur Dessein through and through--eyed him as he walk'd along in profile,--then, en
face;--thought like a Jew,--then a Turk,--disliked his wig,-- cursed him by my gods,--wished
him at the devil. -

- And is all this to be lighted up in the heart for a beggarly account of three or four louis
d'ors, which is the most I can be overreached in?--Base passion! said I, turning myself about,
as a man naturally does upon a sudden reverse of sentiment,--base, ungentle passion! thy hand
is against every man, and every man's hand against thee.--Heaven forbid! said she, raising
her hand up to her forehead, for I had turned full in front upon the lady whom I had seen in
conference with the monk: --she had followed us unperceived.--Heaven forbid, indeed! said I,
offering her my own;-- she had a black pair of silk gloves, open only at the thumb and two
fore-fingers, so accepted it without reserve,--and I led her up to the door of the Remise. 

"On earth my standards were uncomfortably high, unsuited to the natures of most men. Often
I scolded you more than I should have. You passed my test; your love shone through the clouds of all
reprimands." He added tenderly, "I have also come today to tell you: Never again shall I wear
the stern gaze of censure. I shall scold you no more."

How much I had missed the chastisements of my great guru! Each one had been a guardian angel
of protection.

"Dearest Master! Rebuke me a million times-do scold me now!"

"I shall chide you no more." His divine voice was grave, yet with an undercurrent of laughter.
"You and I shall smile together, so long as our two forms appear different in the MAYA-dream
of God.

Finally we shall merge as one in the Cosmic Beloved; our smiles shall
be His smile, our unified song of joy vibrating throughout eternity
to be broadcast to God-tuned souls!"

Sri Yukteswar gave me light on certain matters which I cannot reveal here. During the two hours
that he spent with me in the Bombay hotel room he answered my every question. A number of
world prophecies uttered by him that June day in 1936 have already come to pass.

"I leave you now, beloved one!" At these words I felt Master melting away within my encircling
arms.

"My child," his voice rang out, vibrating into my very soul-firmament, "whenever you enter the
door of NIRBIKALPA SAMADHI and call on me, I shall come to you in flesh and blood, even as
today."

With this celestial promise Sri Yukteswar vanished from my sight. A cloud-voice repeated in
musical thunder: "Tell all! Whosoever knows by NIRBIKALPA realization that your earth is a dream
of God can come to the finer dream-created planet of Hiranyaloka, and there find me resurrected
in a body exactly like my earthly one. Yogananda, tell all!"

Gone was the sorrow of parting. The pity and grief for his death,
long robber of my peace, now fled in stark shame.

Bliss poured forth like a fountain through endless, newly opened soul-pores. Anciently clogged
with disuse, they now widened in purity at the driving flood of ecstasy. Subconscious thoughts
and feelings of my past incarnations shed their karmic taints, lustrously renewed by Sri Yukteswar's
divine visit.

In this chapter of my autobiography I have obeyed my guru's behest and spread the glad tiding,
though it confound once more an incurious generation. Groveling, man knows well; despair is
seldom alien; yet these are perversities, no part of man's true lot. The day he wills, he is set on
the path to freedom. Too long has he hearkened to the dank pessimism of his "dust-thou-art" counselors,
heedless of the unconquerable soul.

I was not the only one privileged to behold the Resurrected Guru.

One of Sri Yukteswar's chelas was an aged woman, affectionately known
as MA (Mother), whose home was close to the Puri hermitage.

Master had often stopped to chat with her during his morning walk.
On the evening of March 16, 1936, Ma arrived at the ashram and asked
to see her guru.

"Why, Master died a week ago!" Swami Sebananda,
now in charge of the Puri hermitage, looked at her sadly.

"That's
impossible!" She smiled a little. "Perhaps you are just trying to
protect the guru from insistent visitors?"

"No." Sebananda recounted
details of the burial. "Come," he said, "I will take you to the front
garden to Sri Yukteswarji's grave."

Ma shook her head. "There is
no grave for him! This morning at ten o'clock he passed in his usual
walk before my door! I talked to him for several minutes in the bright
outdoors.

"'Come this evening to the ashram,' he said.

"I am here!
Blessings pour on this old gray head! The deathless guru wanted me
to understand in what transcendent body he had visited me this morning!"

The
astounded Sebananda knelt before her.

"Ma," he said, "what a weight
of grief you lift from my heart! He is risen!"

{FN43-1} In SABIKALPA
SAMADHI the devotee has spiritually progressed to a state of inward
divine union, but cannot maintain his cosmic consciousness except
in the immobile trance-state.

This certainly, fair lady, said I, raising her hand up little lightly as I began, must be one
of Fortune's whimsical doings; to take two utter strangers by their hands,--of different sexes,
and perhaps from different corners of the globe, and in one moment place them together in such
a cordial situation as Friendship herself could scarce have achieved for them, had she projected
it for a month.

- And your reflection upon it shows how much, Monsieur, she has embarrassed you by the adventure -

When the situation is what we would wish, nothing is so ill-timed as to hint at the circumstances
which make it so:  you thank Fortune, continued she--you had reason--the heart knew it, and
was satisfied; and who but an English philosopher would have sent notice of it to the brain
to reverse the judgment?

In saying this, she disengaged her hand with a look which I thought a sufficient commentary
upon the text.

It is a miserable picture which I am going to give of the weakness of my heart, by owning,
that it suffered a pain, which worthier occasions could not have inflicted.--I was mortified
with the loss of her hand, and the manner in which I had lost it carried neither oil nor wine
to the wound:  I never felt the pain of a sheepish inferiority so miserably in my life.

The triumphs of a true feminine heart are short upon these discomfitures.  In a very few seconds
she laid her hand upon the cuff of my coat, in order to finish her reply; so, some way or other,
God knows how, I regained my situation.

- She had nothing to add.

I forthwith began to model a different conversation for the lady, thinking from the spirit
as well as moral of this, that I had been mistaken in her character; but upon turning her face
towards me, the spirit which had animated the reply was fled,--the muscles relaxed, and I beheld
the same unprotected look of distress which first won me to her interest: --melancholy! to
see such sprightliness the prey of sorrow,--I pitied her from my soul; and though it may seem
ridiculous enough to a torpid heart,--I could have taken her into my arms, and cherished her,
though it was in the open street, without brushing.

The pulsations of the arteries along my fingers pressing across hers, told her what was passing
within me:  she looked down--a silence of some moments followed.

I fear in this interval, I must have made some slight efforts towards a closer compression
of her hand, from a subtle sensation I felt in the palm of my own,--not as if she was going
to withdraw hers--but as if she thought about it;--and I had infallibly lost it a second time,
had not instinct more than reason directed me to the last resource in these dangers,--to hold
it loosely, and in a manner as if I was every moment going to release it, of myself; so she
let it continue, till Monsieur Dessein returned with the key; and in the mean time I set myself
to consider how I should undo the ill impressions which the poor monk's story, in case he had
told it her, must have planted in her breast against me.

THE SNUFF BOX.  CALAIS.

The good old monk was within six paces of us, as the idea of him crossed my mind; and was advancing
towards us a little out of the line, as if uncertain whether he should break in upon us or
no.--He stopp'd, however, as soon as he came up to us, with a world of frankness:  and having
a horn snuff box in his hand, he presented it open to me.--You shall taste mine--said I, pulling
out my box (which was a small tortoise one) and putting it into his hand.-- 'Tis most excellent,
said the monk.  Then do me the favour, I replied, to accept of the box and all, and when you
take a pinch out of it, sometimes recollect it was the peace offering of a man who once used
you unkindly, but not from his heart.

The poor monk blush'd as red as scarlet.  Mon Dieu! said he, pressing his hands together--you
never used me unkindly.--I should think, said the lady, he is not likely.  I blush'd in my
turn; but from what movements, I leave to the few who feel, to analyze.-- Excuse me, Madame,
replied I,--I treated him most unkindly; and from no provocations.--'Tis impossible, said the
lady.--My God! cried the monk, with a warmth of asseveration which seem'd not to belong to
him--the fault was in me, and in the indiscretion of my zeal.--The lady opposed it, and I joined
with her in maintaining it was impossible, that a spirit so regulated as his, could give offence
to any.

I knew not that contention could be rendered so sweet and pleasurable a thing to the nerves
as I then felt it.--We remained silent, without any sensation of that foolish pain which takes
place, when, in such a circle, you look for ten minutes in one another's faces without saying
a word.  Whilst this lasted, the monk rubbed his horn box upon the sleeve of his tunic; and
as soon as it had acquired a little air of brightness by the friction--he made me a low bow,
and said, 'twas too late to say whether it was the weakness or goodness of our tempers which
had involved us in this contest--but be it as it would,--he begg'd we might exchange boxes.--In
saying this, he presented his to me with one hand, as he took mine from me in the other, and
having kissed it,--with a stream of good nature in his eyes, he put it into his bosom,--and
took his leave.

I guard this box, as I would the instrumental parts of my religion, to help my mind on to something
better:  in truth, I seldom go abroad without it; and oft and many a time have I called up
by it the courteous spirit of its owner to regulate my own, in the justlings of the world:
they had found full employment for his, as I learnt from his story, till about the forty-fifth
year of his age, when upon some military services ill requited, and meeting at the same time
with a disappointment in the tenderest of passions, he abandoned the sword and the sex together,
and took sanctuary not so much in his convent as in himself.

I feel a damp upon my spirits, as I am going to add, that in my last return through Calais,
upon enquiring after Father Lorenzo, I heard he had been dead near three months, and was buried,
not in his convent, but, according to his desire, in a little cemetery belonging to it, about
two leagues off:  I had a strong desire to see where they had laid him,--when, upon pulling
out his little horn box, as I sat by his grave, and plucking up a nettle or two at the head
of it, which had no business to grow there, they all struck together so forcibly upon my affections,
that I burst into a flood of tears: --but I am as weak as a woman; and I beg the world not
to smile, but to pity me.

THE REMISE DOOR.  CALAIS.

I had never quitted the lady's hand all this time, and had held it so long, that it would have
been indecent to have let it go, without first pressing it to my lips:  the blood and spirits,
which had suffered a revulsion from her, crowded back to her as I did it.

Now the two travellers, who had spoke to me in the coach-yard, happening at that crisis to
be passing by, and observing our communications, naturally took it into their heads that we
must be MAN AND WIFE at least; so, stopping as soon as they came up to the door of the Remise,
the one of them who was the Inquisitive Traveller, ask'd us, if we set out for Paris the next
morning?--I could only answer for myself, I said; and the lady added, she was for Amiens.--We
dined there yesterday, said the Simple Traveller.-- You go directly through the town, added
the other, in your road to Paris.  I was going to return a thousand thanks for the intelligence,
THAT AMIENS WAS IN THE ROAD TO PARIS, but, upon pulling out my poor monk's little horn box
to take a pinch of snuff, I made them a quiet bow, and wishing them a good passage to Dover.--They
left us alone. -

- Now where would be the harm, said I to myself, if I were to beg of this distressed lady to
accept of half of my chaise?--and what mighty mischief could ensue?

Every dirty passion, and bad propensity in my nature took the alarm, as I stated the proposition.--It
will oblige you to have a third horse, said Avarice, which will put twenty livres out of your
pocket;--You know not what she is, said Caution;--or what scrapes the affair may draw you into,
whisper'd Cowardice. -

Depend upon it, Yorick! said Discretion, 'twill be said you went off with a mistress, and came
by assignation to Calais for that purpose; -

- You can never after, cried Hypocrisy aloud, show your face in the world;--or rise, quoth
Meanness, in the church;--or be any thing in it, said Pride, but a lousy prebendary. 

"Another rare privilege-my first elephant ride. Yesterday the Yuvaraja invited us to his summer
palace to enjoy a ride on one of his elephants, an enormous beast. I mounted a ladder provided
to climb aloft to the HOWDAH or saddle, which is silk-cushioned and
boxlike; and then for a rolling, tossing, swaying, and heaving down
into a gully, too much thrilled to worry or exclaim, but hanging on
for dear life!"

Southern India, rich with historical and archaeological remains, is a land of definite and yet
indefinable charm. To the north of Mysore is the largest native state in India, Hyderabad, a picturesque
plateau cut by the mighty Godavari River. Broad fertile plains, the lovely Nilgiris or "Blue
Mountains," other regions with barren hills of limestone or granite. Hyderabad history is a long, colorful
story, starting three thousand years ago under the Andhra kings, and continuing under Hindu dynasties
until A.D. 1294, when it passed to a line of Moslem rulers who reign to this day.

The most breath-taking display of architecture, sculpture, and painting
in all India is found at Hyderabad in the ancient rock-sculptured
caves of Ellora and Ajanta. The Kailasa at Ellora, a huge monolithic
temple, possesses carved figures of gods, men, and beasts in the stupendous
proportions of a Michelangelo. Ajanta is the site of five cathedrals
and twenty-five monasteries, all rock excavations maintained by tremendous
frescoed pillars on which artists and sculptors have immortalized
their genius.

IN THE STREET.  CALAIS.

