But I cannot, with Mr. Malone, interpret the same passage, by supposing the third line of the
triplet to apply to Dryden. Had he been actually a member of a committee of sequestration,
that circumstance would never have remained in the dubious obscurity of Shadwell's poetry;
it would have been as often echoed and re-echoed as every other incident of the poet's life
which was capable of bearing an unfavourable interpretation. I incline therefore to believe,
that the terms sequestrator and committee-man apply not to the poet, but to his patron Sir
Gilbert, to whom their propriety cannot be doubted.

Sir Gilbert Pickering was not our author's only relation at the court of Cromwell. The chief
of his family, Sir John Driden, elder brother of the poet's father, was also a flaming and
bigoted puritan,[35] through whose gifts and merits his nephew might reasonably hope to attain
preferment In a youth entering life under the protection of such relations, who could have
anticipated the future dramatist and poet laureate, much less the advocate and martyr of prerogative
and of the Stuart family, the convert and confessor of the Roman Catholic faith? In his after
career, his early connections with the puritans, and the principles of his kinsmen during the
civil wars and usurpation, were often made subjects of reproach, to which he never seems to
have deigned an answer.[36]

The death of Cromwell was the first theme of our poet's muse. Averse as the puritans were to
any poetry, save that of Hopkins, of Withers, or of Wisdom, they may be reasonably supposed
to have had some sympathy with Dryden's sorrow upon the death of Oliver, even although it vented
itself in the profane and unprofitable shape of an elegy. But we have no means of estimating
its reception with the public, if, in truth, the public long interested themselves about the
memory of Cromwell, while his relations and dependants presented to them the more animated
and interesting spectacle of a struggle for his usurped power. Richard perhaps, and the immediate
friends of the deceased Protector, with such of Dryden's relations as were attached to his
memory, may have thought, like the tinker at the Taming of the Shrew, that this same elegy
was "marvellous good matter." It did not probably attract much general attention. Wednesday.--Mr.
Punch appears. Up and out early. Rejoicings. Banquets to Mr. STANLEY generally.

Thursday.--Old Half-Quarter Day, New Style. Anniversary Dinner, at the Goose and Serpent, of First
Night Theatrical-Wreckers' Club. Mrs. SNOOKS' Dinner, to meet Mr. STANLEY.

Friday.--Nothing particular, except meeting Mr. STANLEY.

Saturday.--Close
time for Salmon in Serpentine begins. Mrs. NEMO'S first dance with
Mr. STANLEY.

Sunday.--Everyone in Hyde Park to meet Mr. STANLEY. During the controversies of Charles the Second's reign, in
which Dryden took so decided a share, his eulogy on Cromwell was often objected to him, as
a proof of inconsistence and apostasy. One passage, which plainly applies to the civil wars
in general, was wrested to signify an explicit approbation of the murder of Charles the First;
and the whole piece was reprinted by an incensed antagonist, under the title of "An Elegy on
the Usurper O.C., by the author of Absalom and Achitophel, published (it is ironically added)
to show the loyalty and integrity of the poet,"--an odd piece of vengeance, which has perhaps
never been paralleled, except in the single case of "Love in a Hollow Tree."[37] The motives
of the Duchess of Marlborough, in reprinting Lord Grimestone's memorable dramatic essay, did
not here apply.