A pharisaical austerity rendered him redoubtable by the license he assumed in his public reprimands,
whether to plaintiffs, or defendants, advocates or magistrates; so that there was not a single
person who did not tremble to have to do with him.  Besides this, sustained in all by the Court
(of which he was the slave, and the very humble servant of those who were really in favour),
a subtle courtier, a singularly crafty politician, he used all those talents solely to further
his ambition, his desire of domination and his thirst of the reputation of a great man. He
was without real honour, secretly of corrupt manners, with only outside probity, without humanity
even; in one word, a perfect hypocrite; without faith, without law, without a God, and without
a soul; a cruel husband, a barbarous father, a tyrannical brother, a friend of himself alone,
wicked by nature--taking pleasure in insulting, outraging, and overwhelming others, and never
in his life having lost an occasion to do so.  His wit was great, but was always subservient
to his wickedness. He was small, vigorous, and thin, with a lozenge-shaped face, a long aquiline
nose--fine, speaking, keen eyes, that usually looked furtively at you, but which, if fixed
on a client or a magistrate, were fit to make him sink into the earth.  He wore narrow robes,
an almost ecclesiastical collar and wristband to match, a brown wig mimed with white, thickly
furnished but short, and with a great cap over it.  He affected a bending attitude, and walked
so, with a false air, more humble than modest, and always shaved along the walls, to make people
make way for him with greater noise; and at Versailles worked his way on by a series of respectful
and, as it were, shame-faced bows to the right and left.  He held to the King and to Madame
de Maintenon by knowing their weak side; and it was he who, being consulted upon the unheard-of
legitimation of children without naming the mother, had sanctioned that illegality in favour
of the King.

Such was the man whose influence was given entirely to our opponent.

To assist M. de Luxembourg's case as much as possible, the celebrated Racine, so known by his
plays, and by the order he had received at that time to write the history of the King, was
employed to polish and ornament his pleas.  Nothing was left undone by M. de Luxembourg in
order to gain this cause.

I cannot give all the details of the case, the statements made on both sides, and the defences;
they would occupy entire volumes.  We maintained that M. de Luxembourg was in no way entitled
to the precedence he claimed, and we had both law and justice on our side.  To give instructions
to our counsel, and to follow the progress of the case, we met once a week, seven or eight
of us at least, those best disposed to give our time to the matter.  Among the most punctual
was M. de la Rochefoucauld.  I had been solicited from the commencement to take part in the
proceedings, and I complied most willingly, apologising for so doing to M. de Luxembourg, who
replied with all the politeness and gallantry possible, that I could not do less than follow
an example my father had set me.

The trial having commenced, we soon saw how badly disposed the Chief President was towards
us.  He obstructed us in every way, and acted against all rules.  There seemed no other means
of defeating his evident intention of judging against us than by gaining time, first of all;
and to do this we determined to get the case adjourned, There were, however, only two days
at our disposal, and that was not enough in order to comply with the forms required for such
a step.  We were all in the greatest embarrassment, when it fortunately came into the head
of one of our lawyers to remind us of a privilege we possessed, by which, without much difficulty,
we could obtain what we required.  I was the only one who could, at that moment, make use of
this privilege.  I hastened home, at once, to obtain the necessary papers, deposited them with
the procureur of M. de Luxembourg, and the adjournment was obtained.  The rage of M. de Luxembourg
was without bounds.  When we met he would not salute me, and in consequence I discontinued
to salute him; by which he lost more than I, in his position and at his age, and furnished
in the rooms and the galleries of Versailles a sufficiently ridiculous spectacle.  In addition
to this he quarrelled openly with M. de Richelieu, and made a bitter attack upon him in one
of his pleas.  But M. de Richelieu, meeting him soon after in the Salle des Gardes at Versailles,
told him to his face that he should soon have a reply; and said that he feared him neither
on horseback nor on foot--neither him nor his crew--neither in town nor at the Court, nor even
in the army, nor in any place in the world; and without allowing time for a reply he turned
on his heel.  In the end, M. de Luxembourg found himself so closely pressed that he was glad
to apologise to M. de Richelieu.

After a time our cause, sent back again to the Parliament, was argued there with the same vigour,
the same partiality, and the same injustice as before: seeing this, we felt that the only course
left open to us was to get the case sent before the Assembly of all the Chambers, where the
judges, from their number, could not be corrupted by M. de Luxembourg, and where the authority
of Harlay was feeble, while over the Grand Chambre, in which the case was at present, it was
absolute.  The difficulty was to obtain an assembly of all the Chambers, for the power of summoning
them was vested solely in Harlay.  However, we determined to try and gain his consent.  M.
de Chaulnes undertook to go upon this delicate errand, and acquitted himself well of his mission.
He pointed out to Harlay that everybody was convinced of his leaning towards M. de Luxembourg,
and that the only way to efface the conviction that had gone abroad was to comply with our
request; in fine, he used so many arguments, and with such address, that Harlay, confused and
thrown off his guard, and repenting of the manner in which he had acted towards us as being
likely to injure his interests, gave a positive assurance to M. de Chaulnes that what we asked
should be granted. In the plain was a whimsical mosaic edges
of meadows with hazelnuts, corn lands and groves. Majestic crossing the middle a wide river, crystal,
which, wounded by the sun, like a big shiny silver belt. So I fired the car, Obdulia proposed
to his confessor down to this level and wait Hence the arrival of the train. Gladly accepted,
get rid of the eyes of the people of the station. They went down a steep and narrow path and entered
a chestnut forest that stretched to the riverbank.

After this we felt that to treat any longer with a man so perfidious would be time lost; and
we determined, therefore, to put it out of his power to judge the case at all.

According to the received maxim, whoever is at law with the son cannot be judged by the father.
Harlay had a son who was Advocate-General.  We resolved that one among us should bring an action
against him.

After trying in vain to induce the Duc de Rohan, who was the only one of our number who could
readily have done it, to commence a suit against Harlay's sort, we began to despair of arriving
at our aim.  Fortunately for us, the vexation of Harlay became so great at this time, in consequence
of the disdain with which we treated him, and which we openly published, that he extricated
us himself from our difficulty.  We had only to supplicate the Duc de Gesvres in the cause
(he said to some of our people), and we should obtain what we wanted; for the Duc de Gesvres
was his relative.  We took him at his word.  The, Duc de Gesvres received in two days a summons
on our part.  Harlay, annoyed with himself for the advice he had given, relented of it: but
it was too late; he was declared unable to judge the cause, and the case itself was postponed
until the next year.

Meanwhile, let me mention a circumstance which should have found a place before, and then state
what occurred in the interval which followed until the trial recommenced.

It was while our proceedings were making some little stir that fresh favours were heaped upon
the King's illegitimate sons, at the instance of the King himself, and with the connivance
of Harlay, who, for the part he took in the affair, was promised the chancellorship when it
should become vacant.  The rank of these illegitimate sons was placed just below that of the
princes, of the blood, and just above that of the peers even of the oldest creation.  This
gave us all exceeding annoyance: it was the greatest injury the peerage could have received,
and became its leprosy and sore.  All the peers who could, kept themselves aloof from the parliament,
when M. du Maine, M. de Vendome, and the Comte de Toulouse, for whom this arrangement was specially
made, were received there.

There were several marriages at the Court this winter and many very fine balls, at which latter
I danced.  By the spring, preparations were ready for fresh campaigns.  My regiment (I had
bought one at the close of the last season) was ordered to join the army of M. de Luxembourg;
but, as I had no desire to be under him, I wrote to the King, begging to be exchanged.  In
a short time, to the great vexation, as I know, of M. de Luxembourg, my request was granted.
The Chevalier de Sully went to Flanders in my place, and I to Germany in his.  I went first
to Soissons to see my regiment, and in consequence of the recommendation of the King, was more
severe with it than I should otherwise have been.  I set out afterwards for Strasbourg, where
I was surprised with the magnificence of the town, and with the number, beauty, and grandeur
of its fortifications.  As from my youth I knew and spoke German perfectly, I sought out one
of my early German acquaintances, who gave me much pleasure.  I stopped six days at Strasbourg
and then went by the Rhine to Philipsburg.  On the next day after arriving there, I joined
the cavalry, which was encamped at Obersheim.

After several movements--in which we passed and repassed the Rhine--but which led to no effective
result, we encamped for forty days at Gaw- Boecklheim, one of the best and most beautiful positions
in the world, and where we had charming weather, although a little disposed to cold. It was
in the leisure of that long camp that I commenced these memoirs, incited by the pleasure I
took in reading those of Marshal Bassompierre, which invited me thus to write what I should
see in my own time.

During this season M. de Noailles took Palamos, Girone, and the fortress of Castel-Follit in
Catalonia.  This last was taken by the daring of a soldier, who led on a small number of his
comrades, and carried the place by assault.  Nothing was done in Italy; and in Flanders M.
de Luxembourg came to no engagement with the Prince of Orange.

CHAPTER VI

After our long rest at the camp of Gaw-Boecklheim we again put ourselves in movement, but without
doing much against the enemy, and on the 16th of October I received permission to return to
Paris.  Upon my arrival there I learnt that many things had occurred since I left.  During
that time some adventures had happened to the Princesses, as the three illegitimate daughters
of the King were called for distinction sake.  Monsieur wished that the Duchesse de Chartres
should always call the others "sister," but that the others should never address her except
as "Madame."  The Princesse de Conti submitted to this; but the other (Madame la Duchesse,
being the produce of the same love) set herself to call the Duchesse de Chartres "mignonne."
But nothing was less a mignonne than her face and her figure; and Monsieur, feeling the ridicule,
complained to the King. The King prohibited very severely this familiarity.

While at Trianon these Princesses took it into their heads to walk out at night and divert
themselves with crackers.  Either from malice or imprudence they let off some one night under
the windows of Monsieur, rousing him thereby out of his sleep.  He was so displeased, that
he complained to the King, who made him many excuses (scolding the Princesses), but had great
trouble to appease him.  His anger lasted a long time, and the Duchesse de Chartres felt it.
I do not know if the other two were very sorry.  Madame la Duchesse was accused of writing
some songs upon the Duchesse de Chartres.

The Princesse de Conti had another adventure, which made considerable noise, and which had
great results.  She had taken into her favour Clermont, ensign of the gensdarmes and of the
Guard.  He had pretended to be enamoured of her, and had not been repelled, for she soon became
in love with him.  Clermont had attached himself to the service of M. de Luxembourg, and was
the merest creature in his hands.  At the instigation of M. de Luxembourg, he turned away his
regards from the Princesse de Conti, and fixed them upon one of her maids of honour--Mademoiselle
Choin, a great, ugly, brown, thick-set girl, upon whom Monseigneur had lately bestowed his
affection.  Monseigneur made no secret of this, nor did she.  Such being the case, it occurred
to M. de Luxembourg (who knew he was no favourite with the King, and who built all his hopes
of the future upon Monseigneur) that Clermont, by marrying La Choin, might thus secure the
favour of Monseigneur, whose entire confidence she possessed. Obdulia and ceased to exist when he was around. It was not the universe
rather than his thought before the great problem of knowledge.

It, watching him carefully, not in a long time dared to disturb his
ecstasy.

The King, who partly saw this intrigue, soon made himself entirely master of it, by intercepting
the letters which passed between the various parties.  He read there the project of Clermont
and La Choin to marry, and thus govern Monseigneur; he saw how M. de Luxembourg was the soul
of this scheme, and the marvels to himself he expected from it.  The letters Clermont had received
from the Princesse de Conti he now sent to Mademoiselle la Choin, and always spoke to her of
Monseigneur as their "fat friend."  With this correspondence in his hands, the King one day
sent for the Princesse de Conti, said in a severe tone that he knew of her weakness for Clermont;
and, to prove to her how badly she had placed her affection, showed her her own letters to
Clermont, and letters in which he had spoken most contemptuously of her to La Choin.  Then,
as a cruel punishment, he made her read aloud to him the whole of those letters.  At this she
almost died, and threw herself, bathed in tears, at the feet of the King, scarcely able to
articulate.  Then came sobs, entreaty, despair, and rage, and cries for justice and revenge.
This was soon obtained.  Mademoiselle la Choin was driven away the next day; and M. de Luxembourg
had orders to strip Clermont of his office, and send him to the most distant part of the kingdom.
The terror of M. de Luxembourg and the Prince de Conti at this discovery may be imagined. 
Songs increased the notoriety of this strange adventure between the Princess and her confidant.

M. de Noyon had furnished on my return another subject for the song- writers, and felt it the
more sensibly because everybody was diverted at his expense, M. de Noyon was extremely vain,
and afforded thereby much amusement to the King.  A Chair was vacant at the Academic Francaise.
The King wished it to be given to M. de Noyon, and expressed himself to that effect to Dangeau,
who was a member.  As may be believed, the prelate was elected without difficulty.  His Majesty
testified to the Prince de Conde, and to the most distinguished persons of the Court, that
he should be glad to see them at the reception.  Thus M. de Noyon was the first member of the
Academia chosen by the King, and the first at whose reception he had taken the trouble to invite
his courtiers to attend.

The Abbe de Caumartin was at that time Director of the Academie.  He knew the vanity of M.
de Noyon, and determined to divert the public at his expense.  He had many friends in power,
and judged that his pleasantry would be overlooked, and even approved.  He composed, therefore,
a confused and bombastic discourse in the style of M. de Noyon, full of pompous phrases, turning
the prelate into ridicule, while they seemed to praise him.  After finishing this work, he
was afraid lest it should be thought out of all measure, and, to reassure himself, carried
it to M. de Noyon himself, as a scholar might to his master, in order to see whether it fully
met with his approval.  M. de Noyon, so far from suspecting anything, was charmed by the discourse,
and simply made a few corrections in the style.  The Abbe de Caumartin rejoiced at the success
of the snare he had laid, and felt quite bold enough to deliver his harangue.

The day came.  The Academie was crowded.  The King and the Court were there, all expecting
to be diverted.  M. de Noyon, saluting everybody with a satisfaction he did riot dissimulate,
made his speech with his usual confidence, and in his usual style.  The Abbe replied with a
modest air, and with a gravity and slowness that gave great effect to his ridiculous discourse.
The surprise and pleasure were general, and each person strove to intoxicate M. de Noyon more
and more, making him believe that the speech of the Abbe was relished solely because it had
so worthily praised him.  The prelate was delighted with the Abbe and the public, and conceived
not the slightest mistrust.

The noise which this occurrence made may be imagined, and the praises M. de Noyon gave himself
in relating everywhere what he had said, and what had been replied to him.  M. de Paris, to
whose house he went, thus triumphing, did not like him, and endeavoured to open his eyes to
the humiliation he had received.  For some time M. de Noyon would not be convinced of the truth;
it was not until he had consulted with Pere la Chaise that he believed it.  The excess of rage
and vexation succeeded then to the excess of rapture he had felt.  In this state he returned
to his house, and went the next day to Versailles.  There he made the most bitter complaints
to the King, of the Abbe de Caumartin, by whose means he had become the sport and laughing-stock
of all the world.

The King, who had learned what had passed, was himself displeased.  He ordered Pontchartrain
(who was related to Caumartin) to rebuke the Abbe, and to send him a lettre de cachet, in order
that he might go and ripen his brain in his Abbey of Busay, in Brittany, and better learn there
how to speak and write.  Pontchartrain executed the first part of his commission, but not the
second.  He pointed out to the King that the speech of the Abbe de Caumartin had been revised
and corrected by M. de Noyon, and that, therefore, this latter had only himself to blame in
the matter.  He declared, too, that the Abbe was very sorry for what he had done, and was most
willing to beg pardon of M. de Noyon.  The lettre de cachet thus fell to the ground, but not
the anger of the prelate.  He was so outraged that he would not see the Abbe, retired into
his diocese to hide his shame, and remained there a long time.

