Standing on the platform, I glanced at the mighty volume of water; here precipitated over a
huge rock 163 feet high with a thunderlike roar that can be heard, under favorable circumstances,
a distance of fifteen miles.

For a long time we remained there, spell-bound by the wonderful panorama, plunged into a reverie
of rapture. Mrs. James, reminding me the carriages were waiting for us, brought me back to
consciousness.

The spectacle is so sublime and overwhelming that the mind, unable to grasp it, cannot adjust
itself at once to a scale so stupendous, and the impression fails. But, gradually, as you remain
longer, the unvarying, ponderous, unspeakably solemn voice of the great flood finds its way
to the soul, and holds it with a fascination which is all pervasive and cannot be shaken off.

In a car, moving on an inclined plane, we descended to the water's edge. These cars are raised
and lowered by water-power, by means of a three-inch cable 300 feet long, running over steel
wheels.

At the foot of the stairway, tickets may be obtained for the trip on the "Maid of the Mist,"
that steams up to the Horseshoe Fall; then back to the Canadian side, and finally returns to
her starting point.

The view from below presented to us new charms which we could not obtain before. In the first
place the enormous height of the cataract may be better realized from beneath; then the emerald
and opal translucence of the waters, as they pass in their swift career, was here especially
effective; since the sun, shining through the mists of spray from a station in the heavens
most advantageous for our prospect, crowned the entire scene with iridescent diadems. This
fall is known as the American, separated from the "Horseshoe" or "Canadian Fall" by a large
island, standing on the verge of the cliff over which the cataract pours, and dividing the
river in such a manner as to form from its waters the two above named falls.

After a lovely ride through the beautiful woodland we viewed Goat Island, having an area of
61-1/2 acres and a circumference of about one mile. A strip about ten rods wide and eighty
rods long, has been washed away on the south side since the first road was made in 1818.

This island was, in ancient times, one of the favorite burying-grounds of the Indians, and
yet preserves traces of their funeral rites.

Crossing the first bridge, from which we had one of the grandest views of the rapids, we reached
Bath Island, some two acres in extent. A second bridge conveyed us to Goat Island, where we
witnessed a most charming panorama. Descending the stairs, we stood next to the Little Fall,
beneath which is the famous Cave of the Winds.

From the farther point of Luna Island, attainable by a little bridge, we saw the most desirable
near view of the American Fall and Rapids; here, too, we enjoyed a fine spectacle in the perspective
of the gorge below.

It has often been remarked by strangers that this island trembles, which is undoubtedly true,
but the impression is heightened by imagination.

Not far from Luna Island are the famous Biddle Stairs. Shortly after their erection, in 1829,
the well known Sam Patch, whose diving propensities made his name illustrious, performed his
noted, bold feat in 1830. Midway between the foot of these stairs and the Canadian Fall he
built a scaffold, ninety-six feet high, from which he made his successful leap into the river.

Proceeding a little further, we stood in full view of the Horseshoe Fall--so-called because
of its crescent shape--which contains by far the greater body of water; the fall being more
than 2,000 feet wide and 154 feet high.

The site of the old Terrapin Tower is the best point from which to perceive the shape of the fall.

From the south side of the island the Three Sister Islands are accessible, affording the finest
views of the rapids. These islands offer, from their location, a delightfully cool retreat
in the warmest summer days, with attractive and enchanting scenery.

In order to have a comprehensive glance of Nature's grandest wonder known to man, in its climax
of sublimity, we took a ride back through Prospect Park, across the New Suspension Bridge,
below the American Fall, to the Canadian shore. This splendid drive was continued through the
Queen Victoria Niagara Falls Park, opened to the public in 1889.

Following the example of New York State, the Ontario Parliament had passed an act to reserve
the western side of the Falls vicinity--the Canadian Reservation--covering an area of about
154 acres, and beautifully laid out.

Here we had the most imposing view; a finer panorama cannot well be imagined.

The concussion of the descending waters with those in the depths below occasion a spray that
veils the cataract two-thirds up its height. Above this everlasting and impenetrable foam,
there rises fifty feet above the fall a cloud of lighter spray, which, when the rays of the
sun are directed upon it, displays solar rainbows, grand in their magnificence.

Three miles below the falls is the Whirlpool, a vast basin formed by the projection of a rocky
promontory on the Canadian side, against which the waters rush with such violence as to cause
a severe reaction and rotary motion; and in it logs and trees are frequently whirled around
for weeks in succession.

Geology has accepted as a matter of certitude that within the memory of men now living, the
Falls have receded 100 feet, and authorities in that science have stated the fact, that the
retrocession--estimated from one inch to one foot per year--began near Lewiston. The whole
waters of the lakes there foamed over this dam several miles in width.

The name "Niagara" is supposed to belong to the vocabulary of the Iroquois language, meaning
"Thunderer of Waters."

The first white visitor to Niagara Falls was Father Hennepin, a priest and historian, accompanying
Chevalier Robert de la Salle on his discoveries. He published the first description of "this
wonderful Downfall" in 1678.

There exist now three distinct cataracts, which are known as Horseshoe, American, and Central
Falls. The weight of water descending over the cadences in a single hour, is computed to be
100,000,000 tons.

The magnitude of the great waterfalls, and their fame as a natural wonder, had, heretofore,
to a certain degree, excluded from thought the idea of their marvelous utilarian properties;
but the recent development of electrical science, and the far-reaching enterprise of to-day,
have now combined to subject to the uses of mankind a portion of the power of the falls, developed
at such a distance from the great cataract as not to interfere in any way with the natural
beauty of the scenery.

As the western sky was dyed with the tints of sunset, we hastened to reach our floating home;
since we expected two friends of Miss Campbell on board the yacht--a gentleman who holds a
prominent position in Buffalo, Mr. J.B. Seitz, and his charming wife. We returned with the
exhalting sentiment of having visited a temple of nature, to whose shrine thousands from all
over the world annually pay their tribute of praise.

Arriving on board the "Marguerite" that--though still in dry-dock--was not laid dry any more,
we perceived a striking contrast between the close and saturated atmosphere prevailing here,
and the pure, balmy air at Niagara Falls.

Our thoughtful commodore, desirous of giving us the opportunity to inhale the refreshing sea-breeze,
ordered our departure for the breakwater as soon as circumstances permitted; intending early
on the following morning to commence our lake journey.

CHAPTER III.

VOYAGE ON THREE GREAT LAKES, FROM AUGUST 2ND, 7 A.M., TO AUGUST 22ND, 9 A.M.

As the warm rays of the morning sun were lighting up the scene with a radiance, glorious to
behold, we bade farewell to Buffalo which, being already in some distance, soon became entirely
invisible.

Indescribable was our amazement when we viewed once more the waters of Lake Erie, whose raging
billows had betrayed to us, only a few days ago, the unruly nature of a boisterous inland-sea.

Now, as we were gliding on its surface, the lake presented an appearance quite novel to us;
being almost motionless, a true emblem of tranquillity and peacefulness. Only now and then
a gentle zephyr rippled its level which, reflected in the sunbeams, appeared like an undulating
mass of silver. The cloudless heavens, clad in their brightest hue of azure blue, and illumined
by the golden sun, painted a great variety of fine images of light and shade on the limpid
waters beneath. The sky seemed to reflect the water and the water the sky, both gleaming in
the sunshine.

On our right, the lake made the impression of stretching into endless, unlimited space; on
our left, however, we could distinguish romantic hills, decorated by massive groves, with crossing
and intersecting promontories, and fair valleys tenanted by numerous flocks and herds, that
seemed to wander unrestrained through the rich pastures. The luxuriant landscape was intercepted
here and there by undulating slopes, covered with sand, whose light color contrasted with the
verdure of vales and hillocks.

Speeding along, we came abreast of Dunkirk, a lake-port town in Chautauqua County, N.Y., situated
on a small bay in Lake Erie, forty miles southwest of Buffalo. The town, which has a population
of over 5,000, occupies an elevated and favorable position on the lake. Its industries comprise
oil refineries, and the manufacture of flour and iron-work.

After proceeding on our voyage for some hours, we viewed--located in a natural bay--the harbor
of Erie, the capital of Erie County, Penn. The port is protected by a breakwater three and
one-half miles long.

The principal shipments that leave this harbor, are coal, iron, and petroleum; an important
trade being carried on with the Canadian lake-ports.

The streets of the city are spacious and laid out with great regularity. To its prominent buildings
belong the postoffice, the opera house, the city hospital, the court house, and the orphan
asylum. Erie contains nearly 20,000 inhabitants, many of whom are engaged in iron manufacture.
The large supply of water required for the factories is obtained from the lake by powerful
engines, which force it to a tower 200 feet high, whence it is distributed through the mains.
The chief industries developed here, are petroleum refineries and leather factories.

It was at Erie, that Commodore Perry equipped the vessels which in 1813 defeated the British
fleet on Lake Erie. In the year 1795 the town was laid out, and in 1851 it received a city charter.

Therefore, the "Marguerite" was cabled to the dock, about two miles from the village of Conneaut.

A fresh and palpitating evening air invited us to a walk along the coast of the beautiful inland-sea.
Adopting an unfrequented path through a vast plain of sand, we found the charming scenery enhanced
by a solemn stillness. All nature slumbered.

Here, witnessing a magnificent prospect in this lovely solitude, we experienced one of those
seasons when the atmosphere is so surcharged with luxury, that every pore of the body becomes
an ample gate for sensation to flow in; and one has simply to sit still and to be filled.

Seated near the shore, we delivered ourselves up to the exquisite loveliness around us; and
when returning on board the yacht, the impression of the superb panorama tarried with me, even
into the realm of Morpheus; so that I rose on the following morning with the remembrance of
delicious dreams.

When I came on deck, the air seemed to be sweet with perfumes; the water sparkled brightly,
and the blue sky hung cloudless over the placid mirror of Lake Erie.

Thus, favored by the weather, the majestic steam-yacht resumed her voyage.

After the lapse of two hours the harbor of Ashtabula came in sight, and at about 10 o'clock
we approached Fair Point. The noon-tide of the summer day was past, as we were made acquainted
with the fact, that the rising towers and pinnacles, to be discerned in the distance on our
left, pertained to the beautiful "Forest City," next to Cincinnati the largest and most important
city in the State of Ohio.

Cleveland is built on both sides of the Cuyahoga River, which is here crossed by several bridges.
It is located chiefly on a plain from fifty to 100 feet above the lake, of which a magnificent
view is thus obtained.

Leaving East River Street, where our floating home was destined to remain, I undertook an excursion
through the greater portion of the city; not solely for the purpose of viewing the regular
streets, generally from eighty to 100 feet wide, and lined with maple trees, but with the design
to see a friend--Miss Lina Uhl--a teacher in one of the thirty public schools; holding a prominent
position as the president of a teachers' association in Cleveland. She is the niece of Mr.
C.F. Hild, from Schenectady, N.Y.

Having previously informed her of my intention to visit her native city, I was already expected,
and very cordially received at her hospitable home.

After I had spent some very pleasant hours there, my friend accompanied me on my return to
the dock. En route she made me acquainted with many points of interest, which are so numerous
in the "Forest City." Thus, she called my attention to the charming Euclid Avenue, a street
several miles long, considered to be one of the most extensive and picturesque within the limits
of the United States. Here Cleveland's aristocracy built their substantial mansions and luxurious
villas, encircled by tasty, park-like gardens. Of special interest to the visitor is the monument
erected in memory of James Abram Garfield, the twentieth president of the Republic, born in
Orange, Ohio, in 1831. Being in office but a short time, he was shot by a disappointed office-seeker,
Charles J. Guiteau, in 1881. This sad event, which forms a thrilling incidence in the history
of the Union, is comparable with the recent death of Carter Harrison, mayor of Chicago, whose
assassination by Prendergast, under similar circumstances, on Saturday, 8.30 P.M., October
28, 1893, created a profound sensation and great excitement.

Monumental Park, near the center of the city, contains ten acres, divided into four squares
by the extension of Ontario and Superior Streets. Besides a fountain, and other attractive
objects, the park is adorned by a statue of Commodore Perry, erected in 1860 in commemoration
of his victory on Lake Erie in 1813. It is of Italian marble, eight feet high, and stands upon
a granite pedestal twelve feet in altitude. The most noteworthy buildings are the postoffice,
the city hall, the county court house, and the Cleveland medical college. The Union Railway
depot, an immense structure of stone near the lake shore, is one of the largest of the kind
in the United States.

Cleveland was founded in 1796, and named in honor of General Moses Cleveland of Connecticut,
who then had charge of the surveying of this region. It was an important point in the war of
1812, incorporated as a village in 1814, and as a city in 1836. The number of its inhabitants
is estimated to be more than 200,000. The "Forest City" has an extensive trade in copper and
iron ore, shipped from the Lake Superior mining regions, as well as in coal, petroleum, wool,
and lumber, received by railroad, canal, and lake transportation. A sojourn of at least one
week is requisite in order to acquaint one's self with all the attractions of Cleveland, with
its unrivaled position and manifold beauties of scenery.

In fact, our honorable President can be proud to share his name with this delightful place;
and, in return, the "Forest City" may consider it an honor to be the namesake of Grover Cleveland,
the present leader of the powerful Republic.

On Friday morning, as soon as the dawning day dispatched its first rays over Cleveland, we
resumed our voyage on Lake Erie. The flakes of light were falling every moment faster and broader
among the spires and towers of the city of which we gradually lost sight. They were only discernible
as long, gray shadows on the elevated lake shore. The mists were couched in quiet masses, iridescent
with the morning light, upon the breasts of the remote hills, over whose leagues of massy undulations,
they melted into the robe of material light, fading, lost in the increasing lustre, again to
reappear in the higher heavens, while their bases vanished into the unsubstantial and mocking
blue of the lake below. The dispersing wreaths of white clouds gradually gave place to the
pale azure of the horizon. The level of the beautiful inland-sea was bathed in the glorious
sunlight and the whole heaven--one scarlet canopy--colored the limpid waters with an exquisite,
roseate tint; thus giving a redoubled splendor to this fine panorama.

While the midday sun was sending forth his warm rays, we came abreast of Marblehead, and speeding
along we reached Green Island at 1 o'clock.

Having passed Barr Point Lighthouse we chose our halting place on the Canadian shore near Amherstburg,
a small village pleasantly situated on the Detroit River.

As the yacht was fastened to the dock, the heavens were yet illumined by the parting day; which
gave us opportunity to admire the superb spectacle on the opposite shore. Its southwestern
extremity was adorned with numerous verdant islands of various size and form; some stretching
for miles in length--the largest containing a circumference of fourteen miles; several so small
that they seemed destined for a race of fairies; others in clusters; and some like beautiful
vestals, in single loveliness, whose holy vows ordained them forever to live alone.

The last streak of light had faded from the west, and a pale lustre kindling in the eastern
portions of the sky, became brighter and brighter till the white falcated moon was lifted up
above the horizon; while uncountable stars appeared to reflect their brilliancy in the waters
below. This delightful scene around us, so perfectly filled and satisfied our sense of beauty
that we reluctantly gave up our comfortable seats on the stern-deck, notwithstanding an advanced
time of night.

On the following morning the sun rose in his clearest splendor. As soon as that flood of luminous
rays which constitutes day, was flowing on the crystalline sea, we departed from this romantic
country scene in Canada.

Sailing along, we approached the terminus of our voyage on Lake Erie, which is considered the
most dangerous of all the Great Lakes as to navigation, owing to its comparative shallowness--its
mean depth, being about ninety feet--and the consequent liability to a heavy ground swell.
The peculiar features of this body of water are its inferior depth and the clayey nature of
its shores, which are generally low; on the south, however, bordered by an elevated plateau,
through which the rivers have cut deep channels.

Though the lake possesses but a small number of good harbors, the amount of traffic on its
waters, and on the connecting railways is enormous.

This inland-sea, presenting us only sights of utmost quietude and peace, has been the scene
of a naval engagement between the British and Americans, September 10, 1813, in which the latter
were victorious. The view we enjoyed was not in the least adequate to remind us of warfare;
on the contrary

