When we do not at all understand the cause of an action, whether a crime, a good action, or
even one that is simply nonmoral, we ascribe a greater amount of freedom to it. He does not say:
"How strange and terrible a thing the railway must be to them!" He says: "I wish I was rich
enough to travel first, for the natives pouring in and out of this third-class carriage, jabbering
like monkeys, and treading on my feet, disturb my tranquillity. But if even one of the innumerable causes of the act is known
to us we recognize a certain element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for
the crime, or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act, or the freedom of the apparently
original action. That a criminal was reared among male factors mitigates his fault in our eyes.
The self-sacrifice of a father or mother, or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward,
is more comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice, and therefore seems less deserving of
sympathy and less the result of free will. The founder of a sect or party, or an inventor,
impresses us less when we know how or by what the way was prepared for his activity. If we
have a large range of examples, if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the correlation
of cause and effect in people's actions, their actions appear to us more under compulsion and
less free the more correctly we connect the effects with the causes. If we examined simple
actions and had a vast number of such actions under observation, our conception of their inevitability
would be still greater. The dishonest conduct of the son of a dishonest father, the misconduct
of a woman who had fallen into bad company, a drunkard's relapse into drunkenness, and so on
are actions that seem to us less free the better we understand their cause. If the man whose
actions we are considering is on a very low stage of mental development, like a child, a madman,
or a simpleton--then, knowing the causes of the act and the simplicity of the character and
intelligence in question, we see so large an element of necessity and so little free will that
as soon as we know the cause prompting the action we can foretell the result. 

I asked him if he voted, and he said "yes." He said there was only one way to vote, but I did
not understand what this meant.

Had time served I should have asked him further questions--upon the nature of the soul, its ultimate
fate, the origin of man and his destiny, whether mortal or immortal; the proper constitution of
the State, the choice of the legislator, the prince, and the magistrate;
the function of art, whether it is subsidiary or primary in human
life; the family; marriage.

Upon the State he had already informed me, and also upon the institution
of property, and upon his view of armies.

Upon all those other things he would equally have given me a clear reply, for he was a man that
knew his own mind, and that is more than most people can say.


So that if we examine the case of a man whose connection with the external world is well known,
where the time between the action and its examination is great, and where the causes of the
action are most accessible, we get the conception of a maximum of inevitability and a minimum
of free will. If we examine a man little dependent on external conditions, whose action was
performed very recently, and the causes of whose action are beyond our ken, we get the conception
of a minimum of inevitability and a maximum of freedom.

