 For some time,
however, no sounds reached her ears, except those low, mingled murmurs which are peculiar to
the forest in the stillness of night. But at length her quickened organs were greeted by some
noise which she knew was not a fancied one; and the next moment the sound of human footsteps
became distinctly audible. Presently she heard voices at the door, and then saw two dark forms
cautiously entering the room below. After walking around the apartment and thrusting the muzzles
of their guns into corners, with the apparent purpose of ascertaining whether any one was concealed
within, they approached the pile of boughs before described, and gave vent to their satisfaction
at finding so good a bed, in a short, guttural ugh! which proclaimed them, to the trembling
listener above, to be Indians, and of those, doubtless, who had been sent out in pursuit of
her. They then proceeded to draw up the old door and barricade the entrance after which they
set their guns against the wall, and camped down on the bed in the corner.

It would be difficult to describe the sensations with which the hapless girl witnessed what
had occurred; and these, with the fear of what might still be in store for her, nearly filled
the measure of her distress and perplexity; for although she had thus far escaped observation,
and although she soon had the satisfaction of knowing, by the heavy and measured breathing
which reached her ears, that her foes had sunk into a deep sleep, yet how was she, even now,
to avoid falling into their merciless hands? Should she attempt to descend and escape through
the window, could she effect her purpose without being heard and detected? She feared not.
And should she remain in her present situation till daylight, would her terrible visitors then
awaken and depart without discovering her? This alternative appeared to her even less promising
than the other. And yet one of the two courses must be adopted. Which should it be? While anxiously
reflecting on the subject, fresh noises in the woods arrested her attention. These were also
the sounds of footsteps, but evidently not those of any human prowler. With a light, quick
pat, pat, pat, the animal came up to the door, paused, and snuffed the air through the crevices.
He then moved along to the window, reared himself on his hind legs, thrust in his nose, and
after giving two or three quick, eager snuffs there also, withdrew, and trotted off, at a moderate
pace, a short distance into the forest, where he appeared to come to a sudden halt. The next
moment, the long, unearthly howl of a wolf rose shrill and tremulous from the spot, and died
slowly away, in strange, wild cadences, among the echoing mountains around. Sabrey instinctively
shuddered at the fearful sound, but instantly turned her attention to the sleeping Indians,
whom she expected to hear rousing up and rushing out with their guns after the insidious prowler.
But they, to her surprise, snored on, unconscious of the danger. The howl was soon repeated,
when short, faint responses, in the same shrill, savage modulations, became audible in every
direction in the surrounding forest. These answering cries, growing more distinct and loud
every moment, in their evident approach to the spot where the first signal howl was given,
now fully apprised the agitated listener of the fearful character of the scene which was likely
soon to occur beneath or around her. In an incredibly short space of time, the gathering troop
of famished monsters seemed to be arriving and arranging themselves under their invoking leader
to be led on to the promised prey. And soon the trampling of multitudinous feet evinced that
they were in motion and cautiously advancing towards the house. The next moment, they all appeared
to have assembled under the window, and paused as if to plan the mode of attack. After a brief
interval, in which no sounds could be distinguished but the low, suppressed snuffling of the
troop for the scented prey, a large wolf leaped up into the narrow aperture paused a second
and then quickly thrusting his balanced body forward, dropped noiselessly down on the ground
floor within. Another, and another, and another, followed in rapid succession, till more than
half a score of the gaunt, grim monsters had landed inside, and silently arranged themselves
in a row before the bed of their intended victims, who still strangely slept on. One more fearful
pause succeeded, in which the greedy band seemed to be eagerly eyeing the fated sleepers, and
marking out portions of their bodies for the deadly gripe; when suddenly springing forward,
they all fiercely pounced upon the victims, and, with the seeming noise of a thousand wrangling
fiends, mingled with the sharp, short, half-stifled screeches of human agony, that were heard
in the hideous din, seized, throttled, and tore them, limb from limb, to pieces, and bore off
the dissevered parts, munching and snarling, to different corners of the room. The noise now
for a short time subsided, and nothing was heard but the low, broken growls of the cannibal
troop, as they busily craunched the bones, and tore the flesh on which they were raking their
horrid feast. Then followed the fierce and noisy encounters for the decreasing fragments, till
none were left worth contending for.

At this juncture, two of the half-glutted but still ravenous gang, relinquishing the well-picked
bones on which they had been laboring, rose, and, advancing into the middle of the room, stood
a moment listlessly viewing the operations of the rest; when they suddenly started, and, turning
slowly round and round, began busily to snuff the air, and throw their noses upward in search
of some fresh game that appeared now to have struck their keen olfactories. The affrighted
maiden, who had been witnessing this hideous scene from her hitherto unsuspected concealment
above, with blood curdling in horror at the sights and sounds that reached her recoiling senses,
now shuddered in fresh alarm; for she but too well understood what this new and fearfully-significant
movement of the wolves portended. And, instinctively withdrawing her face from her loop-hole
of observation, she hastily drew herself up in the middle of her frail support, so as to be
as far as possible out of the reach of her expected assailants. But they at once detected the
slight sounds occasioned by her movement, and, now guided by two senses instead of one, instantly
began to gnash their teeth, and, with wild howls, to leap upward after their newly-discovered
prey. And although her position was more than seven feet from the ground,--a height which,
it might be supposed, could not have been reached by this class of animals in a perpendicular
leap,--yet so desperate had the present gang become by the taste of human blood, that they
soon, in their determined and constantly-repeated efforts, began to strike and seize the beams
with their teeth, by which they would hang suspended a moment, and then drop back again to
the ground for another trial. The terrified maiden now gave herself up as lost, and tried to
quell the tumult of her frenzied feelings, that she might meet her approaching fate, as dreadful
as it was, with calmness and resignation. But the terrific noise of her maddened assailants,
as they leaped up, snapping, snarling, and howling, in demoniac chorus, and made nearer and
nearer approaches every moment to her person, once more aroused her natural instinct for self-preservation;
and she arose, and, standing upon her feet, involuntarily bent over one end of her support
to catch a view of what was passing below.

In withdrawing her shrinking gaze from the fiercely upheaving heads and fiery eyeballs which
there greeted her, she espied the guns of the Indians still standing against the wall, almost
directly beneath her, with the muzzles extending upward within the reach of her arm. With the
rapid process of thought which danger is known often to beget, a new plan of deliverance, suggested
by the discovery just made, was instantly formed and digested in her mind. And in its pursuance,
she drew a white handkerchief from her pocket, and, hastily folding it together, threw it down
to the farthest corner of the room below. As she had anticipated, the whole gang rushed after
it. And instantly seizing the opportunity thus afforded to execute her design, she hastily
balanced herself on the edge of the bark the most nearly over the guns, reached down her arm,
grasped one of the muzzles, and drew up the heavy weapon, just in time to escape the baffled
brutes as they came bounding back, with redoubled howls of rage and disappointment, to the
spot. Too much accustomed, in the new settlement in which she had been mostly reared, to the
sight and even handling of fire-arms not to know how to use them, she cocked the piece, and,
again advancing to the edge of her platform, pointed down into the thickest of the infuriated
pack, and fired. One wild, piercing yelp followed the deafening explosion, and, the next instant,
all the survivors of the hushed and frightened gang were heard scrambling through the window,
and scattering and fleeing off with desperate speed into the surrounding forest. With the last
sounds of the retreating steps of the wolves, and with the relief which a returning sense of
safety brought to the over-wrought feelings of the maiden, all her strength gave way, and,
sinking down, weak and helpless as an infant, she sobbed out, in the broken murmurs of an overflowing
heart, her gratitude to Heaven for her deliverance from the horrid death from which she had
so narrowly escaped. For a while she could only tremble and weep; but at length the violence
of her emotions began gradually to subside, exhausted nature would be cheated no longer, and
she sunk into slumber, too sound, happily, to permit her to dream over the fearful scenes of
the past.

When she awoke, it was broad daylight, and all was quiet within, while without the birds were
chanting their morning melodies. At first she could scarcely believe that the scene she had
passed through was not the distempered imaginings of some frightful dream. But there, on the
blood-stained floor beneath her, lay the carcass of a dead wolf, and the scattered bones of
the slain Indians, to attest the dreadful reality. Hastening down from the loft into the room,
and averting her eyes from the revolting spectacle, she hurried forward with a shudder to the
door, effected an opening sufficient for her egress, and rushed out into the open air, of which
she now drew a long, grateful inhalation, more expressive than words of the deep sense of inward
pleasure she experienced in being freed from this den of horrors.

Believing that, by the advantages daylight would now afford her, she might be able to retrace
her way to the road, she immediately sought out and entered the old path by which she had approached
the cabin; and this serving to indicate the general course she must pursue to accomplish her
purpose, she followed it back to the end, and then passed on through the forest in the same
direction. She had proceeded but a short distance, however, before she was startled by the
unexpected appearance of a man advancing through the thick intervening undergrowth directly
towards her. As she was about to strike out obliquely into the forest to avoid him, her steps
were arrested by his voice calling out to her.

"Don't be alarmed at a friend, young lady," he said, in a plausible manner, as he came forward
and stopped at a respectful distance--"don't be alarmed at my appearance at all; for you are
the one, I take it, that we are searching for. It is Miss Haviland, is it not?"

"Yes, sir," replied the latter, looking doubtfully at the man whom she thought she had somewhere
before seen--"yes, that is my name; but as there may be both friends and foes out in search
of me, you will excuse me for saying that I do not know to which of these you belong."

"True, true," said the other, in a wheedling tone--"true; I don't blame you for being a little
cautious. So I must tell you that, living in these parts, and being acquainted with Captain
Woodburn, I volunteered, when I heard you were lost last night, to go with the rest in search
of you. And being now so lucky as to find you, I will conduct you out to Coffin's--four or
five miles from this, I suppose--where your friends are anxiously waiting to see or get word
of you."

Although our heroine was not exactly pleased with the manner and countenance of the man, yet
the charm of the name of Woodburn, to whom he had so artfully referred, restored her confidence,
and she at once and thankfully accepted of his proffered guidance, little suspecting that she
had yielded herself to the most subtle of her foes--the deceitful and treacherous David Redding!

CHAPTER VIII. The latter, emboldened both by the presence of a powerful British army on their
borders, and the doubts and difficulties which, for a while, were known to have embarrassed
and rendered ineffectual the deliberations of their opponents, had become so assured and confident
of an easy conquest, that in some sections they proceeded openly in the work of enlistment,
and in others pushed forward their parties into the very heart of the interior, before perceiving
their error; while, by their representations at headquarters, they completely deceived Burgoyne
and his advisers respecting the true state of feeling that animated the bosoms of the great
mass of the people--a fact made abundantly evident, not only by the subsequent confessions
of that general, but by all his operations at the time, and especially that of the short-sighted
expedition, which we have before shown him to have planned and set afoot, under Peters, to
the Connecticut River. It was no wonder, therefore, that when they now suddenly discovered
the whole state in motion--armed men springing up in every glen, nook, and corner of the Green
Mountains, and concentrating to join another no less unexpected, and no less formidable force,
which was understood to be rapidly advancing from New Hampshire--it was no wonder they were
taken wholly by surprise, and slunk silently away to their retreats, or immediately fled to
the British army, whom they still neglected to undeceive.

It was about one week subsequent to the events last recited; and the interim had been marked
with little, as far as immediately concerned the action of our story, and those of its personages
to whom we must now return--with very little to which pen can do justice, except what the reader's
imagination probably has already anticipated; for though thrilling events may be described
with a good degree of adequacy, there are yet certain states of high wrought feeling that language
can never but feebly portray. The search for the lost maiden, on the eventful night of her
capture and escape, had been, as the reader will have inferred, as vain and fruitless as it
was agonizing to her lover, and anxious to all. The renewal of the search next day, till afternoon,
had been no better rewarded. More force having then arrived, the tory encampment was assailed,
but found empty of occupants, who had, some hours before, scattered and fled. Still unwilling
to relinquish his object, Woodburn, with a small party of his friends, continued his efforts
in wider ranges through the forest, which, on the third morning, brought him to the cabin in
which her most fearful trials had occurred; when the dead wolf, the remnants of the slain Indians,
not yet wholly carried off by the foxes or returning wolves, the guns, the torn and blood-stained
earth, and, above all, the white shreds of some part of female apparel, discolored and scattered
round the room, told a tale, that, in spite of the entreaties of his sympathizing friends,
who deemed the evidence not yet wholly conclusive, drove the appalled lover, in a frenzy of
grief and horror, from the dreadful scene.

It was about a week, as we have said, after that night of adventure and excitement. Three companies
of the newly-enlisted regiment of Rangers, embracing all the recruits yet raised on the east
side of the mountains, were paraded in the road before Coffin's tavern, while their officers
were standing listless on the grass in front, and occasionally throwing inquiring glances along
the road to the east, as if awaiting some expected arrival from that quarter. At length Woodburn,
on whose brow rested an air of gloomy sternness, advanced, and calling his sergeant and scoutmaster,
Dunning, to his side, in a low tone, imparted to him some private order or suggestion; when
the latter, beckoning from the ranks his and the reader's old acquaintance, Bill Piper, who
was also a subaltern in the same company, the two laid aside their guns and equipments, and
proceeded leisurely down the road, the way in which the attention of all seemed directed. After
proceeding about a quarter of a mile, they came to a turn in the road, which, now becoming
invisible from the tavern, led down a long hill, and entered an extended piece of woods nearly
another quarter of a mile distant.

"Well," said Dunning, here pausing and casting his eyes forward to the woods, "they der don't
seem to make their appearance yet. I ditter think they must have halted there by the brook
to drink and rest a little so we will stop at this point, where we can see both ways; and when
the troops begin to show themselves, we'll then give the signal."

With this, they threw themselves down in the cool shade of a tree by the way side, and, for
a while, yielded themselves to that listless, dreamy mood, which reclining in the shade, after
exercise, on a warm day, almost invariably induces.

"Dunning," said Piper, at length rousing up a little, and drawing from his pocket a well-filled
leathern purse, which he carelessly chinked against his upraised knee, by way of preliminary--"Dunning,
it is a mystery to me where all this stuff comes from. Six weeks ago, it was thought there
were scarcely a thousand hard dollars, except what was in tory families, in all the Grants.
Now, there must be well on to that sum even in our own company, every recruit having been paid
his bounty and month's advance pay, in silver or gold, on the spot. Where does it come from?"

"From the sales of the der tory estates, of which they have been making a clean sweep, you
know," replied the other.

"Yes, yes, we all know that, I suppose; but where do the purchasers of these estates get the
money to buy with?" rejoined the former.

"I never ditter catechized them about it," said the hunter, evasively.

"Nor I," remarked Piper; "but I have lately heard a curious story about the matter. They say
there has been a sort of homespun-looking old fellow, that nobody seems to know, following
the commissioners of sales round, from place to place, with an old horse and cart, seemingly
loaded with wooden ware, or some such kind of gear, for peddling; and that he has bid off a
great part of all the farms, and stock on them, which have been sold, paying down for them
on the spot in hard money, which they say he carries about with him tied up in old stockings,
and hid away in his load of trumpery. Some mistrust he is a Jew; and some are afraid he is
a British agent, not only buying up farms, but also the Council of Safety, who are also strangely
full of money these days."

"That last would prove a rather ditter tough bargain for him and his masters, I reckon," responded
the hunter, dryly.

"Yes, that is all nonsense, no doubt," observed Piper. "But still it is a mystery to my mind,
how money, that a short time ago was so scarce, should now all at once be so plenty; and that
was the reason I raised the question before you, who generally know pretty near what is going
on among our head men, and who, I thought likely, could easily explain this secret."

"No," said the other; "no, Bill; there might be der trouble about that. When a state secret
falls into my ears, it is not so easy to get it out of my mouth. I've got an impediment in
my ditter speech, you know," he added, with a slight twinkle of the eye.

"Your mouth goes off well enough on some public matters, I find," remarked Piper, with an air
fluctuating between a miff and a laugh.

"Der yes, to say, for instance, that the decree to confiscate and sell the tory estates was
a ditter righteous one--has worked like a charm--called out the rusty dollars from their hiding-places
thick as der bumblebees in June--ditter drove off the blue devils from among the people, and
raised a regiment of men in less than three weeks!"

"Ah! and a fine regiment, too, it will be. I long to see it all wrought together, for I don't
know a tenth of them--men or officers--not even our colonel."

"Herrick? Well, I can't der quite say I should know him now; but he is a ditter go-ahead fellow,
who loves the smell of gunpowder nearly as well as Seth Warner himself, whose pupil he is in
the trade. We shall have the pleasure of seeing him in a few minutes, probably, as Coffin told
me he passed along here night before last, on the way to Number Four, to come on with Stark.
That may be told without ditter mischief."

"And so may another thing, perhaps, which I should like to know, Dunning."

"Der what is that, Bill?"

"Why, you know that Bart, the night after we discovered the place where we supposed the girl
was destroyed, disappeared, and has not been here since. Where have they sent him, and what after?"

"Piper, you are as brave as a lion, and as strong as a horse, der doubtless; but your tongue
may ditter need training, for all that. Still, as you mean right, and will probably learn to
bridle that unruly member only by practice, I will, for once, put you to the trial. Bart has
gone a spy to the British camp. Though Harry, in his despair, would for a while believe nothing
but that she was der dead, or worse, yet, as I and others, putting all things together, hoped
and reasoned ditter different, in part, and thought she might not have been killed there, but
retaken; and, for fear of pursuit, hurried off directly to the British, he concluded to despatch
Bart to his friend Allen, of the Council, to take advice, and then proceed in some disguise
or other, right into the lion's den--ascertain whether the girl was there--and, after ditter
learning what he could about the enemy's movements, return with the news."

"Well, I'll be chunked if the project wan't a bold one! But if any creature on earth can carry
it out, it is Bart; and he will, unless they get word from this quarter that such a fellow
is among them. Ah! I now see the need of a close mouth on the subject, and will keep one, thanking
you kindly, Dunning, for your caution and confidence."

"It will be all right, I presume, Bill, now you perceive Bart's neck may depend on your ditter
discretion. But who have we there?" added the speaker, pointing down the road towards the woods.

While Dunning and Piper were thus engrossed in conversation, two men, on foot, had emerged
from the woods and approached within a hundred yards, before attracting the attention of the
former. They were without coats, or in their shirt sleeves, as, in common parlance, is the
phrase for such undress; and, having handkerchiefs tied round their heads, and carrying in
their hands rough sticks, picked up by the way-side, for canes, they presented an appearance,
as they leisurely came along up the ascending road, with occasional glances back towards the
woods, that left Dunning and his companion wholly in doubt, while attempting to decide who
or what they were.

"Now, who knows," said the wary hunter, "but they may be der tory spies, hanging round the
skirts of Stark's army, and intending soon to be off cross-lots to the British, to report his
progress. I'll ditter banter them a little, at all hazards, before we let 'em pass."

But as the strangers drew near, their appearance grew less and less like that of the ordinary
footpads for whom they had been taken; and there was something in their bearing which considerably
shook, though it did not wholly alter, the hunter's intention to banter them. One was a strongly-built,
broad-chested man, with a high head, hardy brown features, and a countenance betokening much
cool energy and decision of character. The other was rather less stocky, and slightly taller,
of quicker motions, but withal a prompt, resolute-looking person.

"Well, my friends," said the former, coming up and pausing before the expectant Rangers, with
an air that seemed to challenge conversation, "this is Coffin's tavern here ahead, I suppose.
Will the captain be pleased, think ye, to see a little company about this time?"

"Der yes," replied Dunning, eyeing the speaker with a curious, half doubtful and half quizzing
expression. "Yes, if of the right sort, he wont ditter cry, I reckon. But the captain is sometimes
rather particular--for instance, if you should happen to be tories----"

"Tories!--do we look like tories?" demanded the former glancing to his companion with a droll,
surprised look.

"Why der no," replied the hunter, a little abashed, "I ditter think not."

"Well, I had hoped not," rejoined the man. "But who are you, my friend--one of the Green Mountain
Boys, that we hear so much about?"

"Not far from the mark, sergeant, or commissary, or whatever is your ditter title; for you
belong to the army that's at hand, I take it?" said Dunning.

"O, yes," briskly returned the other, again looking at his companion, and joining him in a
merry laugh. "Yes, I am one of them, and mean to have a hand in stirring up Burgoyne, when
we reach him, I assure you."

"That's right, commissary!" exclaimed Dunning. "You are a der chap of some pluck, I'll warrant
it. I begin to ditter like you. What shall I call your name, friend?"

"My name is John Stark, if you will allow," replied the stranger, with an amused look.

"John Stark? Why, that's your der general's name!" said the hunter, incredulously. "Come, come,
friend, you are ditter gumming me. I have seen John Stark--Captain Stark, that was then--now
general--the same that was bought back by our folks for a white pony--ditter dog cheap, too,
as the British will find, before he is der done with them, or I mistake the amount of fight
that's in the critter, amazingly." [Footnote: When General Stark was exposed for sale in Montreal,
by the Indians, by whom he had been captured in the French war, and some of his countrymen
were trying in vain to make his savage master set a price on him, an English gentleman happened
to ride by on a handsome white pony, which so greatly struck the Indian's fancy, that, pointing
after the coveted animal, he exclaimed, "Ah! ugh! me take that you get him." Whereupon the
gentleman was followed, the pony purchased, and, with it, the captive Stark redeemed.]

"Thank you, sir!" heartily exclaimed the former, now evidently as much gratified as amused
at what he heard. "In behalf of that same John Stark, I thank you, sir, for your good opinion
of him. But where, my good fellow," he continued, with at look of lively interest, "where did
you ever fall in with Captain Stark?"

"Why, in the old war, when he der marched through here with Colonel Hawk, I ditter acted as
the colonel's guide over the mountains to Otter Creek. Stark, as I've said, was one of the
captains, though I wasn't much with him, to be sure," replied the hunter, becoming more doubtful
and puzzled every moment, at the turn matters were taking.

"Ah! yes, yes,--our hunter guide on that rough march! I remember now. Well, well, the fault
is not wholly on one side after all!" said the other, musingly.

"Der--der--ditter how? der--ditter--" began Dunning opening his eyes with an uneasy stare.

"This is General Stark, my boys," here quickly interposed the other gentleman. "I see by your
badges that you belong to the Rangers. I am your colonel, Herrick, and this the general himself,
who, by way of relief from a long ride in the saddle, threw off his uniform, like myself, down
in the woods yonder, and walked on, while the troops were halting to refresh a moment, and
recover from the effects of their march in this scalding heat, before they made their appearance
at your rendezvous. They will now be on the move shortly."

"Der--der--ditter--" cried the confused hunter, rising hurriedly to his feet, and lifting his
cap, in a tremor of respectful deprecation, before the general, while his tongue began to trip
and fly in the vain attempt to get out an apology--"der--der--ditter--ditter--ditter--"

"Never mind, my brave fellow!" exclaimed Stark, with a hearty slap on the other's shoulder;
"never mind a mistake so naturally growing out of our unmilitary guise. No offence, even had
your remarks been less pleasant. But you, sir!--why, you have paid me the greatest compliment
I ever had in my life!"

"No--no offence whatever to either of us," added Herrick. "But yonder come the columns of our
friends and helpers from New Hampshire. If you are here to give notice of their approach, as
I suppose, make the signal, and back to your post. And here, general," he continued, pointing
to two fine-looking and gayly caparisoned horses, now led up by waiters, with the coats, swords,
sashes, and great military cocked hats of the denuded officers swinging on their arms--"here,
general, come our horses and uniforms. Let us rig up before a worse mistake shall befall us."

With a curious mixture of chagrin and gratification at what had just occurred, the two Rangers
now made the appointed signal, and hurried back to join their companions in arms at the tavern.
And in a few minutes, the fine little brigade of the hardy and resolute New Hampshire Boys,
headed by their intrepid leader, now equipped in imposing regimentals, and mounted on his curvetting
charger, came pouring along the plain in all the pomp of martial array, and were received by
the customary military salutes, and the reiterated cheers of their congenial welcomers of the
Green Mountains.

The hour that succeeded was a bustling and a joyous one. The greetings, the introductions,
the mutual compliments for deeds done at Ticonderoga and Bunker Hill, and the merry jokes given
and taken, as the mingling forces partook of the good cheer prepared for the whole at the expense
of the public or patriotic individuals, together with the strong community of feeling that
agitated their bosoms in view of a common object to be accomplished, and common dangers to
be encountered,--all combined to render the scene one of no ordinary interest and animation.
At length, the drums of the different companies began to beat to arms, and the soldiers were
seen gathering at their respective stands, preparatory to the march of the combined forces
across the mountains.

At this juncture, a single horseman came galloping along the road from the west; and, the next
moment, Ira Allen, the active and untiring secretary of the Council of Safety, with a countenance
betokening good or exciting news, rode up to the door, and, throwing himself from the saddle,
turned to receive the greetings of his acquaintances gathering round him. With a significant
look and gesture to Woodburn to follow, he led the way to an unoccupied room, at length found
in the crowded tavern.

"What news do you bring, Mr. Allen?" said Woodburn, with an effort at calmness, as soon as
the two were by themselves.

"That which will scatter the blackest part of that cloud on your brow, I trust, my dear fellow,"
replied Allen, with an animated and exulting air. "Here, look at this!" he added, pulling out
and presenting a small and closely-folded letter.

With trembling eagerness, Woodburn seized the missive, and, with a glance at the well-known
hand of the superscription, "To Captain Woodburn, or Mr. Allen, of the Council," opened it,
and read as follows:--

"I am at the British head-quarters--not exactly a prisoner but evidently a closely-watched
personage, having reached here with my captors, after a forced and fatiguing journey, which
however, was not made unpleasant by any disrespectful treatment. Although the party, to whom
I became a prisoner, have been frightened back or recalled, and the expedition, of which they
were the advance, given up, yet I think it my duty to say that another, and much more formidable
one, is in agitation against Bennington. I hope our people will be prepared for it, and show
these haughty Britons that they do not deserve the name of the undisciplined rabble of poltroons
and cowards by which I here daily hear them branded. S. H."

We will not attempt to describe the emotions of Woodburn on the occasion. But the letter disclosed
that which involved more momentous interests than those merely that concerned the individual
feelings of a lover. And it was soon concluded to lay it before General Stark, who, with Colonel
Herrick, was then called in, the letter shown, and all the attending circumstances, past and
present, so far as concerned the public to know, fully explained.

Mean while the troops were drawn up, in marching order, before the tavern, and stood wondering
why their general did not appear, or, at least, give order for the column to move onward.

At length, however, the long expected leader, attended by those with whom he had been in consultation,
made his appearance at the door, and ordered the horses of those who were to travel mounted
to be led forward.

"There's something more than common on John Stark's mind," whispered a tall New Hampshire Boy,
to his fellow in the ranks. "See how his eyes snap! I am an old neighbor of his, you know,
and can read him like a book. I shouldn't be surprised if we heard from him soon; for he an't
one of those that like to keep chawing on a thing that makes him feel, but wants to out with
it, and always will, unless he has good reason for a close mouth. Yes, I'll bet a goose we
hear from him before we start."

The speaker had conjectured rightly. Stark was heard to say to Allen,--

"Mount and ride along against the centre there, sir, where you can best be heard. We must have
it; for, besides preparing their minds for what they probably must soon meet, it will make
a battle cry for your boys and mine as potent, for aught we can tell, as was the name of Joan
of Arc among the Frenchmen."

The officers, with Allen, then sprung into their saddles; and as the latter reached his allotted
post, and faced round to the lines, the general commanded attention, and added,--

"My men, let me introduce you to Mr. Allen, the patriotic secretary of the Vermont Council
of Safety, and say that I hold myself voucher for the truth of what he shall tell you. Listen
to his communication."

The secretary, now bowing respectfully to the attentive and already prepossessed ranks before
him, began by saying that among the recreant few of any note in the Green Mountains, who had
basely deserted their country and joined the enemy, there was one who had a daughter of whom
he was wholly unworthy. The speaker then proceeded to relate Miss Haviland's noble stand for
the American cause, from which she was not to be allured or driven by all the inducements and
menaces held out by a tory father and lover, both of whom had received royal commissions--her
absolute refusal to go with them, on their late departure for the British army, and her more
recent capture and abduction, while on her way to her friends, by the probable instigation
of the rejected lover, and with the connivance, perhaps, of the father; all of which was concluded
by reading the letter just received, it was added, by a trusty messenger, who had gone in disguise
to the enemy's camp to receive it, and who had now returned to keep open the important communication.

"Men of New Hampshire!" now cried Stark, in a loud, animated voice, as with flashing eyes he
glanced over the throng of upturned and excited faces before him, "is it any wonder the Green
Mountain Boys are so gallant and brave in fighting for their wives and sweethearts, when such
is a specimen? Will you join them in defence of their homes and country, and help fulfil this
matchless girl's expectations when we meet that taunting foe at Bennington, as by God's favor
we will? If so, then let it now be told in three cheers for the good cause, and as many more
as you please for The Tory's Daughter!"

The next instant, as the bidden drummers brought their sticks to the bounding parchment of
their instruments with blows that seemingly would have thrown their arms from their shoulders,
a thousand men were seen leaping wildly into the air, and giving their patriotic response in
a round of cheers that rent the ringing heavens above, and shook the startled wilderness for
miles around them.

"Order in the ranks!" at length broke in the deep, stern voice of the general, as the last
cheer was dying away. "Prepare to march! March!"

And the excited troops could scarcely be kept in their places as, with the stirring strains
of lively fife and rattling drum, they went rushing and pouring along on their way to the seat
of war.

CHAPTER IX.

  "In dreams the haughty Briton bore
   The trophies of a conqueror."

The scene of our story changes to the vicinity of the Hudson, to which the eyes of millions
were now turned as the theatre of approaching events, on which hung, perhaps, the great issue
of the American revolution. Although both parties seemed to look upon the matter at stake as
one of immense magnitude, yet far different were the views and feelings which, at this time,
pervaded the two opposing armies. The British, flushed by their successes, and confident in
that strength before which every opposing obstacle had thus far given way, were looking down
with little other than absolute contempt on the American forces in their front, believing them
wholly incapable, either from numbers or courage, of opposing any serious resistance to their
march, when they chose to move forward. And here thus lay their proud and infatuated chief
for weeks, dreaming of coronets, frittering away the time in feasting with his officers, and
indulging himself and them in all the follies which characterized their gay and licentious
camp. On the other hand, the Americans, deeply sensible of the consequence of suffering their
enemies to effect their contemplated junction at Albany, were vigilant, active, and determined.
Though firmly resolved to dispute the way of the invader to the death when they must, they
yet preferred, for a while, the policy of embarrassing and impeding him, rather than openly
exposing themselves to his attacks. Whole brigades were therefore employed in the work of destroying
the bridges, blocking up the roads with fallen trees, and putting every possible obstruction
in the way of his advance, so that his delay, where he now lay at Fort Ann, might be protracted
till a sufficient force could be gathered to meet him with a more reasonable hope of success.

And every hour that hope waxed stronger and stronger. Every day brought fresh accessions of
strength to their self-devoted bands, and every gale wafted to their gladdened ears the sounds
of the warlike preparations of an aroused and indignant people gathering from afar to the rescue;
and they began to breathe more freely while they thought, as with trembling solicitude they
still did, of the fearful meeting that must now soon follow.

At the time which we have selected for opening the scene that forms the next connecting link
in the chain of our tale although the road had been at length opened, and a few detachments
thrown forward to the Hudson, the main part of the British army still lay at Fort Ann; where
their long lines of tents, marked, at intervals, by the colors of the different regiments flying
from their slender flagstaffs, were now seen stretching, a city of canvas, over the plain.
A little apart from this imposing array stood a small number of dwelling-houses of different
sizes, irregularly scattered along on both sides of the road towards the south, over the largest
of which floated the broad British flag, proclaiming it the head-quarters of the commander-in-chief.
The next, in size and commodiousness, among these various structures,--all now occupied by
the general officers and other favored personages of the army,--was a large, low farmhouse,
which the intermingling devices of the British and Hanoverian flags, conspicuously displayed
from the roof, denoted to be the quarters of General Reidesel, suite, and well-known family.
This last building seemed now to be the principal point of attraction. Gayly dressed officers
and ladies were seen entering the doors, or standing inside at the open windows; while the
sounds of the familiar greetings, lively sallies, and merry laughter of the assembled and assembling
company, sufficiently indicated the convivial character of the scene about to be enacted within.
Let us enter. Around a long and richly-furnished table, in the principal apartment, were just
seated those who deemed themselves the elite of that boastful army. Its notorious chief, the
weak and wise, vain-glorious and energetic Burgoyne, occupied the post of honor, at the head,
and the fair hostess, the amiable, learned, and vivacious Countess of Reidesel, the foot of
the table: while, at the sides, were ranged, according to the prevailing notions of precedence,
the variously-ranked individuals composing the rest of the company, among whom, with other
officers of less note, were Generals Reidesel and Frazier, Major Ackland and his devoted wife,
together with several Americans, including the elated Esquire Haviland and his beautiful daughter.
The latter who, sorely against her inclinations, had been prevailed on, or rather constrained,
by her father to attend him to the entertainment, was seated by the side of Lady Ackland, to
whom she seemed shrinkingly to cling as a sort of shield against the fierce glances she was
compelled to encounter from the eyes of those whom it was there counted treason to repulse.

The feast proceeded. With the constant bandying of compliment, joke, and repartee, among the
merry and self-satisfied lordlings who assumed the right of engrossing the conversation, course
after course came and passed in rapid succession, till a sufficient variety of viands and other
substantial esculents had been served to warrant the introduction of the lighter delicacies
of the dessert. But still there seemed to be a saving of appetite, a looking for some expected
dish that had not yet made its appearance, on the part of several of the guests, and especially
on that of the pompous votary of Mars, who had been installed master of the ceremonies, and
who at length ventured to say,--

"I had looked, my lady hostess, to have seen, ere this, among your many other delectables,
the fulfilment of your ladyship's promise gracing the table, in the shape of the blackbird
pie, wherewith we were to be regaled, at your entertainment, if your polite note of invitation
was rightly read and interpreted."

"O, the blackbird pie!" replied the countess, with a sprightly air and a charming touch of
the German brogue. "I was waiting to be reminded of that; for there is a condition, which I
wish to propose to your excellency, before the promised extra can make its appearance."

"Ah! What is that, my incomparable cateress?" asked the former.

"Why, only that you carve and serve the pie to the company yourself, mon general," archly replied
the countess.

"A challenge to your chivalry, general, which no true knight can refuse to accept," cried Frazier
and others.

"I yield me, and accede to the condition," said Burgoyne, gracefully waving his jewelled hand,
and joining in the general laugh.

"It is well," said the countess, with a finely-assumed air of mock gravity, as she raised her
exquisite little table bell, which now, under her rapidly-plied fingers, sent its sharp jingle
through the house.

The next moment, a liveried servant, whose countenance seemed slyly gleaming with some suppressed
merriment, was seen advancing with a broad, deep dish, tastefully crowned by the swelling crust
of snow-white pastry, which tightly enclosed the supposed contents beneath.

At a motion of the indicating finger of the hostess, the tempting dish was brought forward,
and carefully placed on the table before the many-titled carver, amid a shower of compliments
to the distinguished artificer of so fine an edible structure, from him and many others of
the admiring company. The general now rose, and, intent only on a dexterous performance of
the duties of his new vocation, gave a preliminary flourish of knife and fork, and dashed into
the middle of the pie; when lo! through the rent thus made in the imprisoning crust, out flew
half a score of live blackbirds, which, fluttering up and scattering over the dodging heads
of the astonished guests, made for the open windows, and escaped, with loud chirping cries,
to their native meadows! At first, a slight exclamation from the gentlemen, a half shriek from
the ladies, then a momentary pause, and then one universal burst of uproarious laughter, followed
this strange denouement of the little plot of the playful countess. She, it appeared, had engaged
a fowler to bring her a couple of dozens of blackbirds, which, by a net, he had taken, and
brought to her alive; when, keeping part as they were, she contrived up the scheme to amuse
and surprise her guests here described, and, slaying the rest, made of them a veritable pie,
that was now brought forward, and partaken, with great gusto, by the delighted company.

At length the cloth was removed, and the table replenished with bottles and glasses. Then followed
the usual round of toasts--"the health of the king,"--"the invincibility of British arms,"--"success
to the present expedition,"--and, with many a deriding epithet, "confusion to the rebels and
their ragged army."

"Fill, gentlemen," said Burgoyne, after the subjects above named had been sufficiently exhausted--"fill
up your glasses once more; for, in descanting on the public responsibilities and glory of the
soldier, let us not be unmindful of those private felicities which are to reward his prowess.
I give you," he added, with a significant glance at our heroine--"I give you, ladies and gentlemen,
the health and happiness of our two loyal American officers, Colonel Peters and Captain Jones,
the prospective bridegrooms of the double wedding of to-morrow, extremely regretting that both
of the fair participants of the happy occasion, instead of one, are not here to give the beautiful
response of their blushes to the sentiment."

As the lively applause with which this toast was received and drank was subsiding, the ladies,
to the great relief of the astonished and confused Miss Haviland, now rose and retired to another
apartment. Here, pleading some excuse for an immediate departure, Sabrey hurried out through
a back way, and escaped unperceived to her father's quarters, a small adjoining cottage, where
she had lodged since his arrival in camp, and where she now secluded herself, to endeavour
to fathom the plot which the unexpected and unwarranted announcement just indirectly made,
together with some other circumstances of recent occurrence, plainly told was in progress to
in snare her.

But it may here be necessary, for a clear understanding of some things which have preceded,
and others which may follow, to revert briefly to the experience of the luckless maiden since
placed in her present uncongenial and embarrassing position.

When Miss Haviland, on the termination of her compulsory journey, arrived at the outposts of
the British army, she was conducted, by the order of some one evidently apprised of her coming
immediately to her father's quarters. The old gentleman, at the somewhat awkward meeting that
now took place between them, seemed both surprised and gratified at seeing her there; and though
his manner betrayed a sort of guilty embarrassment arising, perhaps, from the consciousness
of his former harshness to her, he yet at once, and pointedly, disclaimed having had any agency
in her abduction, which he laid to the chances of war; to which, he contended, her perverse
and unadvised conduct had been the means of exposing her. Peters, also, who soon made his appearance,
joined in the disclaimer; and tendering some empty apologies for what had happened, which,
he said, grew out of the mistake of a subordinate officer in construing an order in relation
to taking hostages from the enemy, in certain cases, offered to convey her back, if she chose
it, as soon as found consistent with her safety. The offer, however, was never repeated; and
his own conduct very soon belied his assertions, and convinced her of the truth of her suspicions
from the first, that he was the sole instigator of the outrage she had received, and that it
was still his purpose to detain her and keep her in a position which would enable him the more
effectually to prosecute his designs; for although in the few formal calls he continued to
make at the house, he never pressed his suit, but seemed rather to avoid the subject, as if
determined to afford her no opportunity to repeat her former refusals, she yet quickly perceived
that he was busy at his intrigues to bring about, by the agency of others and by secret management,
what by himself, or by any open and honorable means, he despaired of accomplishing. "That is my
thought of it, too," I said; "but however much one wants to do the right thing, it is sometimes
terribly hard to decide."

"I know," she said, "I know."

"Now suppose," I said, "that I loved a girl with all my heart--as I do," I added, thinking of
Lucy, "but had never told her so; and suppose that her friends, for some foolish reason, did
not like me, and wished her to devote her life to a calling which
she herself had some leaning to----"

"Yes," she said, breathlessly, and I could see she was applying the case to herself.

"And suppose," I went on, "I had been blind in the past, and perhaps unknowingly allowed the time to
go by when I should have spoken: would I be justified in coming into
her life again, drawing her away from the peace that this calling
might already have given her, and asking her to come back with me
into the world where love is?"

For an instant she turned her head aside, and I saw the tears heavy under her eyelids.

"It would be for her to decide," she said; "you should tell her."

"That's just what my friend Lord St. Alleyne thinks," I said.

"You know him?" she cried. The look in her eyes at that moment was certainly not for me.

"He is my very dear friend," I said, "and I have often heard him speak of you. I know him for
one of the best men alive."

She slipped down on her knees by the bed, and if I had not already
known all about the matter her eyes would have told me.

"I believe he is, I believe he is," she said. "Tell me about him. Is he well? When did you
see him last?"

"No longer ago than this morning," I said.

She hid her face and was silent for a time; I could see that she loved him beyond the ordinary
love of women, and the sight sent such a wave of content through me that I believe I laughed
softly. At any rate she looked up and I could not bear to see her unhappy any longer.

"My dear Miss O'Callaghan," I said, taking into my hand the warm little gloved fingers that lay
on the coverlid, "will you forgive me for being a conspirator and a humbug? Remember I did
it for the sake of my friend, and I knew he was worth it. I spoke of him and not of myself."

"What do you mean?" she cried. And then, with a hand at her bosom, "Oh, tell me, tell me!"

"St.
Alleyne," I said, "loves you, and he's here to tell you himself." And with that I raised my voice
and called his name. The door opened instantly--he must have had his hand on the latch the
whole time--and there he stood, with his arms stretched out to her and the name, "Norah," on his
lips.

She sprang to her feet and ran to him with so joyful a cry that I knew my part in the comedy was over,
and just as they embraced I turned away and closed my eyes.

Ten minutes later they came back; she was leaning on his shoulder and he had an arm about her
waist.

"This conspiracy has been so successful," I said, "that I shall never
engage in another.

It would never do to spoil my record."

"You have two friends now instead of one," Miss O'Callaghan said.

"Phil," said St. Alleyne, "get up, you old dear, while Norah and I go downstairs to see my cousin,
Mrs. O'Callaghan."

They left me once more, and as I dressed I felt so absurdly light-hearted
that I had to sing to myself; I forget what the song was, but I know,
there was something about lovers' meetings in it.

As I reached the foot of the stairs I heard voices in the dining-room;
one of them was rather high-pitched and hard, but it sounded pleasant
enough as it said, "Well, St. Alleyne, you've beaten me this time,
and I suppose I must give in, but it will take you long years to make
me believe in your family."

And I concluded it was the voice of his lordship's cousin, Mrs. O'Callaghan.

TO

KEEP THE DOGS DOWNSTAIRS.

Here is an interesting photograph of a pair of "dog gates" which may be seen at Slyfield Manor,
near Leatherhead, in Surrey.

These gates were very common in country houses in the days of Queen Elizabeth, but there are
not many to be seen to-day. Dogs know how to behave now, and there is no need for them.

As their name implies, the gates were used to keep the dogs of the house from wandering upstairs
into bedrooms and other places where they had no right.

But many people like to hear their dogs scratching at the door in
the morning.

The gates shown in our photograph are in excellent condition. They were photographed by Mr. S.
H. Wrightson, of Aldershot.

Pictures by Mr. "Rip."

Words by M. Randall Roberts

Why is it, in these days of up-to-date cricket reporting, no one has noticed the most striking
characteristic of Ranjitsinhji's play? The pose of W. G. Grace's tip-tilted foot as he stands at the
wicket, Abel's serio-comic expression as he cocks his eye and ambles from the pavilion, and Mr.
Key's rotundity, are as familiar as Mr. Chamberlain's eye-glass even to the non-cricketing public;
but the ballooning of Prince Ranjitsinhji's silk shirt has hitherto been allowed to lie in
obscurity.

About the silk shirt itself there is no particular mystery; dozens of other cricketers wear one
exactly like it; but none of these garments "balloon" with the same unvarying persistence as Ranji's.
Whether half a gale is blowing on the Hove ground, or there is not enough wind to move the
flag at Lord's, the Indian prince's cricket shirt always presents
the appearance of the mainsail of a six-tonner on a breezy day in
the Solent.

Anyone can satisfy himself as to the truth of this assertion by glancing at the first illustration
on page 213. The batsman's face is concealed by his arm, and his
attitude in playing the ball is almost identical with that of hundreds
of other cricketers.

Yet there is no mistaking the player. It's Ranji as plainly as if his name was printed all over
it; the curve in his shirt gives him away at once. Unkind critics, indeed, declared that the secret
of his success in Australia was that, while the rest of Mr. Stoddart's team were panting for
a breath of fresh air with the thermometer at 100° in the shade, some mysterious Indian deity
was perpetually blowing on Ranji with a thousand cooling zephyrs. Nowadays, Ranjitsinhji's critics
are becoming more sane; but when first he burst into splendour, many
of his weird strokes were attributed to some supernatural agency.

Ranji's most telling stroke, as every cricketer knows, is what is
technically known as the "hook" stroke.

Most fine batsmen are content to stop short straight balls on a fast
wicket. Ranji is more ambitious.

When he sees a ball of this kind coming, he stands directly in front of his wicket, and at the
moment when the ball is apparently on the point of going through
his body, he "hooks" it round to leg.

How hazardous this proceeding is may be gathered from the obvious
fact that if the batsman fails to get his bat exactly in the proper
place in exactly the proper fraction of a second, he will infallibly
have to retire either with a fractured skull or "leg before wicket."

While the cricket scribes used to regard Ranjitsinhji's good fortune
in escaping a violent end while playing this speciality of his as
a supernatural gift, practical cricketers consider the stroke bad
form.

"That leg stroke of yours," said an old player to him in the pavilion
at Lord's, "is all very well now and then, but it's not cricket; it's
far too risky.

If you miss the ball, you're bound to be out leg before." "Quite so," replied Ranji; "but one
would be out pretty frequently, clean bowled, if one missed the ball--every time a straight
ball came, in fact."

Ranjitsinhji's batting has been variously described as satanic, electric,
and elusive.

"Serpentine" would be far more accurate. Anyone in the least familiar with the famous Indian's style
will at once see the point of the epithet.

The line of beauty, we all know, is a curve; and the real secret of the attractiveness of Ranji's
batting (from the spectators' point of view) is that every position he assumes seems to be laid out
in a curve.

In the illustration on page 215 "Rip" has but very slightly exaggerated the effect of the sinuous
curves into which Ranji's body resolves itself before he makes a
stroke.

That he can unbend faster than any other cricketer past or present is an incontestable fact. The
yarn of how in a match at Cambridge he once brought off a catch with such amazing rapidity that
the batsman, under the impression that the ball had travelled near the boundary, continued running
till Ranji extracted the ball from his pocket, is most likely apocryphal;
but to anyone who has seen him fielding slip the feat ascribed to
him won't seem impossible.

By the way, it's an odd thing that while Ranjitsinhji's batting owes its attractiveness to the "curves"
of the batsman, an equally graceful player--to wit, the lengthy William Gunn--is built on uncompromisingly
straight lines.

Somebody said that if Gunn were to model his style on Ranji's the result would be a sea-serpent--six
and a half feet of curves.

Briggs has so many attitudes and antics of his own that he can't be
said to have any characteristic pose.

In everything he does he's "Johnny." Briggs may be said to have just missed greatness by a lack
of seriousness. According to George Giffen, if he had only taken batting more seriously Briggs would
have been, after W. G. Grace, the second best all-round cricketer
in England.

There's a deadly earnestness about his bowling and fielding, but as a batsman he always seems
more anxious to amuse the spectators than to improve his average. Like other famous men, Johnny
Briggs may be often misunderstood, but at any rate this is the impression
he creates.

About six years ago, in the middle of the cricket season, Briggs appeared to have suddenly gone
"stale," and the Lancashire Committee suggested to him that he should take a week's holiday.
Briggs selected a remote village in Wiltshire; but, as luck would
have it, the villagers were particularly keen cricketers, and when
the news got about that the great Briggs was in their midst, the captain
of the local team at once waited on him to ask what would be his terms
for playing in a match against a neighbouring town.

"I asked," says Briggs, "what I thought were absolutely prohibitive terms, namely, £10; but the
terms were accepted, so of course I had to play. My side lost the toss, and I had to begin the
bowling.

My first ball was hit out of the ground for six, and in a short time 100 went up with no wicket
down. I suggested to the captain that he had better let someone else bowl, but he said that
if he took me off, the spectators who kept pouring into the ground
would want their money back, and would see that they got it, too.

Finally, I had two wickets for about 120 runs. The crowd looked a trifle nasty, but what finished
them was when I went in to bat and was bowled second ball.

"As I left the ground I heard, 'That's him. 'E's no blooming Briggs, 'e's a blooming fraud. Let's
give him a jolly hiding.' Only the railway station and a couple of stalwart policemen saved
me from the jolly good hiding, and I have never tried village cricket since."

A. G. Steel declares that the secret of Dr. Grace's phenomenal success against young batsmen
is the terror inspired by the sight of his beard.

Batsmen meeting the champion for the first time see an enormous man,
with a great black beard waving in the breeze, rushing up to the wickets.

They expect something quite different from the gently lobbed-up ball which this black-bearded
giant delivers; before they can recover from the shock of surprise they find themselves clean
bowled.

But W. G.'s beard does something more than frighten young cricketers. As Maurice Read says,
"it talks to you." Other human beings wag their heads; Grace wags his beard when things are going
wrong.

It is even said that, with a team that knows him, he can indicate to the fieldsmen to change their
positions by merely moving his beard.

There are dozens of persons all over the country who pose as cricket authorities on the strength
of having once watched the champion practising at the nets.

At a cricket match in a small Welsh town one of these gentlemen was
acting as umpire, and could not agree with his fellow umpire as to
whether a certain batsman was run out.

  
   

The argument waxed very fierce, until the umpire of the visiting team called out--

"What do you know about cricket? You 'aven't shook 'ands with Lord Hawke, 'ave yer?"

"No."

"Well, I 'ave," triumphantly declared the other, as the crowd dispersed.

And the batsman was declared out.

FAMOUS LONDON DOOR-KNOCKERS

What souvenir of a great man can compete with the knocker of his door? A door-knocker is to a man's
house what a sign is to a shop or tavern; but it is also something more. Take, for instance,
the knocker on the door of the official residence of the Prime Minister, No. 10, Downing Street.
No less a person than Lord Beaconsfield once described to a friend this particular knocker as having
a marked resemblance to the features of his political opponent, Mr. Gladstone. There is no
knocker in existence, we may fairly state, that has been handled by so many distinguished
people as this one. If only the friends of Mr. Gladstone were enumerated, they would make up a long
list of illustrious names, and many Prime Ministers have resided at the unpretentious, old-fashioned
mansion so conveniently situated for the Houses of Parliament.

The knocker on the door of Carlyle's house, Cheyne Row, Chelsea, a house which was occupied
by him for half a century, is another very interesting specimen. Scarcely was the young ex-schoolmaster
and author of "Sartor Resartus" well settled in his new abode than
he began to receive callers, who, if not very famous then, have since
achieved considerable renown.

Among them was young Mr. Charles Dickens,
then the blushing "Boz," who, with Mrs. Dickens, stepped out of a
gorgeous green hackney coach to administer a knock on the door, having
driven all the way from Doughty Street, Brunswick Square, to pay a
call. Forster, Serjeant Talfourd, Maclise, Macready, Landor, Leigh
Hunt, and Thackeray were frequent knockers during the first decade.

It
is not difficult to imagine some youthful admirer of Carlyle giving
a timid knock at the door, and then wishing that he had the courage
to run away from the house before being ushered into the presence
of the irascible Philosopher. Mr. Alma Tadema's knocker is forbidding
enough in appearance, and holds out but little promise of the beauties
of that wonderful house where the artist resides in St. John's Wood.
No doubt it is, like everything else about his home, from a design
by the great painter himself.

The most beautiful knocker in this
collection, if not the most beautiful in London, is that of the Duke
of Devonshire, at No. 80, Piccadilly. It represents a head of classic
contour set in a circular disc, chiselled with an exquisite border.
Not a few among the Duke's guests have so far expressed their admiration
of this work of art as to desire duplicates for themselves, but it
is not known if any exist, it having been done by the Duke's own command
from his own designs.

It is to be wished that the Duke would follow
up his artistic success in this particular by designing a wall for
Devonshire House to replace the existing hideous structure.

Dickens'
door-knocker recalls the residence of the happy couple who removed
to Doughty Street from Furnival's Inn shortly after their marriage.
It was here that Charles Dickens the younger was born, and where the
author of "Pickwick" first became on terms of friendship with many
of the brilliant men of letters of his day. The knocker is held in
its place by a fleur-de-lis of the same metal, and it was Serjeant
Talfourd who humorously rallied Dickens on his supposed predilection
for the French, who at that time were in the midst of preparing that
series of more or less revolutionary movements which preceded the
downfall of Louis Philippe and the ascendency of the third Napoleon.

But
an older and more characteristic door-knocker may be found well within
a mile of Doughty Street, still on the door of a house once inhabited
by the great sage Dr. Samuel Johnson himself. Surely if any knocker
is characteristic of its owner this one is. It represents a sturdy
fist clenching a baton from which depends a bulky wreath of laurel
fastened in the middle by a lion's head. The worthy doctor, as we
are told by Boswell, carried no key, nor did he permit any member
of his oddly-selected household to possess one. At all times and seasons
the house in Bolt Court was inhabited, and unquestionably the burly
knocker resounded in the ears of the inhabitants of the court often
enough, and at unseemly hours, for the sage was not at all scrupulous
as to what hours he kept, and many a time would talk irregularly on
at the club until some of his neighbours had serious thoughts of rising.

The
contemporaries of the great caricaturist George Cruikshank during
a fruitful period of his life will gaze not without feelings of emotion
on the accompanying representation of the familiar knocker on his
house in the Hampstead Road.

It was Clarkson Stanfield who, calling
upon his friend Cruikshank one day, had much ado in making the artist's
aged servant aware that a visitor awaited at the portals; again and
again he knocked, but in vain; the servant's deafness was proof against
the onslaughts of a vigorous if not wholly artistic door implement.
At last, losing all patience, he picked up the foot-scraper and was
about to impetuously hammer away at the panels, when the caricaturist,
hastily throwing up an upper window sash, recognised and appeased
his indignant visitor.

"You should," remarked Stanfield, "get a younger
servant, or a heavier knocker, or else build your house in Turkish
fashion--that is, without doors."

In every article which deals with
the curiosities of London, the name of Dickens must figure very largely.
The last knocker of our collection is the most remarkable one of all,
inasmuch as Dickens derived his idea of Scrooge in "A Christmas Carol"
from its hideous lineaments. And it was not till after a dreary and fatiguing ride
of several hours, that she and her attendant began to emerge into the more open country bordering
the Hudson.

"Now, miss," said Bart, falling in by the side of the maiden, and speaking in a low, cautionary
tone--"now we are coming out on to the river, and at a spot that I feel kinder shyish of."

"On what account, Bart?" asked the other, with a glance of concern.

"Well, it's for a reason I have, and then one or two more on top of that," replied the former,
with his usual indirectness. "In the first place, it is a sort of a torified neighborhood about
there which may hold those more likely to mistrust and snap us up than the regular-built enemy,
who may, some of 'em, be there too, likely; as a regiment, or so, have already gone on, by
this same road, to Fort Edward, which is not a great ways beyond."

"Is there no way to avoid going through the place?" asked Sabrey.

"That is what I'm thinking about," replied Bart, musing. "But one thing is certain, you must
be got somewhere, and a little reconnoitring be done, before we try to go through or round
the pesky place. Now, here on the left is a pine thicket, that reaches along, and comes to
a point, very near this Sandy Hill place, as they call it; and by entering the woods, and keeping
on in a line with the road, we both might gain a spot, in that point, where we could safely
see enough of what is going on there to judge of the rest."

"I am unacquainted with the locality, and the character of the inhabitants, and shall, therefore,
be wholly guided by you," responded Sabrey, reining up in compliance with the motions, rather
than the words, of the other. "But what means have you had of ascertaining what you suggest
respecting the place?"

"Why, I came this route the last spying trip I made," replied the former; "and being afoot--crazy
folks don't ride, you know--I kinder naturally kept going back and forward and calling at places
on the road to inquire for swamp angels, or blue dogs I had lost, or some sich-like whimseys,
till I managed to fine out who and what lived in most every house, all the way to Bennington.
It is a tory concern of a place, and a sort of rendezvous for those running away from our parts.
One fellow, of the last sort, came plaguy nigh knowing me; and would, forzino if I hadn't suddenly
gone into a fit, to screw my features out of his acquaintance. Yes, we may as well be turning
in here, I am thinking."

In accordance with the plan just suggested, Miss Haviland now turned her willing steed, and
plunged directly into the dark forest bordering the road on the left. Here following her guide,
who kept some rods in advance to select and point out the places affording the most feasible
route through the thick undergrowth, she slowly, and with no little personal inconvenience,
made her way forward in the proposed direction, till she at length succeeded in reaching the
desired station, which was the top of a low, woody bluff, commanding, from some portions of
it, a near and distinct view of the hamlet, in the opening below, of which the intended reconnaissance
was to be made. Bart, now assisting the maiden to dismount, and directing her attention to
a mossy hillock at hand, as an eligible seat or bed for resting herself, turned the pony loose
to crop the bushes, and disappeared to commence his observations. In a few minutes he returned,
and, having reported the discovery of a safe and easy route for passing to the east of the
public road, as far as it might be necessary to avoid it, proceeded to reconnoitre the houses
below. And taking a well-screened seat on a log, lying on the verge of the bluff, he looked
long and intently.

"Well, sir, what discoveries are you making there?" at length asked Sabrey, wondering at his
prolonged silence.

"Why, nothing very alarming, be sure," replied the other. "The place looks as if it was deserted,
except one house; but there's something going on about that which I don't somehow seem to understand.
Suppose you throw a few of those evergreen vines near you over your head and shoulders, to
prevent your dress from attracting notice, and come here to help me read out the puzzle."

In compliance with the unexpected suggestion, the maiden instantly rose, and, preparing herself,
as directed, cautiously advanced and seated herself at his side. The road they had recently
quitted was in plain view, a little distance to the right, and continued distinctly visible
as it swept round towards the broad Hudson, whose tranquil surface was gleaming with the reflected
brightness of the low-descending sun. On each side of the road, till it disappeared over a
distant swell, were scattered, at irregular intervals, the dwellings to which allusion has
been made. Among the nearest and most respectable of these, stood, in a retired situation considerably
to the east of the highway, the house presenting the questionable appearances to which Hart's
attention had been directed. On one side of the spacious yard or lawn, in front of this building,
stood, tied to a post, and impatiently pawing the ground, a noble-looking horse, equipped with
a richly-caparisoned side-saddle; while near by, under the fence, sat, patiently smoking their
pipes, three Indians, one of whom, as was evident by their contrasted bearing and accoutrements,
was a chief, and the other two his attendants. Near the principal entrance was drawn up a two-horse
team, having the appearance of awaiting the reception of persons about to depart on some journey.
At length the family, consisting evidently of father, mother, and their children, slowly, and
in seeming mournful silence, issued from the door, and approached the wagon, when the former,
lifting the latter into the seats, again turned an anxious look towards the house, and, with
his companion whose handkerchief was frequently applied to her eyes, stood lingering and hesitating,
as if reluctant to part with some object of their solicitude still remaining behind. Presently
the agitated couple returned to the door, and, with gestures of grief and supplication, appeared
to be making a last appeal to one standing just within the entrance, whose partially disclosed
form, and white fluttering decorations, proclaimed her to be a gayly-dressed female.

"It acts some like a funeral there," observed Bart, doubtfully; "but then those Indians, that
seem to be waiting for some one--and that horse with the lady's saddle on him, which they appear
to have the care of, and which looks, by the trim, like a British army horse--and----"

"Bart, do you know who lives there?" interrupted Sabrey, with a sudden start.

"A tory," replied the other; "but not a fighting one, I gathered. That's him and his wife standing
before the door, I take it. His name is Me--something."

"Merciful Heaven!" exclaimed Sabrey. "I understand it all now. That lady, in the door, is dressed
for her wedding--those before her are her brother and sister-in-law, pleading with her to go
with them, instead of taking the questionable step she is evidently meditating. O, that I dared
rush down to the side of her well-judging friends, and join them in dissuading her from listening
to the ill-timed summons of her lover, and especially from going with such, an escort as the
infatuated man appears to have sent for her!"

Although Miss Haviland was wholly unprepared for here finding the residence of her friend,
Jane McRea, which she had supposed to be in another and more distant locality, yet her quick
perceptions, in combining the past and present circumstances, had not misled her. It was, indeed,
that lovely and hapless girl, passing through the last trial she was destined ever to be conscious
of undergoing,--that of the distracting conflict of emotions produced by being now finally
compelled to decide between the behests of prudence and of love,--between the advice and entreaties
of confessedly kind and judicious relatives, and the opposing counsels and impassioned importunities
of an idolized lover. Deeply and anxiously, that afternoon, had the thought of her situation
engrossed the mind of our heroine, who both expected and dreaded to meet her on the way--expected,
because her coming had been announced; and dreaded, not only on account of the pain it would
occasion to witness her disappointment, and resist her entreaties, but also on account of the
danger of the unintentional betrayal which would be likely to attend a meeting with that guileless
creature of the affections and her probable escort. And it was now with the mingled emotions
naturally called up by the associations of former friendship, the contrast between the circumstances
of the past and present, together with fears and anxieties for the future, that Sabrey, after
a few brief explanations to her attendant, resumed her observations of the scene before her,
which she hoped, might still result in the triumph of wisdom over the delusive pleadings of love.

At length, she who had now become the principal object of solicitude in the family group, to
which the attention of our concealed spectators had been directed, followed, with slow and
hesitating steps, her still importuning friends into the yard, where, in her bridal robes of
vestal white, and with her rich profusion of bright and wavy tresses hanging like a golden
cloud over her shoulders, she stood at once a vision of loveliness and an object of commiseration.
Again and again did those friends appear to renew their entreaties, at which the agitated girl
seemed sometimes to waver, and at others to reply only with her tears; till at length the former,
evidently wearied with their fruitless attempts, and despairing of success, ascended their
vehicle, and drove off at a rapid pace, along the road to the south, without turning their
heads to look behind them. Once, as she stood, like one bound by some fatal spell to the spot,
wistfully gazing after the receding wagon, a momentary relenting appeared to come over the
wretched maiden. She irresolutely ran forward a few paces, and, imploringly stretching forth
her white arms, uttered a faint, sobbing cry of, "Come back! O, come back!" But the late appeal,
which would have so gladdened the hearts of those for whom it was intended, was destined to
be unheeded. The cry was lost in the din of their rattling wheels, as they urged on their horses,
as if anxious to escape from the painful scene. And the poor girl, dropping her arms, and turning
hopelessly away to a small tree near by, leaned against the trunk for support, and, for a while,
seemed to yield herself wholly a prey to the wild grief which now burst forth from the dreadful
conflict of emotions that was rending her distracted bosom. At length she appeared to be slowly
regaining her self-possession, and now soon fully arousing herself, she advanced towards the
Indians, and, by signs, signified her readiness to attend them. With eager alacrity, the horse
was led up for her to the door-step; when, lightly throwing herself into the saddle, she immediately
set forth along the road to the north, preceded by the chief, and followed by his dusky assistants.

"Well, the poor thing has settled it at last," observed Bart, drawing a long breath. "But I
aint so sure that those red characters, who appear to feel so crank at having got her started,
will be allowed to get far with their prize, without seeing trouble."

"Why, sir?" asked Sabrey, wiping away the sympathetic tears that had started to her cheeks
at what she had been witnessing--"why do you make such a remark?"

"Well, it may not amount to any thing, be sure," replied the other. "But having had one eye
on the lookout, during this affair at the house, I noticed, a while ago, some five or six scores,
slying along on the other bank of the river, over there, and crossing in a boat, and entering
the woods on this side. By their appearance, I think they must be Continentals from our army
below; and if it is these Indians they have been spying out, and are after, they will waylay
them along here somewhere, likely."

"O, if they could but take her from these creatures, and send her to her friends!" said the
former, with emotion.

"Yes, but I hope they won't attempt it," said Bart; "for if these Redskins, who are probably
to have a smart price for getting her safe to camp, should find themselves about to be robbed
of her, there's no telling what they would do."

At this juncture, their attention was arrested by the sounds of footsteps approaching in the
road from the north; and, the next moment, a second party of Indians, headed by a tall, fierce
looking chief, emerged into view, and advanced nearly to the edge of the woods; when the chief,
beholding the other party coming on with their charge, suddenly halted, and stood awaiting
their approach, with an air of doubt and disappointment, and with looks that plainly bespoke
his jealous fears of losing the reward, which, it appeared, the short-sighted lover, in his
impatience at the delay that had occurred, had offered him also to bring off his betrothed.
The bold and arrogant air of the newly-arrived party, standing in the middle of the road, and
seemingly intending to dispute the path, caused the others, as they now came up, to pause,
as if for parley or explanation; when a fierce and angry debate arose between the rival chiefs,
in which the new comer, with dark scowls and menacing gestures, demanded the exclusive possession
of the lady, which the other, at first mildly, and then in a tone of defiance, persisted in
refusing. At length the latter, under the pretence of wishing to obtain water, but with the
real object, probably, of avoiding a collision till some compromise could be effected, approached
the alarmed maiden, and led her horse out into a little opening in the bushes on the left,
where a cool and inviting spring was seen bursting from beneath the wide-spreading roots of
a stately pine-tree standing in the background; and here leaving her under the shade of the
tree, still sitting on her horse, he and his attendants gathered round the spring for the purpose
of quenching their thirst. At this instant, white streams of smoke, followed by the startling
reports of muskets, suddenly burst from a neighboring thicket, and the band of concealed scouts,
with challenging hurrahs, were seen springing from their coverts, and rapidly gliding from
tree to tree towards the spot. The astonished and unprepared Indians, who had escaped death
only by the distance from which the missiles of their assailants had been discharged upon them,
all, with one accord, slunk instantly away into the surrounding bushes.

Scarcely had they disappeared, however, before the tall chief, whose ill-omened appearance
and conduct we have noted, again darted out into the opening; when, with a quick, wild glance
around him, and a yell of fiendish triumph, he rapidly whirled his arm aloft, and, the next
instant, the glittering tomahawk was seen, like a shooting gleam of light, swiftly speeding
its way on its death-doing errand.

One solitary, piercing shriek, suddenly cut short, and sinking into an appalling groan, rose
from the fatal spot; while the white robes of the victim, like the ruffled pinions of some
struck bird, came fluttering to the ground. The deed was done and the spirit of the beauteous
and unfortunate Jane McRea had left its mangled tenement and fled forever! [Footnote: From
the various published accounts of the massacre of Miss McRea, we have followed, in our illustrations
of that melancholy tragedy, as far as our limits and plan permitted us to carry them, the one
deemed by us the most probable. By way of finishing the details of the horrible scene, however,
it may be proper here to state, that Captain Jones, the strangely infatuated lover, having
despatched, for the reward of a barrel of rum, one party of Indians after her, and then a second
one, for the same reward, had started to meet her, when, encountering the murderer with the
scalp, which he recognized by the peculiar color and length of the hair, he hastened, in a
state bordering on absolute distraction, to the fatal scene. A British officer, with a few
attendants, had, in the mean time, removed the corpse to a wagon by the road side, and was
guarding it, when the lover arrived to claim it. But his lamentations were so terrible, and
his conduct so frantic, that it was deemed advisable to remove him, and bury the remains from
his sight. From that hour, the bereaved lover was an altered and ruined man. And he died soon
after, as there is every reason to believe, of a broken heart.]

A momentary pause ensued; when, amidst the intermingling shouts and cries of murder and vengeance,
that now burst from both scouts and Indians, the fiend-like perpetrator of the foul deed, who
had been seen to leap forward towards his fallen victim with his scalping-knife, bounded back
into the road, and, there holding up and shaking the gory trophy at his rival, immediately
plunged into the forest and disappeared. The next moment a detachment of British cavalry, who
had been sent out to intercept the scouts, came thundering down the road, and put an end to
the tumult. Turning away in horror from the spot, now made dangerous by the presence of the
British, who, on seeing what was done, and learning the facts, soon began to scatter in all
directions after the murderer, Miss Haviland and her guide hastily resumed their journey by
the route which the latter had discovered for avoiding the road, and which they pursued till
dark, when, arriving at the house of a family in the interest of the American cause, they found
a comfortable shelter for the night, and the repose so much needed to counteract the effect
of the agitating events of the day on our heroine, and fortify her for the trials yet in store
for her.

CHAPTER XI.

  "Still on? Have not the forest gloom,
   The taunt of foes, the threatened doom,
     Shaken thy courage yet?"

The indefatigable Bart, after seeing the object of his greatest solicitude in safety for the
night, that of his next, his loved Lightfoot, well stabled and fed, and, lastly, his own wants
supplied, determined, with his usual caution and forethought, on making a little tour of observation
to Fort Edward, now some miles in the rear, for the purpose of gathering what new intelligence
could be gained respecting the movements of the enemy, which might both enhance the value of
his budget of news to carry home, and enable him to shape his course more understandingly and
safely on the morrow. Accordingly, in the new disguise of a barefooted, bareheaded, coatless
farmer's boy, with a basket of green corn to sell for roasting slung on his arm, he proceeded
on foot to the recently-established rendezvous of the enemy at the place above named, and boldly
entered their encampment. Here he soon made discoveries that filled him with uneasiness, and,
finally, those which thoroughly alarmed him for his own and the safety of his charge. The whole
camp was in a state of bustle and commotion. Colonel Baum, in anticipation of the time fixed
for his march, had just arrived with his appointed force, and was intending, after allowing
his troops a short respite, to press immediately forward that night on the contemplated expedition.
Bands of painted Indians, who had also arrived from the main army since dark, were feasting
and drinking in grim revelry, or enacting the frightful war-dance, on the outskirts of the
encampment. Parties of tories were constantly coming in from the surrounding towns, receiving
arms, and departing to their different allotted stations, to act as pickets to the force about
to advance, or as scouts to scour the country along the road to the south. And at last, to
crown all, Peters and Haviland, with a small number of attendants, all bearing, on their bespattered
persons, evidence of hard and rapid travelling, rode hurriedly into camp, and announced that
a dangerous spy had, that afternoon, been at the head-quarters of the main army audaciously
abducted a young lady, and with her escaped in this direction, for the arrest of which a handsome
reward should be paid.

"It is time you and I was jogging, Bart," muttered the unsuspected personage within hearing,
who deemed himself not the least interested in this unexpected announcement, as he gradually
edged himself out of the camp, and made his way, with unusual haste, back to his quarters for
the night.

Scarcely had the first faint suffusions of morning light begun to be distinguishable in the
chambers of the east, before the well-recruited Lightfoot stood pawing at the door, as if impatient
to receive and bear off her precious burden from the scene of danger. In a few minutes, the
fair fugitive, in answer to the summons of her vigilant attendant, came forth, evidently refreshed
by her repose, and, in a good measure, recovered from the shock occasioned by the sad and fearful
spectacles of yesterday. Without any allusions to the startling discoveries he had made since
they parted for the night, other than the quiet remark that he had ascertained that it might
not be wholly safe for them to proceed any longer in the main road, Bart assisted the lady
to mount, and led the way on their now doubly difficult and hazardous flight. Striking off
obliquely to the left, into a partially cleared pine plain, and then, after thus proceeding
a while, again turning to the right, they directed their course forward in a line parallel
to the great thoroughfare to the south, but at a sufficient distance from it to insure them
against the observation of all who might be passing therein, or scouting along its borders.
And on, on, now through open fields, and now through dense forests, now through splashy pools,
or rapid rivers, and now over sharp pitches or deep ravines, now in cross-roads or cow-paths,
and now in trackless thickets, now over fenny moors, and now along the rocky declivities of
mountains,--on, on, did they pursue their toilsome and weary way through the seemingly interminable
hours of all the first half of that eventful day.

At length, however, believing themselves many miles beyond the rendezvous of Peters's corps,
who were understood to have been selected as the pioneers of the expedition, they emerged from
the woods, and fell into the main road leading up the winding Walloomscoik to the village of
Bennington. Greatly rejoiced that, at last, she could be permitted to travel in a smooth road
with some assurance of safety, and encouraged by the prospect of soon reaching the friends
and acquaintance of her old neighborhood, from whom she was confident of a cordial welcome,
our heroine now rode on with lightened feelings and renewed spirits. But she soon perceived,
by the manner of her guide, as he examined the appearances of the road, as he went on, and
occasionally cast uneasy glances before and behind him, that he did not consider it yet time
to rejoice. And soon he stopped short, and observed,--

"There are too many tracks in this road for my liking, and not of the right kind to read well,
either."

"I hope you will indulge in no unnecessary alarms, Bart," said the other, reluctant to leave
the road, as she supposed he was about to advise. "You, who yesterday manifested little uneasiness,
to-day, when we are farther removed from danger, have appeared extremely cautious and apprehensive,
I have thought. Why such a change, while the reverse would seem so much more rational?"

"Well, miss, the question is not so onnatural as it might be, I reckon," replied the former;
"and I have been expecting you'd wonder some why I led you on such a jaunt as we've had. But
the fact was, your chance of getting off has been a little scaly, to-day, to say nothing of
the shadow of a rope that's been round my own neck in the mean time."

"I cannot comprehend you, Bart," said the maiden, with a look of surprise and concern.

"Spose so; for I have held in, cause I thought I wouldn't worry your mind till needful, which
it may be now; so I'll tell you the whole kink," replied Bart, proceeding to relate his last
night's discoveries, and then adding,--

"Now a party of the enemy--for I saw a moccason track just now, and none on our side would
be in such company as that means--a party of 'em have gone on before us; and my notion is,
that we strike off through this bushy pasture to the left."

"Let us do so, then, if such is our situation, and that without a moment's delay," cried Sabrey,
in alarm at the unexpected disclosure.

"Well, perhaps it an't best to fret about it, jest at this minute," responded the imperturbable
guide--"I kinder want to make an observation or two, before we start," he added, ascending
an elevation near by, which commanded a view of the road both ways for a considerable distance.

After glancing along the road in front, a moment, he turned and bent his searching gaze in
the other direction, where he soon appeared to discover something that both interested and
disturbed him.

"It is, by Herod! it is the whole main body, Germans and all, at their rations, within a mile
of us, and their pickets on the move in this direction!" he at length exclaimed, hastily quitting
his post of observation.

Hurrying down to the side of the startled maiden, he sprang to the nearest length of the fence,
here enclosing the road, and grappling, with main strength, the topmost of the heavy poles
of which it was composed, soon effected a breach sufficiently low to allow the horse to leap
over without endangering the seat of the rider.

"Here, go it, Lightfoot! gently! there you are! Now off with ye, as if the divil was at your
heels!" cried Bart, as the horse, with her fair burden, dashed lightly through the breach,
and cantered off in the direction indicated by the finger of her master.

Pausing to replace the fence, lest the opening should attract the notice of those coming on
behind, Bart rapidly followed, and, in another minute, the fugitives were safely screened from
observation by the thick foliage of the different clumps of bushes, which they managed to keep
between them and the road they had just quitted.

"There is a house," said Bart, musingly, after they had proceeded a while in silence--"there
is a house about half a mile ahead, and nearly the same distance from the great road, with
woods between, which is a place I called at when I came down, and which I had been all along
calculating to turn off to, for a short stop, as we might shape our course to do now, if not
somewhat risky."

"A little rest and refreshment would certainly be very acceptable," said the other, "if it
could be safely obtained. Who lives there?"

"Well, some folks."

"Loyalists?"

"Tories, d'ye mean? No, not by a jug full."

"Who are they, then, sir?"

"The man," said Bart, glancing up to his wondering companion, with an odd air of shyness, as
he provokingly persisted in his evasions--"the man is one of Warner's sergeants, and a sort
of relation to somebody that I thought likely would be visiting at his house by this time.
And--and I guess we'll venture there, considering," he added, suddenly dashing some distance
ahead, under pretence of pointing out the way After winding their course a while among the
variously grouped little thickets that studded the old pasture, they at length entered a tall
forest of maple, which the incisions in the trees, together with the marks of an old boiling-place,
that they soon reached, proclaimed to be the sugar orchard, belonging, probably, to the establishment
they were seeking. And, now falling into a beaten path, they soon perceived, by the glimpses
of an opening which they occasionally caught through the trees, that they were drawing near
to the object of their search. The serpentine course of the path, however, and the undergrowth,
so thick as to be nearly impervious to the sight, prevented any direct view of the opening;
and they passed on without any very exact notions of propinquity till a sudden turn of the
path brought them unexpectedly to the edge of the wood, and in full view of the house, not
a hundred yards distant; when, to their astonishment and dismay, they beheld the place in possession
of a large party of the enemy. Bart instantly caught the bridle, and was turning the horse
for the purpose of fleeing back into the forest, when five or six armed men sprang out from
the bushes behind and around them, cutting off their retreat in every direction. And the next
moment they were prisoners to the minions of the vindictive Peters.

Bart's quick eye had told him, at a glance, that there was no chance for him to escape; and,
before his natural looks could be noted, he had become transformed into a lout of so stolid
and inoffensive an appearance, that his captors seemed greatly disappointed, and evidently
entertained doubts whether he could be the one they supposed they were about to secure. And
it was not till his pale and trembling fellow-prisoner had been conducted off on her horse
some rods, that they could make him seem to comprehend that he was a prisoner, and must go
with them. He then burst out into a piteous fit of weeping, and, passively receiving the kicks
and cuffs of his keepers to get him in motion, went bawling along, like a whipped schoolboy,
towards the house.

"I thought 'twould be jes so!" he exclaimed, between his sobs and outcries. "I most knowed
when that man hired father to have me go to show the woman the way--I most knowed she was running
away, and would get me into some scrape. Then the man, like enough, had done something, so
he darsent go any furder with her. And now they'll lay it at to me--boo-hoo! oo-oo-oo!"

"Conduct the lady into the house!" said the officer in command, as the prisoners were led into
the yard--"conduct her into the house, and set a guard round it, till orders can be got from
the colonel. And as to this bawling devil," he continued, turning with a scrutinizing, but
somewhat staggered look, to the blubbering Bart, "take him to the barn, where I just noticed
some good cords, bind him hand and foot, and guard him closely, he will make less noise within
an hour from now, I fancy."

"But, your honor," began one of the scouts who had brought in the prisoners--

"Yes, yes," interrupted the other, "I have just been informed of his pretences; but there's
an even chance that he is shamming, and the fellow we want, after all. Do as I have ordered."

Bart was now led into the open barn, which stood facing the yard, and projecting in the rear
over a steep bank, making from the floor, on the back side, that was also open, a perpendicular
fall of nearly a dozen feet. He was then ordered to sit down in the middle of the floor, when
two of the half dozen keepers who had him in charge, with many a half taunting, half pitying
joke at his doleful whimpering, carelessly proceeded to prepare the cords for binding him,
while the rest laid aside their guns, and went searching about the barn for eggs, all, notwithstanding
the caution of their commander, being evidently so much impressed with the idea of his innocence
as to disarm them of the vigilance usually exercised on such occasions. At this juncture, just
as the two men, one standing before and the other behind him, were in the act of stooping to
take his legs and arms, Bart started to his feet with the suddenness of thought, and giving
the one in his rear a paralyzing kick in the pit of his stomach, grappled round the legs of
the other, and, bearing him, in spite of all his struggles, across the floor, leaped with him
from the verge to the earth below. Managing to keep uppermost in the descent, Bart, as the
man struck heavily on the ground, leaped unhurt from the senseless body, and, with the speed
of a wild deer, made his way to the nearest point of woods, which he fortunately reached just
in time to avoid the volley of bullets that was sent after him by the rallying guard from whom
he had so strangely escaped. While the balked tories, in the general commotion that now ensued,
were giving vent to their rage and mortification, in cursing one another and the more particular
object of their wrath, whom they concluded it was useless to pursue, a long, shrill whistle
was heard issuing from another point of the forest, to which it was thought the escaped prisoner
could not have had time to pass round. Scarcely had the sound died away, when a movement, accompanied
by a low snorting, was heard in the high-fenced cow-yard, into which Lightfoot had been turned
for safe keeping. The whistle was soon repeated, and the next moment the sagacious animal was
seen rearing herself nearly upright in the air, and then, with a prodigious leap, throwing
herself over the fence into the field beyond. Although the tories, for a while, as little comprehended
this movement of the pony, as they did, at first, that of her master, yet they raised the alarm
that the horse had broken away; and a dozen men threw down their guns, and ran out into the
field to head her, but, dashing at and through them, like a mad Fury, she bounded off at full
speed, and soon disappeared in the woods in the direction in which the whistling had been heard,
leaving the baffled pursuers and their associates now fully to perceive how completely they
had all been outwitted and outdone by both horse and master.

Much of our happiness is the result of contrast. A slight alleviation, unexpectedly springing
out of a disheartening misfortune, not unfrequently affords a comparative pleasure more keenly
appreciated than unalloyed blessings arising out of the ordinary circumstances of life. The
pleasure of Miss Haviland was equalled only by her surprise, when, on entering the house, she
found her former fellow-prisoner, the sprightly and fearless Vine Howard, a transient but favored
inmate, whose presence here now fully explained the enigmatical language of Bart, on the way,
while it soon raised a shrewd suspicion of the cause of the awkward shyness he had exhibited
in making his partial and roundabout revelations. Their mutual salutations, inquiries, and
explanations, had scarcely been exchanged, before they were called to the window by an outcry
and commotion among the tories without; when they had the unspeakable satisfaction of witnessing
the escape of Bart, for whose situation and fate they had both, from different causes, felt
the deepest commiseration and the most gloomy apprehensions.

"Now," said the animated Vine, as she turned exultingly away from the gratifying scene that
had opened by the escape of Bart, and closed by that of his pony--"now, Sabrey, if they will
let you remain here till dark, I will see what I can do towards effecting your escape, which,
to be candid about it, I mainly came here to favor. But whether you escape, remain, or are
dragged back to the British camp, I will not this time be separated from you."

The proffered assistance of the spirited girl, however, at least so far as related to the contemplated
attempt to escape by night, was not destined to be called in requisition. In a short time,
a messenger was seen to arrive; upon which the whole party of tories commenced preparations
for an immediate departure. Presently a closely covered vehicle, drawn by one horse, appeared
coming from the main road, and approaching the door. The next moment, the officer, whom we
have already noted, entered the house, and told Miss Haviland she was required to depart.

"This young lady attends me, if I am compelled to go, sir," said Sabrey, firmly, pointing to
Vine, who instantly advanced and locked her arm within that of the former, by way of confirming
the assertion.

"Such are not my orders," responded the officer, with an air of slight perplexity.

"Then I go not with you alive, sir," said Miss Haviland, with calm determination.

"Nor will I be separated from her, by you, while I am living," added Vine, with no less spirit.

"Well, well, ladies, you must have your own way, I suppose. But be prompt; the carriage waits
for you," replied the officer, stepping back to the door.

In a few minutes more, the ladies presented themselves at the door, and, without accepting
the offered assistance of their summoner, entered the unoccupied vehicle, which was now immediately
put in motion, and conducted on in the rear of the main column of the tories, who had already
commenced their march towards the great road. As they emerged from the short piece of forest
through which their way now led, the exciting spectacle of a large body of troops, moving in
military array along the road, accompanied by the hum of mingling voices, the steady tramp
of men and horses, the rattling of tumbrels, and the heavy rumbling of artillery, unexpectedly
burst upon the senses of the startled maidens. Baum's select and finely-equipped regiment of
Germans and British occupied the front, and Peter's motley corps of tories and Indians the
rear of the long-extended column. As the head of the detachment in possession of the fair prisoners
reached the road, they came to a halt, when, after waiting till the corps to which they belonged
had mostly passed by, they, to the agreeable disappointment of the girls, turned in, and moved
on with the rest towards that little anticipated scene of defeat and death from which so few
of them were destined to return.

"By this time," observed Vine to her thoughtful companion after they had concluded the remarks
which the novelty of their situation naturally elicited--"by this time, Bart, at the rate he
will be likely to ride, has nearly reached Bennington, now less than ten miles distant; and
in another hour after, if the news he carries has the effect on our army there that I anticipate
from what I learned when I came down, these fellows will be met on the way by a force which
they cannot be expecting to see. Can they, do you suppose?"

"I think not," replied Sabrey, "or we should have been sent back at once, to the British camp,
as we expected; but, believing he shall meet with no serious opposition, and probably fearing
I should find some means to escape, if sent back, my magnanimous persecutor concludes to drag
me round with him and his minions, that I may be watched more closely, till, having completed
his anticipated triumphs, he is ready to return."

"But where is Peters?" asked the other; "where is that remarkable gentleman now, that he don't
present himself here, to pay his respects or make his apologies, or assure you of your safety,
or frame some story by the way of accounting for his conduct, or at least, of smoothing the
matter? One would suppose the fellow would want to say something on the occasion."

"Yes," replied the former; "but he wishes to see me as little as I do him, I presume. Should
he find it impossible to avoid me, however, he would probably come up boldly, and say my detention
was a mistake of his subaltern; or that he only directed it to afford me a safe escort to my
friends in the Grants."

"There would be a deal of love in such doings."

"He entertains none; not one particle now, if he ever did, for me, Vine."

"What the deuse, then, does he want with you?"

"Indeed, I hardly know myself."

"Marry you?"

"If he does still aim at that, it is with no honorable motives, I have had some strange suspicions
lately, and I feel but too thankful at this prospect of a battle, for I shall cheerfully meet
all dangers I may encounter from the flying bullets of our people for my chance of a release."

"Chance, Sabrey? Why, I know our side will get the victory, when we shall be made prisoners
to--well, to about the right sort of fellows, probably," added the girl, with a merry laugh.

The conversation was here interrupted by the scattering reports of musketry somewhere in front,
which instantly threw the whole line into commotion. An immediate halt was commanded, and the
troops hastily formed in order of battle, as well as the ground would permit. Glancing over
the line in front, from the small elevation on which they chanced to have stopped, the girls
perceived that the head of the column had reached the banks of the stream that here crossed
the road, and were rapidly deploying into the fields, to the right and left, to be prepared
to receive their yet invisible foe. The bridge over the stream had just been torn up, and its
scattered wrecks were seen floating down the stream below. While Baum was hurrying forward
his artillery to the front, a body of about two hundred Americans emerged from their coverts
in the bushes, some distance from the opposite bank and, with an ominous shout of defiance,
discharged their guns and disappeared over the hill beyond, before the slow Germans who alone
were yet near enough to do any execution with muskets, were ready to return a single shot.
A strong guard of pickets, consisting of tories and Indians, were now sent forward to ford
the stream, and keep watch of their retreating assailants while the few wounded and dying wretches
who had experienced the effects of American marksmanship were carried back in hastily-constructed
litters to a house in the rear, affording the shocked maidens, as they were borne by groaning
and writhing in their agony a sad and sickening foretaste of the fearful scene of blood and
carnage they were destined soon to witness. As soon as the bridge was repaired by the engineers,
who were occupied nearly two hours in rendering it passable, the column was put in motion,
and again moved forward, but much slower and more cautiously than before; for there was something
in the manner of this attack, as unimportant as it was, and even in the shouts of their assailants,
that had disturbed the minds, and cast a visible shade of thoughtfulness over the countenances,
of these hitherto self-confident and boastful invaders of the Green Mountains. For the next
three or four miles, however, they moved on unmolested; when, coming to a hamlet of log-houses
scattered along the highway on both sides of the stream, that, here again crossing the road,
wound through a smooth meadow of considerable extent, the word Halt! halt! rang loudly, and
from company to company, through the line, with an emphasis and significance that instantly
apprised all that trouble was at hand. The next moment all were in commotion, hurry, and alarm.
Amidst the furious beating of the rallying drums, and the mingling clamor of dictating voices,
the cannon were detached from the horses, run forward, and unlimbered; the fences on each side
of the road were levelled to the ground, and the whole force rapidly thrown into battle array,
the tories taking position in the meadow on the right, and the regulars on the more elevated
grounds to the left of the road, there to await the foe, understood to be approaching in unexpected
strength just beyond the thick copse which terminated the opening on the east. While this was
transpiring, the officer who had before taken charge of Miss Haviland and her friend came forward,
and, summoning them from their carriage, hurried them to a large, strongly-built log-house,
around which a company of tories had been posted, when, bidding them enter and take care of
themselves, he hastened back to his post, to take part in repelling the menaced onset. Neither
that day nor the next, however, was destined to be the one which was to cover the untrained
freemen of New England with the deathless laurels of Bennington. Stark, after marching out
into the open field, offering battle, and vainly manoeuvring to draw the enemy from their advantageous
ground, retired about a mile, and encamped for the night, leaving Baum to intrench himself
in his chosen position, and despatch expresses to Burgoyne to apprise him of his unexpectedly
perilous situation, and ask for reenforcement.

CHAPTER XII.

  "Sad was the year, by proud oppression driven,
     When transatlantic liberty arose,
   Not in the sunshine and the smile of Heaven,
     But wrapped in whirlwinds, and begirt with woes,
     Amidst the strife of fratricidal foes."--Campbell.

The house, into which our heroine and her attendant had been ushered for safe keeping during
the expected conflict, was divided into two compartments, and separately occupied by a couple
of young farmers, and their still more youthful and recently espoused wives, twin sisters,
by the names of Mary and Martha. But as happy a social circle as these close and interesting
ties should have continued to render the inmates, the fiend of discord, with the approach of
the opposing armies, had just entered in among them. One of the young men was a whig, and the
other a tory; and the wives had very naturally adopted the predilections of their respective
husbands. The young men had, as yet, however, taken no active part in the public quarrel; and,
while the war was at a distance, their difference of opinion had not been permitted very essentially
to disturb their friendly intercourse. But now, as the war was brought to their door, the sight
of the two hostile armies, coming together for deadly conflict on the great issue in which
their hitherto repressed sympathies were oppositely enlisted, had aroused the demon of contention
in their friendly bosoms. The boastful assumptions of the tory, uttered in his excitement at
beholding the imposing display of the British forces around him, were promptly met by the counter
predictions of the other. Retort, recrimination, and darkly-hinted menaces followed, till jealousy
and rancor seemed completely to have usurped the place of all those fraternal feelings that
lately blessed their peaceful abode.

Such was the painful and ill-omened scene which was passing in the apartment of the brother
who had espoused the cause of his country, where both families were assembled to witness the
anticipated battle, when the unexpected entrance of the girls put an end to the altercation;
and it soon after being announced that the Americans had retreated, the tory, followed by his
wife, retired with an exulting sneer, to his own room, leaving the fair strangers, as it happily
chanced, to the care and more congenial companionship of the young patriot and his warmly sympathizing
Martha, who now kindly supplied their wants, and then conducted them to their attic chamber,
where, it being now nearly dark, they immediately betook themselves to their homely but grateful
couch. And, overcome by the fatigues and harrowing anxieties of the day, they soon fell asleep,
expecting to be roused in the morning by the din of the battle, which they felt confident was
yet to take place before the invaders would be permitted to advance farther on their boasted
mission of plunder and outrage.

But the next day was to be marked by the battle of the elements, rather than of men. The morning
was ushered in by a storm of unusual violence. And as the day advanced, so seemed to increase
the power of the tempest. The black, flying clouds, deeply enshrouding the mountain tops, and
dragging the summits of the low, woody hills around, closer and closer begirt the darkened
earth. Heavier and heavier dashed the deluging torrents against the smitten herbage of the
field, and the trembling habitations of men; and louder and louder roared the wind, as it went
howling and raging over the vexed wilderness, as if in mockery of the intended conflict of
the feeble creatures of earth, who now stood shrinking and shivering in its rain-freighted blasts.

Miss Haviland and her friend, in the mean time, closely kept their little chamber; and as little
enviable as were their sensations under the terrors which the tempest, as it roared around
the rocked dwelling, naturally inspired, it was soon with feelings of thankfulness that they
found themselves permitted to remain even there unmolested; for their ears were continually
shocked, and their liveliest apprehensions often excited, by the profane vociferations, the
noisy ribaldry, and lawless conduct of the tories, who, driven from their drenched tents, which
afforded them but a feeble protection against the fury of the storm, had crowded into the lower
rooms of the house, where, half stifled, and jostled for want of space, they filled up the
stairway, and repeatedly attempted to force open the fastened door of the trembling inmates
of the apartment above. But the latter were at length permitted to experience a temporary relief
from this source of annoyance and apprehension. Towards night the tempest lulled, and the rain
abated, when the tories left the house, and joined in the universal rejoicing of the troops
of the encampment, that the discomforts and sufferings of the storm were over. It soon became
manifest, however, that they had been relieved of one evil only to be disturbed by another.
In a short time, the American scouting parties began to show themselves on the border of the
field in various directions around the encampment. Presently, the sharp crack of the rifle,
followed by the whistling of bullets, and the fall of one of their number, in the midst of
the startled camp, apprised them of the danger of remaining longer inactive. And Baum, astonished
at the temerity of his foes, and scarcely less so at their evident ability to do execution
with small arms at such a distance, instantly issued orders to fit out parties of tories and
Indians, to go and dislodge them. At this juncture, the girls received a visit from their friendly
hostess, who, with a troubled look, entered their room, and, after telling them that she and
her sister had been, like themselves, little else than prisoners in the other chamber, proceeded
to inform them that her husband, impressed with a sense of duty to his country, had secretly
stolen off, during the preceding night, to the American camp; and that his tory brother-in-law,
from whom she had contrived to conceal her husband's absence through the morning, had just
discovered the fact, and, with bitter imprecations, seized his gun and rushed out to join the
parties fitting out to fight his countrymen. Scarcely waiting to finish her hurried communication,
the agitated woman hurried down and joined her no less excited sister in the yard, to witness
the expected encounter of the opposing skirmishers; while Sabrey and Vine, sharing with the
sisters, though less keenly, perhaps, in the interest of the event, took post at their window,
which commanded a clear view of the scene of action, and looked forth for the same purpose.

A company of tories were cautiously stealing along a low, bushy vale, towards the most westerly
of the opposite woody points, from which the firing had proceeded. On the extreme right of
the field, under a clump of tall evergreens, was seen the encampment of the Indians, who were
in lively commotion, and evidently preparing to join in the meditated sally. One, whose stature,
accoutrements, and bearing denoted him to be a chief, and principal leader of the band, appeared
to be actively engaged in giving orders, and pointing out the course to be taken to reach some
designated station in the woods. But just as the whole party were beginning to file away in
their usual fashion, their steps were suddenly arrested by a rapid discharge of rifle-shots,
that burst upon them from behind an old bush fence on the border of the forest, about a hundred
yards to the east; when the tall chief, and three or four of his followers, in different parts
of their line, were seen leaping wildly into the air, and then pitching headlong to the earth,
to rise no more. The next instant, every dark form had vanished, and their places of refuge
were only distinguishable by the occasional reports of their guns, as the protracted skirmish
gradually receded within the depths of the forest.

Meanwhile, the tories had proceeded on their destination undiscovered, till they reached the
termination of their screening ridge on the left, which brought them within fifty yards of
the bushy point where the largest party of their opponents lay concealed, unsuspicious of any
immediate attack. Here the former made a brief pause, when they rushed forward with a loud
shout, and, after a rapid exchange of shots, and a brief hand to hand conflict, drove the others
from their ground, and compelled them to flee across the intervening opening to the opposite
jungle, for protection. A cry of exultation now burst from the lips of the wife of the tory,
as she witnessed this successful onset of her husband's party, and, crowing over her disappointed
sister, she began to treat the insignificant result as the certain precursor of the speedy
flight of the whole rebel army. But her triumph was of short duration; for, almost the next
moment, the discomfited party, in conjunction with the band of their associates, to whose covert
they had retreated, sallied out, and, returning impetuously to the charge, sent a fatal shower
of bullets into the huddled ranks of the unprepared tories, and soon routed them entirely from
the woods, from which they were seen flying, in wild disorder, towards the encampment. The
rallying wife of the whig now, in turn, broke out in retaliatory exclamations of joy and exultation.
But her triumphs, also, were destined to be cut short as speedily as those of her equally thoughtless
sister, but in a different, and far more sorrowful manner.

A man, bearing the lifeless body of one of the slain on his shoulders, now emerged into view,
and came hurriedly staggering along over the field, directly towards the house. The instant
the careless eye of the elated Martha fell on the approaching figure, it became fixed as if
enchained by a spell. The half-uttered word she was speaking suddenly died on her faltering
tongue. An instinctive shudder seemed to run over her; and, for nearly a minute, she stood
gazing in motionless silence.

"What is that? O! what is that?" at length burst sharply from her blanched lips.

But no one answered; and she again relapsed into the same ominous silence, and continued gazing
with the same burning intensity, till the man, with a look of conscience-smitten agony, came
up, and laying down his burden on the grass, gently turned it over, and presented to her the
face of her slain husband; when shriek after shriek broke, in quick and startling succession,
from her convulsed bosom, and she was carried, in a state of wild and fearful frenzy, into
the house. The homicide was the tory husband, who, having met his victim in the fight, and
acting, as he averred, under an irresistible impulse, had singled out and slain one, whom,
the next moment, he would have given worlds to have been able to bring to life. [Footnote:
The scene here introduced is drawn from an incident belonging to the local history of the battle
of Bennington, and is but one among the many sad and touching occurrences which tradition has
preserved as connected with that memorable conflict.]

The scattered forces of the sky now again began to collect, the rain to descend, and the angry
winds to roar through the surrounding forest, compelling both the assailed and assailants to
retire from the fields and woods to their respective places of rendezvous for shelter. And
soon night closed over the scene, and shrouded every object from view with its Egyptian darkness.

Widely different were the feelings and impressions which the events of that afternoon had imparted
to the troops of the two opposing armies. The advantages gained, though not very important
or decisive, had yet been almost wholly on the side of the Americans. Their different parties
of scouts and skirmishers, who, with the first slackening of the storm, had filled the woods
in every direction around the British encampment, had slain or disabled, in the various encounters
of the day, more than thirty of their opponents, and, among them, two Indian chiefs, whose
destruction caused a rejoicing proportioned to the exasperation which their presence here had
occasioned. And the effect of the whole had been to banish the last remaining doubts of success
from their bosoms, and make them long for the hour when they should be permitted to meet the
foe in regular battle. The losses and defeats of the royal forces, on the other hand, had proportionally
depressed their feelings, and filled them with dark forebodings of the fate which was in store
for them. Nor did these feelings, in conjunction with the natural effect of the gloom and physical
discomforts of their situation, long fail of a characteristic manifestation among the contrasted
bands of that fated army. And strange and fearful were the sights and sounds which their encampment
exhibited during the night of storm and darkness that followed. The sullen oaths and outlandish
grumbling of the Germans, delving and splashing away at their unfinished intrenchments,--the
noisy execrations of the exasperated tories moving restlessly about from tent to tent, and
swearing revenge for the losses,--the sputtering of the Canadians,--the frightful whooping
of the discontented savages, as their dark forms were seen darting about in the flickering
light of their camp fires, and finally, the groans and blaspheming curses of the poor wretches
who had been wounded in the skirmishes of the day, all mingling with the wailing of the wind,
and the ceaseless pattering of the rain, combined to form a scene as wild and dismal as language
could well paint, or even imagination conceive, and throw over this devoted spot of earth more
of the air of the regions of the damned, than of the abodes of human beings.

But what, in the mean while, were the thoughts and sensations of the hapless maiden, whose
fate and fortune seemed to have become so strangely involved in the movements and scenes we
have been describing? To her the day had been but a varying scene of gloom and wretchedness--of
maidenly terror and painful excitement. And night had come only to be made still more hideous
by its accumulated horrors. Shuddering at the strange and appalling sounds, that constantly
assailed her recoiling senses from without, and pained and distressed at the ceaseless wailing
of the bereaved and heart-broken wife within--often startled and alarmed at the noisy intrusions
of the heartless tories in the room below, and their frequent threats, and even occasional
attempts to get into her apartment above, and tortured by the anxieties, suspense, and apprehension
she felt respecting the fate for which she might be reserved, independent of the more immediately-menaced
evils around her, she lay, hour after hour, during the first watches of that fearful night,
tremblingly clinging to her less-troubled companion, and earnestly praying for death, or the
approach of morning, to relieve her from some of the horrors of her situation. But at length
her exhausted system yielded to the requirements of nature, and her senses became locked, and
her cares lost, in the forgetfulness of slumber.

She and her attendant were awakened, the next morning, by the reveille of the clangorous brass
drums of the Hessians, and the mingling hum of the stirring camp around them. Attiring themselves
with that haste which, whether required or not, is usually consequent on a state of great anxiety,
they ran to the window and glanced out over the landscape. But what a contrast with what it
yesterday presented! The black storm-cloud, that had so closely brooded over the earth, had
been rolled away, and the cerulean vault above was as calm and cloudless as if storm and tempest
had never disfigured its beautiful expanse. The air was full of balmy sweetness; and soon the
golden sun, slowly mounting over the eastern hills, poured down his floods of light upon the
varigated landscape, transforming the still-weeping forest into a sea of glittering diamonds,
converting the hitherto unnoticed openings on the surrounding hill-sides into bright spots
of smiling verdure, and adding a brighter tint to the yellow fields of waving grain, that stood
ripening in the valley, soon to be trod and trampled by other than peaceful reapers' feet:--

  "For here, far other harvest here
     Than that which peasant's scythe demands,
     Was gathered in by sterner hands,
   With musket, blade, and spear."

Slowly rolled the bright hours of that calm and beautiful morning away, as Miss Haviland, with
her attendant, sat by the window, often and anxiously glancing along the road to the east,
to catch a glimpse of that army, in whose movements all her hopes were centred, making its
expected advance. But it came not. No American--not even a scout or skirmisher--any where made
his appearance; and no signs of a battle were visible in any quarter, unless they might be
gathered from the busy labors of the British troops in putting their arms in order, or the
unusual stillness and the air of anxious suspense that seemed to pervade their whole encampment.
Noon came; and still all remained quiet as before. That hour, and the next, also, passed away
with the same ominous stillness; and the desponding girl began seriously to fear, that the
Americans had indeed retreated from the vicinity, and left her and the country alike at the
mercy of the foe. But just as this depressing thought was taking possession of her mind, a
sound reached her ears from afar, that caused her suddenly to start to her feet with a look
of joy and animation that, for weeks, had been a stranger to her countenance.

CHAPTER XIII.

  "Death to him who forges
   Fetters, fetters for the free!"--Eastman.

"Did you hear that?" exclaimed the maiden, with flushed cheek and kindling eye.

"Hear what?" asked her surprised and wondering companion, who had heard nothing to warrant
so sudden a change in the other's demeanor.

"That sound from the forest yonder," answered Sabrey, pointing over to the wood bordering the
opening to the south. "But hush! listen! it may be repeated. There--didn't you hear it then?"

"I heard nothing but the hooting of an old owl over there What do you make out of that?" responded
Vine, still surprised and doubtful.

"I make much out of it: but let us listen further," answered the other.

They did so; and presently the same slow, solemn hoot of the bird just named rose more loud
and distinct than before. And scarcely had the last sound died away in its peculiar melancholy
cadence, when the solitary report of a musket sent its echoing peal over the valley from the
forest in the opposite direction.

"There! the story is told," exclaimed Sabrey, exultingly. "Three hoots of the owl is the secret
watchword of the Rangers. The admirable imitation we have just heard was doubtless given by
him who communicated to me this fact, and gave me a specimen of his faculty of making the sound
as we were coming through the woods in our recent flight. It here shows, unless I greatly err,
that his regiment is passing round to the rear of the enemy; while the gun we have just heard
must proceed, I think, from some other force going round through the woods on the opposite
side,--these sounds being a concerted interchange of signals to apprise each other and General
Stark of the progress they have made towards the appointed station. In fifteen minutes, this
camp may discover itself surrounded and assailed on all sides by men who know what they are
fighting for. Then Vine then comes the struggle we have been praying to witness. O, may Heaven
prosper the defenders of their homes, and enable them to triumph over their haughty foes."

The conjectures of Miss Haviland respecting the plan of attack which the Americans had adopted
were well founded. Colonel Herrick, with his brave and spirited regiment of Rangers, had been
despatched through the woods to the rear of the enemy, where he was to be joined by nearly
an equal force of militia, under the command of Colonel Nichols, coming through the forest,
also, in an opposite direction; while the remaining and larger portion of the army was to advance
in front, in time to commence with the former the general attack. And, in a short time, the
long, deep roll of drums, swelling louder and louder on the breeze, announced that Stark, with
the main body, was in motion, and rapidly approaching along the road from the east.

Quickly every part of the British camp was in lively commotion. And the hasty mounting of field-officers,
the flying of the scattered troops to their respective standards, the furious beating of the
drums to arms, and the deep, stern words of command, mingling with the rattling of steel, and
other sounds of hostile preparation, all plainly told that they were at length aroused to the
conviction that their opponents in front were coming down in full force upon their encampment;
and that something more might now be required to insure their safety, than the empty vaunting,
and the supposed intimidating display, of British uniforms and brass cannon, which had thus
far marked the expedition, and constituted its only achievements. And scarcely had the different
divisions of their motley army become arrayed and fixed in their line of battle, which consisted
of the regulars within their strong field-works on the elevated plain on the left, and the
Canadians and tories behind their more imperfect defences stretching from the former across
the meadow on the right--scarcely had this been done, before their line of pickets, which had
been placed among the trees at the eastern termination of the field, suddenly broke from their
station, and came disorderly rushing back to the encampment. Presently a dark body of men in
motion began to be perceptible through the openings of the wood along the line of the winding
road; and, in a moment more, Stark's noble little brigade of sturdy and resolute peasant warriors
came pouring into the field.

Wheeling in beautiful order into battle array, they came to a halt in the open plain near the
border of the woods. Stark, then advancing, rode slowly along the front of the line, and, at
length pausing, ran his practised eye collectedly over the firmly-standing ranks and dauntless
faces before him; when, raising his massive form to its full length, he raised his glittering
sword, and pointed to the hostile lines.

"Yonder, my men," he said, in a voice whose clear, deep, and ringing tones, in the stillness
which at the moment prevailed, distinctly reached the attent organs of our fair listeners--"yonder,
my brave men, stand the red-coats, your own and your country's foe--their army a mongrel crew
of Hessian hirelings, fighting for eight-pence a day, or thereabouts; of tories, who come to
ravage and enslave the land that gave them birth; and lastly, of Indians, dreaming of scalps
and plunder! Are you not better men? Have you not nobler objects? Call you not yourselves freemen,
with hearts to defend your homes and country? If so, then let your deeds this day prove it
to the world! As for myself, my resolution is taken,--the field and foe is ours by set of sun,
or Molly Stark this night will sleep a widow."

Three hearty cheers, bursting spontaneously from the listening ranks before him, told the gratified
leader that he had not overrated the spirit and enthusiasm of the men to whom his brief but
effective appeal had been addressed.

The British forces, in the mean time, awaited the approach of their opponents in silence. Baum
even forebore to open upon them with his cannon, in the delusive hope that they would prove
to be one of the large bodies of friendly inhabitants, who, he had been assured, would rise
up in arms to join his standard as he advanced into the interior. "But if the cottage is yours,"
I said, at last, "how came that little scoundrel----"

"That's just what I have come down to find out," he said. "Now, tell me, Mr. Oxenham, from
whom did you take the cottage?"

"From Mr. Joseph Scorer."

"William, you mean; but that is a detail."

"Joseph," said I. "Stay! I'll show you my agreement," and I went inside and got it.

"Joseph?" he said, with knitted brow, as he perused the document; and, after a pause, "Then what
the deuce has become of William? What kind of a man was he?"

"Small, sharp, brown man, with one club foot."

He nodded.
"Which foot?" he asked.

I had to cast back my thoughts.

"Left,"
I said, at last.

"No, right," said he.

"Left; I am quite sure of
it."

He tapped the folded paper against his hand, and said--

"One
of us is wrong. Scorer has been in my service for fifteen years, and
I ought to know."

"Suppose we ask my wife if she remembers?"

I called
her and put the question.

"His left foot was the lame one," she said,
after a thoughtful pause. "I can see him standing there"--she said
it so decidedly that we involuntarily turned to look, but he was not
there, except in her memory--"and it was his right shoulder that humped
up. Yes, I am quite sure of it."

"This is very curious," said Mr.
Sawyer. "I am afraid there is something wrong. Besides, Scorer never
could have done such a thing. He was as honest as the day."

"And
yet he let this cottage sixteen times over to sixteen different parties,
and I have had the privilege, such as it is, of holding the fort against
them all."

"I can't believe William Scorer would do such a thing,"
he said, looking at us with eyes full of puzzled suspicion, as though
he were not quite sure whether I had told him all I knew of the matter.
 Herrick and Nichols having
now resumed their march, and Stark put his corps in motion, the three divisions, with two small
flanking detachments, despatched along the woods to the right and left of the main body, all
moved steadily on to the different points of attack. They were not permitted, however, to advance
far unmolested; for suddenly every part of the royal lines became wrapped in clouds of mingling
smoke and flame; while the heavens and earth seemed rent by the deafening crash of exploding
muskets, and the jarring concussions of cannon, which instantly followed. Unmoved, however,
by the tremendous outbreak, the American forces all moved steadily and rapidly forward till
the forms of their opponents could be discerned beneath the lifting smoke, when they poured
in a storm of fire and lead which told with dreadful effect on the shrinking lines before them.
The general fire thus fatally delivered was speedily returned; and the battle now commencing
in fearful earnest in every part of the field, both armies became so deeply concealed in the
whirling clouds of smoke, which enveloped them, that the opposing forces could be distinguished
only in the fierce gleams of musketry and the broader blaze of cannon that burst incessantly
along the lines, filling, with the mingled uproar of a thousand thunders, the rocking valley
and reverberating mountains around.

In the mean while, our heroine and her companion, who, at the first shock of this terrible
onset, had shrunk back in consternation from view of the scene, sat listening on their humble
couch to the fearful din that assailed their recoiling senses in every direction around them
from without, with feelings which can be far more easily imagined than described. For more
than an hour, while the battle continued to rage with increasing violence, and showers of bullets
were heard every moment striking and burying themselves in the logs composing the walls of
their seemingly devoted shelter, the amazed and trembling girls remained in the same position,
dreading to look out upon the field, lest their eyes should be greeted with the sight of the
death and carnage which they full well knew must there be going on to a fearful extent among
both friends and foes. But Sabrey's increasing anxiety for the result, at length, mastering
all other considerations, she arose, and, against the remonstrances of her companion, advanced
towards the window.

"How awful!" she exclaimed, as she glanced out on the terrific conflict.

"Too awful to witness, unless there were some use in so doing," responded Vine. "If we were
permitted to mingle in the fight with our friends, I, for one, would be willing to brave all
the horrors of the battle for the good I might do; but, as this cannot be, why should we expose
ourselves to danger so uselessly? Now, I do entreat you, Sabrey, to venture no farther," she
continued, as the former, reaching the window, leaned forward for a full view of the scene.
"Step back from that dangerous spot; don't you hear the bullets rattling, like hail, round
the building?"

"Yes, but there is no danger where I stand, I presume, but if there were, I could no longer
forbear watching the issue of a contest in which my own fate, as well as that of friends, is
so deeply involved," replied Sabrey, with desperate calmness, as she continued to rivet her
gaze on the field below.

"If you will look, then," said the other, "tell me what you see going on."

"I will," answered the former, "as far as I can distinguish any movements. But, at present,
both sides are so completely concealed in the smoke that enshrouds them, that I can only discern
dark forms in active motion along the lines, as the blaze of their fire-arms reveals portions
of their ranks. The struggle, however, is evidently a dreadful one! In that continued, deafening
crash which you hear, flames and smoke seem to be vomited forth from the earth, as if from
the mouth of a volcano."

"There seems to be less firing now," observed Vine, after listening in silence a few minutes.
"Can you perceive any new movements afoot? Can't you distinguish any of the words of command,
or any thing that is said among that uproar of voices, which, between the booming of the cannon,
once in a while, plainly reaches my ears?"

"Ay," returned the other, intently bending her ear towards the scene of action--"ay, I think
I can, now. Hark! I hear one voice in particular, rising loud over all others; but it is the
voice of one in prayer, invoking the God of battles to strike with the free and aid in bringing
down quick destruction on their foes. How mightily he cries to Heaven for succor and success!"

"Where is he? among the rest in the fight?"

"No, not directly in the battle, I should think, but a little aloof, in the rear of this end
of the American lines. There! I can now distinguish his form coming obliquely out of the smoke
in this direction."

"Who is he?"

"I know not; but he seems a venerable old man, and his long, white locks are streaming in the
wind, as, with a grasped musket in his hands, and the cry of The sword of the Lord and Gideon
on his lips, he rushes towards the foe."

"What! to encounter them alone?"

"Yes, alone, and in advance of all others. Now he takes his stand in front of a group of tories
partially concealed by the bushes on the bank of the stream. There! he raises his gun, and
crying, God have mercy on your soul, fires, and his victim pitches headlong to the ground.
They return his fire, but harm him not; and he again raises his gun, and, with the same prayer
for mercy on the soul of the foeman he has singled out, fires, and another tory falls heavily
to the earth. Mercy! they are now rushing forward to slay the old man! But now they are met
by a party of the Americans, running forward with shouts, For the rescue of Father Herriot!
Both sides fire; and again all are enveloped in the cloud of smoke that rolls over them."

"Father Herriot--Father Herriot," said Vine, musingly. "I have heard a great deal said about
one they call Father Herriot, lately; but can he be here fighting?"

"Why, who and what is he, that he should not be here?" asked the other.

"A sort of preacher, I believe," answered Vine, "but rich enough to have bought several large
tory estates; though where he came from, or how he got so much hard money as he seems to have,
nobody can tell."

A fresh and general outbreak between the opposing lines here interrupted the conversation,
and turned Sabrey's attention again to the field. And for nearly another fearful hour did she
keep her stand at the window, heedless of the danger from the bullets which were whistling
round her head, and unable, in the agonizing anxiety she felt for the result, to withdraw her
eyes from that dread field, where the continued thunders of the artillery and musketry, shaking
the solid earth along the line of conflict proclaimed the battle to be still raging with unabated
fury.

At length, a brisk breeze sprang up in the north-west, and the battle cloud rolled heavily
away before it from the field, disclosing, not only the relative positions of the opposing
forces, but the awful picture of carnage that every where strewed the blackened earth. Mutually
anxious to avail themselves of this opportunity to ascertain each other's situation, both parties
at once suspended operations, for the purpose of obtaining observations which should enable
them to resume the battle with more deadly effect. The deafening roar of musketry which, for
nearly two hours, had shaken the embattled plain like one continued peal of thunder, was now
heard rolling away, in dying echoes, among the far-off hills, leaving only the monotonous din
of the martial music, kept up to drown the cries of the wounded, and the heavy booming of Baum's
artillery, that still maintained its regular fire on the hill, though only to send--as it now
became evident it had done from the first--its iron missiles high and harmlessly over the heads
of the Americans, into the tops of the crashing forest beyond. 

Our eyes met and held one another, and my thought crossed his.

"What do you suspect, Mr. Oxenham?" he asked.

"I suspect that I met
Joseph and you know William," I said.

"But I left William in charge
here."

"And I found Joseph."

"Then where is William?" "No, I think not--I trust not; for the
British yet remain unconquered."

"Can you see them now?"

"Yes; the wind is driving away the smoke, and both armies are now fast becoming visible."

"Do our men maintain their ground?"

"Ay, and more. They have advanced almost to the hostile intrenchments; and there they stand
face to face with their foes; and with ranks less thinned, thank Heaven, than I should think
possible after withstanding so long the dreadful fire to which they have been exposed; though
I can distinguish the forms of many poor fellows stretched upon the earth."

"And have not the ranks of the enemy suffered also?"

"Severely, it is evident. The ground along their lines as far as I can see, and especially
that part opposite to the station occupied by the Rangers, whom I can distinguish by their
green uniform, is thickly strown with the bodies of the slain. And if our men could see the
destruction they have caused behind those intrenchments to encourage them! But stay! what means
that commotion? Can it be?" Heaven forbid! But it is so. They fly!"

"Who fly?" eagerly demanded Vine.

"The Americans--Stark's division--and all is lost, when one more effort might have given them
the victory! If my feeble voice could but reach them, I would rush out and raise it, though
I perished in the attempt!" rapidly exclaimed the heroic girl, agonized at the thought that
her countrymen were actually retreating from a field she believed so nearly won. "Ay, and who
knows but I might be heard, or, at least, understood?" she added, glancing hurriedly through
the window to the grounds round the house, to see what might be there to prevent her from trying
to put her half-formed resolution into execution.

In looking out, with this object, her eye fell on the rude portico running along that side
of the house, the narrow, flat roof of which rose to within a few feet of her window. And,
suddenly changing her purpose, she hastily tore out the fastenings of the window, removed the
sashes, and leaped down upon the roof of the portico, and stood in open view of the greater
partion of both armies. But still regardless of her exposure, she advanced to the verge of
the roof, and, turning towards the Americans, waved high her kerchief, and essayed to lift
her voice over the tumult in words which, she hoped, would catch their attention and arrest
their supposed flight. But the Americans, who had only fallen back a short distance to avoid
the now unobstructed aim of the enemy, and prepare for a fresh onset, had already come to a
stand, but were at first too busily engaged in loading their guns, and watching the motions
of their foes, to observe her. The tories, however, whose forces were posted in the more immediate
vicinity, instantly noted her appearance, and pointed her out to their officers, who, at once,
appeared to read her intentions. He stood speechless and staring; Lady Sutherland looked annoyed
and incredulous. As for me, I cannot describe my feelings; I was in a perfect whirl. Mysie was
the first to recover from her astonishment. She joined in the laughter of the two men.

"How like you, Fred, to do a thing like that! Do come and tell us all about it. I thought you
were at the Cape. Still, that loud guffaw sounded familiar. But how different you look without
your moustache--and your hair, too! Well, I should never have known
you!"

"God have mercy on your soul!" was at that instant heard issuing from a covert near the American
lines, in the well-known voice of Father Herriot. With the exclamation came the report of a
musket, and at the same time a bullet struck and shattered in his hand the raised pistol of
the dastardly Peters, who, casting away the remnant of the weapon to which he had been indebted
only for his life, hastily wheeled and galloped back to his post barely escaping the shower
of balls that, as he had rightly anticipated, was sent after him from the nearest of his foes.

But although the maiden had failed at the onset to attract the attention of the Americans by
her attempt, as she had designed, yet the incident, to which the bold step she had taken gave
rise, more effectually subserved her purpose. The firing had at once drawn all eyes to the
spot. Presently the low hum of questioning voices was heard running through the American lines,
while many an uplifted hand was seen pointing to her conspicuous form, as, still undeterred
from her purpose, she stood waving her signal kerchief towards them. And the next moment the
loud and cheering cry, Forward, to the rescue of the Tory's Daughter! burst from the Rangers,
and was speedily caught up and echoed in lively acclamations, from detachment to detachment,
through the whole encircling lines of the assailing army, which, with one impulse, now threw
itself forward towards the foe. And I had asked him once about it, in the careless gayety of happy
love. He had said, he supposed it might have happened--perhaps--who knows?--if he had not
seen me. But he had seen me! Could it be that he was thinking of?

My calmness was giving way. As soon as I spoke, though it was only in a word of ejaculation,
my pity for myself broke all the flood-gates down, and I fell on my face in a paroxysm of sobs.

A
very calm, loving voice, and a strong arm raising me, brought me
back at once from the wild ocean of passion on which I was tossing.

Astonished and alarmed at beholding all his outworks so suddenly and unexpectedly stormed and
carried, Baum seemed immediately to have resolved on a desperate effort to retrieve the fortunes
of the day. And in a few minutes he was seen at the head of a long column of his grenadiers,
issuing from his intrenchments on the hill, and bearing down with hasty step on the assailing
forces below. With the growth of other branches of industry, labor will become respectable and profitable,
and laborers will flock to the country; and a new, a purer, and more prosperous future will
open upon the entire Republic. Perhaps, also, it may in time be discovered that even slave-labor
is most profitable when most intelligent and best rewarded,--that the present mode of growing
cotton is the most wasteful and extravagant, and one not bearing competition.
 And before the dull roar of the explosion
was lost among the echoing hills, the deep-toned voice of the intrepid Stark, ever eagle-eyed
to see, and prompt to seize, an advantage, was heard rising over the tumult, in ordering the
final assault, which, having leaped from his horse, and sprung forward to the head of a forming
column, he was the next moment seen, with the air of a roused lion, leading on in person. In
one minute more, all the various forces, not required to guard the prisoners already taken,
were in motion, and, with flashing eyes, and rapid, determined tread, charging up the ascending
grounds towards the different sides of the doomed redoubt; in another, they were furiously
rushing over the embankments, and pouring their bristling columns in resistless streams down
upon the weakened and dismayed forces of the Germans and British in the enclosure. Then succeeded
the rapid, scattering reports of pistols and musketry, the sounds of fiercely-clashing steel,
and the wild cries of those struggling hand to hand in deadly contest, and the wilder shrieks
of the wounded, all rising in mingled uproar from the spot. Then all was hushed in a momentary
stillness; and then rose the long, loud shout of a thousand uniting voices, pealing forth to
the heavens the exulting acclamations of victory!

CHAPTER XIV.

  "The strife, that for a while did fail,
   Now trebly thundering, swelled the gale."--Scott.

