"Little good can come to my Marion from such amusements, Mrs. Roden; but something, perhaps,
of harm. Wilt thou say that such recreation must necessarily be of service to a girl born to
perform the hard duties of a strict life?"

"I would trust Marion in anything," said Mrs. Roden, eagerly.

"So would I; so would I. She hath ever been a good girl."

"But do you not distrust her if you shut her up, and are afraid to allow her even to sit at
table in a strange house?"

"I have never forbidden her to sit at thy table," said the Quaker.

"And you should let her go specially as a kindness to me. For my son's sake I have promised
to be there, and it would be a comfort to me to have another woman with me."

"Then you will hardly need me," said Mr. Fay, not without a touch of jealousy.

"He specially pressed his request that you would come. It is among such as you that he would
wish to make himself known. Moreover, if Marion is to be there, you, I am sure, will choose
to accompany her. Would you not wish to see how the child bears herself on such an occasion?"

"On all occasions, at all places, at all hours, I would wish to have my child with me. There
is nothing else left to me in all the world on which my eye can rest with pleasure. But I doubt
whether it may be for her good." Then he took his departure, leaving the matter still undecided,
speaking of it with words which seemed to imply that he must ultimately refuse, but impressing
Mrs. Roden with a conviction that he would at last accept the invitation.

"Doest thou wish it thyself?" he said to his daughter before retiring to rest that night.

"If you will go, father, I should like it."

"Why shouldst thou like it? What doest thou expect? Is it because the young man is a lord,
and that there will be something of the gilded grandeur of the grand ones of the earth to be
seen about his house and his table?"

"It is not for that, father."

"Or is it because he is young and comely, and can say soft things as such youths are wont to
say, because he will smell sweetly of scents and lavender, because his hand will be soft to
the touch, with rings on his fingers, and jewels perhaps on his bosom like a woman?"

"No, father; it is not for that."

"The delicacies which he will give thee to eat and to drink; the sweetmeats and rich food cannot
be much to one nurtured as thou hast been."

"Certainly not, father; they can be nothing to me.

"Then why is it that thou wouldst go to his house?"

"It is that I may hear you, father, speak among men."

"Nay," said he, laughing, "thou mayst hear me better speak among men at King's Court in the
City. There I can hold my own well enough, but with these young men over their wine, I shall
have but little to say, I fancy. If thou hast nothing to gain but to hear thy old father talk,
the time and money will be surely thrown away."

"I would hear him talk, father."

"The young lord?"

"Yes; the young lord. He is bright and clever, and, coming from another world than our world,
can tell me things that I do not know."

"Can he tell thee aught that is good?"

"From what I hear of him from our friend he will tell me, I think, naught that is bad. You
will be there to hear, and to arrest his words if they be evil. But I think him to be one from
whose mouth no guile or folly will be heard."

"Who art thou, my child, that thou shouldst be able to judge whether words of guile are likely
to come from a young man's lips?" But this he said smiling and pressing her hand while he seemed
to rebuke her.

"Nay, father; I do not judge. I only say that I think it might be so. They are not surely all
false and wicked. But if you wish it otherwise I will not utter another syllable to urge the
request."

"We will go, Marion. Thy friend urged that it is not good that thou shouldst always be shut
up with me alone. And, though I may distrust the young lord as not knowing him, my confidence
in thee is such that I think that nothing will ever shake it." And so it was settled that they
should all go. He would send to a livery stable and hire a carriage for this unusual occasion.
There should be no need for the young lord to send them home. Though he did not know, as he
said, much of the ways of the outside world, it was hardly the custom for the host to supply
carriages as well as viands. When he dined, as he did annually, with the elder Mr. Pogson,
Mr. Pogson sent him home in no carriage. He would sit at the lord's table, but he would go
and come as did other men.

On the Friday named the two ladies and the two men arrived at Hendon Hall in something more
than good time. Hampstead hopped and skipped about as though he were delighted as a boy might
have been at their coming. It may be possible that there was something of guile even in this,
and that he had calculated that he might thus best create quickly that intimacy with the Quaker
and his daughter which he felt to be necessary for his full enjoyment of the evening. If the
Quaker himself expected much of that gilding of which he had spoken he was certainly disappointed.
The garniture of Hendon Hall had always been simple, and now had assumed less even of aristocratic
finery than it used to show when prepared for the use of the Marchioness. "I'm glad you've
come in time," said he, "because you can get comfortably warm before dinner." Then he fluttered
about round Mrs. Roden, paying her attention much rather than Marion Fay,--still with some
guile, as knowing that he might thus best prepare for the coming of future good things. "I
suppose you found it awfully cold," he said.

"I do not know that we were awed, my lord," said the Quaker. "But the winter has certainly
set in with some severity."

"Oh, father!" said Marion, rebuking him.

"Everything is awful now," said Hampstead, laughing. "Of course the word is absurd, but one
gets in the way of using it because other people do."

"Nay, my lord, I crave pardon if I seemed to criticize thy language. Being somewhat used to
a sterner manner of speaking, I took the word in its stricter sense."

"It is but slang from a girl's school, after all," said Roden.

"Now, Master George, I am not going to bear correction from you," said Hampstead, "though I
put up with it from your elders. Miss Fay, when you were at school did they talk slang?"

"Where I was at school, Lord Hampstead," Marion answered, "we were kept in strict leading-strings.
Fancy, father, what Miss Watson would have said if we had used any word in a sense not used
in a dictionary."

"Miss Watson was a sensible woman, my dear, and understood well, and performed faithfully,
the duties which she had undertaken. I do not know that as much can be said of all those who
keep fashionable seminaries for young ladies at the West End."

"Miss Watson had a red face, and a big cap, and spectacles;--had she not?" said Hampstead,
appealing to Marion Fay.

"Miss Watson," said Mrs. Roden, "whom I remember to have seen once when Marion was at school
with her, was a very little woman, with bright eyes, who wore her own hair, and always looked
as though she had come out of a bandbox."

"She was absolutely true to her ideas of life, as a Quaker should be," said Mr. Fay, "and I
only hope that Marion will follow her example. As to language, it is, I think, convenient that
to a certain extent our mode of speech should consort with our mode of living. You would not
expect to hear from a pulpit the phrases which belong to a racecourse, nor would the expressions
which are decorous, perhaps, in aristocratic drawing-rooms befit the humble parlours of clerks
and artisans."

"I never will say that anything is awful again," said Lord Hampstead, as he gave his arm to
Mrs. Roden, and took her in to dinner.

"I hope he will not be angry with father," whispered Marion Fay to George Roden, as they walked
across the hall together.

"Not in the least. Nothing of that kind could anger him. If your father were to cringe or to
flatter him then he would be disgusted."

"Father would never do that," said Marion, with confidence.

The dinner went off very pleasantly, Hampstead and Roden taking between them the weight of
the conversation. The Quaker was perhaps a little frightened by the asperity of his own first
remark, and ate his good things almost in silence. Marion was quite contented to listen, as
she had told her father was her purpose; but it was perhaps to the young lord's words that
she gave attention rather than to those of his friends. His voice was pleasant to her ears.
There was a certain graciousness in his words, as to which she did not suppose that their softness
was specially intended for her hearing. Who does not know the way in which a man may set himself
at work to gain admission into a woman's heart without addressing hardly a word to herself?
And who has not noted the sympathy with which the woman has unconsciously accepted the homage?
That pressing of the hand, that squeezing of the arm, that glancing of the eyes, which are
common among lovers, are generally the developed consequences of former indications which have
had their full effect, even though they were hardly understood, and could not have been acknowledged,
at the time. But Marion did, perhaps, feel that there was something of worship even in the
way in which her host looked towards her with rapid glances from minute to minute, as though
to see that if not with words, at any rate with thoughts, she was taking her share in the conversation
which was certainly intended for her delight. The Quaker in the mean time ate his dinner very
silently. He was conscious of having shown himself somewhat of a prig about that slang phrase,
and was repenting himself. Mrs. Roden every now and then would put in a word in answer rather
to her son than to the host, but she was aware of those electric sparks which, from Lord Hampstead's
end of the wire, were being directed every moment against Marion Fay's heart.

"Now just for the fashion of the thing you must sit here for a quarter of an hour, while we
are supposed to be drinking our wine." This was said by Lord Hampstead when he took the two
ladies into the drawing-room after dinner.

"Don't hurry yourselves," said Mrs. Roden. "Marion and I are old friends, and will get on very
well."

"Oh yes," said Marion. "It will be pleasure enough to me just to sit here and look around me."
Then Hampstead knelt down between them, pretending to doctor up the fire, which certainly required
no doctoring. They were standing, one on one side and the other on the other, looking down
upon him.

"You are spoiling that fire, Lord Hampstead," said Mrs. Roden.

"Coals were made to be poked. I feel sure of that. Do take the poker and give them one blow.
That will make you at home in the house for ever, you know." Then he handed the implement to
Marion. She could hardly do other than take it in her hand. She took it, blushed up to the
roots of her hair, paused a moment, and then gave the one blow to the coals that had been required
of her. "Thanks," said he, nodding at her as he still knelt at her feet and took the poker
from her; "thanks. Now you are free of Hendon Hall for ever. I wouldn't have any one but a
friend poke my fire." Upon that he got up and walked slowly out of the room.

"Oh, Mrs. Roden," said Marion, "I wish I hadn't done it."

"It doesn't matter. It was only a joke."

"Of course it was a joke! but I wish I hadn't done it. It seemed at the moment that I should
look to be cross if I didn't do as he bade me. But when he had said that about being at home--!
Oh, Mrs. Roden, I wish I had not done it."

"He will know that it was nothing, my dear. He is good-humoured and playful, and likes the
feeling of making us feel that we are not strangers." But Marion knew that Lord Hampstead would
not take it as meaning nothing. Though she could see no more than his back as he walked out
of the room, she knew that he was glowing with triumph.

"Now, Mr. Fay, here is port if you like, but I recommend you to stick to the claret."

"I have pretty well done all the sticking, my lord, of which I am competent," said the Quaker.
"A little wine goes a long way with me, as I am not much used to it."

"Wine maketh glad the heart of man," said Roden.

"True enough, Mr. Roden. But I doubt whether it be good that a man's heart should be much gladdened.
Gladness and sorrow counterbalance each other too surely. An even serenity is best fitted to
human life, if it can be reached."

"A level road without hills," said Hampstead. "They say that horses are soonest tired by such
travelling."

"They would hardly tell you so themselves if they could give their experience after a long
day's journey." Then there was a pause, but Mr. Fay continued to speak. "My lord, I fear I
misbehaved myself in reference to that word 'awful' which fell by chance from thy mouth."

"Oh, dear no; nothing of the kind."

"I was bethinking me that I was among the young men in our court in Great Broad Street, who
will indulge sometimes in a manner of language not befitting their occupation at the time,
or perhaps their station in life. I am wont then to remind them that words during business
hours should be used in their strict sense. But, my lord, if you will take a farm horse from
his plough you cannot expect from him that he should prance upon the green."

"It is because I think that there should be more mixing between what you call plough horses
and animals used simply for play, that I have been so proud to make you welcome here. I hope
it may not be by many the last time that you will act as a living dictionary for me. If you
won't have any more wine we will go to them in the drawing-room."

Mrs. Roden very soon declared it necessary that they should start back to Holloway. Hampstead
himself did not attempt to delay them. The words that had absolutely passed between him and
Marion had hardly been more than those which have been here set down, but yet he felt that
he had accomplished not only with satisfaction but with some glory to himself the purpose for
which he had specially invited his guests. His scheme had been carried out with perfect success.
After the manner in which Marion had obeyed his behest about the fire, he was sure that he
was justified in regarding her as a friend.

CHAPTER XXI.

WHAT THEY ALL THOUGHT AS THEY WENT HOME.

Lord Hampstead had come to the door to help them into the carriage. "Lord Hampstead," said
Mrs. Roden, "you will catch your death of cold. It is freezing, and you have nothing on your head."

"I am quite indifferent about those things," he said, as for a moment he held Marion's hand
while he helped her into the carriage.

"Do go in," she whispered. Her lips as she spoke were close to his ear,--but that simply came
from the position in which chance had placed her. Her hand was still in his,--but that, too,
was the accident of the situation. But there is, I think, an involuntary tendency among women
to make more than necessary use of assistance when the person tendering it has made himself
really welcome. Marion had certainly no such intention. Had the idea come to her at the moment
she would have shrank from his touch. It was only when his fingers were withdrawn, when the
feeling of the warmth of this proximity had passed away, that she became aware that he had
been so close to her, and that now they were separated.

Then her father entered the carriage, and Roden.

"Good-night, my lord," said the Quaker. "I have passed my evening very pleasantly. I doubt
whether I may not feel the less disposed for my day's work to-morrow."

"Not at all, Mr. Fay; not at all. You will be like a giant refreshed. There is nothing like
a little friendly conversation for bracing up the mind. I hope it will not be long before you
come and try it again." Then the carriage was driven off, and Lord Hampstead went in to warm
himself before the fire which Marion Fay had poked.

He had not intended to fall in love with her. Was there ever a young man who, when he first
found a girl to be pleasant to him, has intended to fall in love with her? Girls will intend
to fall in love, or, more frequently perhaps, to avoid it; but men in such matters rarely have
a purpose. Lord Hampstead had found her, as he thought, to be an admirable specimen of excellence
in that class of mankind which his convictions and theories induced him to extol. He thought
that good could be done by mixing the racers and plough-horses,--and as regarded the present
experiment, Marion Fay was a plough-horse. No doubt he would not have made this special attempt
had she not pleased his eye, and his ear, and his senses generally. He certainly was not a
philosopher to whom in his search after wisdom an old man such as Zachary Fay could make himself
as acceptable as his daughter. It may be acknowledged of him that he was susceptible to female
influences. But it had not at first occurred to him that it would be a good thing to fall in
love with Marion Fay. Why should he not be on friendly terms with an excellent and lovely girl
without loving her? Such had been his ideas after first meeting Marion at Mrs. Roden's house.
Then he had determined that friends could not become friends without seeing each other, and
he had concocted his scheme without being aware of the feelings which she had excited. The
scheme had been carried out; he had had his dinner-party; Marion Fay had poked his fire; there
had been one little pressure of the hand as he helped her into the carriage, one little whispered
word, which had it not been whispered would have been as nothing; one moment of consciousness
that his lips were close to her cheek; and then he returned to the warmth of his fire, quite
conscious that he was in love.

What was to come of it? When he had argued both with his sister and with Roden that their marriage
would be unsuitable because of their difference in social position, and had justified his opinion
by declaring it to be impossible that any two persons could, by their own doing, break through
the conventions of the world without ultimate damage to themselves and to others, he had silently
acknowledged to himself that he also was bound by the law which he was teaching. That such
conventions should gradually cease to be, would be good; but no man is strong enough to make
a new law for his own governing at the spur of the moment;--and certainly no woman. The existing
distances between man and man were radically bad. This was the very gist of his doctrine; but
the instant abolition of such distances had been proved by many experiments to be a vain dream,
and the diminution of them must be gradual and slow. That such diminution would go on till
the distances should ultimately disappear in some future millennium was to him a certainty.
The distances were being diminished by the increasing wisdom and philanthropy of mankind. To
him, born to high rank and great wealth, it had been given to do more perhaps than another.
In surrendering there is more efficacy, as there is also more grace, than in seizing. What
of his grandeur he might surrender without injury to others to whom he was bound, he would
surrender. Of what exact nature or kind should be the woman whom it might please him to select
as his wife, he had formed no accurate idea; but he would endeavour so to marry that he would
make no step down in the world that might be offensive to his family, but would yet satisfy
his own convictions by drawing himself somewhat away from aristocratic blood. His father had
done the same when choosing his first wife, and the happiness of his choice would have been
perfect had not death interfered. Actuated by such reasoning as this, he had endeavoured in
a mild way to separate his sister from her lover, thinking that they who were in love should
be bound by the arguments which seemed good to him who was not in love. But now he also was
in love, and the arguments as they applied to himself fell into shreds and tatters as he sat
gazing at his fire, holding the poker in his hand.

Had there ever been anything more graceful than the mock violence with which she had pretended
to strike heartily at the coals?--had there ever anything been more lovely than that mingled
glance of doubt, of fear, and of friendliness with which she had looked into his face as she
did it? She had quite understood his feeling when he made his little request. There had been
heart enough in her, spirit enough, intelligence enough, to tell her at once the purport of
his demand. Or rather she had not seen it all at once, but had only understood when her hand
had gone too far to be withdrawn that something of love as well as friendship had been intended.
Before long she should know how much of love had been intended! Whether his purpose was or
was not compatible with the wisdom of his theory as to a gradual diminution of distances, his
heart had gone too far now for any retracting. As he sat there he at once began to teach himself
that the arguments he had used were only good in reference to high-born females, and that they
need not necessarily affect himself. Whomever he might marry he would raise to his own rank.
For his rank he did not care a straw himself. It was of the prejudices of others he was thinking
when he assured himself that Marion would make as good a Countess and as good a Marchioness
as any lady in the land. In regard to his sister it was otherwise. She must follow the rank
of her husband. It might be that the sores which she would cause to many by becoming the wife
of a Post Office clerk ought to be avoided. But there need be no sores in regard to his marriage
with Marion Fay.

His present reasoning was, no doubt, bad, but such as it was it was allowed to prevail absolutely.
It did not even occur to him that he would make an attempt to enfranchise himself from Marion's
charms. Whatever might occur, whatever details there might be which would require his attention
in regard to his father or others of the family, everything must give way to his present passion.
She had poked his fire, and she must be made to sit at his hearth for the remainder of their
joint existence. She must be made to sit there if he could so plead his cause that his love
should prevail with her. As to the Quaker father, he thought altogether well of him too,--an
industrious, useful, intelligent man, of whose quaint manners and manly bearing he would not
be ashamed in any society. She, too, was a Quaker, but that to him was little or nothing. He
also had his religious convictions, but they were not of a nature to be affronted or shocked
by those of any one who believed that the increasing civilization of the world had come from
Christ's teaching. The simple, earnest purity of the girl's faith would be an attraction to
him rather than otherwise. Indeed, there was nothing in his Marion, as he saw her, that was
not conducive to feminine excellence.

His Marion! How many words had he spoken to her? How many thoughts had he extracted from her?
How many of her daily doings had he ever witnessed? But what did it matter? It is not the girl
that the man loves, but the image which imagination has built up for him to fill the outside
covering which has pleased his senses. He was quite as sure that the Ten Commandments were
as safe in Marion's hands as though she were already a saint, canonized for the perfection
of all virtues. He was quite ready to take that for granted; and having so convinced himself,
was now only anxious as to the means by which he might make this priceless pearl his own.

There must be some other scheme. He sat, thinking of this, cudgelling his brains for some contrivance
by which he and Marion Fay might be brought together again with the least possible delay. His
idea of a dinner-party had succeeded beyond all hope. But he could not have another dinner-party
next week. Nor could he bring together the guests whom he had to-day entertained after his
sister's return. He was bound not to admit George Roden to his house as long as she should
be with him. Without George he could hardly hope that Mrs. Roden would come to him, and without
Mrs. Roden how could he entice the Quaker and his daughter? His sister would be with him on
the following day, and would, no doubt, be willing to assist him with Marion if it were possible.
But the giving of such assistance on her part would tacitly demand assistance also from him
in her difficulties. Such assistance, he knew, he could not give, having pledged himself to
his father in regard to George Roden. He could at the present moment devise no other scheme
than the very simple one of going to Mrs. Roden, and declaring his love for the girl.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

The four guests in the carriage were silent throughout their drive home. They all had thoughts
of their own sufficient to occupy them. George Roden told himself that this, for a long day,
must be his last visit to Hendon Hall. He knew that Lady Frances would arrive on the morrow,
and that then his presence was forbidden. He had refused to make any promise as to his assured
absence, not caring to subject himself to an absolute bond; but he was quite aware that he
was bound in honour not to enter the house in which he could not be made welcome. He felt himself
to be safe, with a great security. The girl whom he loved would certainly be true. He was not
impatient, as was Hampstead. He did not trouble his mind with schemes which were to be brought
to bear within the next few days. He could bide his time, comforting himself with his faith.
But still a lover can hardly be satisfied with the world unless he can see some point in his
heaven from which light may be expected to break through the clouds. He could not see the point
from which the light might be expected.

The Quaker was asking himself many questions. Had he done well to take his girl to this young
nobleman's house? Had he done well to take himself there? It had been as it were a sudden disruption
in the settled purposes of his life. What had he or his girl to do with lords? And yet he had
been pleased. Courtesy always flatters, and flattery is always pleasant. A certain sense of
softness had been grateful to him. There came upon him a painful question,--as there does on
so many of us, when for a time we make a successful struggle against the world's allurements,--whether
in abandoning the delights of life we do in truth get any compensation for them. Would it not
after all be better to do as others use? Phoebus as he touches our trembling ear encourages
us but with a faint voice. It had been very pleasant,--the soft chairs, the quiet attendance,
the well-cooked dinner, the good wines, the bright glasses, the white linen,--and pleasanter
than all that silvery tone of conversation to which he was so little accustomed either in King's
Court or Paradise Row. Marion indeed was always gentle to him as a dove cooing; but he was
aware of himself that he was not gentle in return. Stern truth, expressed shortly in strong
language, was the staple of his conversation at home. He had declared to himself all through
his life that stern truth and strong language were better for mankind than soft phrases. But
in his own parlour in Paradise Row he had rarely seen his Marion bright as she had been at
this lord's table. Was it good for his Marion that she should be encouraged to such brightness;
and if so, had he been cruel to her to suffuse her entire life with a colour so dark as to
admit of no light? Why had her beauty shone so brightly in the lord's presence? He too knew
something of love, and had it always present to his mind that the time would come when his
Marion's heart would be given to some stranger. He did not think, he would not think, that
the stranger had now come;--but would it be well that his girl's future should be affected
even as was his own? He argued the points much within himself, and told himself that it could
not be well.

Mrs. Roden had read it nearly all,--though she could not quite read the simple honesty of the
young lord's purpose. The symptoms of love had been plain enough to her eyes, and she had soon
told herself that she had done wrong in taking the girl to the young lord's house. She had
seen that Hampstead had admired Marion, but she had not dreamed that it would be carried to
such a length as this. But when he had knelt on the rug between them, leaning just a little
towards the girl, and had looked up into the girl's face, smiling at his own little joke, but
with his face full of love;--then she had known. And when Marion had whispered the one word,
with her little fingers lingering within the young lord's touch, then she had known. It was
not the young lord only who had given way to the softness of the moment. If evil had been done,
she had done it; and it seemed as though evil had certainly been done. If much evil had been
done, how could she forgive herself?

And what were Marion's thoughts? Did she feel that an evil had been done, an evil for which
there could never be a cure found? She would have so assured herself, had she as yet become
aware of the full power and depth and mortal nature of the wound she had received. For such
a wound, for such a hurt, there is but one cure, and of that she certainly would have entertained
no hope. But, as it will sometimes be that a man shall in his flesh receive a fatal injury,
of which he shall for awhile think that only some bruise has pained him, some scratch annoyed
him; that a little time, with ointment and a plaister, will give him back his body as sound
as ever; but then after a short space it becomes known to him that a deadly gangrene is affecting
his very life; so will it be with a girl's heart. She did not yet,--not yet,--tell herself
that half-a-dozen gentle words, that two or three soft glances, that a touch of a hand, the
mere presence of a youth whose comeliness was endearing to the eye, had mastered and subdued
all that there was of Marion Fay. But it was so. Not for a moment did her mind run away, as
they were taken homewards, from the object of her unconscious idolatry. Had she behaved ill?--that
was her regret! He had been so gracious;--that was her joy! Then there came a pang from the
wound, though it was not as yet a pang as of death. What right had such a one as she to receive
even an idle word of compliment from a man such as was Lord Hampstead? What could he be to
her, or she to him? He had his high mission to complete, his great duties to perform, and doubtless
would find some noble lady as a fit mother for his children. He had come across her path for
a moment, and she could not but remember him for ever! There was something of an idea present
to her that love would now be beyond her reach. But the pain necessarily attached to such an
idea had not as yet reached her. There came something of a regret that fortune had placed her
so utterly beyond his notice;--but she was sure of this, sure of this, that if the chance were
offered to her, she would not mar his greatness by accepting the priceless boon of his love.
But why,--why had he been so tender to her? Then she thought of what were the ways of men,
and of what she had heard of them. It had been bad for her to go abroad thus with her poor
foolish softness, with her girl's untried tenderness,--that thus she should be affected by
the first chance smile that had been thrown to her by one of those petted darlings of Fortune!
And then she was brought round to that same resolution which was at the moment forming itself
in her father's mind;--that it would have been better for her had she not allowed herself to
be taken to Hendon Hall. Then they were in Paradise Row, and were put down at their separate
doors with but few words of farewell to each other.

"They have just come home," said Clara Demijohn, rushing into her mother's bedroom. "You'll
find it is quite true. They have been dining with the lord!"

CHAPTER XXII.

AGAIN AT TRAFFORD.

The meeting between Hampstead and his sister was affectionate and, upon the whole, satisfactory,
though it was necessary that a few words should be spoken which could hardly be pleasant in
themselves. "I had a dinner-party here last night," he said laughing, desirous of telling her
something of George Roden,--and something also of Marion Fay.

"Who were the guests?"

"Roden was here." Then there was silence. She was glad that her lover had been one of the guests,
but she was not as yet moved to say anything respecting him. "And his mother."

"I am sure I shall like his mother," said Lady Frances.

"I have mentioned it," continued her brother, speaking with unusual care, "because, in compliance
with the agreement I made at Trafford, I cannot ask him here again at present."

"I am sorry that I should be in your way, John."

"You are not in my way, as I think you know. Let us say no more than that at present. Then
I had a singular old Quaker, named Zachary Fay, an earnest, honest, but humble man, who blew
me up instantly for talking slang."

"Where did you pick him up?"

"He comes out of the City," he said, not wishing to refer again to Paradise Row and the neighbourhood
of the Rodens,--"and he brought his daughter."

"A young lady?"

"Certainly a young lady."

"Ah, but young,--and beautiful?"

"Young,--and beautiful."

"Now you are laughing. I suppose she is some strong-minded, rather repulsive, middle-aged woman."

"As to the strength of her mind, I have not seen enough to constitute myself a judge," said
Hampstead, almost with a tone of offence. "Why you should imagine her to be repulsive because
she is a Quaker, or why middle-aged, I do not understand. She is not repulsive to me."

"Oh, John, I am so sorry! Now I know that you have found some divine beauty."

"We sometimes entertain angels unawares. I thought that I had done so when she took her departure."

"Are you in earnest?"

"I am quite in earnest as to the angel. Now I have to consult you as to a project." It may
be remembered that Hampstead had spoken to his father as to the expediency of giving up his
horses if he found that his means were not sufficient to keep up Hendon Hall, his yacht, and
his hunting establishment in Northamptonshire. The Marquis, without saying a word to his son,
had settled that matter, and Gorse Hall, with its stables, was continued. The proposition now
made to Lady Frances was that she should go down with him and remain there for a week or two
till she should find the place too dull. He had intended to fix an almost immediate day; but
now he was debarred from this by his determination to see Marion yet once again before he took
himself altogether beyond the reach of Holloway. The plan, therefore, though it was fixed as
far as his own intention went and the assent of Lady Frances, was left undefined as to time.
The more he thought of Holloway, and the difficulties of approaching Paradise Row, the more
convinced he became that his only mode of approaching Marion must be through Mrs. Roden. He
had taken two or three days to consider what would be the most appropriate manner of going
through this operation, when on a sudden he was arrested by a letter from his father, begging
his presence down at Trafford. The Marquis was ill, and was anxious to see his son. The letter
in which the request was made was sad and plaintive throughout. He was hardly able to write,
Lord Kingsbury said, because he was so unwell; but he had no one to write for him. Mr. Greenwood
had made himself so disagreeable that he could no longer employ him for such purposes. "Your
stepmother is causing me much vexation, which I do not think that I deserve from her." He then
added that it would be necessary for him to have his lawyer down at Trafford, but that he wished
to see Hampstead first in order that they might settle as to certain arrangements which were
required in regard to the disposition of the property. There were some things which Hampstead
could not fail to perceive from this letter. He was sure that his father was alarmed as to
his own condition, or he would not have thought of sending for the lawyer to Trafford. He had
hitherto always been glad to seize an opportunity of running up to London when any matter of
business had seemed to justify the journey. Then it occurred to his son that his father had
rarely or ever spoken or written to him of his "stepmother." In certain moods the Marquis had
been wont to call his wife either the Marchioness or Lady Kingsbury. When in good humour he
had generally spoken of her to his son as "your mother." The injurious though strictly legal
name now given to her was a certain index of abiding wrath. But things must have been very
bad with the Marquis at Trafford when he had utterly discarded the services of Mr. Greenwood,--services
to which he had been used for a time to which the memory of his son did not go back. Hampstead
of course obeyed his father's injunctions, and went down to Trafford instantly, leaving his
sister alone at Hendon Hall. He found the Marquis not in bed indeed, but confined to his own
sitting-room, and to a very small bed-chamber which had been fitted up for him close to it.
Mr. Greenwood had been anxious to give up his own rooms as being more spacious; but the offer
had been peremptorily and almost indignantly refused. The Marquis had been unwilling to accept
anything like a courtesy from Mr. Greenwood. Should he make up his mind to turn Mr. Greenwood
out of the house,--and he had almost made up his mind to do so,--then he could do what he pleased
with Mr. Greenwood's rooms. But he wasn't going to accept the loan of chambers in his own house
as a favour from Mr. Greenwood.

Hampstead on arriving at the house saw the Marchioness for a moment before he went to his father.
"I cannot tell how he is," said Lady Kingsbury, speaking in evident dudgeon. "He will hardly
let me go near him. Doctor Spicer seems to think that we need not be alarmed. He shuts himself
up in those gloomy rooms down-stairs. Of course it would be better for him to be off the ground
floor, where he would have more light and air. But he has become so obstinate, that I do not
know how to deal with him."

"He has always liked to live in the room next to Mr. Greenwood's."

"He has taken an absolute hatred to Mr. Greenwood. You had better not mention the poor old
gentleman's name to him. Shut up as I am here, I have no one else to speak a word to, and for
that reason, I suppose, he wishes to get rid of him. He is absolutely talking of sending the
man away after having had him with him for nearly thirty years." In answer to all this Hampstead
said almost nothing. He knew his stepmother, and was aware that he could do no service by telling
her what he might find it to be his duty to say to his father as to Mr. Greenwood, or on any
other subject. He did not hate his stepmother,--as she hated him. But he regarded her as one
to whom it was quite useless to speak seriously as to the affairs of the family. He knew her
to be prejudiced, ignorant, and falsely proud,--but he did not suppose her to be either wicked
or cruel.

His father began almost instantly about Mr. Greenwood, so that it would have been quite impossible
for him to follow Lady Kingsbury's advice on that matter had he been ever so well minded. "Of
course I'm ill," he said; "I suffer so much from sickness and dyspepsia that I can eat nothing.
Doctor Spicer seems to think that I should get better if I did not worry myself; but there
are so many things to worry me. The conduct of that man is abominable."

"What man, sir?" asked Hampstead,--who knew, however, very well what was coming.

"That clergyman," said Lord Kingsbury, pointing in the direction of Mr. Greenwood's room.

"He does not come to you, sir, unless you send for him?"

"I haven't seen him for the last five days, and I don't care if I never see him again."

"How has he offended you, sir?"

"I gave him my express injunctions that he should not speak of your sister either to me or
the Marchioness. He gave me his solemn promise, and I know very well that they are talking
about her every hour of the day."

"Perhaps that is not his fault."

"Yes, it is. A man needn't talk to a woman unless he likes. It is downright impudence on his
part. Your stepmother comes to me every day, and never leaves me without abusing Fanny."

"That is why I thought it better that Fanny should come to me."

"And then, when I argue with her, she always tells me what Mr. Greenwood says about it. Who
cares about Mr. Greenwood? What business has Mr. Greenwood to interfere in my family? He does
not know how to behave himself, and he shall go."

"He has been here a great many years, sir," said Hampstead, pleading for the old man.

"Too many," said the Marquis. "When you've had a man about you so long as that, he is sure
to take liberties."

"You must provide for him, sir, if he goes."

"I have thought of that. He must have something, of course. He has had three hundred a-year
for the last ten years, and has had everything found for him down to his washing and his cab
fares. For five-and-twenty years he has never paid for a bed or a meal out of his own pocket.
What has he done with his money? He ought to be a rich man for his degree."

"What a man does with his money is, I suppose, no concern to those who pay it. It is supposed
to have been earned, and there is an end of it as far as they are concerned."

"He shall have a thousand pounds," said the Marquis.

"That would hardly be liberal. I would think twice before I dismissed him, sir."

"I have thought a dozen times."

"I would let him remain," said Hampstead, "if only because he's a comfort to Lady Kingsbury.
What does it matter though he does talk of Fanny? Were he to go she would talk to somebody
else who might be perhaps less fit to hear her, and he would, of course, talk to everybody."

"Why has he not obeyed me?" demanded the Marquis, angrily. "It is I who have employed him.
I have been his patron, and now he turns against me." Thus the Marquis went on till his strength
would not suffice for any further talking. Hampstead found himself quite unable to bring him
to any other subject on that day. He was sore with the injury done him in that he was not allowed
to be the master in his own house.

On the next morning Hampstead heard from Dr. Spicer that his father was in a state of health
very far from satisfactory. The doctor recommended that he should be taken away from Trafford,
and at last went so far as to say that his advice extended to separating his patient from Lady
Kingsbury. "It is, of course, a very disagreeable subject," said the doctor, "for a medical
man to meddle with; but, my lord, the truth is that Lady Kingsbury frets him. I don't, of course,
care to hear what it is, but there is something wrong." Lord Hampstead, who knew very well
what it was, did not attempt to contradict him. When, however, he spoke to his father of the
expediency of change of air, the Marquis told him that he would rather die at Trafford than
elsewhere.

That his father was really thinking of his death was only too apparent from all that was said
and done. As to those matters of business, they were soon settled between them. There was,
at any rate, that comfort to the poor man that there was no probability of any difference between
him and his heir as to the property or as to money. Half-an-hour settled all that. Then came
the time which had been arranged for Hampstead's return to his sister. But before he went there
were conversations between him and Mr. Greenwood, between him and his stepmother, and between
him and his father, to which, for the sake of our story, it may be as well to refer.

"I think your father is ill-treating me," said Mr. Greenwood. Mr. Greenwood had allowed himself
to be talked into a thorough contempt and dislike for the young lord; so that he had almost
brought himself to believe in those predictions as to the young lord's death in which Lady
Kingsbury was always indulging. As a consequence of this, he now spoke in a voice very different
from those obsequious tones which he had before been accustomed to use when he had regarded
Lord Hampstead as his young patron.

"I am sure my father would never do that," said Hampstead, angrily.

"It looks very like it. I have devoted all the best of my life to his service, and he now talks
of dismissing me as though I were no better than a servant."

"Whatever he does, he will, I am sure, have adequate cause for doing."

"I have done nothing but my duty. It is out of the question that a man in my position should
submit to orders as to what he is to talk about and what not. It is natural that Lady Kingsbury
should come to me in her troubles."

"If you will take my advice," said Lord Hampstead, in that tone of voice which always produces
in the mind of the listener a determination that the special advice offered shall not be taken,
"you will comply with my father's wishes while it suits you to live in his house. If you cannot
do that, it would become you, I think, to leave it." In every word of this there was a rebuke;
and Mr. Greenwood, who did not like being rebuked, remembered it.

"Of course I am nobody in this house now," said the Marchioness in her last interview with
her stepson. It is of no use to argue with an angry woman, and in answer to this Hampstead
made some gentle murmur which was intended neither to assent or to dispute the proposition
made to him. "Because I ventured to disapprove of Mr. Roden as a husband for your sister I
have been shut up here, and not allowed to speak to any one."

"Fanny has left the house, so that she may no longer cause you annoyance by her presence."

"She has left the house in order that she may be near the abominable lover with whom you have
furnished her."

"This is not true," said Hampstead, who was moved beyond his control by the double falseness
of the accusation.

"Of course you can be insolent to me, and tell me that I speak falsehoods. It is part of your
new creed that you should be neither respectful to a parent, nor civil to a lady."

"I beg your pardon, Lady Kingsbury,"--he had never called her Lady Kingsbury before,--"if I
have been disrespectful or uncivil, but your statements were very hard to bear. Fanny's engagement
with Mr. Roden has not even received my sanction. Much less was it arranged or encouraged by
me. She has not gone to Hendon Hall to be near Mr. Roden, with whom she had undertaken to hold
no communication as long as she remains there with me. Both for my own sake and for hers I
am bound to repudiate the accusation." Then he went without further adieu, leaving with her
a conviction that she had been treated with the greatest contumely by her husband's rebellious
heir.

Nothing could be sadder than the last words which the Marquis spoke to his son. "I don't suppose,
Hampstead, that we shall ever meet again in this world."

"Oh, father!"

"I don't think Mr. Spicer knows how bad I am."

"Will you have Sir James down from London?"

"No Sir James can do me any good, I fear. It is ill ministering to a mind diseased."

"Why, sir, should you have a mind diseased? With few men can things be said to be more prosperous
than with you. Surely this affair of Fanny's is not of such a nature as to make you feel that
all things are bitter round you."

"It is not that."

"What then? I hope I have not been a cause of grief to you?"

"No, my boy;--no. It irks me sometimes to think that I should have trained you to ideas which
you have taken up too violently. But it is not that."

"My mother--?"

"She has set her heart against me,--against you and Fanny. I feel that a division has been
made between my two families. Why should my daughter be expelled from my own house? Why should
I not be able to have you here, except as an enemy in the camp? Why am I to have that man take
up arms against me, whom I have fed in idleness all his life?"

"I would not let him trouble my thoughts."

"When you are old and weak you will find it hard to banish thoughts that trouble you. As to
going, where am I to go to?"

"Come to Hendon."

"And leave her here with him, so that all the world shall say that I am running away from my
own wife? Hendon is your house now, and this is mine;--and here I must stay till my time has come."

This was very sad, not as indicating the state of his father's health, as to which he was more
disposed to take the doctor's opinion than that of the patient, but as showing the infirmity
of his father's mind. He had been aware of a certain weakness in his father's character,--a
desire not so much for ruling as for seeming to rule all that were around him. The Marquis
had wished to be thought a despot even when he had delighted in submitting himself to the stronger
mind of his first wife. Now he felt the chains that were imposed upon him, so that they galled
him when he could not throw them off. All this was very sad to Hampstead; but it did not make
him think that his father's health had in truth been seriously affected.

END OF VOL. II.

       I. THE IRREPRESSIBLE CROCKER.
      II. MRS. RODEN'S ELOQUENCE.
     III. MARION'S VIEWS ABOUT MARRIAGE.
      IV. LORD HAMPSTEAD IS IMPATIENT.
       V. THE QUAKER'S ELOQUENCE.
      VI. MARION'S OBSTINACY.
     VII. MRS. DEMIJOHN'S PARTY.
    VIII. NEW YEAR'S DAY.
      IX. MISS DEMIJOHN'S INGENUITY.
       X. KING'S COURT, OLD BROAD STREET.
      XI. MR. GREENWOOD BECOMES AMBITIOUS.
     XII. LIKE THE POOR CAT I' THE ADAGE.
    XIII. LADY FRANCES SEES HER LOVER.
     XIV. MR. GREENWOOD'S FEELINGS.
      XV. "THAT WOULD BE DISAGREEABLE."
     XVI. "I DO."
    XVII. AT GORSE HALL.
   XVIII. POOR WALKER.
     XIX. FALSE TIDINGS.
      XX. NEVER, NEVER, TO COME AGAIN.
     XXI. DI CRINOLA.

MARION FAY.

CHAPTER I.

THE IRREPRESSIBLE CROCKER.

Hampstead remained nearly a fortnight down at Trafford, returning to Hendon only a few days
before Christmas. Crocker, the Post Office clerk, came back to his duties at the same time,
but, as was the custom with him, stole a day more than belonged to him, and thus incurred the
frowns of Mr. Jerningham and the heavy wrath of the great Æolus. The Æoluses of the Civil Service
are necessarily much exercised in their minds by such irregularities. To them personally it
matters not at all whether one or another young man may be neglectful. It may be known to such
a one that a Crocker may be missed from his seat without any great injury,--possibly with no
injury at all,--to the Queen's service. There are Crockers whom it would be better to pay for
their absence than their presence. This Æolus thought it was so with this Crocker. Then why
not dismiss Crocker, and thus save the waste of public money? But there is a necessity,--almost
a necessity,--that the Crockers of the world should live. They have mothers, or perhaps even
wives, with backs to be clothed and stomachs to be fed, or perhaps with hearts to be broken.
There is, at any rate, a dislike to proceed to the ultimate resort of what may be called the
capital punishment of the Civil Service. To threaten, to frown, to scold, to make a young man's
life a burden to him, are all within the compass of an official Æolus. You would think occasionally
that such a one was resolved to turn half the clerks in his office out into the streets,--so
loud are the threats. In regard to individuals he often is resolved to do so at the very next
fault. But when the time comes his heart misgives him. Even an Æolus is subject to mercy, and
at last his conscience becomes so callous to his first imperative duty of protecting the public
service, that it grows to be a settled thing with him, that though a man's life is to be made
a burden to him, the man is not to be actually dismissed. But there are men to whom you cannot
make their life a burden,--men upon whom no frowns, no scoldings, no threats operate at all;
and men unfortunately sharp enough to perceive what is that ultimate decision to which their
Æolus had been brought. Such a one was our Crocker, who cared very little for the blusterings.
On this occasion he had remained away for the sake of having an additional day with the Braeside
Harriers, and when he pleaded a bilious headache no one believed him for an instant. It was
in vain for Æolus to tell him that a man subject to health so precarious was altogether unfitted
for the Civil Service. Crocker had known beforehand exactly what was going to be said to him,
and had discounted it at its exact worth. Even in the presence of Mr. Jerningham he spoke openly
of the day's hunting, knowing that Mr. Jerningham would prefer his own ease to the trouble
of renewed complaint. "If you would sit at your desk now that you have come back, and go on
with your docketing, instead of making everybody else idle, it would be a great deal better,"
said Mr. Jerningham.

"Then my horse took the wall in a fly, and old Amblethwaite crept over afterwards," continued
Crocker, standing with his back to the fire, utterly disregarding Mr. Jerningham's admonitions.

On his first entrance into the room Crocker had shaken hands with Mr. Jerningham, then with
Bobbin and Geraghty, and at last he came to Roden, with whom he would willingly have struck
up terms of affectionate friendship had it been possible for him to do so. He had resolved
that it should be so, but when the moment came his courage a little failed him. He had made
himself very offensive to Roden at their last interview, and could see at a glance that Roden
remembered it. As far as his own feelings were concerned such "tiffs," as he called them, went
for nothing. He had, indeed, no feelings, and was accustomed to say that he liked the system
of give and take,--meaning that he liked being impudent to others, and did not care how impudent
others might be to him. This toughness and insolence are as sharp as needles to others who
do not possess the same gifts. Roden had learned to detest the presence of the young man, to
be sore when he was even spoken to, and yet did not know how to put him down. You may have
a fierce bull shut up. You may muzzle a dog that will bite. You may shoot a horse that you
cannot cure of biting and tearing. But you cannot bring yourself to spend a morning in hunting
a bug or killing a flea. Crocker had made himself a serious annoyance even to Lord Hampstead,
though their presence together had only been for a very short time. But Roden had to pass his
life at the same desk with the odious companion. Absolutely to cut him, to let it be known
all through the office that they two did not speak, was to make too much of the matter. But
yet it was essentially necessary for his peace that some step should be taken to save himself
from the man's insolence. On the present occasion he nodded his head to Crocker, being careful
not to lay the pen down from his fingers. "Ain't you going to give us your hand, old fellow?"
said Crocker, putting on his best show of courage.

"I don't know that I am," said Roden. "Perhaps some of these days you may learn to make yourself
less disagreeable."

"I'm sure I've always meant to be very friendly, especially with you," said Crocker; "but it
is so hard to get what one says taken in the proper sense."

After this not a word was spoken between the two all the morning. This happened on a Saturday,--Saturday,
the 20th of December, on which day Hampstead was to return to his own house. Punctually at
one Crocker left his desk, and with a comic bow of mock courtesy to Mr. Jerningham, stuck his
hat on the side of his head, and left the office. His mind, as he took himself home to his
lodgings, was full of Roden's demeanour towards him. Since he had become assured that his brother
clerk was engaged to marry Lady Frances Trafford, he was quite determined to cultivate an enduring
and affectionate friendship. But what steps should he take to recover the ground which he had
lost? It occurred to him now that while he was in Cumberland he had established quite an intimacy
with Lord Hampstead, and he thought that it would be well to use Lord Hampstead's acknowledged
good-nature for recovering the ground which he had lost with his brother clerk.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

At about three o'clock that afternoon, when Lady Frances was beginning to think that the time
of her brother's arrival was near at hand, the servant came into the drawing-room, and told
her that a gentleman had called, and was desirous of seeing her. "What gentleman?" asked Lady
Frances. "Has he sent his name?"

"No, my lady; but he says,--he says that he is a clerk from the Post Office." Lady Frances
was at the moment so dismayed that she did not know what answer to give. There could be but
one Post Office clerk who should be anxious to see her, and she had felt from the tone of the
servant's voice that he had known that it was her lover who had called. Everybody knew that
the Post Office clerk was her lover. Some immediate answer was necessary. She quite understood
the pledge that her brother had made on her behalf; and, though she had not herself made any
actual promise, she felt that she was bound not to receive George Roden. But yet she could
not bring herself to turn him away from the door, and so to let the servant suppose that she
was ashamed to see him to whom she had given the promise of her hand. "You had better show
the gentleman in," she said at last, with a voice that almost trembled. A moment afterwards
the door was opened, and Mr. Crocker entered the room!

She had endeavoured in the minute which had been allowed her to study the manner in which she
should receive her lover. As she heard the approaching footsteps, she prepared herself. She
had just risen from her seat, nearly risen, when the strange man appeared. It has to be acknowledged
that she was grievously disappointed, although she had told herself that Roden ought not to
have come to her. What woman is there will not forgive her lover for coming, even though he
certainly should not have come? What woman is there will fail to receive a stranger with hard
looks when a stranger shall appear to her instead of an expected lover? "Sir?" she said, standing
as he walked up the room and made a low bow to her as he took his position before her.

Crocker was dressed up to the eyes, and wore yellow kid gloves. "Lady Frances," he said, "I
am Mr. Crocker, Mr. Samuel Crocker, of the General Post Office. You may not perhaps have heard
of me from my friend, Mr. Roden?"

"No, indeed, sir."

"You might have done so, as we sit in the same room and at the same desk. Or you may remember
meeting me at dinner at your uncle's castle in Cumberland."

"Is anything,--anything the matter with Mr. Roden?"

"Not in the least, my lady. I had the pleasure of leaving him in very good health about two
hours since. There is nothing at all to occasion your ladyship the slightest uneasiness." A
dark frown came across her brow as she heard the man talk thus freely of her interest in George
Roden's condition. She no doubt had betrayed her own secret as far as there was a secret; but
she was not on that account the less angry because he had forced her to do so.

"Has Mr. Roden sent you as a messenger?" she asked.

"No, my lady; no. That would not be at all probable. I am sure he would very much rather come
with any message of his own." At this he sniggered most offensively. "I called with a hope
of seeing your brother, Lord Hampstead, with whom I may take the liberty of saying that I have
a slight acquaintance."

"Lord Hampstead is not at home."

"So the servant told me. Then it occurred to me that as I had come all the way down from London
for a certain purpose, to ask a little favour from his lordship, and as I was not fortunate
enough to find his lordship at home, I might ask the same from your ladyship."

"There can be nothing that I can do for you, sir."

"You can do it, my lady, much better than any one else in the world. You can be more powerful
in this matter even than his lordship."

"What can it be?" asked Lady Frances.

"If your ladyship will allow me I will sit down, as the story I have to tell is somewhat particular."
It was impossible to refuse him the use of a chair, and she could therefore only bow as he
seated himself. "I and George Roden, my lady, have known each other intimately for these ever
so many years." Again she bowed her head. "And I may say that we used to be quite pals. When
two men sit at the same desk together they ought to be thick as thieves. See what a cat and
dog life it is else! Don't you think so, my lady?"

"I know nothing of office life. As I don't think that I can help you, perhaps you wouldn't
mind--going away?"

"Oh, my lady, you must hear me to the end, because you are just the person who can help me.
Of course as you two are situated he would do anything you were to bid him. Now he has taken
it into his head to be very huffy with me."

"Indeed I can do nothing in the matter," she said, in a tone of deep distress.

"If you would only just tell him that I have never meant to offend him! I am sure I don't know
what it is that has come up. It may be that I said a word in joke about Lord Hampstead, only
that there really could not have been anything in that. Nobody could have a more profound respect
for his lordship's qualities than I have, and I may say the same for your ladyship most sincerely.
I have always thought it a great feather in Roden's cap that he should be so closely connected,--more
than closely, I may say,--with your noble family."

What on earth was she to do with a man who would go on talking to her, making at every moment
insolent allusions to the most cherished secret of her heart! "I must beg you to go away and
leave me, sir," she said. "My brother will be here almost immediately."

This had escaped from her with a vain idea that the man would receive it as a threat,--that
he would think probably that her brother would turn him out of the house for his insolence.
In this she was altogether mistaken. He had no idea that he was insolent. "Then perhaps you
will allow me to wait for his lordship," he said.

"Oh dear, no! He may come or he may not. You really cannot wait. You ought not to have come
at all."

"But for the sake of peace, my lady! One word from your fair lips--." Lady Frances could endure
it no longer. She got up from her seat and walked out of the room, leaving Mr. Crocker planted
in his chair. In the hall she found one of the servants, whom she told to "take that man to
the front door at once." The servant did as he was bid, and Crocker was ushered out of the
house without any feeling on his part that he had misbehaved himself.

Crocker had hardly got beyond the grounds when Hampstead did in truth return. The first words
spoken between him and his sister of course referred to their father's health. "He is unhappy
rather than ill," said Hampstead.

"Is it about me?" she asked.

"No; not at all about you in the first instance."

"What does that mean?"

"It is not because of you; but from what others say about you."

"Mamma?" she asked.

"Yes; and Mr. Greenwood."

"Does he interfere?"

"I am afraid he does;--not directly with my father, but through her ladyship, who daily tells
my father what the stupid old man says. Lady Kingsbury is most irrational and harassing. I
have always thought her to be silly, but now I cannot keep myself from feeling that she misbehaves
herself grievously. She does everything she can to add to his annoyance."

"That is very bad."

"It is bad. He can turn Mr. Greenwood out of the house if Mr. Greenwood becomes unbearable.
But he cannot turn his wife out."

"Could he not come here?"

"I am afraid not,--without bringing her too. She has taken it into her stupid head that you
and I are disgracing the family. As for me, she seems to think that I am actually robbing her
own boys of their rights. I would do anything for them, or even for her, if I could comfort
her; but she is determined to look upon us as enemies. My father says that it will worry him
into his grave."

"Poor papa!"

"We can run away, but he can not. I became very angry when I was there, both with her ladyship
and that pestilential old clergyman, and told them both pretty much what I thought. I have
the comfort of knowing that I have two bitter enemies in the house."

"Can they hurt you?"

"Not in the least,--except in this, that they can teach those little boys to regard me as an
enemy. I would fain have had my brothers left to me. Mr. Greenwood, and I must now say her
ladyship also, are nothing to me."

It was not till after dinner that the story was told about Crocker. "Think what I must have
felt when I was told that a clerk from the Post Office wanted to see me!"

"And then that brute Crocker was shown in?" asked Hampstead.

"Do you really know him?"

"Know him! I should rather think so. Don't you remember him at Castle Hautboy?"

"Not in the least. But he told me that he had been there."

"He never would leave me. He absolutely drove me out of the country because he would follow
me about when we were hunting. He insulted me so grievously that I had to turn tail and run
away from him. What did he want of me?"

"To intercede for him with George Roden."

"He is an abominable man, irrepressible, so thick-skinned that you cannot possibly get at him
so as to hurt him. It is of no use telling him to keep his distance, for he does not in the
least know what you mean. I do not doubt that he has left the house with a conviction that
he has gained a sincere friend in you."

      *      *      *      *      *      *

It was now more than a fortnight since Marion Fay had dined at Hendon, and Hampstead felt that
unless he could succeed in carrying on the attack which he had commenced, any little beginning
of a friendship which he had made with the Quaker would be obliterated by the length of time.
If she thought about him at all, she must think that he was very indifferent to let so long
a time pass by without any struggle on his part to see her again. There had been no word of
love spoken. He had been sure of that. But still there had been something of affectionate intercourse
which she could not have failed to recognize. What must she think of him if he allowed that
to pass away without any renewal, without an attempt at carrying it further? When she had bade
him go in out of the cold there had been something in her voice which had made him feel that
she was in truth anxious for him. Now more than a fortnight had gone, and there had been no
renewal! "Fanny," he said, "how would it be if we were to ask those Quakers to dine here on
Christmas Day?"

"It would be odd, wouldn't it, as they are strangers, and dined here so lately?"

"People like that do not stand on ceremony at all. I don't see why they shouldn't come. I could
say that you want to make their acquaintance."

"Would you ask them alone?"

In that he felt that the great difficulty lay. The Fays would hardly come without Mrs. Roden,
and the Rodens could not be asked. "One doesn't always ask the same people to meet each other."

"It would be very odd, and I don't think they'd come," said Lady Frances, gravely. Then after
a pause she went on. "I fear, John, that there is more in it than mere dinner company."

"Certainly there is," he said boldly;--"much more in it."

"You are not in love with the Quaker's daughter?"

"I rather think I am. When I have seen her three or four times more, I shall be able to find
out. You may be sure of this, that I mean to see her three or four times more, and at any rate
one of the times must be before I go down to Gorse Hall." Then of course she knew the whole
truth. He did, however, give up the idea as to the Christmas dinner-party, having arrived at
the belief, after turning the matter over in his mind, that Zachary Fay would not bring his
daughter again so soon.

CHAPTER II.

MRS. RODEN'S ELOQUENCE.

On Sunday Hampstead was nervous and fidgety. He had at one time thought that it would be the
very day for him to go to Holloway. He would be sure to find Mrs. Roden at home after church,
and then, if he could carry things to the necessary length, he might also see Zachary Fay.
But on consideration it appeared to him that Sunday would not suit his purpose. George Roden
would be there, and would be sadly in the way. And the Quaker himself would be in the way,
as it would be necessary that he should have some preliminary interview with Marion before
anything could be serviceably said to her father. He was driven, therefore, to postpone his
visit. Nor would Monday do, as he knew enough of the manners of Paradise Row to be aware that
on Monday Mrs. Vincent would certainly be there. It would be his object, if things could be
made to go pleasantly, first to see Mrs. Roden for a few minutes, and then to spend as much
of the afternoon as might be possible with Marion Fay. He therefore fixed on the Tuesday for
his purpose, and having telegraphed about the country for his horses, groom, and other appurtenances,
he went down to Leighton on the Monday, and consoled himself with a day's hunting with the
staghounds.

On his return his sister spoke to him very seriously as to her own affairs. "Is not this almost
silly, John, about Mr. Roden not coming here?"

"Not silly at all, according to my ideas."

"All the world knows that we are engaged. The very servants have heard of it. That horrid young
man who came from the Post Office was aware of it."

"What has all that to do with it?"

"If it has been made public in that way, what can be the object of keeping us apart? Mamma
no doubt told her sister, and Lady Persiflage has published it everywhere. Her daughter is
going to marry a duke, and it has crowned her triumph to let it be known that I am going to
marry only a Post Office clerk. I don't begrudge her that in the least. But as they have talked
about it so much, they ought, at any rate, to let me have my Post Office clerk."

"I have nothing to say about it one way or the other," said Hampstead. "I say nothing about
it, at any rate now."

"What do you mean by that, John?"

"When I saw how miserable you were at Trafford I did my best to bring you away. But I could
only bring you here on an express stipulation that you should not meet George Roden while you
were in my house. If you can get my father's consent to your meeting him, then that part of
the contract will be over."

"I don't think I made any promise."

"I understand it so."

"I said nothing to papa on the subject,--and I do not remember that I made any promise to you.
I am sure I did not."

"I promised for you." To this she was silent. "Are you going to ask him to come here?"

"Certainly not. But if he did come, how could I refuse to see him? I thought that he was here
on Saturday, and I told Richard to admit him. I could not send him away from the door."

"I do not think he will come unless he is asked," said Hampstead. Then the conversation was over.

On the following day, at two o'clock, Lord Hampstead again started for Holloway. On this occasion
he drove over, and left his trap and servant at the "Duchess of Edinburgh." He was so well
known in the neighbourhood now as hardly to be able to hope to enter on the domains of Paradise
Row without being recognized. He felt that it was hard that his motions should be watched,
telling himself that it was one of the evils belonging to an hereditary nobility; but he must
accept this mischief as he did others, and he walked up the street trying to look as though
he didn't know that his motions were being watched first from Number Fifteen as he passed it,
and then from Number Ten opposite, as he stood at Mrs. Roden's door.

Mrs. Roden was at home, and received him, of course, with her most gracious smile; but her
heart sank within her as she saw him, for she felt sure that he had come in pursuit of Marion
Fay. "It is very kind of you to call," she said. "I had heard from George that you had gone
down into the country since we had the pleasure of dining with you."

"Yes; my father has been unwell, and I had to stay with him a few days or I should have been
here sooner. You got home all of you quite well?"

"Oh, yes."

"Miss Fay did not catch cold?"

"Not at all;--though I fear she is hardly strong."

"She is not ill, I hope?"

"Oh, no; not that. But she lives here very quietly, and I doubt whether the excitement of going
out is good for her."

"There was not much excitement at Hendon Hall, I think," he said, laughing.

"Not for you, but for her perhaps. In appreciating our own condition we are so apt to forget
what is the condition of others! To Marion Fay it was a strange event to have to dine at your
house,--and strange also to receive little courtesies such as yours. It is hard for you to
conceive how strongly the nature of such a girl may be effected by novelties. I have almost
regretted, Lord Hampstead, that I should have consented to take her there."

"Has she said anything?"

"Oh, no; there was nothing for her to say. You are not to suppose that any harm has been done."

"What harm could have been done?" he asked. Of what nature was the harm of which Mrs. Roden
was speaking? Could it be that Marion had made any sign of altered feelings; had declared in
any way her liking or disliking; had given outward testimony of thoughts which would have been
pleasant to him,--or perhaps unpleasant,--had he known them?

"No harm, of course," said Mrs. Roden;--"only to a nature such as hers all excitement is evil."

"I cannot believe that," he said, after a pause. "Now and then in the lives of all of us there
must come moments of excitement which cannot be all evil. What would Marion say if I were to
tell her that I loved her?"

"I hope you will not do that, my lord."

"Why should you hope so? What right have you to hope so? If I do love her, is it not proper
that I should tell her?"

"But it would not be proper that you should love her."

"There, Mrs. Roden, I take the liberty of declaring that you are altogether in the wrong, and
that you speak without due consideration."

"Do I, my lord?"

"I think so. Why am I not to be allowed the ordinary privilege of a man,--that of declaring
my passion to a woman when I meet one who seems in all things to fulfil the image of perfection
which I have formed for myself,--when I see a girl that I fancy I can love?"

"Ah, there is the worst! It is only a fancy."

"I will not be accused in that way without defending myself. Let it be fancy or what not, I
love Marion Fay, and I have come here to tell her so. If I can make any impression on her I
shall come again and tell her father so. I am here now because I think that you can help me.
If you will not, I shall go on without your help."

"What can I do?"

"Go to her with me now, at once. You say that excitement is bad for her. The excitement will
be less if you will come with me to her house."

Then there was a long pause in the conversation, during which Mrs. Roden was endeavouring to
determine what might be her duty at this moment. She certainly did not think that it would
be well that Lord Hampstead, the eldest son of the Marquis of Kingsbury, should marry Marion
Fay. She was quite sure that she had all the world with her there. Were any one to know that
she had assisted in arranging such a marriage, that any one would certainly condemn her. That
would assuredly be the case, not only with the young lord's family, not only with others of
the young lord's order, but with all the educated world of Great Britain. How could it be that
such a one as Marion Fay should be a fitting wife for such a one as Lord Hampstead? Marion
Fay had undoubtedly great gifts of her own. She was beautiful, intelligent, sweet-minded, and
possessed of natural delicacy,--so much so that to Mrs. Roden herself she had become as dear
almost as a daughter; but it was impossible that she should have either the education or the
manners fit for the wife of a great English peer. Though her manners might be good and her
education excellent, they were not those required for that special position. And then there
was cause for other fears. Marion's mother and brothers and sisters had all died young. The
girl herself had hitherto seemed to escape the scourge under which they perished. But occasionally
there would rise to her cheeks a bright colour, which for the moment would cause Mrs. Roden's
heart to sink within her. Occasionally there would be heard from her not a cough, but that
little preparation for coughing which has become so painfully familiar to the ears of those
whose fate it has been to see their beloved ones gradually fade from presumed health. She had
already found herself constrained to say a word or two to the old Quaker, not telling him that
she feared any coming evil, but hinting that change of air would certainly be beneficial to
such a one as Marion. Acting under this impulse, he had taken her during the inclemency of
the past spring to the Isle of Wight. She was minded gradually to go on with this counsel,
so as if possible to induce the father to send his girl out of London for some considerable
portion of the year. If this were so, how could she possibly encourage Lord Hampstead in his
desire to make Marion his wife?

And then, as to the girl herself, could it be for her happiness that she should be thus lifted
into a strange world, a world that would be hard and ungracious to her, and in which it might
be only too probable that the young lord should see her defects when it would be too late for
either of them to remedy the evil that had been done? She had thought something of all this
before, having recognized the possibility of such a step as this after what she had seen at
Hendon Hall. She had told herself that it would be well at any rate to discourage any such
idea in Marion's heart, and had spoken jokingly of the gallantry of men of rank. Marion had
smiled sweetly as she had listened to her friend's words, and had at once said that such manners
were at any rate pretty and becoming in one so placed as Lord Hampstead. There had been something
in this to make Mrs. Roden almost fear that her words had been taken as intending too much,--that
Marion had accepted them as a caution against danger. Not for worlds would she have induced
the girl to think that any danger was apprehended. But now the danger had come, and it behoved
Mrs. Roden if possible to prevent the evil. "Will you come across with me now?" said Hampstead,
having sat silent in his chair while these thoughts were passing through the lady's mind.

"I think not, my lord."

"Why not, Mrs. Roden? Will it not be better than that I should go alone?"

"I hope you will not go at all."

"I shall go,--certainly. I consider myself bound by all laws of honesty to tell her what she
has done to me. She can then judge what may be best for herself."

"Do not go at any rate to-day, Lord Hampstead. Let me beg at least as much as that of you.
Consider the importance of the step you will be taking."

"I have thought of it," said he.

"Marion is as good as gold."

"I know she is."

"Marion, I say, is as good as gold; but is it likely that any girl should remain untouched
and undazzled by such an offer as you can make her?"

"Touched I hope she may be. As for dazzled,--I do not believe in it in the least. There are
eyes which no false lights can dazzle."

"But if she were touched, as would no doubt be the case," said Mrs. Roden, "could it be well
that you with such duties before you should marry the daughter of Zachary Fay? Listen to me
a moment," she continued, as he attempted to interrupt her. "I know what you would say, and
I sympathize with much of it; but it cannot be well for society that classes should be mixed
together suddenly and roughly."

"What roughness would there be?" he asked.

"As lords and ladies are at present, as dukes are, and duchesses, and such like, there would
be a roughness to them in having Marion Fay presented to them as one of themselves. Lords have
married low-born girls, I know, and the wives have been contented with a position which has
almost been denied to them, or only grudgingly accorded. I have known something of that, my
lord, and have felt--at any rate I have seen--its bitterness. Marion Fay would fade and sink
to nothing if she were subjected to such contumely. To be Marion Fay is enough for her. To
be your wife, and not to be thought fit to be your wife, would not be half enough."

"She shall be thought fit."

"You can make her Lady Hampstead, and demand that she shall be received at Court. You can deck
her with diamonds, and cause her to be seated high in honour according to your own rank. But
could you induce your father's wife to smile on her?" In answer to this he was dumb. "Do you
think she would be contented if your father's wife were to frown on her?"

"My father's wife is not everybody."

"She would necessarily be much to your wife. Take a week, my lord, or a month, and think upon
it. She expects nothing from you yet, and it is still in your power to save her from unhappiness."

"I would make her happy, Mrs. Roden."

"Think about it;--think about it."

"And I would make myself happy also. You count my feelings as being nothing in the matter."

"Nothing as compared with hers. You see how plainly I deal with you. Let me say that for a
time your heart will be sore;--that you do in truth love this girl so as to feel that she is
necessary to your happiness. Do you not know that if she were placed beyond your reach you
would recover from that sting? The duties of the world would still be open to you. Being a
man, you would still have before you many years for recovery before your youth had departed
from you. Of course you would find some other woman, and be happy with her. For her, if she
came to shipwreck in this venture, there would be no other chance."

"I would make this chance enough for her."

"So you think; but if you will look abroad you will see that the perils to her happiness which
I have attempted to describe are not vain. I can say no more, my lord, but can only beg that
you will take some little time to think of it before you put the thing out of your own reach.
If she had once accepted your love I know that you would never go back."

"Never."

"Therefore think again while there is time." He slowly dragged himself up from his chair, and
left her almost without a word at parting. She had persuaded him--to take another week. It
was not that he doubted in the least his own purpose, but he did not know how to gainsay her
as to this small request. In that frame of mind which is common to young men when they do not
get all that they want, angry, disappointed, and foiled, he went down-stairs, and opened the
front door,--and there on the very steps he met Marion Fay.

"Marion," he said, pouring all the tenderness of his heart into his voice.

"My lord?"

"Come in, Marion,--for one moment." Then she followed him into the little passage, and there
they stood. "I had come over to ask you how you are after our little party."

"I am quite well;--and you?"

"I have been away with my father, or I should have come sooner."

"Nay;--it was not necessary that you should trouble yourself."

"It is necessary;--it is necessary; or I should be troubled very much. I am troubled." She
stood there looking down on the ground as though she were biding her time, but she did not
speak to him. "She would not come with me," he said, pointing up the stairs on which Mrs. Roden
was now standing. "She has told me that it is bad that I should come; but I will come one day
soon." He was almost beside himself with love as he was speaking. The girl was so completely
after his own heart as he stood there close to her, filled with her influences, that he was
unable to restrain himself.

"Come up, Marion dear," said Mrs. Roden, speaking from the landing. "It is hardly fair to keep
Lord Hampstead standing in the passage."

"It is most unfair," said Marion. "Good day, my lord."

"I will stand here till you come down to me, unless you will speak to me again. I will not
be turned out while you are here. Marion, you are all the world to me. I love you with my whole,
whole heart. I had come here, dear, to tell you so;--but she has delayed me. She made me promise
that I would not come again for a week, as though weeks or years could change me? Say one word
to me, Marion. One word shall suffice now, and then I will go. Marion, can you love me?"

"Come to me, Marion, come to me," said Mrs. Roden. "Do not answer him now."

"No," said Marion, looking up, and laying her hand gently on the sleeve of his coat. "I will
not answer him now. It is too sudden. I must think of words to answer such a speech. Lord Hampstead,
I will go to her now."

"But I shall hear from you."

"You shall come to me again, and I will tell you."

"To-morrow?"

"Nay; but give me a day or two. On Friday I will be ready with my answer."

"You will give me your hand, Marion." She gave it to him, and he covered it with kisses. "Only
have this in your mind, fixed as fate, that no man ever loved a woman more truly than I love
you. No man was ever more determined to carry out his purpose. I am in your hands. Think if
you cannot dare to trust yourself into mine." Then he left her, and went back to the "Duchess
of Edinburgh," not thinking much of the eyes which might be looking at him.

CHAPTER III.

MARION'S VIEWS ABOUT MARRIAGE.

When Lord Hampstead shut the door behind him, Marion went slowly up the stairs to Mrs. Roden,
who had returned to her drawing-room. When she entered, her friend was standing near the door,
with anxiety plainly written on her face,--with almost more than anxiety. She took Marion by
the hand and, kissing her, led her to the sofa. "I would have stopped him if I could," she said.

"Why should you have stopped him?"

"Such things should be considered more."

"He had made it too late for considering to be of service. I knew, I almost knew, that he would
come."

"You did?"

"I can tell myself now that I did, though I could not say it even to myself before." There
was a smile on her face as she spoke, and, though her colour was heightened, there was none
of that peculiar flush which Mrs. Roden so greatly feared to see. Nor was there any special
excitement in her manner. There was no look either of awe or of triumph. She seemed to take
it as a matter of course, quite as much at least as any Lady Amaldina could have done, who
might have been justified by her position in expecting that some young noble eldest son would
fling himself at her feet.

"And are you ready with your answer?" Marion turned her eyes towards her friend, but made no
immediate reply. "My darling girl,--for you in truth are very dear to me,--much thought should
be given to such an appeal as that before any answer is made."

"I have thought."

"And are you ready?"

"I think so. Dear Mrs. Roden, do not look at me like that. If I do not say more to tell you
immediately it is because I am not perhaps quite sure;--not sure, at any rate, of the reasons
I may have to give. I will come to you to-morrow, and then I will tell you."

There was room then at any rate for hope! If the girl had not quite resolved to grasp at the
high destiny offered to her, it was still her friend's duty to say something that might influence
her.

"Marion, dear!"

"Say all that you think, Mrs. Roden. Surely you know that I know that whatever may come from
you will come in love. I have no mother, and to whom can I go better than to you to fill a
mother's place?"

"Dear Marion, it is thus I feel towards you. What I would say to you I would say to my own
child. There are great differences in the ranks of men."

"I have felt that."

"And though I do in my honest belief think that the best and honestest of God's creatures are
not always to be found among so-called nobles, yet I think that a certain great respect should
be paid to those whom chance has raised to high places."

"Do I not respect him?"

"I hope so. But perhaps you may not show it best by loving him."

"As to that, it is a matter in which one can, perhaps, hardly control oneself. If asked for
love it will come from you like water from a fountain. Unless it be so, then it cannot come
at all."

"That surely is a dangerous doctrine for a young woman."

"Young women, I think, are compassed by many dangers," said Marion; "and I know but one way
of meeting them."

"What way is that, dear?"

"I will tell you, if I can find how to tell it, to-morrow."

"There is one point, Marion, on which I feel myself bound to warn you, as I endeavoured also
to warn him. To him my words seemed to have availed nothing; but you, I think, are more reasonable.
Unequal marriages never make happy either the one side or the other."

"I hope I may do nothing to make him unhappy."

"Unhappy for a moment you must make him;--for a month, perhaps, or for a year; though it were
for years, what would that be to his whole life?"

"For years?" said Marion. "No, not for years. Would it be more than for days, do you think?"

"I cannot tell what may be the nature of the young man's heart;--nor can you. But as to that,
it cannot be your duty to take much thought. Of his lasting welfare you are bound to think."

"Oh, yes; of that certainly;--of that above all things."

"I mean as to this world. Of what may come afterwards to one so little known we here can hardly
dare to speak,--or even to think. But a girl, when she has been asked to marry a man, is bound
to think of his welfare in this life."

"I cannot but think of his eternal welfare also," said Marion.

"Unequal marriages are always unhappy," said Mrs. Roden, repeating her great argument.

"Always?"

"I fear so. Could you be happy if his great friends, his father, and his stepmother, and all
those high-born lords and ladies who are connected with him,--could you be happy if they frowned
on you?"

"What would their frowns be to me? If he smiled I should be happy. If the world were light
and bright to him, it would certainly be light and bright to me."

"I thought so once, Marion. I argued with myself once just as you are arguing now."

"Nay, Mrs. Roden, I am hardly arguing."

"It was just so that I spoke to myself, saying that the joy which I took in a man's love would
certainly be enough for my happiness. But oh, alas! I fell to the ground. I will tell you now
more of myself than I have told any one for many a year, more even than I have told George.
I will tell you because I know that I can trust your faith."

"Yes; you can trust me," said Marion.

"I also married greatly; greatly, as the world's honours are concerned. In mere rank I stood
as a girl higher perhaps than you do now. But I was lifted out of my own degree, and in accepting
the name which my husband gave me I assured myself that I would do honour to it, at any rate
by my conduct. I did it no dishonour;--but my marriage was most unfortunate."

"Was he good?" asked Marion.

"He was weak. Are you sure that Lord Hampstead is strong? He was fickle-hearted. Can you be
sure that Lord Hampstead will be constant amidst the charms of others whose manners will be
more like his own than yours can be?"

"I think he would be constant," said Marion.

"Because you are ready to worship him who has condescended to step down from his high pedestal
and worship you. Is it not so?"

"It may be that it is so," said Marion.

"Ah, yes, my child. It may be that it is so. And then, think of what may follow,--not only
for him, but for you also; not only for you, but for him also. Broken hearts, crushed ambitions,
hopes all dead, personal dislikes, and perhaps hatred."

"Not hatred; not hatred."

"I lived to be hated;--and why not another?" Then she was silent, and Marion rising from her
seat kissed her, and went away to her home.

She had very much to think of. Though she had declared that she had almost expected this offer
from her lover, still it could not be that the Quaker girl, the daughter of Zachary Fay, Messrs.
Pogson and Littlebird's clerk, should not be astounded by having such an offer from such a
suitor as Lord Hampstead. But in truth the glory of the thing was not very much to her. It
was something, no doubt. It must be something to a girl to find that her own personal charms
have sufficed to lure down from his lofty perch the topmost bird of them all. That Marion was
open to some such weakness may be acknowledged of her. But of the coronet, of the diamonds,
of the lofty title, and high seats, of the castle, and the parks, and well-arranged equipages,
of the rich dresses, of the obsequious servants, and fawning world that would be gathered around
her, it may be said that she thought not at all. She had in her short life seen one man who
had pleased her ear and her eye, and had touched her heart; and that one man had instantly
declared himself to be all her own. That made her bosom glow with some feeling of triumph!

That same evening she abruptly told the whole story to her father. "Father," she said, "Lord
Hampstead was here to-day."

"Here, in this house?"

"Not in this house. But I met him at our friend's, whom I went to see, as is my custom almost
daily."

"I am glad he came not here," said the Quaker.

"Why should you be glad?" To this the Quaker made no answer.

"His purpose was to have come here. It was to see me that he came."

"To see thee?"

"Father, the young lord has asked me to be his wife."

"Asked thee to be his wife!"

"Yes, indeed. Have you not often heard that young men may be infatuated? It has chanced that
I have been the Cinderella for his eyes."

"But thou art no princess, child."

"And, therefore, am unfit to mate with this prince. I could not answer him at once, father.
It was too sudden for me to find the words. And the place was hardly fitting. But I have found
them now."

"What words, my child?"

"I will tell him with all respect and deference,--nay, I will tell him with some love, for
I do love him,--that it will become him to look for his wife elsewhere."

"Marion," said the Quaker, who was somewhat moved by those things which had altogether failed
with the girl herself; "Marion, must it be so?"

"Father, it must certainly be so."

"And yet thou lovest him?"

"Though I were dying for his love it must be so."

"Why, my child, why? As far as I saw the young man he is good and gracious, of great promise,
and like to be true-hearted."

"Good, and gracious, and true-hearted! Oh, yes! And would you have it that I should bring such
a one as that to sorrow,--perhaps to disgrace?"

"Why to sorrow? Why to disgrace? Wouldst thou be more likely to disgrace a husband than one
of those painted Jezebels who know no worship but that of their faded beauty? Thou hast not
answered him, Marion?"

"No, father. He is to come on Friday for my answer."

"Think of it yet again, my child. Three days are no time for considering a matter of such moment.
Bid him leave you for ten days further."

"I am ready now," said Marion.

"And yet thou lovest him! That is not true to nature, Marion. I would not bid thee take a man's
hand because he is rich and great if thou couldst not give him thy heart in return. I would
not have thee break any law of God or man for the glitter of gold or tinsel of rank. But the
good things of this world, if they be come by honestly, are good. And the love of an honest
man, if thou lovest him thyself in return, is not of the less worth because he stands high
in wealth and in honour."

"Shall I think nothing of him, father?"

"Yea, verily; it will be thy duty to think of him, almost exclusively of him,--when thou shalt
be his wife."

"Then, father, shall I never think of him."

"Wilt thou pay no heed to my words, so as to crave from him further time for thought?"

"Not a moment. Father, you must not be angry with your child for this. My own feelings tell
me true. My own heart, and my own heart alone, can dictate to me what I shall say to him. There
are reasons--"

"What reasons?"

"There are reasons why my mother's daughter should not marry this man." Then there came a cloud
across his brow, and he looked at her as though almost overcome by his anger. It seemed as
though he strove to speak; but he sat for a while in silence. Then rising from his chair he
left the room, and did not see her again that night.

This was on a Tuesday; on the Wednesday he did not speak to her on the subject. The Thursday
was Christmas Day, and she went to church with Mrs. Roden. Nor did he on that day allude to
the matter; but on the evening she made to him a little request. "To-morrow, father, is a holiday,
is it not, in the City?"

"So they tell me. I hate such tom-fooleries. When I was young a man might be allowed to earn
his bread on all lawful days of the week. Now he is expected to spend the wages he cannot earn
in drinking and shows."

"Father, you must leave me here alone after our dinner. He will come for his answer."

"And you will give it?"

"Certainly, father, certainly. Do not question me further, for it must be as I told you." Then
he left her as he had done before; but he did not urge her with any repetition of his request.

This was what occurred between Marion and her father; but on the Wednesday she had gone to
Mrs. Roden as she had promised, and there explained her purpose more fully than she had before
been able to do. "I have come, you see," she said, smiling. "I might have told you all at once,
for I have changed nothing of my mind since first he spoke to me all so suddenly in the passage
down-stairs."

"Are you so sure of yourself?"

"Quite sure;--quite sure. Do you think I would hurt him?"

"No, no. You would not, I know, do so willingly."

"And yet I must hurt him a little. I hope it will hurt him just a little." Mrs. Roden stared
at her. "Oh, if I could make him understand it all! If I could bid him be a man, so that it
should wound him only for a short time."

"What wound!"

"Did you think that I could take him, I, the daughter of a City clerk, to go and sit in his
halls, and shame him before all the world, because he had thought fit to make me his wife? Never!"

"Marion, Marion!"

"Because he has made a mistake which has honoured me, shall I mistake also, so as to dishonour
him? Because he has not seen the distance, shall I be blind to it? He would have given himself
up for me. Shall I not be able to make a sacrifice? To such a one as I am to sacrifice myself
is all that I can do in the world."

"Is it such a sacrifice?"

"Could it be that I should not love him? When such a one comes, casting his pearls about, throwing
sweet odours through the air, whispering words which are soft-sounding as music in the heavens,
whispering them to me, casting them at me, turning on me the laughing glances of his young
eyes, how could I help to love him? Do you remember when for a moment he knelt almost at my
feet, and told me that I was his friend, and spoke to me of his hearth? Did you think that
that did not move me?"

"So soon, my child;--so soon?"

"In a moment. Is it not so that it is done always?"

"Hearts are harder than that, Marion."

"Mine, I think, was so soft just then that the half of his sweet things would have ravished
it from my bosom. But I feel for myself that there are two parts in me. Though the one can
melt away, and pass altogether from my control, can gush like water that runs out and cannot
be checked, the other has something in it of hard substance which can stand against blows,
even from him."

"What is that something, Marion?"

"Nay, I cannot name it. I think it be another heart, of finer substance, or it may be it is
woman's pride, which will suffer all things rather than hurt the one it loves. I know myself.
No words from him,--no desire to see his joy, as he would be joyful, if I told him that I could
give him all he asks,--no longing for all his love could do for me, shall move me one tittle.
He shall tell himself to his dying day that the Quaker girl, because she loved him, was true
to his interests."

"My child;--my child!" said Mrs. Roden, taking Marion in her arms.

"Do you think that I do not know,--that I have forgotten? Was it nothing to me to see my--mother
die, and her little ones? Do I not know that I am not, as others are, free to wed, not a lord
like that, but even one of my own standing? Mrs. Roden, if I can live till my poor father shall
have gone before me, so that he may not be left alone when the weakness of age shall have come
upon him,--then,--then I shall be satisfied to follow them. No dream of loving had ever crossed
my mind. He has come, and without my mind, the dream has been dreamed. I think that my lot
will be happier so, than if I had passed away without any feeling such as that I have now.
Perhaps he will not marry till I am gone."

"Would that hurt you so sorely?"

"It ought not. It shall not. It will be well that he should marry, and I will not wish to cause
him evil. He will have gone away, and I shall hardly know of it. Perhaps they will not tell
me." Mrs. Roden could only embrace her, sobbing, wiping her eyes with piteousness. "But I will
not begrudge aught of the sacrifice," she continued. "There is nothing, I think, sweeter than
to deny oneself all things for love. What are our lessons for but to teach us that? Shall I
not do unto him as it would be well for me that some such girl should do for my sake if I were
such as he?"

"Oh, Marion, you have got the better part."

"And yet,--and yet--. I would that he should feel a little because he cannot have the toy that
has pleased his eye. What was it that he saw in me, do you think?" As she asked the question
she cheered up wonderfully.

"The beauty of your brow and eyes,--the softness of your woman's voice."

"Nay, but I think it was my Quaker dress. His eye, perhaps, likes things all of a colour. I
had, too, new gloves and a new frock when he saw me. How well I remember his coming,--how he
would glance round at me till I hardly knew whether I was glad that he should observe me so
much,--or offended at his persistence. I think that I was glad, though I told myself that he
should not have glanced at me so often. And then, when he asked us to go down to his house
I did long,--I did long,--to win father's consent to the journey. Had he not gone--"

"Do not think of it, Marion."

"That I will not promise;--but I will not talk of it. Now, dear Mrs. Roden, let all then be
as though it had never been. I do not mean to mope, or to neglect my work, because a young
lord has crossed my path and told me that he loves me. I must send him from me, and then I
will be just as I have been always." Having made this promise she went away, leaving Mrs. Roden
much more flurried by the interview than was she herself. When the Friday came, holiday as
it was, the Quaker took himself off to the City after dinner, without another word as to his
daughter's lover.

CHAPTER IV.

LORD HAMPSTEAD IS IMPATIENT.

Hampstead, when he was sent away from Paradise Row, and bade to wait till Friday for an answer,
was disappointed, almost cross, and unreasonable in his feelings towards Mrs. Roden. To Mrs.
Roden altogether he attributed it that Marion had deferred her reply. Whether the delay thus
enjoined told well or ill for his hopes he could not bring himself to determine. As he drove
himself home his mind was swayed now in one direction and now in the other. Unless she loved
him somewhat, unless she thought it possible that she should love him, she would hardly have
asked for time to think of it all. And yet, had she really have loved him, why should she have
asked for time? He had done for her all that a man could do for a girl, and if she loved him
she should not have tormented him by foolish delays,--by coying her love!

It should be said on his behalf that he attributed to himself no preponderance of excellence,
either on the score of his money or his rank. He was able so to honour the girl as to think
of her that such things would go for nothing with her. It was not that he had put his coronet
at her feet, but his heart. It was of that he thought when he reminded himself of all that
he had done for her, and told himself angrily that she should not have tormented him. He was
as arrogant and impatient of disappointment as any young lord of them all,--but it was not,
however, because he was a lord that he thought that Marion's heart was due to him.

"I have been over to Holloway," he said to his sister, almost as soon as he had returned.

Out of the full heart the mouth speaks. "Have you seen George?" asked Lady Frances.

"No; I did not go to see him. He, of course, would be at his office during the day. I went
about my own business."

"You need not be so savage with me, John. What was your own business at Holloway?"

"I went to ask Marion Fay to be my wife."

"You did?"

"Yes; I did. Why should I not? It seems the fashion for us all now to marry just those we fancy
best."

"And why not? Have I gainsaid you? If this Quaker's daughter be good and honest, and fair to
look at--"

"That she is fair to look at I can say certainly. That she is good I believe thoroughly. That
she is honest, at any rate to me, I cannot say as yet."

"Not honest?"

"She will not steal or pick a pocket, if you mean that."

"What is it, John? Why do you speak of her in this way?"

"Because I have chosen to tell you. Having made up my mind to do this thing, I would not keep
it secret as though I were ashamed of it. How can I say that she is honest till she has answered
me honestly?"

"What answer has she made you?" she asked.

"None;--as yet! She has told me to come again another day."

"I like her better for that."

"Why should you like her better? Just because you're a woman, and think that shilly-shallying
and pretending not to know your own mind, and keeping a fellow in suspense, is becoming. I
am not going to change my mind about Marion; but I do think that mock hesitation is unnecessary,
and in some degree dishonest."

"Must it necessarily be mock hesitation? Ought she not to be sure of herself that she can love
you?"

"Certainly; or that she should not love me. I am not such a puppy as to suppose that she is
to throw herself into my arms just because I ask her. But I think that she must have known
something of herself so as to have been able to tell me either to hope or not to hope. She
was as calm as a Minister in the House of Commons answering a question; and she told me to
wait till Friday just as those fellows do when they have to find out from the clerks in the
office what it is they ought to say."

"You will go again on Friday?" she asked.

"Of course I must. It is not likely that she should come to me. And then if she says that she'd
rather not, I must come home once more with my tail between my legs."

"I do not think she will say that."

"How can you tell?"

"It is the nature of a girl, I think," said Lady Frances, "to doubt a little when she thinks
that she can love, but not to doubt at all when she feels that she cannot. She may be persuaded
afterwards to change her mind, but at first she is certain enough."

"I call that shilly-shally."

"Not at all. The girl I'm speaking of is honest throughout. And Miss Fay will have been honest
should she accept you now. It is not often that such a one as you, John, can ask a girl in vain."

"That is mean," he said, angrily. "That is imputing falseness, and greed, and dishonour to
the girl I love. If she has liked some fellow clerk in her father's office better than she
likes me, shall she accept me merely because I am my father's son?"

"It was not that of which I was thinking. A man may have personal gifts which will certainly
prevail with a girl young and unsullied by the world, as I suppose is your Marion Fay."

"Bosh," he said, laughing. "As far as personal gifts are concerned, one fellow is pretty nearly
the same as another. A girl has to be good-looking. A man has got to have something to buy
bread and cheese with. After that it is all a mere matter of liking and disliking--unless,
indeed, people are dishonest, which they very often are."

Up to this period of his life Lord Hampstead had never met any girl whom he had thought it
desirable to make his wife. It was now two years since the present Marchioness had endeavoured
to arrange an alliance between him and her own niece, Lady Amaldina Hauteville. This, though
but two years had passed since, seemed to him to have occurred at a distant period of his life.
Very much had occurred to him during those two years. His political creed had been strengthened
by the convictions of others, especially by those of George Roden, till it had included those
advanced opinions which have been described. He had annoyed, and then dismayed, his father
by his continued refusal to go into Parliament. He had taken to himself ways of living of his
own, which gave to him the manners and appearance of more advanced age. At that period, two
years since, his stepmother still conceived high hopes of him, even though he would occasionally
utter in her presence opinions which seemed to be terrible. He was then not of age, and there
would be time enough for a woman of her tact and intellect to cure all those follies. The best
way of curing them, she thought, would be by arranging a marriage between the heir to the Marquisate
and the daughter of so distinguished a conservative Peer as her brother-in-law, Lord Persiflage.
Having this high object in view, she opened the matter with diplomatic caution to her sister.
Lady Persiflage had at that moment begun to regard Lord Llwddythlw as a possible son-in-law,
but was alive to the fact that Lord Hampstead possessed some superior advantages. It was possible
that her girl should really love such a one as Lord Hampstead,--hardly possible that there
should be anything romantic in a marriage with the heir of the Duke of Merioneth. As far as
wealth and rank went there was enough in both competitors. She whispered therefore to her girl
the name of the younger aspirant,--aspirant as he might be hoped to be,--and the girl was not
opposed to the idea. Only let there be no falling to the ground between two stools; no starving
for want of fodder between two bundles of hay! Lord Llwddythlw had already begun to give symptoms.
No doubt he was bald; no doubt he was pre-occupied with Parliament and the county. There was
no doubt that his wife would have to encounter that touch of ridicule which a young girl incurs
when she marries a man altogether removed beyond the world of romance. But dukes are scarce,
and the man of business was known to be a man of high honour. There would be no gambling, no
difficulties, no possible question of a want of money. And then his politics were the grandest
known in England,--those of an old Tory willing always to work for his party without desiring
any of those rewards which the "party" wishes to divide among as select a number as possible.
What Lord Hampstead might turn out to be, there was as yet no knowing. He had already declared
himself to be a Radical. He was fond of hunting, and it was quite on the cards that he should
take to Newmarket. Then, too, his father might live for five-and-twenty years, whereas the
Duke of Merioneth was already nearly eighty. But Hampstead was as beautiful as a young Phoebus,
and the pair would instantly become famous if only from their good looks alone. The chance
was given to Lady Amaldina, but only given on the understanding that she must make very quick
work of her time.

Hampstead was coaxed down to Castle Hautboy for a month in September, with an idea that the
young lovers might be as romantic as they pleased among the Lakes. Some little romance there
was; but at the end of the first week Amaldina wisely told her mother that the thing wouldn't
do. She would always be glad to regard Lord Hampstead as a cousin, but as to anything else,
there must be an end of it. "I shall some day give up my title and abandon the property to
Freddy. I shall then go to the United States, and do the best I can there to earn my own bread."
This little speech, made by the proposed lover to the girl he was expected to marry, opened
Lady Amaldina's eyes to the danger of her situation. Lord Llwddythlw was induced to spend two
days in the following month at Castle Hautboy, and then the arrangements for the Welsh alliance
were completed.

From that time forth a feeling of ill-will on the part of Lady Kingsbury towards her stepson
had grown and become strong from month to month. She had not at first conceived any idea that
her Lord Frederic ought to come to the throne. That had come gradually when she perceived,
or thought that she perceived, that Hampstead would hardly make a marriage properly aristocratic.
Hitherto no tidings of any proposed marriage had reached her ears. She lived at last in daily
fear, as any marriage would be the almost sure forerunner of a little Lord Highgate. If something
might happen,--something which she had taught herself to regard as beneficent and fitting rather
than fatal,--something which might ensure to her little Lord Frederic those prospects which
he had almost a right to expect, then in spite of all her sufferings Heaven would have done
something for her for which she might be thankful. "What will her ladyship say when she hears
of my maid Marion?" said Hampstead to his sister on the Christmas Day before his further visit
to Holloway.

"Will it matter much?" asked Lady Frances.

"I think my feelings towards her are softer than yours. She is silly, arrogant, harsh, and
insolent to my father, and altogether unprincipled in her expectations and ambitions."

"What a character you give her," said his sister.

"But nevertheless I feel for her to such an extent that I almost think I ought to abolish myself."

"I cannot say that I feel for her."

"It is all for her son that she wants it; and I agree with her in thinking that Freddy will
be better fitted than I am for the position in question. I am determined to marry Marion if
I can get her; but all the Traffords, unless it be yourself, will be broken-hearted at such
a marriage. If once I have a son of my own the matter will be hopeless. If I were to call myself
Snooks, and refused to take a shilling from the property, I should do them no good. Marion's
boy would be just as much in their way as I am."

"What a way of looking at it."

"How my stepmother will hate her! A Quaker's daughter! A clerk at Pogson and Littlebird's!
Living at Paradise Row! Can't you see her! Is it not hard upon her that we should both go to
Paradise Row?" Lady Frances could not keep herself from laughing. "You can't do her any permanent
injury, because you are only a girl; but I think she will poison me. It will end in her getting
Mr. Greenwood to give me some broth."

"John, you are too terrible."

"If I could be on the jury afterwards, I would certainly acquit them both on the ground of
extreme provocation."

Early on the following morning he was in a fidget, having fixed no hour for his visit to Holloway.
It was not likely that she should be out or engaged, but he determined not to go till after
lunch. All employment was out of the question, and he was rather a trouble to his sister; but
in the course of the morning there came a letter which did for a while occupy his thoughts.
The envelope was addressed in a hand he did not know, and was absurdly addressed to the

   "RIGHT HONOURABLE,
    THE LORD HAMPSTEAD."

"I wonder who this ass is," said he, tearing it open. The ass was Samuel Crocker, and the letter
was as follows;--

   Heathcote Street,
   Mecklenburg Square,
   Christmas Day, 18--.

   MY DEAR LORD HAMPSTEAD,

   I hope I may be excused for addressing your lordship in
   this familiar manner. I take occasion of this happy day
   to write to your lordship on a message of peace. Since
   I had the honour of meeting you at your noble uncle's
   mansion, Castle Hautboy, I have considered it one of the
   greatest delights of my life to be able to boast of your
   acquaintance. You will not, I am sure, forget that we have
   been fellow sportsmen, and that we rode together on that
   celebrated run when we killed our fox in the field just
   over Airey Force. I shall never forget the occasion, or
   how well your lordship went over our rough country. To my
   mind there is no bond of union so strong as that of sport.

      "Up strikes little Davy with his musical horn."

   I am sure you will remember that, my lord, and the
   beautiful song to which it belongs. I remember, too, how,
   as we were riding home after the run, your lordship was
   talking all the way about our mutual friend, George Roden.

   He is a man for whom I have a most sincere regard, both as
   being an excellent public servant, and as a friend of your
   lordship's. It is quite a pleasure to see the way in which
   he devotes himself to the service,--as I do also. When
   you have taken the Queen's shilling you ought to earn
   it. Those are my principles, my lord. We have a couple
   of young fellows there whose only object it is to get
   through the day and eat their lunches. I always tell them
   that official hours ain't their own. I suppose they'll
   understand me some day.

   But as I was saying to your lordship about George
   Roden, there has something come up which I don't quite
   understand, which seems to have turned him against me.
   Nothing has ever given me so much pleasure as when I
   heard of his prospects as to a certain matter--which
   your lordship will know what I mean. Nothing could be
   more flattering than the way I've wished him joy ever so
   many times. So I do also your lordship and her ladyship,
   because he is a most respectable young man, though his
   station in life isn't so high as some people's. But a
   clerk in H. M. S. has always been taken for a gentleman
   which I am proud to think is my position as well as his.

   But, as I was saying to your lordship, something seems to
   have gone against him as to our mutual friendship. He sits
   there opposite and won't speak a word to me, except just
   to answer a question, and that hardly civil. He is as
   sweet as sugar to those fellows who ain't at the same
   desk with him as I am,--or I should think it was his
   future prospects were making him upsetting. Couldn't
   your lordship do something to make things up between us
   again,--especially on this festive occasion? I'm sure your
   lordship will remember how pleasant we were together at
   Castle Hautboy, and at the hunt, and especially as we were
   riding home together on that day. I did take the liberty
   of calling at Hendon Hall, when her ladyship was kind
   enough to see me. Of course there was a delicacy in
   speaking to her ladyship about Mr. Roden, which nobody
   could understand better than I do; but I think she made me
   something of a promise that she would say a word when a
   proper time might come.

   It could only have been a joke of mine; and I do joke
   sometimes, as your lordship may have observed. But I
   shouldn't think Roden would be the man to be mortally
   offended by anything of that sort. Anyway, I will leave
   the matter in your lordship's hands, merely remarking
   that,--as your lordship may remember,--"Blessed are the
   peace-makers, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven."

   I have the honour to be,
   My dear Lord Hampstead,
   Your lordship's most obedient,
   Very humble servant,

   SAMUEL CROCKER.

Fretful and impatient as he was on that morning, it was impossible for Hampstead not to laugh
at this letter. He showed it to his sister, who, in spite of her annoyance, was constrained
to laugh also. "I shall tell George to take him to his bosom at once," said he.

"Why should George be bothered with him?"

"Because George can't help himself. They sit at the same desk together, as Crocker has not
forgotten to tell me a dozen times. When a man perseveres in this way, and is thick-skinned
enough to bear all rebuffs, there is nothing he will not accomplish. I have no doubt he will
be riding my horses in Leicestershire before the season is over." An answer, however, was written
to him in the following words;--

   DEAR MR. CROCKER,

   I am afraid I cannot interfere with Mr. Roden, who doesn't
   like to be dictated to in such matters.

   Yours truly,

   HAMPSTEAD.

"There," said he; "I do not think he can take that letter as a mark of friendship."

In this way the morning was passed till the time came for the start to Holloway. Lady Frances,
standing at the hall door as he got into his trap, saw that the fashion of his face was unusually
serious.

CHAPTER V.

THE QUAKER'S ELOQUENCE.

When the Friday morning came in Paradise Row both father and daughter, at No. 17, were full
of thought as they came down to breakfast. To each of them it was a day laden with importance.
The father's mind had been full of the matter ever since the news had been told to him. He
had received Marion's positive assurance that such a marriage was altogether impossible with
something of impatience till she had used that argument as to her own health, which was so
powerful with her. On hearing that he had said nothing, but had gone away. Nor had he spoken
a word on the subject since. But his mind had been full of it. He had lost his wife,--and all
his little ones, as she had said; but he had declared to himself with strong confidence that
this child was to be spared to him. He was a man whose confidence was unbounded in things as
to which he had resolved. It was as though he had determined, in spite of Fate, in spite of
God, that his Marion should live. And she had grown up under his eyes, if not robust, by no
means a weak creature. She did her work about the house, and never complained. In his eyes
she was very beautiful; but he saw nothing in her colour which was not to him a sign of health.
He told himself that it was nothing that she, having seen so many die in her own family, should
condemn herself; but for himself he repudiated the idea, and declared to himself that she should
not become an early victim. So thinking, he exercised his mind constantly during those few
days in considering whether there was any adequate cause for the refusal which Marion had determined
to give this man.

He, in truth, was terribly anxious that this grand stroke of fortune should be acknowledged
and accepted. He wanted nothing from the young lord himself,--except, perhaps, that he might
be the young lord's father-in-law. But he did want it all, long for it all, pant for it all,
on behalf of his girl. If all these good things came in his girl's way because of her beauty,
her grace, and her merit, why should they not be accepted? Others not only accepted these things
for their daughters, but hunted for them, cheated for them, did all mean things in searching
for them,--and had their tricks and their lies regarded by the world quite as a matter of course,--because
it was natural that parents should be anxious for their children. He had not hunted. He had
not cheated. The thing had come in his girl's way. The man had found her to be the most lovely,
the most attractive, the most loveable among all whom he had seen. And was this glory to be
thrown away because she had filled her mind with false fears? Though she were to die, must
not the man take his chance with her, as do other husbands in marrying other wives?

He had been thinking of this, and of nothing but this, during the days which had intervened
since Lord Hampstead had been in Paradise Row. He had not said a word to his daughter,--had
indeed not dared to say a word to her, so abhorrent to him was the idea of discussing with
her the probabilities of her own living or dying. And he was doubtful, too, whether any words
coming from him at the present might not strengthen her in her resolution. If the man really
loved her he might prevail. His words would be stronger to overcome her than any that could
be spoken by her father. And then, too, if he really loved her, the one repulse would not send
him back for ever. It might, perhaps, be better that any arguments from her father should be
postponed till she should have heard her lover's arguments. But his mind was so filled with
the whole matter that he could not bring himself to assure himself certainly that his decision
was the best. Though he was one who rarely needed counsel from others, on this occasion he
did need it, and now it was his purpose to ask counsel of Mrs. Roden before the moment should
have come which might be fatal to his hopes.

As this was the day immediately following Christmas, there was no business for him in the City.
In order that the weary holiday might be quicker consumed, they breakfasted at No. 17 an hour
later than was usual. After breakfast he got through the morning as well as he could with his
newspaper, and some record of stocks and prices which he had brought with him from the City.
So he remained, fretful, doing nothing, pretending to read, but with his mind fixed upon the
one subject, till it was twelve o'clock, at which hour he had determined to make his visit.
At half-past one they were to dine, each of them having calculated, without, however, a word
having been spoken, that Lord Hampstead would certainly not come till the ceremony of dinner
would be over. Though the matter was so vitally important to both of them, not a word concerning
it was spoken.

At twelve o'clock he took up his hat, and walked out. "You will be back punctually for dinner,
father?" she asked. He made his promise simply by nodding his head, and then left the room.
Five minutes afterwards he was closeted with Mrs. Roden in her drawing-room. Having conceived
the difficulty of leading up to the subject gradually, he broke into it at once. "Marion has
told thee that this young man will be here to-day?" She simply assented. "Hast thou advised
her as to what she should say?"

"She has not seemed to want advice."

"How should a girl not want advice in so great a matter?"

"How, indeed? But yet she has needed none."

"Has she told thee," he asked, "what it is in her mind to do?"

"I think so."

"Has she said that she would refuse the man?"

"Yes; that certainly was her purpose."

"And given the reasons?" he said, almost trembling as he asked the question.

"Yes, she gave her reasons."

"And didst thou agree with her?" Before she could reply to this Mrs. Roden felt herself compelled
to pause. When she thought of that one strongest reason, fully as she agreed with it, she was
unable to tell the father of the girl that she did so. She sat looking at him, wanting words
with which she might express her full concurrence with Marion without plunging a dagger into
the other's heart. "Then thou didst agree with her?" There was something terrible in the intensity
and slowness of the words as he repeated the question.

"On the whole I did," she said. "I think that unequal marriages are rarely happy."

"That was all?" he asked. Then when she was again silent, he made the demand which was so important
to him. "Did she say aught of her health in discussing all this with thee?"

"She did, Mr. Fay."

"And thou?"

"It was a subject, my friend, on which I could not speak to her. All that was said came from
her. Her mind was so fully made up, as I have said before, no advice from me could avail anything.
With some people it is easy to see that whether you agree with them or differ from them it
is impossible to turn them."

"But to me thou canst say whether thou hast agreed with her. Yes; I know well that the subject
is one difficult to talk of in a father's hearing. But there are things which should be talked
of, though the heart should break." After another pause he continued; "Is there, thinkest thou,
sufficient cause in the girl's health to bid her sever herself from these delights of life
and customary habits which the Lord has intended for His creatures?" At every separate question
he paused, but when she was silent he went on with other questions. "Is there that in her looks,
is there that in her present condition of life, which make it needful for thee, her friend,
or for me, her father, to treat her as though she were already condemned by the hand of the
Lord to an early grave?" Then, again, looking almost fiercely into her face, he went on with
his examination, "That is what thou art doing."

"Not I;--not I."

"Yes, thou, my friend; thou, with all thy woman's softness in thy heart! It is what I shall
do, unless I bring myself to tell her that her fears are vain. To me she has said that that
is her reason. It is not that she cannot love the man. Has she not said as much to thee?"

"Yes; truly."

"And art thou not assenting to it unless thou tell'st her that her fancies are not only vain,
but wrong? Though thou hast not spoken the word, has not thy silence assented as fully as words
could do? Answer me at any rate to that."

"It is so," she said.

"Is it then necessary to condemn her? Art thou justified in thine own thoughts in bidding her
regard herself as one doomed?" Again there was a pause. What was she to say? "Thou art aware
that in our poor household she does all that the strictest economy would demand from an active
mother of a family? She is never idle. If she suffers I do not see it. She takes her food,
if not with strong appetite, yet regularly. She is upright, and walks with no languor. No doctor
comes near her. If like others she requires change of air and scene, what can give her such
chance as this marriage? Hast thou not heard that for girls of feeble health marriage itself
will strengthen them? Is she such that thou as her friend must bid her know that she must perish
like a blighted flower? Must I bid her to hem and stitch her own winding-sheet? It comes to
that if no word be said to her to turn her from this belief. She has seen them all die,--one
after another,--one after another, till the idea of death, of death for herself as well as
for them, has gotten hold of her. And yet it will be the case that one in a family shall escape.
I have asked among those who know, and I have found that it is so. The Lord does not strike
them all, always. But if she thinks that she is stricken then she will fall. If she goes forth
to meet Death on the path, Death will come half way to encounter her. Dost thou believe of
me that it is because the man is a noble lord that I desire this marriage?"

"Oh no, Mr. Fay."

"He will take my child away from me. She will then be but little to me. What want I with lords,
who for the few days of active life that are left to me would not change my City stool for
any seat that any lord can give me? But I shall know that she has had her chance in the world,
and has not been unnecessarily doomed--to an early grave!"

"What would you have me do?"

"Go to her, and tell her that she should look forward, with trust in God, to such a state of
health as He may vouchsafe to give her. Her thoughts are mostly with her God. Bid her not shorten
His mercies. Bid her not to tell herself that she can examine His purposes. Bid her do in this
as her nature bids her, and, if she can love this man, give herself into his arms and leave
the rest to the Lord."

"But he will be there at once."

"If he be there, what harm? Thou canst go when he comes to the door. I shall go to her now,
and we shall dine together, and then at once I will leave her. When you see me pass the window
then thou canst take thine occasion." So saying, without waiting for a promise, he left her
and went back to his own house.

And Marion's heart had been full of many thoughts that morning,--some of them so trifling in
their object, that she herself would wonder at herself because that they should occupy her.
How should she be dressed to receive her lover? In what words first should she speak to him,--and
in what sort? Should she let any sign of love escape from her? Her resolution as to her great
purpose was so fixed that there was no need for further thought on that matter. It was on the
little things that she was intent. How far might she indulge herself in allowing some tenderness
to escape her? How best might she save him from any great pain, and yet show him that she was
proud that he had loved her? In what dress she might receive him, in that would she sit at
table with her father. It was Christmas time, and the occasion would justify whatever of feminine
smartness her wardrobe possessed. As she brought out from its recess the rich silk frock, still
all but new, in which he had first seen her, she told herself that she would probably have
worn it for her father's sake, had no lover been coming. On the day before, the Christmas Day,
she had worn it at church. And the shoes with the pretty buckles, and the sober but yet handsome
morsel of lace which was made for her throat,--and which she had not been ashamed to wear at
that memorable dinner,--they were all brought out. It was Christmas, and her father's presence
would surely have justified them all! And would she not wish to leave in her lover's eyes the
memory of whatever prettiness she might have possessed? They were all produced. But when the
moment came for arraying herself they were all restored to their homes. She would be the simple
Quaker girl as she was to be found there on Monday, on Tuesday, and on Wednesday. It would
be better that he should know how little there was for him to lose.

Zachary Fay ate his dinner almost without a word. She, though she smiled on him and tried to
look contented, found it almost impossible to speak. She uttered some little phrases which
she intended to be peculiar to the period of the year; but she felt that her father's mind
was intent on what was coming, and she discontinued her efforts. She found it hardly possible
to guess at the frame of his mind, so silent had he been since first he had yielded to her
when she assured him of her purpose. But she had assured him, and he could not doubt her purpose.
If he were unhappy for the moment it was needful that he should be unhappy. There could be
no change, and therefore it was well that he should be silent. He had hardly swallowed his
dinner when he rose from his chair, and, bringing in his hat from the passage, spoke a word
to her before he departed. "I am going into the City, Marion," he said. "I know it is well
that I should be absent this afternoon. I shall return to tea. God bless thee, my child."

Marion, rising from her chair, kissed his lips and cheeks, and accompanied him to the door.
"It will be all well, my father," she said; "it will be all well, and your child will be happy."

About half-an-hour afterwards there came a knock at the door, and Marion for a moment thought
that her lover was already there. But it was Mrs. Roden who came up to her in the drawing-room.
"Am I in the way, Marion?" she asked. "I will be gone in a minute; but perhaps I can say a
word first."

"Why should you be in the way?"

"He is coming."

"Yes, I suppose so. He said that he would come. But what if he come? You and he are old friends."

"I would not be here to interrupt him. I will escape when we hear the knock. Oh, Marion!"

"What is it, Mrs. Roden? You are sad, and something troubles you?"

"Yes, indeed. There is something which troubles me sorely. This lover of yours?"

"It is fixed, dear friend; fixed as fate. It does not trouble me. It shall not trouble me.
Why should it be a trouble? Suppose I had never seen him!"

"But you have seen him, my child."

"Yes, indeed; and whether that be for good or evil, either to him or to me, it must be accepted.
Nothing now can alter that. But I think, indeed, that it is a blessing. It will be something
to me to remember that such a one as he has loved me. And for him--"

"I would speak now of you, Marion."

"I am contented."

"It may be, Marion, that in this concerning your health you should be altogether wrong."

"How wrong?"

"What right have you or I to say that the Lord has determined to shorten your days."

"Who has said so?"

"It is on that theory that you are acting."

"No;--not on that; not on that alone. Were I as strong as are other girls,--as the very strongest,--I
would do the same. Has my father been with you?"

"Yes, he has."

"My poor father! But it is of no avail. It would be wrong, and I will not do it. If I am to
die, I must die. If I am to live, let me live. I shall not die certainly because I have resolved
to send this fine lover away. However weak Marion Fay may be, she is strong enough not to pine
for that."

"If there be no need?"

"No need? What was it you said of unequal marriages? What was the story that you told me of
your own? If I love this man, of whom am I to think the most? Could it be possible that I should
be to him what a wife ought to be to her husband? Could I stand nobly on his hearth-rug, and
make his great guests welcome? Should I be such a one that every day he should bless the kind
fortune which had given him such a woman to help him to rule his house? How could I go from
the littleness of these chambers to walk through his halls without showing that I knew myself
to be an intruder? And yet I should be so proud that I should resent the looks of all who told
me by their faces that I was so. He has done wrong in allowing himself to love me. He has done
wrong in yielding to his passion, and telling me of his love. I will be wiser and nobler than
he. If the Lord will help me, if my Saviour will be on my side, I will not do wrong. I did
not think that you, Mrs. Roden, would turn against me."

"Turn against thee, Marion? I to turn against thee!"

"You should strengthen me."

"It seems to me that you want no strength from others. It is for your poor father that I would
say a word."

"I would not have father believe that my health has aught to do with it. You know,--you know
what right I have to think that I am fit to marry and to hope to be the mother of children.
It needs not that he should know. Let it suffice for him to be told that I am not equal to
this greatness. A word escaped me in speaking to him, and I repent myself that I so spoke to
him. But tell him,--and tell him truly,--that were my days fixed here for the next fifty years,
were I sure of the rudest health, I would not carry my birth, my manners, my habits into that
young lord's house. How long would it be, Mrs. Roden, before he saw some little trick that
would displease him? Some word would be wrongly spoken, some garment would be ill-folded, some
awkward movement would tell the tale,--and then he would feel that he had done wrong to marry
the Quaker's daughter. All the virtues under the sun cannot bolster up love so as to stand
the battery of one touch of disgust. Tell my father that, and tell him that I have done well.
Then you can tell him also, that, if God shall so choose it, I shall live a strong old maid
for many years, to think night and day of his goodness to me,--of his great love."

Mrs. Roden, as she had come across from her own house, had known that her mission would fail.
To persuade another against one's own belief is difficult in any case, but to persuade Marion
Fay on such a matter as this was a task beyond the eloquence of man or woman. She had made
up her mind that she must fail utterly when the knock came at the door. She took the girl in
her arms and kissed her without further attempt. She would not even bid her think of it once
again, as might have been so easy at parting. "I will go into your room while he passes," she
said. As she did so Lord Hampstead's voice was heard at the door.

CHAPTER VI.

MARION'S OBSTINACY.

Lord Hampstead drove himself very fast from Hendon Hall to the "Duchess of Edinburgh" at Holloway,
and then, jumping out of his trap, left it without saying a word to his servant, and walked
quickly up Paradise Row till he came to No. 17. There, without pausing a moment, he knocked
sharply at the door. Going on such a business as this, he did not care who saw him. There was
an idea present to him that he would be doing honour to Marion Fay if he made it known to all
the world of Holloway that he had come there to ask her to be his wife. It was this feeling
which had made him declare his purpose to his sister, and which restrained him from any concealment
as to his going and coming.

Marion was standing alone in the middle of the room, with her two hands clasped together, but
with a smile on her face. She had considered much as to this moment, determining even the very
words that she would use. The words probably were forgotten, but the purpose was all there.
He had resolved upon nothing, had considered nothing,--except that she should be made to understand
that, because of his exceeding love, he required her to come to him as his wife. "Marion,"
he said, "Marion, you know why I am here!" And he advanced to her, as though he would at once
have taken her in his arms.

"Yes, my lord, I know."

"You know that I love you. I think, surely, that never love was stronger than mine. If you
can love me say but the one word, and you will make me absolutely happy. To have you for my
wife is all that the world can give me now. Why do you go from me? Is it to tell me that you
cannot love me, Marion? Do not say that, or I think my heart will break."

She could not say that, but as he paused for her answer it was necessary that she should say
something. And the first word spoken must tell the whole truth, even though it might be that
the word must be repeated often before he could be got to believe that it was an earnest word.
"My lord," she began.

"Oh, I do hate that form of address. My name is John. Because of certain conventional arrangements
the outside people call me Lord Hampstead."

"It is because I can be to you no more than one of the outside people that I call you--my lord."

"Marion!"

"Only one of the outside people;--no more, though my gratitude to you, my appreciation, my
friendship for you may be ever so strong. My father's daughter must be just one of the outside
people to Lord Hampstead,--and no more."

"Why so? Why do you say it? Why do you torment me? Why do you banish me at once, and tell me
that I must go home a wretched, miserable man? Why?--why?--why?

"Because, my lord--"

"I can give a reason,--a good reason,--a reason which I cannot oppose, though it must be fatal
to me unless I can remove it; a reason to which I must succumb if necessary, but to which,
Marion, I will not succumb at once. If you say that you cannot love me that will be a reason."

If it were necessary that she should tell him a lie, she must do so. It would have been pleasant
if she could have made him understand that she would be content to love him on condition that
he would be content to leave her. That she should continue to love him, and that he should
cease to love her,--unless, perhaps, just a little,--that had been a scheme for the future
which had recommended itself to her. There should be a something left which should give a romance
to her life, but which should leave him free in all things. It had been a dream, in which she
had much trusted, but which, while she listened to the violence of his words, she acknowledged
to herself to be almost impossible. She must tell the lie;--but at the moment it seemed to
her that there might be a middle course. "I dare not love you," she said.

"Dare not love me, Marion? Who hinders you? Who tells you that you may not? Is it your father?"

"No, my lord, no."

"It is Mrs. Roden."

"No, my lord. This is a matter in which I could obey no friend, no father. I have had to ask
myself, and I have told myself that I do not dare to love above my station in life."

"I am to have that bugbear again between me and my happiness?"

"Between that and your immediate wishes;--yes. Is it not so in all things? If I,--even I,--had
set my heart upon some one below me, would not you, as my friend, have bade me conquer the
feeling?"

"I have set my heart on one whom in the things of the world I regard as my equal,--in all other
things as infinitely my superior."

"The compliment is very sweet to me, but I have trained myself to resist sweetness. It may
not be, Lord Hampstead. It may not be. You do not know as yet how obstinate such a girl as
I may become when she has to think of another's welfare,--and a little, perhaps, of her own."

"Are you afraid of me?"

"Yes."

"That I should not love you?"

"Even of that. When you should come to see in me that which is not lovable you would cease
to love me. You would be good to me because your nature is good; kind to me because your nature
is kind. You would not ill-treat me because you are gentle, noble, and forgiving. But that
would not suffice for me. I should see it in your eye, despite yourself,--and hear it in your
voice, even though you tried to hide it by occasional softness. I should eat my own heart when
I came to see that you despised your Quaker wife."

"All that is nonsense, Marion."

"My lord!"

"Say the word at once if it has to be said,--so that I may know what it is that I have to contend
with. For you my heart is so full of love that it seems to be impossible that I should live
without you. If there could be any sympathy I should at once be happy. If there be none, say so."

"There is none."

"No spark of sympathy in you for me,--for one who loves you so truly?" When the question was
put to her in that guise she could not quite tell so monstrous a lie as would be needed for
an answer fit for her purpose. "This is a matter, Marion, in which a man has a right to demand
an answer,--to demand a true answer."

"Lord Hampstead, it may be that you should perplex me sorely. It may be that you should drive
me away from you, and to beg you never to trouble me any further. It may be that you should
force me to remain dumb before you, because that I cannot reply to you in proper words. But
you will never alter my purpose. If you think well of Marion Fay, take her word when she gives
it you. I can never become your lordship's wife."

"Never?"

"Never! Certainly never!"

"Have you told me why;--all the reason why?"

"I have told you enough, Lord Hampstead."

"By heavens, no! You have not answered me the one question that I have asked you. You have
not given me the only reason which I would take,--even for a while. Can you love me, Marion?"

"If you loved me you would spare me," she said. Then feeling that such words utterly betrayed
her, she recovered herself, and went to work with what best eloquence was at her command to
cheat him out of the direct answer which he required. "I think," she said, "you do not understand
the workings of a girl's heart in such a matter. She does not dare to ask herself about her
love, when she knows that loving would avail her nothing. For what purpose should I inquire
into myself when the object of such inquiry has already been obtained? Why should I trouble
myself to know whether this thing would be a gain to me or not, when I am well aware that I
can never have the gain?"

"Marion, I think you love me." She looked at him and tried to smile,--tried to utter some half-joking
word; and then as she felt that she could no longer repress her tears, she turned her face
from him, and made no attempt at a reply. "Marion," he said again, "I think that you love me."

"If you loved me, my lord, you would not torture me." She had seated herself now on the sofa,
turning her face away from him over her shoulder so that she might in some degree hide her
tears. He sat himself at her side, and for a moment or two got possession of her hand.

"Marion," he said, pleading his case with all the strength of words which was at his command,
"you know, do you not, that no moment of life can be of more importance to me than this?"

"Is it so, my lord?"

"None can be so important. I am striving to get her for my companion in life, who to me is
the sweetest of all human beings. To touch you as I do now is a joy to me, even though you
have made my heart so sad." At the moment she struggled to get her hand away from him, but
the struggle was not at first successful. "You answer me with arguments which are to me of
no avail at all. They are, to my thinking, simply a repetition of prejudices to which I have
been all my life opposed. You will not be angry because I say so?"

"Oh, no, my lord," she said; "not angry. I am not angry, but indeed you must not hold me."
With that she extricated her hand, which he allowed to pass from his grasp as he continued
his address to her.

"As to all that, I have my opinion and you have yours. Can it be right that you should hold
to your own and sacrifice me who have thought so much of what it is I want myself,--if in truth
you love me? Let your opinion stand against mine, and neutralize it. Let mine stand against
yours, and in that we shall be equal. Then after that let love be lord of all. If you love
me, Marion, I think that I have a right to demand that you shall be my wife."

There was something in this which she did not know how to answer;--but she did know, she was
quite sure, that no word of his, no tenderness either on his part or on her own, would induce
her to yield an inch. It was her duty to sacrifice herself for him,--for reasons which were
quite apparent to herself,--and she would do it. The fortress of her inner purpose was safe,
although he had succeeded in breaking down the bulwark by which it had been her purpose to
guard it. He had claimed her love, and she had not been strong enough to deny the claim. Let
the bulwark go. She was bad at lying. Let her lie as she might, he had wit enough to see through
it. She would not take the trouble to deny her love should he persist in saying that it had
been accorded to him. But surely she might succeed at last in making him understand that, whether
she loved him or no, she would not marry him. "I certainly shall never be your wife," she said.

"And that is all?"

"What more, my lord?"

"You can let me go, and never wish me to return?"

"I can, my lord. Your return would only be a trouble to you, and a pain to me. Another time
do not turn your eyes too often on a young woman because her face may chance to please you.
It is well that you should marry. Go and seek a wife, with judgment, among your own people.
When you have done that, then you may return and tell Marion Fay that you have done well by
following her advice."

"I will come again, and again, and again, and I will tell Marion Fay that her counsels are
unnatural and impossible. I will teach her to know that the man who loves her can seek no other
wife;--that no other mode of living is possible to him than one in which he and Marion Fay
shall be joined together. I think I shall persuade her at last that such is the case. I think
she will come to know that all her cold prudence and worldly would-be wisdom can be of no avail
to separate those who love each other. I think that when she finds that her lover so loves
her that he cannot live without her, she will abandon those fears as to his future fickleness,
and trust herself to one of whose truth she will have assured herself." Then he took her hand,
and kneeling at her knee, he kissed it before she was powerful enough to withdraw it. And so
he left her, without another word, and mounting on his vehicle, drove himself home without
having exchanged a single word at Holloway with any one save Marion Fay.

She, when she was left alone, threw herself at full length on the sofa and burst into an ecstacy
of tears. Trust herself to him! Yes, indeed. She would trust herself to him entirely, only
in order that she might have the joy, for one hour, of confessing her love to him openly, let
the consequences to herself afterwards be what they might! As to that future injury to her
pride of which she had spoken both to her father and also to her friend,--of which she had
said so much to herself in discussing this matter with her own heart--as to that he had convinced
her. It did not become her in any way to think of herself in this matter. He certainly would
be able to twist her as he would if she could stand upon no surer rock than her fears for her
own happiness. One kiss from him would be payment for it all. But all his love, all his sweetness,
all his truth, all his eloquence should avail nothing with her towards overcoming that spirit
of self-sacrifice by which she was dominated. Though he should extort from her all her secret,
that would be her strength. Though she should have to tell him of her failing health,--her
certainly failing health,--though even that should be necessary, she certainly would not be
won from her purpose. It might be sweet, she thought, to make him in all respects her friend
of friends; to tell him everything; to keep no fear, no doubt, no aspiration a secret from
him. "Love you, oh my dearest, thou very pearl of my heart, love you indeed! Oh, yes. Do you
not know that not even for an instant could I hide my love? Are you not aware, did you not
see at the moment, that when you first knelt at my feet, my heart had flown to you without
an effort on my part to arrest it? But now, my beloved one, now we understand each other. Now
there need be no reproaches between us. Now there need be no speaking of distrust. I am all
yours,--only it is not fit, as you know, dearest, that the poor Quaker girl should become your
wife. Now that we both understand that, why should we be sad? Why should we mourn?" Why should
she not succeed in bringing things to such a pass as this; and if so, why should life be unhappy
either to him or to her?

Thus she was thinking of it till she had almost brought herself to a state of bliss, when her
father returned to her. "Father," she said, getting up and embracing his arm as he stood, "it
is all over."

"What is over?" asked the Quaker.

"He has been here."

"Well, Marion; and what has he said?"

"What he said it is hardly for me to tell you. What I said,--I would you could know it all
without my repeating a word of it."

"Has he gone away contented?"

"Nay, not that, father. I hardly expected that. I hardly hoped for that. Had he been quite
contented perhaps I might not have been so."

"Why should you not have both been made happy?" asked the father.

"It may be that we shall be so. It may be that he shall understand."

"Thou hast not taken his offer then?"

"Oh, no! No, father, no. I can never accept his offer. If that be in your mind put it forth.
You shall never see your Marion the wife of any man, whether of that young lord or of another
more fitted to her. No one ever shall be allowed to speak to me as he has spoken."

"Why dost thou make thyself different from other girls?" he said, angrily.

"Oh, father, father!"

"It is romance and false sentiment, than which nothing is more odious to me. There is no reason
why thou shouldst be different from others. The Lord has not marked thee out as different from
other girls, either in His pleasure or His displeasure. It is wrong for thee to think it of
thyself." She looked up piteously into his face, but said not a word. "It is thy duty to take
thyself from His hands as He has made thee; and to give way to no vain ecstatic terrors. If,
as I gather from thy words, this young man be dear to thee, and if, as I gather from this second
coming of his, thou art dear to him, then I as thy father tell thee that thy duty calls thee
to him. It is not that he is a lord."

"Oh, no, father."

"It is not, I say, that he is a lord, or that he is rich, or that he is comely to the eyes,
that I would have thee go to him as his wife. It is because thou and he love each other, as
it is the ordinance of the Lord Almighty that men and women should do. Marriage is honourable,
and I, thy father, would fain see thee married. I believe the young man to be good and true.
I could give thee to him, lord though he be, with a trusting heart, and think that in so disposing
of my child I had done well for her. Think of this, Marion, if it be not already too late."
All this he had said standing, so that he was able to leave the room without the ceremony of
rising from his chair. Without giving her a moment for reply, having his hand on the lock of
the door as he uttered the last words of his counsel to her, he marched off, leaving her alone.

It may be doubted whether at the moment she could have found words for reply, so full was her
heart with the feelings that were crowded there. But she was well aware that all her father's
words could go for nothing. Of only one thing was she sure,--that no counsel, no eloquence,
no love would ever induce her to become the wife of Lord Hampstead.

CHAPTER VII.

MRS. DEMIJOHN'S PARTY.

   Mrs. Demijohn presents her compliments to Mr. Crocker, and
   begs the honour of his company to tea at nine o'clock on
   Wednesday, 31st of December, to see the New Year in.

   R.I.V.P. (Do come, C. D.)

   10, Paradise Row, Holloway.
   29th December, 18--.

This note was delivered to Crocker on his arrival at his office on the morning of Saturday,
the 27th.

It must be explained that Crocker had lately made the acquaintance of Miss Clara Demijohn without
any very formal introduction. Crocker, with that determination which marked his character,
in pursuit of the one present purport of his mind to effect a friendly reconciliation with
George Roden, had taken himself down to Holloway, and had called at No. 11, thinking that he
might induce his friend's mother to act on his behalf in a matter appertaining to peace and
charity. Mrs. Roden had unhappily been from home, but he had had the good fortune to encounter
Miss Demijohn. Perhaps it was that she had seen him going in and out of the house, and had
associated him with the great mystery of the young nobleman; perhaps she had been simply attracted
by the easy air with which he cocked his hat and swung his gloves;--or, perhaps it was simply
chance. But so it was that in the gloom of the evening she met him just round the corner opposite
to the "Duchess of Edinburgh," and the happy acquaintance was commenced. No doubt, as in all
such cases, it was the gentleman who spoke first. Let us, at any rate, hope so for the sake
of Paradise Row generally. Be that as it may, before many minutes were over she had explained
to him that Mrs. Roden had gone out in a cab soon after dinner, and that probably something
was up at Wimbledon, as Mrs. Roden never went anywhere else, and this was not the day of the
week on which her visits to Mrs. Vincent were generally made. Crocker, who was simplicity itself,
soon gave her various details as to his own character and position in life. He, too, was a
clerk in the Post Office, and was George Roden's particular friend. "Oh, yes; he knew all about
Lord Hampstead, and was, he might say, intimately acquainted with his lordship. He had been
in the habit of meeting his lordship at Castle Hautboy, the seat of his friend, Lord Persiflage,
and had often ridden with his lordship in the hunting-field. He knew all about Lady Frances
and the engagement, and had had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of her ladyship. He
had been corresponding lately with Lord Hampstead on the subject. No;--he had not as yet heard
anything of Marion Fay, the Quaker's daughter. Then Clara had something to say on her side.
She quite understood that if she expected to be communicated with, she also must communicate;
and moreover, young Mr. Crocker was by his age, appearance, and sex, just such a one as prompted
her to be communicative without loss of self-respect. What was the good of telling things to
Mrs. Duffer, who was only an old widow without any friends, and with very small means of existence?
She had communicated her secrets to Mrs. Duffer simply from want of a better pair of ears into
which she could pour them. But here was one in telling secrets to whom she could take delight,
and who had secrets of his own to give in return. It is not to be supposed that the friendship
which arose grew from the incidents of one meeting only. On that first evening Crocker could
not leave the fair one without making arrangements for a further interview, and so the matter
grew. The intimacy between them was already of three days' standing when the letter of invitation
above given reached Crocker's hands. To tell the very truth, the proposed party was made up
chiefly for Crocker's sake. What is the good of having a young man if you cannot show him to
your friends?

"Crocker!" said Mrs. Demijohn to her niece; "where did you pick up Crocker?"

"What questions you do ask, aunt! Pick him up, indeed!"

"So you have--; picked him up, as you're always a doing with young men. Only you never know
how to keep 'em when you've got 'em."

"I declare, aunt, your vulgarity is unbearable."

"I'm not going to have any Crocker in my house," said the old woman, "unless I know where he
comes from. Perhaps he's a counter-skipper. He may be a ticket-of-leave man for all you know."

"Aunt Jemima, you're so provoking that I sometimes think I shall have to leave you."

"Where will you go to, my dear?"

To this question, which had often been asked before, Clara thought it unnecessary to make any
answer; but returned at once to the inquiries which were not unnaturally made by the lady who
stood to her in the place of a mother. "Mr. Crocker, Aunt Jemima, is a clerk in the Post Office,
who sits at the same desk with George Roden, and is intimately acquainted both with Lord Hampstead
and with Lady Frances Trafford. He used to be George Roden's bosom friend; but there has lately
been some little tiff between the young men, which would be so pleasant if we could make it
up. You have got to a speaking acquaintance with Mrs. Roden, and perhaps if you will ask them
they'll come. I am sure Marion Fay will come, because you always get your money from Pogson
and Littlebird. I wish I had the cheek to ask Lord Hampstead." Having heard all this, the old
lady consented to receive our sporting friend from the Post Office, and also assented to the
other invitations, which were given.

Crocker, of course, sent his compliments, and expressed the great pleasure he would have in
"seeing the New Year in" in company with Mrs. Demijohn. As the old lady was much afflicted
with rheumatism, the proposition as coming from her would have been indiscreet had she not
known that her niece on such occasions was well able to act as her deputy. Mrs. Roden also
promised to come, and with difficulty persuaded her son that it would be gracious on his part
to be so far civil to his neighbours. Had he known that Crocker also would be there he certainly
would not have yielded; but Crocker, when at the office, kept the secret of his engagement
to himself. The Quaker also and Marion Fay were to be there. Mr. Fay and Mrs. Demijohn had
long known each other in regard to matters of business, and he, for the sake of Messrs. Pogson
and Littlebird's firm, could not refuse to drink a cup of tea at their client's house. A junior
clerk from the same counting-house, one Daniel Tribbledale by name, with whom Clara had made
acquaintance at King's Court some two years since, was also to be of the party. Mr. Tribbledale
had at one time, among all Clara's young men, been the favourite. But circumstances had occurred
which had somewhat lessened her goodwill towards him. Mr. Littlebird had quarrelled with him,
and he had been refused promotion. It was generally supposed at the present time in the neighbourhood
of Old Broad Street that Daniel Tribbledale was languishing for the love of Clara Demijohn.
Mrs. Duffer, of course, was to be there, and so the list of friends for the festive occasion
was completed.

Mrs. Duffer was the first to come. Her aid, indeed, was required for the cutting up of the
cakes and arrangements of the cups and saucers. The Quaker and his daughter were next, appearing
exactly at nine o'clock,--to do which he protested to be the best sign of good manners that
could be shown. "If they want me at ten, why do they ask me at nine?" demanded the Quaker.
Marion was forced to give way, though she was by no means anxious to spend a long evening in
company with Mrs. Demijohn. As to that seeing of the New Year in, it was quite out of the question
for the Quaker or for his daughter. The company altogether came early. The only touch of fashion
evinced on this occasion was shown by Mr. Crocker. The Rodens, with Mr. Tribbledale at their
heels, appeared not long after Mr. Fay, and then the demolition of the Sally Lunns was commenced.
"I declare I think he means to deceive us," whispered Clara to her friend, Mrs. Duffer, when
all the good tea had been consumed before the young man appeared. "I don't suppose he cares
much for tea," said Mrs. Duffer; "they don't now-a-days." "It isn't just for the tea that a
man is expected to come," said Clara, indignantly. It was now nearly ten, and she could not
but feel that the evening was going heavily. Tribbledale had said one tender word to her; but
she had snubbed him, expecting Crocker to be there almost at once, and he had retired silent
into a corner. George Roden had altogether declined to make himself agreeable--to her; but
as he was an engaged man, and engaged to a lady of rank, much could not be expected of him.
Mrs. Roden and the Quaker and Mrs. Demijohn did manage to keep up something of conversation.
Roden from time to time said a few words to Marion. Clara, who was repenting herself of her
hardness to young Tribbledale, was forced to put up with Mrs. Duffer. When suddenly there came
a thundering knock at the door, and Mr. Crocker was announced by the maid, who had been duly
instructed beforehand as to all peculiarities in the names of the guests.

There was a little stir, as there always is when a solitary guest comes in much after the appointed
time. Of course there was rebuke,--suppressed rebuke from Mrs. Demijohn, mild rebuke from Mrs.
Duffer, a very outburst of rebuke from Clara. But Crocker was up to the occasion. "Upon my
word, ladies, I had no help for it. I was dining with a few friends in the City, and I couldn't
get away earlier. If my own ideas of happiness had been consulted I should have been here an
hour ago. Ah, Roden, how are you? Though I know you live in the same street, I didn't think
of meeting you." Roden gave him a nod, but did not vouchsafe him a word. "How's his lordship?
I told you, didn't I, that I had heard from him the other day?" Crocker had mentioned more
than once at his office the fact that he had received a letter from Lord Hampstead.

"I don't often see him, and very rarely hear from him," said Roden, without turning away from
Marion to whom he was at the moment speaking.

"If all our young noblemen were like Hampstead," said Crocker, who had told the truth in declaring
that he had been dining, "England would be a very different sort of place from what it is.
The most affable young lord that ever sat in the House of Peers." Then he turned himself towards
Marion Fay, at whose identity he made a guess. He was anxious at once to claim her as a mutual
friend, as connected with himself by her connection with the lord in question. But as he could
find no immediate excuse for introducing himself, he only winked at her.

"Are you acquainted with Mr. Tribbledale, Mr. Crocker?" asked Clara.

"Never had the pleasure as yet," said Crocker. Then the introduction was effected. "In the
Civil Service?" asked Crocker. Tribbledale blushed, and of necessity repudiated the honour.
"I thought, perhaps, you were in the Customs. You have something of the H.M.S. cut about you."
Tribbledale acknowledged the compliment with a bow. "I think the Service is the best thing
a man can do with himself," continued Crocker.

"It is genteel," said Mrs. Duffer.

"And the hours so pleasant," said Clara. "Bank clerks have always to be there by nine."

"Is a young man to be afraid of that?" asked the Quaker, indignantly. "Ten till four, with
one hour for the newspapers and another for lunch. See the consequence. I never knew a young
man yet from a public office who understood the meaning of a day's work."

"I think that is a little hard," said Roden. "If a man really works, six hours continuously
is as much as he can do with any good to his employers or himself."

"Well done, Roden," said Crocker. "Stick up for Her Majesty's shop." Roden turned himself more
round than before, and continued to address himself to Marion.

"Our employers wouldn't think much of us," said the Quaker, "if we didn't do better for them
than that in private offices. I say that the Civil Service destroys a young man, and teaches
him to think that the bread of idleness is sweet. As far as I can see, nothing is so destructive
of individual energy as what is called public money. If Daniel Tribbledale would bestir himself
he might do very well in the world without envying any young man his seat either at the Custom
House or the Post Office." Mr. Fay had spoken so seriously that they all declined to carry
that subject further. Mrs. Demijohn and Mrs. Duffer murmured their agreement, thinking it civil
to do so, as the Quaker was a guest. Tribbledale sat silent in his corner, awestruck at the
idea of having given rise to the conversation. Crocker winked at Mrs. Demijohn, and thrust
his hands into his pockets as much as to say that he could get the better of the Quaker altogether
if he chose to exercise his powers of wit and argument.

Soon after this Mr. Fay rose to take his daughter away. "But," said Clara, with affected indignation,
"you are to see the Old Year out and the New Year in."

"I have seen enough of the one," said Mr. Fay, "and shall see enough of the other if I live
to be as near its close as I am to its birth."

"But there are refreshments coming up," said Mrs. Demijohn.

"I have refreshed myself sufficiently with thy tea, madam. I rarely take anything stronger
before retiring to my rest. Come, Marion, thou requirest to be at no form of welcoming the
New Year. Thou, too, wilt be better in thy bed, as thy duties call upon thee to be early."
So saying, the Quaker bowed formally to each person present, and took his daughter out with
him under his arm. Mrs. Roden and her son escaped almost at the same moment, and Mrs. Demijohn,
having waited to take what she called just a thimbleful of hot toddy, went also to her rest.

"Here's a pretty way of seeing the New Year in," said Clara, laughing.

"We are quite enough of us for the purpose," said Crocker, "unless we also are expected to
go away." But as he spoke he mixed a tumbler of brandy and water, which he divided among two
smaller glasses, handing them to the two ladies present.

"I declare," said Mrs. Duffer, "I never do anything of the kind,--almost never."

"On such an occasion as this everybody does it," said Crocker.

"I hope Mr. Tribbledale will join us," said Clara. Then the bashful clerk came out of his corner,
and seating himself at the table prepared to do as he was bid. He made his toddy very weak,
not because he disliked brandy, but guided by an innate spirit of modesty which prevented him
always from going more than halfway when he was in company.

Then the evening became very pleasant. "You are quite sure that he is really engaged to her
ladyship?" asked Clara.

"I wish I were as certainly engaged to you," replied the polite Crocker.

"What nonsense you do talk, Mr. Crocker;--and before other people too. But you think he is?"

"I am sure of it. Both Hampstead and she have told me so much themselves out of their own mouths."

"My!" exclaimed Mrs. Duffer.

"And here's her brother engaged to Marion Fay," said Clara. Crocker declared that as to this
he was by no means so well assured. Lord Hampstead in spite of their intimacy had told him
nothing about it. "But it is so, Mr. Crocker, as sure as ever you are sitting there. He has
been coming here after her over and over again, and was closeted with her only last Friday
for hours. It was a holiday, but that sly old Quaker went out of the way, so as to leave them
together. That Mrs. Roden, though she's as stiff as buckram, knows all about it. To the best
of my belief she got it all up. Marion Fay is with her every day. It's my belief there's something
we don't understand yet. She's got a hold of them young people, and means to do just what she
likes with 'em." Crocker, however, could not agree to this. He had heard of Lord Hampstead's
peculiar politics, and was assured that the young lord was only carrying out his peculiar principles
in selecting Marion Fay for himself and devoting his sister to George Roden.

"Not that I like that kind of thing, if you ask me," said Crocker. "I'm very fond of Hampstead,
and I've always found Lady Frances to be a pleasant and affable lady. I've no cause to speak
other than civil of both of them. But when a man has been born a lord, and a lady a lady--.
A lady of that kind, Miss Demijohn."

"Oh, exactly;--titled you mean, Mr. Crocker?"

"Quite high among the nobs, you know. Hampstead will be a Marquis some of these days, which
is next to a Duke."

"And do you know him,--yourself?" asked Tribbledale with a voice of awe.

"Oh, yes," said Crocker.

"To speak to him when you see him?"

"I had a long correspondence with him about a week ago about a matter which interested both
of us very much."

"And how does he address you?" asked Clara,--also with something of awe.

"'Dear Crocker;'--just that. I always say 'My dear Lord Hampstead,' in return. I look upon
'Dear Hampstead,' as a little vulgar, you know, and I always think that one ought to be particular
in these matters. But, as I was saying, when it comes to marriage, people ought to be true
to themselves. Now if I was a Marquis,--I don't know what I mightn't do if I saw you, you know,
Clara." "Clara" pouted, but did not appear to have been offended either by the compliment or
by the familiarity. "But under any other circumstances less forcible I would stick to my order."

"So would I," said Mrs. Duffer. "Marquises ought to marry marquises, and dukes dukes."

"There it is!" said Clara, "and now we must drink its health, and I hope we may be all married
to them we like best before it comes round again." This had reference to the little clock on
the mantelpiece, the hands of which had just crept round to twelve o'clock.

"I wish we might," said Crocker, "and have a baby in the cradle too."

"Go away," said Clara.

"That would be quick," said Mrs. Duffer. "What do you say, Mr. Tribbledale?"

"Where my heart's fixed," said Tribbledale, who was just becoming warm with the brandy-and-water,
"there ain't no hope for this year, nor yet for the one after." Whereupon Crocker remarked
that "care killed a cat."

"You just put on your coat and hat, and take me across to my lodgings. See if I don't give
you a chance," said Mrs. Duffer, who was also becoming somewhat merry under the influences
of the moment. But she knew that it was her duty to do something for her young hostess, and,
true woman as she was, thought that this was the best way of doing it. Tribbledale did as he
was bid, though he was obliged thus to leave his lady-love and her new admirer together. "Do
you really mean it?" said Clara, when she and Crocker were alone.

"Of course I do,--honest," said Crocker.

"Then you may," said Clara, turning her face to him.

CHAPTER VIII.

NEW YEAR'S DAY.

Crocker had by no means as yet got through his evening. Having dined with his friends in the
City, and "drank tea" with the lady of his love, he was disposed to proceed, if not to pleasanter
delights, at any rate to those which might be more hilarious. Every Londoner, from Holloway
up to Gower Street, in which he lived, would be seeing the New Year in,--and beyond Gower Street
down in Holborn, and from thence all across to the Strand, especially in the neighbourhood
of Covent Garden and the theatres, there would be a whole world of happy revellers engaged
in the same way. On such a night as this there could certainly be no need of going to bed soon
after twelve for such a one as Samuel Crocker. In Paradise Row he again encountered Tribbledale,
and suggested to that young man that they should first have a glass of something at the "Duchess"
and then proceed to more exalted realms in a hansom. "I did think of walking there this fine
starlight night," said Tribbledale, mindful of the small stipend at which his services were
at present valued by Pogson and Littlebird. But Crocker soon got the better of all this. "I'll
stand Sammy for this occasion," said he. "The New Year comes in only once in twelve months."
Then Tribbledale went into "The Duchess," and after that was as indifferent, while his money
lasted him, as was Crocker himself. "I've loved that girl for three years," said Tribbledale,
as soon as they had left "The Duchess" and were again in the open air.

It was a beautiful night, and Crocker thought that they might as well walk a little way. It
was pleasant under the bright stars to hear of the love adventures of his new friend, especially
as he himself was now the happy hero. "For three years?" he asked.

"Indeed I have, Crocker." That glass of hot whiskey-and-water, though it enhanced the melancholy
tenderness of the young man, robbed him of his bashfulness, and loosened the strings of his
tongue. "For three years! And there was a time when she worshipped the very stool on which
I sat at the office. I don't like to boast."

"You have to be short, sharp, and decisive if you mean to get a girl like that to travel with you."

"I should have taken the ball at the hop, Crocker; that's what I ought to have done. But I
see it all now. She's as fickle as she is fair;--fickler, perhaps, if anything."

"Come, Tribbledale; I ain't going to let you abuse her, you know."

"I don't want to abuse her. God knows I love her too well in spite of all. It's your turn now.
I can see that. There's a great many of them have had their turns."

"Were there now?" asked Crocker anxiously.

"There was Pollocky;--him at the Highbury Gas Works. He came after me. It was because of him
she dropped me."

"Was that going on for a marriage?"

"Right ahead, I used to think. Pollocky is a widower with five children."

"Oh Lord!"

"But he's the head of all the gas, and has four hundred a year. It wasn't love as carried her
on with him. I could see that. She wouldn't go and meet him anywhere about the City, as she
did me. I suppose Pollocky is fifty, if he's a day."

"And she dropped him also?"

"Or else it was he." On receipt of this information Crocker whistled. "It was something about
money," continued Tribbledale. "The old woman wouldn't part."

"There is money I suppose?"

"The old woman has a lot."

"And isn't the niece to have it?" asked Crocker.

"No doubt she will; because there never was a pair more loving. But the old lady will keep
it herself as long as she is here." Then there entered an idea into Crocker's head that if
he could manage to make Clara his own, he might have power enough to manage the aunt as well
as the niece. They had a little more whiskey-and-water at the Angel at Islington before they
got into the cab which was to take them down to the Paphian Music-Hall, and after that Tribbledale
passed from the realm of partial fact to that of perfect poetry. "He would never," he said,
"abandon Clara Demijohn, though he should live to an age beyond that of any known patriarch.
He quite knew all that there was against him. Crocker he thought might probably prevail. He
rather hoped that Crocker might prevail;--for why should not so good a fellow be made happy,
seeing how utterly impossible it was that he, Daniel Tribbledale, should ever reach that perfect
bliss in dreaming of which he passed his miserable existence. But as to one thing he had quite
made up his mind. The day that saw Clara Demijohn a bride would most undoubtedly be the last
of his existence."

"Oh, no, damme; you won't," said Crocker turning round upon him in the cab.

"I shall!" said Tribbledale with emphasis. "And I've made up my mind how to do it too. They've
caged up the Monument, and you're so looked after on the Duke of York's, that there isn't a
chance. But there's nothing to prevent you from taking a header at the Whispering Gallery of
Saint Paul's. You'd be more talked of that way, and the vergers would be sure to show the stains
made on the stones below. 'It was here young Tribbledale fell,--a clerk at Pogson and Littlebird's,
who dashed out his brains for love on the very day as Clara Demijohn got herself married.'
I'm of that disposition, Crocker, as I'd do anything for love;--anything." Crocker was obliged
to reply that he trusted he might never be the cause of such a fatal attempt at glory; but
he went on to explain that in the pursuit of love a man could not in any degree give way to
friendship. Even though numberless lovers might fall from the Whispering Gallery in a confused
heap of mangled bodies, he must still tread the path which was open to him. These were his
principles, and he could not abandon them even for the sake of Tribbledale. "Nor would I have
you," shouted Tribbledale, leaning out over the door of the cab. "I would not delay you not
for a day, not for an hour. Were to-morrow to be your bridal morning it would find me prepared.
My only request to you is that a boy might be called Daniel after me. You might tell her it
was an uncle or grandfather. She would never think that in her own child was perpetuated a
monument of poor Daniel Tribbledale." Crocker, as he jumped out of the cab with a light step
in front of the Paphian Hall, promised that in this particular he would attend to the wishes
of his friend.

The performances at the Paphian Hall on that festive occasion need not be described here with
accuracy. The New Year had been seen well in with music, dancing, and wine. The seeing of it
in was continued yet for an hour, till an indulgent policeman was forced to interfere. It is
believed that on the final ejection of our two friends, the forlorn lover, kept steady, no
doubt, by the weight of his woe, did find his way home to his own lodgings. The exultant Crocker
was less fortunate, and passed his night without the accommodation of sheets and blankets somewhere
in the neighbourhood of Bow Street. The fact is important to us, as it threatened to have considerable
effect upon our friend's position at his office. Having been locked up in a cell during the
night, and kept in durance till he was brought on the following morning before a magistrate,
he could not well be in his room at ten o'clock. Indeed when he did escape from the hands of
the Philistines, at about two in the day, sick, unwashed and unfed, he thought it better to
remain away altogether for that day. The great sin of total absence would be better than making
an appearance before Mr. Jerningham in his present tell-tale condition. He well knew his own
strength and his own weakness. All power of repartee would be gone from him for the day. Mr.
Jerningham would domineer over him, and Æolus, should the violent god be pleased to send for
him, would at once annihilate him. So he sneaked home to Gower Street, took a hair of the dog
that bit him, and then got the old woman who looked after him to make him some tea and to fry
a bit of bacon for him. In this ignominious way he passed New Year's Day,--at least so much
of it as was left to him after the occurrences which have been described.

But on the next morning the great weight of his troubles fell upon him heavily. In his very
heart of hearts he was afraid of Æolus. In spite of his "brummagem" courage the wrath of the
violent god was tremendous to him. He knew what it was to stand with his hand on the lock of
the door and tremble before he dared to enter the room. There was something in the frown of
the god which was terrible to him. There was something worse in the god's smile. He remembered
how he had once been unable to move himself out of the room when the god had told him that
he need not remain at the office, but might go home and amuse himself just as he pleased. Nothing
crushes a young man so much as an assurance that his presence can be dispensed with without
loss to any one. Though Crocker had often felt the mercies of Æolus, and had told himself again
and again that the god never did in truth lift up his hand for final irrevocable punishment,
still he trembled as he anticipated the dread encounter.

When the morning came, and while he was yet in his bed, he struggled to bethink himself of
some strategy by which he might evade the evil hour. Could he have been sent for suddenly into
Cumberland? But in this case he would of course have telegraphed to the Post Office on the
preceding day. Could he have been taken ill with a fit,--so as to make his absence absolutely
necessary, say for an entire week? He well knew that they had a doctor at the Post Office,
a crafty, far-seeing, obdurate man, who would be with him at once and would show him no mercy.
He had tried these schemes all round, and had found that there were none left with which Æolus
was not better acquainted than was he himself. There was nothing for it but to go and bear
the brunt.

Exactly at ten o'clock he entered the room, hung his hat up on the accustomed peg, and took
his seat on the accustomed chair before any one spoke a word to him. Roden on the opposite
seat took no notice of him. "Bedad, he's here anyhow this morning," whispered Geraghty to Bobbin,
very audibly. "Mr. Crocker," said Mr. Jerningham, "you were absent throughout the entire day
yesterday. Have you any account to give of yourself?" There was certainly falsehood implied
in this question, as Mr. Jerningham knew very well what had become of Crocker. Crocker's misadventure
at the police office had found its way into the newspapers, and had been discussed by Æolus
with Mr. Jerningham. I am afraid that Mr. Jerningham must have intended to tempt the culprit
into some false excuse.

"I was horribly ill," said Crocker, without stopping the pen with which he was making entries
in the big book before him. This no doubt was true, and so far the trap had been avoided.

"What made you ill, Mr. Crocker?"

"Headache."

"It seems to me, Mr. Crocker, you're more subject to such attacks as these than any young man
in the office."

"I always was as a baby," said Crocker, resuming something of his courage. Could it be possible
that Æolus should not have heard of the day's absence?

"There is ill-health of so aggravated a nature," said Mr. Jerningham, "as to make the sufferer
altogether unfit for the Civil Service."

"I'm happy to say I'm growing out of them gradually," said Crocker. Then Geraghty got up from
his chair and whispered the whole truth into the sufferer's ears. "It was all in the Pall Mall
yesterday, and Æolus knew it before he went away." A sick qualm came upon the poor fellow as
though it were a repetition of yesterday's sufferings. But still it was necessary that he should
say something. "New Year's Day comes only once a year, I suppose."

"It was only a few weeks since that you remained a day behind your time when you were on leave.
But Sir Boreas has taken the matter up, and I have nothing to say to it. No doubt Sir Boreas
will send for you." Sir Boreas Bodkin was that great Civil servant in the General Post Office
whom men were wont to call Æolus.

It was a wretched morning for poor Crocker. He was not sent for till one o'clock, just at the
moment when he was going to eat his lunch! That horrid sickness, the combined result of the
dinner in the City, of Mrs. Demijohn's brandy, and of the many whiskies which followed, still
clung to him. The mutton-chop and porter which he had promised himself would have relieved
him; but now he was obliged to appear before the god in all his weakness. Without a word he
followed a messenger who had summoned him, with his tail only too visibly between his legs.
Æolus was writing a note when he was ushered into the room, and did not condescend to arrest
himself in the progress merely because Crocker was present. Æolus well knew the effect on a
sinner of having to stand silent and all alone in the presence of an offended deity.

"So, Mr. Crocker," said Æolus at last, looking up from his completed work; "no doubt you saw
the Old Year out on Wednesday night." The jokes of the god were infinitely worse to bear than
his most furious blasts. "Like some other great men," continued Æolus, "you have contrived
to have your festivities chronicled in the newspapers." Crocker found it impossible to utter
a word. "You have probably seen the Pall Mall of yesterday, and the Standard of this morning?"

"I haven't looked at the newspaper, sir, since--"

"Since the festive occasion," suggested Æolus.

"Oh, Sir Boreas--"

"Well, Mr. Crocker; what is it that you have to say for yourself?"

"I did dine with a few friends."

"And kept it up tolerably late, I should think."

"And then afterwards went to a tea-party," said Crocker.

"A tea-party!"

"It was not all tea," said Crocker, with a whine.

"I should think not. There was a good deal besides tea, I should say." Then the god left off
to smile, and the blasts began to blow. "Now, Mr. Crocker, I should like to know what you think
of yourself. After having read the accounts of your appearance before the magistrate in two
newspapers, I suppose I may take it for granted that you were abominably drunk out in the streets
on Wednesday night." It is very hard for a young man to have to admit under any circumstances
that he has been abominably drunk out in the streets;--so that Crocker stood dumb before his
accuser. "I choose to have an answer, sir. I must either have your own acknowledgment, or must
have an official account from the police magistrate."

"I had taken something, sir."

"Were you drunk? If you will not answer me you had better go, and I shall know how to deal
with you." Crocker thought that he had perhaps better go and leave the god to deal with him.
He remained quite silent. "Your personal habits would be nothing to me, sir," continued Æolus,
"if you were able to do your work and did not bring disgrace on the department. But you neglect
the office. You are unable to do your work. And you do bring disgrace on the department. How
long is it since you remained away a day before?"

"I was detained down in Cumberland for one day, after my leave of absence."

"Detained in Cumberland! I never tell a gentleman, Mr. Crocker, that I do not believe him,--never.
If it comes to that with a gentleman, he must go." This was hard to bear; but yet Crocker was
aware that he had told a fib on that occasion in reference to the day's hunting. Then Sir Boreas
took up his pen and again had recourse to his paper, as though the interview was over. Crocker
remained standing, not quite knowing what he was expected to do. "It's of no use your remaining
there," said Sir Boreas. Whereupon Crocker retired, and, with his tail still between his legs,
returned to his own desk. Soon afterwards Mr. Jerningham was sent for, and came back with an
intimation that Mr. Crocker's services were no longer required, at any rate for that day. When
the matter had been properly represented to the Postmaster-General, a letter would be written
to him. The impression made on the minds of Bobbin and Geraghty was that poor Crocker would
certainly be dismissed on this occasion. Roden, too, thought that it was now over with the
unfortunate young man, as far as the Queen's service was concerned, and could not abstain from
shaking hands with the unhappy wretch as he bade them all a melancholy good-bye. "Good afternoon,"
said Mr. Jerningham to him severely, not condescending to shake hands with him at all.

But Mr. Jerningham heard the last words which the god had spoken on the subject, and was not
therefore called upon to be specially soft-hearted. "I never saw a poor devil look so sick
in my life," Æolus had said.

"He must have been very bad, Sir Boreas."

Æolus was fond of a good dinner himself, and had a sympathy for convivial offences. Indeed
for all offences he had a sympathy. No man less prone to punish ever lived. But what is a man
to do with inveterate offenders? Æolus would tear his hair sometimes in dismay because he knew
that he was retaining in the service men whom he would have been bound to get rid of had he
done his duty. "You had better tell him to go home," said Æolus,--"for to-day, you know."

"And what then, Sir Boreas?"

"I suppose he'll sleep it off by to-morrow. Have a letter written to him,--to frighten him,
you know. After all, New Year's Day only does come once a year." Mr. Jerningham, having thus
received instructions, went back to his room and dismissed Crocker in the way we have seen.
As soon as Crocker's back was turned Roden was desired to write the letter.

   SIR,

   Your conduct in absenting yourself without leave from
   the office yesterday is of such a nature as to make
   it necessary for me to inform you, that should it be
   repeated I shall have no alternative but to bring your
   name under the serious consideration of my Lord the
   Postmaster-General.

   I am, sir,
   Your obedient servant,

   (Signed) BOREAS BODKIN.

In the same envelope was a short note from one of his brother clerks.

   DEAR CROCKER,

   You had better be here sharp at ten to-morrow. Mr.
   Jerningham bids me tell you.

   Yours truly,

   BART. BOBBIN.

Thus Crocker got through his troubles on this occasion.

CHAPTER IX.

MISS DEMIJOHN'S INGENUITY.

On the day on which Crocker was going through his purgatory at the Post Office, a letter reached
Lady Kingsbury at Trafford Park, which added much to the troubles and annoyances felt by different
members of the family there. It was an anonymous letter, and the reader,--who in regard to
such mysteries should never be kept a moment in ignorance,--may as well be told at once that
the letter was written by that enterprising young lady, Miss Demijohn. The letter was written
on New Year's Day, after the party,--perhaps in consequence of the party, as the rash doings
of some of the younger members of the Trafford family were made specially obvious to Miss Demijohn
by what was said on that occasion. The letter ran as follows:

   MY LADY MARCHIONESS--

   I conceive it to be my duty as a well-wisher of the family
   to inform you that your stepson, Lord Hampstead, has
   become entangled in what I think to be a dangerous way
   with a young woman living in a neighbouring street to
   this.

The "neighbouring" street was of course a stroke of cunning on the part of Miss Demijohn.

   She lives at No. 17, Paradise Row, Holloway, and her name
   is Marion Fay. She is daughter to an old Quaker, who is
   clerk to Pogson and Littlebird, King's Court, Great Broad
   Street, and isn't of course in any position to entertain
   such hopes as these. He may have a little money saved, but
   what's that to the likes of your ladyship and his lordship
   the Marquis? Some think she is pretty. I don't. Now I
   don't like such cunning ways. Of what I tell your ladyship
   there isn't any manner of doubt. His lordship was there
   for hours the other day, and the girl is going about as
   proud as a peacock.

   It's what I call a regular Paradise Row conspiracy, and
   though the Quaker has lent himself to it, he ain't at
   the bottom. Next door but two to the Fays there is a Mrs.
   Roden living, who has got a son, a stuck-up fellow and a
   clerk in the Post Office. I believe there isn't a bit of
   doubt but he has been and got himself engaged to another
   of your ladyship's noble family. As to that, all Holloway
   is talking of it. I don't believe there is a 'bus driver
   up and down the road as doesn't know it. It's my belief
   that Mrs. Roden is the doing of it all! She has taken
   Marion Fay by the hand just as though she were her own,
   and now she has got the young lord and the young lady
   right into her mashes. If none of 'em isn't married yet it
   won't be long so unless somebody interferes. If you don't
   believe me do you send to the 'Duchess of Edinburgh' at
   the corner, and you'll find that they know all about it.

   Now, my Lady Marchioness, I've thought it my duty to
   tell you all this because I don't like to see a noble
   family put upon. There isn't nothing for me to get out
   of it myself. But I do it just as one of the family's
   well-wishers. Therefore I sign myself your very
   respectful,

   A WELL-WISHER.

The young lady had told her story completely as far as her object was concerned, which was
simply that of making mischief. But the business of anonymous letter-writing was one not new
to her hand. It is easy, and offers considerable excitement to the minds of those whose time
hangs heavy on their hands.

The Marchioness, though she would probably have declared beforehand that anonymous letters
were of all things the most contemptible, nevertheless read this more than once with a great
deal of care. And she believed it altogether. As to Lady Frances, of course she knew the allegations
to be true. Seeing that the writer was so well acquainted with the facts as to Lady Frances,
why should she be less well-informed in reference to Lord Hampstead? Such a marriage as this
with the Quaker girl was exactly the sort of match which Hampstead would be pleased to make.
Then she was especially annoyed by the publicity of the whole affair. That Holloway and the
drivers of the omnibuses, and the "Duchess of Edinburgh" should know all the secrets of her
husband's family,--should be able to discuss the disgrace to which "her own darlings" would
be subjected, was terrible to her. But perhaps the sting that went sharpest to her heart was
that which came from the fact that Lord Hampstead was about to be married at all. Let the wife
be a Quaker or what not, let her be as low as any woman that could be found within the sound
of Bow Bells, still, if the marriage ceremony were once pronounced over them, that woman's
son would become Lord Highgate, and would be heir to all the wealth and all the titles of the
Marquis of Kingsbury,--to the absolute exclusion of the eldest-born of her own darlings.

She had had her hopes in the impracticability of Lord Hampstead. Such men as that, she had
told herself, were likely to keep themselves altogether free of marriage. He would not improbably,
she thought, entertain some abominable but not unlucky idea that marriage in itself was an
absurdity. At any rate, there was hope as long as he could be kept unmarried. Were he to marry
and then have a son, even though he broke his neck out hunting next day, no good would come
of it. In this condition of mind she thought it well to show the letter to Mr. Greenwood before
she read it to her husband. Lord Kingsbury was still very ill,--so ill as to have given rise
to much apprehension; but still it would be necessary to discuss this letter with him, ill
as he might be. Only it should be first discussed with Mr. Greenwood.

Mr. Greenwood's face became flatter, and his jaw longer, and his eyes more like gooseberries
as he read the letter. He had gradually trained himself to say and to hear all manner of evil
things about Lady Frances in the presence of the Marchioness. He had too accustomed himself
to speak of Lord Hampstead as a great obstacle which it would be well if the Lord would think
proper to take out of the way. He had also so far followed the lead of his patroness as to
be deep if not loud in his denunciations of the folly of the Marquis. The Marquis had sent
him word that he had better look out for a new home, and without naming an especial day for
his dismissal, had given him to understand that it would not be convenient to receive him again
in the house in Park Lane. But the Marquis had been ill when he had thus expressed his displeasure,--and
was now worse. It might be that the Marquis himself would never again visit Park Lane. As no
positive limit had been fixed for Mr. Greenwood's departure from Trafford Park, there he remained,--and
there he intended to remain for the present. As he folded up the letter carefully after reading
it slowly, he only shook his head.

"Is it true, I wonder?" asked the Marchioness.

"There is no reason why it should not be."

"That's just what I say to myself. We know it is true about Fanny. Of course there's that Mr.
Roden, and the Mrs. Roden. When the writer knows so much, there is reason to believe the rest."

"A great many people do tell a great many lies," said Mr. Greenwood.

"I suppose there is such a person as this Quaker,--and that there is such a girl?"

"Quite likely."

"If so, why shouldn't Hampstead fall in love with her? Of course he's always going to the street
because of his friend Roden."

"Not a doubt, Lady Kingsbury."

"What ought we to do?" To this question Mr. Greenwood was not prepared with an immediate answer.
If Lord Hampstead chose to get himself married to a Quaker's daughter, how could it be helped?
"His father would hardly have any influence over him now." Mr. Greenwood shook his head. "And
yet he must be told." Mr. Greenwood nodded his head. "Perhaps something might be done about
the property."

"He wouldn't care two straws about settlements," said Mr. Greenwood.

"He doesn't care about anything he ought to. If I were to write and ask him, would he tell
the truth about this marriage?"

"He wouldn't tell the truth about anything," said Mr. Greenwood.

The Marchioness passed this by, though she knew it at the moment to be calumny. But she was
not unwilling to hear calumny against Lord Hampstead. "There used to be ways," she said, "in
which a marriage of that kind could be put on one side afterwards."

"You must put it on one side before, now-a-days, if you mean to do it at all," said the clergyman.

"But how?--how?"

"If he could be got out of the way."

"How out of the way?"

"Well;--that's what I don't know. Suppose he could be made to go out yachting, and she be married
to somebody else when he's at sea!" Lady Kingsbury felt that her friend was but little good
at a stratagem. But she felt also that she was not very good herself. She could wish; but wishing
in such matters is very vain. She had right on her side. She was quite confident as to that.
There could be no doubt but that "gods and men" would desire to see her little Lord Frederic
succeed to the Marquisate rather than this infidel Republican. If this wretched Radical could
be kept from marrying there would evidently be room for hope, because there was the fact,--proved
by the incontestable evidence of Burke's Peerage,--that younger sons did so often succeed.
But if another heir were to be born, then, as far as she was aware, Burke's Peerage promised
her nothing. "It's a pity he shouldn't break his neck out hunting," said Mr. Greenwood.

"Even that wouldn't be much if he were to be married first," said the Marchioness.

Every day she went to her husband for half-an-hour before her lunch, at which time the nurse
who attended him during the day was accustomed to go to her dinner. He had had a physician
down from London since his son had visited him, and the physician had told the Marchioness
that though there was not apparently any immediate danger, still the symptoms were such as
almost to preclude a hope of ultimate recovery. When this opinion had been pronounced there
had arisen between the Marchioness and the chaplain a discussion as to whether Lord Hampstead
should be once again summoned. The Marquis himself had expressed no such wish. A bulletin of
a certain fashion had been sent three or four times a week to Hendon Hall purporting to express
the doctor's opinion of the health of their noble patient; but the bulletin had not been scrupulously
true. Neither of the two conspirators had wished to have Lord Hampstead at Trafford Park. Lady
Kingsbury was anxious to make the separation complete between her own darlings and their brother,
and Mr. Greenwood remembered, down to every tittle of a word and tone, the insolence of the
rebuke which he had received from the heir. But if Lord Kingsbury were really to be dying,
then they would hardly dare to keep his son in ignorance.

"I've got something I'd better show you," she said, as she seated herself by her husband's
sofa. Then she proceeded to read to him the letter, without telling him as she did so that
it was anonymous. When he had heard the first paragraph he demanded to know the name of the
writer. "I'd better read it all first," said the Marchioness. And she did read it all to the
end, closing it, however, without mentioning the final "Well-Wisher." "Of course it's anonymous,"
she said, as she held the letter in her hand.

"Then I don't believe a word of it," said the Marquis.

"Very likely not; but yet it sounds true."

"I don't think it sounds true at all. Why should it be true? There is nothing so wicked as
anonymous letters."

"If it isn't true about Hampstead it's true at any rate of Fanny. That man comes from Holloway,
and Paradise Row and the 'Duchess of Edinburgh.' Where Fanny goes for her lover, Hampstead
is likely to follow. 'Birds of a feather flock together.'"

"I won't have you speak of my children in that way," said the sick lord.

"What can I do? Is it not true about Fanny? If you wish it, I will write to Hampstead and ask
him all about it." In order to escape from the misery of the moment he assented to this proposition.
The letter being anonymous had to his thinking been disgraceful and therefore he had disbelieved
it. And having induced himself to disbelieve the statements made, he had been drawn into expressing,--or
at any rate to acknowledging by his silence,--a conviction that such a marriage as that proposed
with Marion Fay would be very base. Her ladyship felt therefore that if Lord Hampstead could
be got to acknowledge the engagement, something would have been done towards establishing a
quarrel between the father and the son.

"Has that man gone yet?" he asked as his wife rose to leave the room.

"Has what man gone?"

"Mr. Greenwood."

"Gone? How should he have gone? It has never been expected that he should go by this time.
I don't see why he should go at all. He was told that you would not again require his services
up in London. As far as I know, that is all that has been said about going." The poor man turned
himself on his sofa angrily, but did not at the moment give any further instructions as to
the chaplain's departure.

"He wants to know why you have not gone," Lady Kingsbury said to the clergyman that afternoon.

"Where am I to go to?" whined the unfortunate one. "Does he mean to say that I am to be turned
out into the road at a moment's notice because I can't approve of what Lady Frances is doing?
I haven't had any orders as to going. If I am to go I suppose he will make some arrangement
first." Lady Kingsbury said what she could to comfort him, and explained that there was no
necessity for his immediate departure. Perhaps the Marquis might not think of it again for
another week or two; and there was no knowing in what condition they might find themselves.

Her ladyship's letter to her stepson was as follows; and by return of post her stepson's answer
came;--

   MY DEAR HAMPSTEAD,--

   Tidings have reached your father that you have engaged
   yourself to marry a girl, the daughter of a Quaker named
   Fay, living at No. 17, Paradise Row. He, the Quaker, is
   represented as being a clerk in a counting-house in the
   City. Of the girl your father has heard nothing, but can
   only imagine that she should be such as her position would
   make probable. He desires me to ask you whether there
   is any truth in the statement. You will observe that I
   express no opinion myself whether it be true or false,
   whether proper or improper. After your conduct the other
   day I should not think of interfering myself; but your
   father wishes me to ask for his information.

   Yours truly,

   CLARA KINGSBURY.

Hampstead's answer was very short, but quite sufficient for the purpose;--

   MY DEAR LADY KINGSBURY,

   I am not engaged to marry Miss Fay,--as yet. I think that
   I may be some day soon.

   Yours affectionately,

   HAMPSTEAD.

By the same post he wrote a letter to his father, and that shall also be shown to the reader.

   MY DEAR FATHER,--

   I have received a letter from Lady Kingsbury, asking me as
   to a report of an engagement between me and a young lady
   named Marion Fay. I am sorry that her writing should be
   evidence that you are hardly yet strong enough to write
   yourself. I trust that it may not long be so.

   Would you wish to see me again at Trafford? I do not like
   to go there without the expression of a wish from you;
   but I hold myself in readiness to start whenever you may
   desire it. I had hoped from the last accounts that you
   were becoming stronger.

   I do not know how you may have heard anything of Marion
   Fay. Had I engaged myself to her, or to any other young
   lady, I should have told you at once. I do not know
   whether a young man is supposed to declare his own
   failures in such matters, when he has failed,--even to his
   father. But, as I am ashamed of nothing in the matter, I
   will avow that I have asked the young lady to be my wife,
   but she has as yet declined. I shall ask her again, and
   still hope to succeed.

   She is the daughter of a Mr. Fay who, as Lady Kingsbury
   says, is a Quaker, and is a clerk in a house in the City.
   As he is in all respects a good man, standing high for
   probity and honour among those who know him, I cannot
   think that there is any drawback. She, I think, has all
   the qualities which I would wish to find in the woman
   whom I might hope to make my wife. They live at No. 17,
   Paradise Row, Holloway. Lady Kingsbury, indeed, is right
   in all her details.

   Pray let me have a line, if not from yourself, at any rate
   dictated by you, to say how you are.

   Your affectionate son,

   HAMPSTEAD.

It was impossible to keep the letter from Lady Kingsbury. It thus became a recognized fact
by the Marquis, by the Marchioness, and by Mr. Greenwood, that Hampstead was going to marry
the Quaker's daughter. As to that pretence of a refusal, it went for nothing, even with the
father. Was it probable that a Quaker's daughter, the daughter of a merchant's clerk out of
the City, should refuse to become a Marchioness? The sick man was obliged to express anger,
having been already made to treat the report as incredible because of the disgrace which would
accompany it, if true. Had he been left to himself he would have endeavoured to think as little
about it as possible. Not to quarrel with his two eldest children was the wish that was now
strongest at his heart. But his wife recalled the matter to him at each of the two daily visits
which she made. "What can I do?" he was driven to ask on the third morning.

"Mr. Greenwood suggests--," began his wife, not intending to irritate him, having really forgotten
at the moment that no suggestion coming from Mr. Greenwood could be welcome to him.

"D---- Mr. Greenwood," he shouted, lifting himself up erect from the pillows on his sofa. The
Marchioness was in truth so startled by the violence of his movement, and by the rage expressed
on his haggard face, that she jumped from her chair with unexpected surprise. "I desire," said
the Marquis, "that that man shall leave the house by the end of this month."

CHAPTER X.

KING'S COURT, OLD BROAD STREET.

Hampstead received the letter from Lady Kingsbury, and answered it on Saturday, the 3rd of
January, having at that time taken no active steps in regard to Marion Fay after the rejection
of his suit on the day following Christmas. Eight days had thus elapsed, and he had done nothing.
He had done nothing, though there was not an hour in the day in which he was not confirming
his own resolve to do something by which he might make Marion Fay his own. He felt that he
could hardly go to the girl again immediately after the expression of her resolution. At first
he thought that he would write to her, and did sit down to the table for that purpose; but
as he strove to produce words which might move her, he told himself that the words which he
might speak would be better. Then he rode half way to Holloway, with the object of asking aid
from Mrs. Roden; but he returned without completing his purpose, telling himself that any such
aid, even if it could be obtained, would avail him nothing. In such a contest, if a man cannot
succeed by his own doing, surely he will not do so by the assistance of any one else; and thus
he was in doubt.

After having written to Lady Kingsbury and his father he reflected that, in his father's state
of health, he ought to go again to Trafford Park. If it were only for a day or for an hour
he ought to see his father. He knew that he was not wanted by his stepmother. He knew also
that no desire to see him had reached him from the Marquis. He was afraid that the Marquis
himself did not wish to see him. It was almost impossible for him to take his sister to the
house unless an especial demand for her attendance was made; and he could not very well leave
her alone for any lengthened period. Nevertheless he determined to make a rapid run into Shropshire,
with the intention of returning the following day, unless he found the state of his father's
health so bad as to make it expedient that he should remain. He intended to hunt on the Monday
and the Tuesday, travelling from London to Leighton and back. But he would leave London by
the night mail train from Paddington on Wednesday evening so as to reach Trafford Park House
on the following morning between four and five. It was a journey which he had often made before
in the same manner, and to which the servants at Trafford were well accustomed. Even at that
time in the morning he would walk to the Park from the station, which was four miles distant,
leaving his luggage, if he had any, to be sent for on the following morning; but he would usually
travel without luggage, having all things necessary for his use in his own room at Trafford.

It had hitherto been his custom to acquaint his sister with his manoeuvres on these occasions,
having never been free in his correspondence with his stepmother. He had written or telegraphed
to Lady Frances, and she had quite understood that his instructions, whatever they might be,
were to be obeyed. But Lady Frances was no longer a resident at Trafford Park, and he therefore
telegraphed to the old butler, who had been a servant in the family from a period previous
to his own birth. This telegram he sent on the Monday, as follows;--"Shall be at Trafford Thursday
morning, 4.30 A.M. Will walk over. Let Dick be up. Have room ready. Tell my father." He fixed
Wednesday night for his journey, having made up his mind to devote a portion of the Wednesday
morning to the business which he had on hand in reference to Marion Fay.

It was not the proper thing, he thought, to go to a girl's father for permission to ask the
girl to be his wife, before the girl had herself assented; but the circumstances in this case
were peculiar. It had seemed to him that Marion's only reason for rejecting him was based on
disparity in their social condition,--which to his thinking was the worst reason that could
be given. It might be that the reason had sprung from some absurd idea originating with the
Quaker father; or it might be that the Quaker father would altogether disapprove of any such
reason. At any rate he would be glad to know whether the old man was for him or against him.
And with the object of ascertaining this, he determined that he would pay a visit to the office
in King's Court on the Wednesday morning. He could not endure the thought of leaving London,--it
might be for much more than the one day intended,--without making some effort in regard to
the object which was nearest his heart.

Early in the day he walked into Messrs. Pogson and Littlebird's office, and saw Mr. Tribbledale
seated on a high stool behind a huge desk, which nearly filled up the whole place. He was rather
struck by the smallness and meanness of Messrs. Pogson and Littlebird's premises, which, from
a certain nobility belonging to the Quaker's appearance, he would have thought to be spacious
and important. It is impossible not to connect ideas after this fashion. Pogson and Littlebird
themselves carried in their own names no flavour of commercial grandeur. Had they been only
known to Hampstead by their name, any small mercantile retreat at the top of the meanest alley
in the City might have sufficed for them. But there was something in the demeanour of Zachary
Fay which seemed to give promise of one of those palaces of trade which are now being erected
in every street and lane devoted in the City to business. Nothing could be less palatial than
Pogson and Littlebird's counting-house. Hampstead had entered it from a little court, which
it seemed to share with one other equally unimportant tenement opposite to it, by a narrow
low passage. Here he saw two doors only, through one of which he passed, as it was open, having
noticed that the word "Private" was written on the other. Here he found himself face to face
with Tribbledale and with a little boy who sat at Tribbledale's right hand on a stool equally
high. Of these two, as far as he could see, consisted the establishment of Messrs. Pogson and
Littlebird. "Could I see Mr. Fay?" asked Hampstead.

"Business?" suggested Tribbledale.

"Not exactly. That is to say, my business is private."

Then there appeared a face looking at him over a screen about five feet and a-half high, which
divided off from the small apartment a much smaller apartment, having, as Hampstead now regarded
it, the appearance of a cage. In this cage, small as it was, there was a desk, and there were
two chairs; and here Zachary Fay carried on the business of his life, and transacted most of
those affairs appertaining to Messrs. Pogson and Littlebird which could be performed in an
office. Messrs. Pogson and Littlebird themselves, though they had a room of their own, to which
that door marked "Private" belonged, were generally supposed to be walking on 'Change as British
merchants should do, or making purchases of whole ships' cargos in the Docks, or discounting
bills, the least of which would probably represent £10,000. The face which looked over the
barrier of the cage at Lord Hampstead was of course that of Zachary Fay. "Lord Hampstead!"
he said, with surprise.

"Oh, Mr. Fay, how do you do? I have something I want to say to you. Could you spare me five
minutes?"

The Quaker opened the door of the cage and asked Lord Hampstead to walk in. Tribbledale, who
had heard and recognized the name, stared hard at the young nobleman,--at his friend Crocker's
noble friend, at the lord of whom it had been asserted positively that he was engaged to marry
Mr. Fay's daughter. The boy, too, having heard that the visitor was a lord, stared also. Hampstead
did as he was bid, but remembering that the inhabitant of the cage had at once heard what had
been said in the office, felt that it would be impossible for him to carry on his conversation
about Marion without other protection from the ears of the world. "It is a little private what
I have to say," remarked Hampstead.

The Quaker looked towards the private room. "Old Mr. Pogson is there," whispered Tribbledale.
"I heard him come in a quarter of an hour ago."

"Perhaps thou wouldst not mind walking up and down the yard," said the Quaker. Hampstead of
course walked out, but on looking about him found that the court was very small for the communication
which he had to make. Space would be required, so that he might not be troubled by turning
when he was in the midst of his eloquence. Half-a-dozen steps would carry him the whole length
of King's Court; and who could tell his love-story in a walk limited to six steps?

"Perhaps we might go out into the street?" he suggested.

"Certainly, my lord," said the Quaker. "Tribbledale, should any one call before I return, and
be unable to wait for five minutes, I shall be found outside the court, not above fifty yards
either to the right or to the left." Hampstead, thus limited to a course not exceeding a hundred
yards in one of the most crowded thoroughfares of the City, began the execution of his difficult
task.

"Mr. Fay," he said, "are you aware of what has passed between me and your daughter Marion?"

"Hardly, my lord."

"Has she told you nothing of it?"

"Yea, my lord; she has in truth told me much. She has told me no doubt all that it behoves
a father to hear from a daughter in such circumstances. I live on such terms with my Marion
that there are not many secrets kept by either of us from the other."

"Then you do know?"

"I know that your lordship tendered to her your hand,--honestly, nobly, and truly, as I take it."

"With perfect honesty and perfect truth most certainly."

"And I know also that she declined the honour thus offered her."

"She did."

"Is this you, Zachary? How are you this morning?" This came from a stout, short, red-faced
man, who stopped them, standing in the middle of the pavement.

"Well, I thank thee, Mr. Gruby. At this moment I am particularly engaged. That is Jonathan
Gruby," said the Quaker to his companion as soon as the stout man had walked on; "one of the
busiest men in the City. You have heard probably of Gruby and Inderwald."

Hampstead had never heard of Gruby and Inderwald, and wished that the stout man had been minding
his business at that moment. "But as to Miss Fay," he said, endeavouring to continue to tell
his love-story.

"Yes, as to Marion. I hardly do know what passed between you two, not having heard the reasons
she gave thee."

"No reasons at all;--nothing worth speaking of between persons who know anything of the world."

"Did she tell thee that she did not love thee, my lord?--because that to my thinking would
be reason enough."

"Nothing of the kind. I don't mean to boast, but I don't see why she should not like me well
enough."

"Nor in sooth do I either."

"What, Zachary; you walking about at this busy time of the day?"

"I am walking about, Sir Thomas. It is not customary with me, but I am walking about." Then
he turned on his heel, moved almost to dudgeon by the interruption, and walked the other way.
"Sir Thomas Bolster, my lord; a very busy sort of gentleman, but one who has done well in the
world.--Nor in sooth do I either; but this is a matter in which a young maiden must decide
for herself. I shall not bid her not to love thee, but I cannot bid her to do so."

"It isn't that, Mr. Fay. Of course I have no right to pretend to any regard from her. But as
to that there has been no question."

"What did she say to thee?"

"Some trash about rank."

"Nay, my lord, it is not trash. I cannot hear thee speak so of thine own order without contradiction."

"Am I to be like a king in the old days, who was forced to marry any ugly old princess that
might be found for him, even though she were odious to him? I will have nothing to do with
rank on such terms. I claim the right to please myself, as do other men, and I come to you
as father to the young lady to ask from you your assistance in winning her to be my wife."
At this moment up came Tribbledale running from the office.

"There is Cooke there," said Tribbledale, with much emphasis in his voice, as though Cooke's
was a very serious affair; "from Pollock and Austen's."

"Is not Mr. Pogson within?"

"He went out just after you. Cooke says that it's most important that he should see some one
immediately."

"Tell him that he must wait yet five minutes longer," said Zachary Fay, frowning. Tribbledale,
awestruck as he bethought himself how great were the affairs of Pollock and Austen, retreated
back hurriedly to the court.

"You know what I mean, Mr. Fay," continued Lord Hampstead.

"I know well what thou meanest, my lord. I think I know what thou meanest. Thou meanest to
offer to my girl not only high rank and great wealth, but, which should be of infinitely more
value to her, the heart and the hand of an honest man. I believe thee to be an honest man,
my lord."

"In this matter, Mr. Fay, at any rate, I am."

"In all matters as I believe; and how should I, being such a one as I am, not be willing to
give my girl to such a suitor as thee? And what is it now?" he shrieked in his anger, as the
little boy off the high stool came rushing to him.

"Mr. Pogson has just come back, Mr. Fay, and he says that he can't find those letters from
Pollock and Austen anywhere about the place. He wants them immediately, because he can't tell
the prices named without seeing them."

"Lord Hampstead," said the Quaker, almost white with rage, "I must pray thee to excuse me for
five minutes." Hampstead promised that he would confine himself to the same uninteresting plot
of ground till the Quaker should return to him, and then reflected that there were certain
reasons upon which he had not calculated against falling in love with the daughter of a City clerk.

"We will go a little further afield," said the Quaker, when he returned, "so that we may not
be troubled again by those imbeciles in the court. It is little, however, that I have to say
to thee further. Thou hast my leave."

"I am glad of that."

"And all my sympathies. But, my lord, I suppose I had better tell the truth."

"Oh, certainly."

"My girl fears that her health may fail her."

"Her health!"

"It is that as I think. She has not said so to me openly; but I think it is that. Her mother
died early,--and her brothers and her sisters. It is a sad tale, my lord."

"But need that hinder her?"

"I think not, my lord. But it must be for thee to judge. As far as I know she is as fit to
become a man's wife as are other girls. Her health has not failed her. She is not robust, but
she does her work in looking after my household, such as it is, well and punctually. I think
that her mind is pervaded with vain terrors. Now I have told thee all, placing full confidence
in thee as in an honest man. There is my house. Thou art welcome to go there if it seemeth
thee good, and to deal with Marion in this matter as thy love and thy judgment may direct thee."
Having said this he returned hurriedly to King's Court as though he feared that Tribbledale
or the boy might again find him out.

So far Hampstead had succeeded; but he was much troubled in his mind by what he had heard as
to Marion's health. Not that it occurred to him for a moment that such a marriage as he contemplated
would be undesirable because his Marion might become ill. He was too thoroughly in love to
entertain such an idea. Nor is it one which can find ready entrance into the mind of a young
man who sees a girl blooming with the freshness and beauty of youth. It would have seemed to
him, had he thought about it at all, that Marion's health was perfect. But he was afraid of
her obstinacy, and he felt that this objection might be more binding on her than that which
she put forward in reference to his rank. He went back, therefore, to Hendon Hall only half-satisfied,--sometimes
elated, but sometimes depressed. He would, however, go and discuss the matter with her at full
length as soon as he should have returned from Shropshire. He would remain there only for one
day,--though it might be necessary for him to repeat the journey almost immediately,--so that
no time might be lost in using his eloquence upon Marion. After what had passed between him
and the Quaker, he thought that he was almost justified in assuring himself that the girl did
in truth love him.

"Give my father my kindest love," said Lady Frances, as her brother was about to start for
the train.

"Of course I will."

"And tell him that I will start at a moment's notice whenever he may wish to see me."

"In such case of course I should take you."

"And be courteous to her if you can."

"I doubt whether she will allow me. If she abuses you or insults me I must answer her."

"I wouldn't."

"You would be more ready than I am. One cannot but answer her because she expects to hear something
said in return. I shall keep out of her way as much as possible. I shall have my breakfast
brought to me in my own room to-morrow, and shall then remain with my father as much as possible.
If I leave him at all I shall get a walk. There will only be the dinner. As to one thing I
have quite made up my mind. Nothing shall drive me into having any words with Mr. Greenwood;--unless,
indeed, my father were to ask me to speak to him."

CHAPTER XI.

MR. GREENWOOD BECOMES AMBITIOUS.

Mr. Greenwood was still anxious as to the health of the Rector of Appleslocombe. There might
be even yet a hope for him; but his chance, he thought, would be better with the present Marquis--ill-disposed
towards him as the Marquis was--than with the heir. The Marquis was weary of him, and anxious
to get rid of him,--was acting very meanly to him, as Mr. Greenwood thought, having offered
him £1000 as a final payment for a whole life's attention. The Marquis, who had ever been a
liberal man, had now, perhaps on his death-bed, become unjust, harsh, and cruel. But he was
weak and forgetful, and might possibly be willing to save his money and get rid of the nuisance
of the whole affair by surrendering the living. This was Mr. Greenwood's reading of the circumstances
as they at present existed. But the Marquis could not dispose of the living while the Rector
was still alive; nor could he even promise it, to any good effect, without his son's assent.
That Lord Hampstead would neither himself so bestow his patronage or allow it to be so bestowed,
Mr. Greenwood was very sure. There had been that between him and Lord Hampstead which convinced
him that the young man was more hostile to him even than the father. The Marquis, as Mr. Greenwood
thought, had insulted him of late;--but Lord Hampstead, young as he was, had also been insolent;
and what was worse, he had insulted Lord Hampstead. There had been something in the young lord's
eye which had assured him of the young lord's contempt as well as dislike. If anything could
be done about the living it must be done by the Marquis. The Marquis was very ill; but it was
still probable that the old rector should die first. He had been given to understand that the
old rector could hardly live many weeks.

Mr. Greenwood understood but little of the young lord's character. The Marquis, no doubt, he
knew well, having lived with him for many years. When he supposed his patron to be fretful
and irascible because of his infirmities, but to be by nature forgiving, unreasonable, and
weak, he drew an easy portrait, which was like the person portrayed. But in attributing revenge,
or harshness, or pride of power to Lord Hampstead he was altogether wrong. As regarded Appleslocombe
and other parishes, the patronage of which would some day belong to him, Lord Hampstead had
long since made up his mind that he would have nothing to do with them, feeling himself unfit
to appoint clergymen to ministrations in a Church to which he did not consider himself to belong.
All that he would leave to the Bishop, thinking that the Bishop must know more about it than
himself. Was his father, however, to make any request to him with reference to Appleslocombe
especially, he would no doubt regard the living as bestowed before his father's death. But
of all this Mr. Greenwood could understand nothing. He felt, however, that as the Marquis had
given him cause for anger, so had the young lord given him cause for hatred as well as anger.

Daily, almost hourly, these matters were discussed between Lady Kingsbury and the chaplain.
There had come to be strong sympathy between them as far as sympathy can exist where the feelings
are much stronger on the one side than on the other. The mother of the "darlings" had allowed
herself to inveigh very bitterly against her husband's children by his former marriage, and
at first had been received only half way by her confidential friend. But of late her confidential
friend had become more animated and more bitter than herself, and had almost startled her by
the boldness of his denunciations. She in her passion had allowed herself more than once to
express a wish that her stepson--were dead. She had hardly in truth meant as much as she implied,--or
meaning it had hardly thought of what she meant. But the chaplain taking the words from her
lips, had repeated them till she was almost terrified by their iniquity and horror. He had
no darlings to justify him! No great injury had been done to him by an unkind fortune! Great
as were the sin of Lord Hampstead and his sister, they could bring no disgrace upon him! And
yet there was a settled purpose of hatred in his words which frightened her, though she could
not bring herself to oppose them. She in her rage had declared that it would be well that Lord
Hampstead should break his neck out hunting or go down in his yacht at sea; and she had been
gratified to find that her friend had sanctioned her ill-wishes. But when Mr. Greenwood spoke
as though something might possibly be done to further those wishes, then she almost repented
herself.

She had been induced to say that if any power should come to her of bestowing the living of
Appleslocombe she would bestow it on Mr. Greenwood. Were Lord Hampstead to die before the Marquis,
and were the Marquis to die before the old rector, such power would belong to her during the
minority of her eldest son. There had, therefore, been some meaning in the promise; and the
clergyman had referred to it more than once or twice. "It is most improbable, you know, Mr.
Greenwood," she had said very seriously. He had replied as seriously that such improbabilities
were of frequent occurrence. "If it should happen I will do so," she had answered. But after
that she had never of her own accord referred to the probability of Lord Hampstead's death.

From day to day there grew upon her a feeling that she had subjected herself to domination,
almost to tyranny from Mr. Greenwood. The man whom she had known intimately during her entire
married life now appeared to assume different proportions and almost a different character.
He would still stand before her with his flabby hands hanging listlessly by his side, and with
eyes apparently full of hesitation, and would seem to tremble as though he feared the effect
of his own words; but still the words that fell from him were felt to be bonds from which she
could not escape. When he looked at her from his lack-lustre eyes, fixing them upon her for
minutes together, till the minutes seemed to be hours, she became afraid. She did not confess
to herself that she had fallen into his power; nor did she realize the fact that it was so;
but without realizing it she was dominated, so that she also began to think that it would be
well that the chaplain should be made to leave Trafford Park. He, however, continued to discuss
with her all family matters as though his services were indispensable to her; and she was unable
to answer him in such a way as to reject his confidences.

The telegram reached the butler as to Hampstead's coming on the Monday, and was, of course,
communicated at once to Lord Kingsbury. The Marquis, who was now confined to his bed, expressed
himself as greatly gratified, and himself told the news to his wife. She, however, had already
heard it, as had also the chaplain. It quickly went through the whole household, in which among
the servants there existed an opinion that Lord Hampstead ought to have been again sent for
some days since. The Doctor had hinted as much to the Marchioness, and had said so plainly
to the butler. Mr. Greenwood had expressed to her ladyship his belief that the Marquis had
no desire to see his son, and that the son certainly had no wish to pay another visit to Trafford.
"He cares more about the Quaker's daughter than anything else," he had said,--"about her and
his hunting. He and his sister consider themselves as separated from the whole of the family.
I should leave them alone if I were you." Then she had said a faint word to her husband, and
had extracted from him something that was supposed to be the expression of a wish that Lord
Hampstead should not be disturbed. Now Lord Hampstead was coming without any invitation.

"Going to walk over, is he, in the middle of the night?" said Mr. Greenwood, preparing to discuss
the matter with the Marchioness. There was something of scorn in his voice, as though he were
taking upon himself to laugh at Lord Hampstead for having chosen this way of reaching his father's
house.

"He often does that," said the Marchioness.

"It's an odd way of coming into a sick house,--to disturb it in the middle of the night." Mr.
Greenwood, as he spoke, stood looking at her ladyship severely.

"How am I to help it? I don't suppose anybody will be disturbed at all. He'll come round to
the side door, and one of the servants will be up to let him in. He always does things differently
from anybody else."

"One would have thought that when his father was dying--"

"Don't say that, Mr. Greenwood. There's nothing to make you say that. The Marquis is very ill,
but nobody has said that he's so bad as that." Mr. Greenwood shook his head, but did not move
from the position in which he was standing. "I suppose that on this occasion Hampstead is doing
what is right."

"I doubt whether he ever does what is right. I am only thinking that if anything should happen
to the Marquis, how very bad it would be for you and the young lords."

"Won't you sit down, Mr. Greenwood?" said the Marchioness, to whom the presence of the standing
chaplain had become almost intolerable.

The man sat down,--not comfortably in his chair, but hardly more than on the edge of it, so
as still to have that air of restraint which had annoyed his companion. "As I was saying, if
anything should happen to my lord it would be very sad for your ladyship and for Lord Frederick,
and Lord Augustus, and Lord Gregory."

"We are all in the hands of God," said her ladyship, piously.

"Yes;--we are all in the hands of God. But it is the Lord's intention that we should all look
out for ourselves, and do the best we can to avoid injustice, and cruelty, and,--and--robbery."

"I do not think there will be any robbery, Mr. Greenwood."

"Would it not be robbery if you and their little lordships should be turned at once out of
this house?"

"It would be his own;--Lord Hampstead's,--of course. I should have Slocombe Abbey in Somersetshire.
As far as a house goes, I should like it better than this. Of course it is much smaller;--but
what comfort do I ever have out of a house like this?"

"That's true enough. But why?"

"There is no good in talking about it, Mr. Greenwood."

"I cannot help talking about it. It is because Lady Frances has broken up the family by allowing
herself to be engaged to a young man beneath her own station in life." Here he shook his head,
as he always did when he spoke of Lady Frances. "As for Lord Hampstead, I look upon it as a
national misfortune that he should outlive his father."

"What can we do?"

"Well, my lady; it is hard to say. What will my feelings be, should anything happen to the
Marquis, and should I be left to the tender mercies of his eldest son? I should have no claim
upon Lord Hampstead for a shilling. As he is an infidel, of course he would not want a chaplain.
Indeed I could not reconcile it to my conscience to remain with him. I should be cast out penniless,
having devoted all my life, as I may say, to his lordship's service."

"He has offered you a thousand pounds."

