So far as the preamble and resolutions of the Synod of 1857 embody the doctrines, and what
we supposed to be the policy of our Church, we heartily agreed with them. Of course we were
pained to see that they implied, that, in organizing a Church at Amoy, we had not proceeded
according to the order of our Church, or had found great difficulty in doing so. This was altogether
a mistake, and was already producing evil results. We think there is another mistake in the
preamble. It seems small, but because of this fact, and of its plausibility, it has done more,
perhaps, than anything else in leading our Church into the false position which she seems now
to occupy. Therefore, we should examine it with some care. It is the assumption, as a matter
of course, that, "the converts at Amoy" are "an integral part of our Church," in this country.
What made them so? Is it because they were converted through the instrumentality of the preaching
of our Missionaries? This is a new doctrine, that a convert as a matter of course belongs to
the Church of the preacher through whose instrumentality he has been led unto Christ. Perhaps
it was the doctrine of some of the Corinthians, when they said, "I am of Paul, and I of Apollos,"
&c., but it was not the doctrine of the Apostle who reproved them. Besides this, how shall
we know which of them were converted through our instrumentality? The English Presbyterian
brethren and ourselves have preached indiscriminately. Is it because they were baptized by
our Missionaries? But many of them were baptized by the English Presbyterian brethren. They
have baptized in our churches, and we in theirs. If they be an integral part of the Dutch Church
in America, they are also an integral part of the Presbyterian Church in England. We, it is
true, baptized a majority, say two-thirds. Are they, then, two-thirds of an integral part in
America, and one-third of an integral part in England? No. The whole is a fallacy. Each individual
Church there is an integral part of the whole of them. All together, they form an integer.
They might by the act of our Church, and a correlative act on their own part, become an integral
part of the Church in America? In a similar way they might become an integral part of the Church
in England. They are now an integer of themselves. To make one portion of them an integral
part of the Church in this country, and another portion an integral part of the Church in England,
is to be guilty of causing a violent rupture.

We felt that the consequences were so momentous, that, before we should allow ourselves to
be instrumental in thus (as we supposed) rending the "Body of Christ" at Amoy, we should make
another effort to get the facts before the Church. As yet, we could not, if we would, carry
out the resolution of Synod, and organize a Classis in connection with the Particular Synod
of Albany, for, it was not till several years after, only very recently, that we had materials
"enough to render the permanency of such an organization reasonably certain." Therefore we
wrote, as above, under date of December 23, 1857, and frequently wrote on the subject, as occasion
offered.

Although our views were not made public (the Board judging that they had no right, or that
it would not be for the good of the Church, and the interests of the Mission, to publish them),
still we continued to prosecute our labors, in connection with the English Presbyterian brethren,
receiving and giving mutual assistance. We were encouraged thus to continue our work: 1. Because
of letters we received from home, some of them written by individuals who were able advocates
of the decision of the Synod of 1857. They told us that it could not be otherwise than that
a separation must come between us and the brethren of the English Presbyterian Church, but
they would not have us inaugurate that separation. 2. (and more important) Because a marvelous
blessing from on high was attending our labors. 3. (and most important) Because we knew this
harmonious and mutual assistance to be entirely in accordance with the spirit of the Gospel.

In process of time a Church was organized at Chioh-be by the appointment of elders and deacons,
then at Peh-chui-ia, then at Mapeng, and then the Church at Amoy was divided into two distinct
organizations. Thus we had five organized churches, all of our order--the elders and deacons
chosen and set apart according to our Forms, and all our Forms in use so far as there was yet
occasion for them. Two of these churches were under the especial care of the English Presbyterians,
and pecuniarily the work was sustained by funds collected in England and Scotland. The other
three were under our especial care. The pecuniary expenses, beyond what the native churches
could themselves raise, were borne by our Church at home.

One of the essential principles of our Church polity is, that individual Churches are not independent
of each other. They are members one of another. They are to be subject to each other. They
are individual parts of a whole. Each part should be subject to the whole. Hence the necessity
of higher judicatories. Thus we felt that these five churches had a right to an ecclesiastical
organization, by which they might enjoy this essential principle of Presbyterianism. [I trust
we shall hear no more of the charge that the Missionaries at Amoy are Congregationalists.]
But we were afraid to give this organization to the native churches, lest we should give offense
at home. We knew that we were misunderstood, and as yet could see no way to make the Church
acquainted with our position and our views. If the Master should plainly call us to go forward,
of course we must obey, and leave the results with Him.

These churches, having grown out of each other, were essentially one, and were as closely united
together as it was possible for them to be, without a formal organization. The first formal
meeting of all these churches was held at Chioh-be (a church under our care), in 1861. No ecclesiastical
power was assumed. The next similar meeting was held in April, 1862, in the churches at Amoy.
This was still more formal. It was composed of all the Missionaries of our own and of the English
Presbyterian Church, and of one representative Elder from each of the five organized churches.
This body may be called an incipient Classis. The only ecclesiastical power exercised, however,
was connected with church discipline. Heretofore each individual Church, in connection with
the Missionaries, had exercised the power of discipline, even to excommunication. Now certain
cases of excommunication were referred by individual Consistories to, and acted on by, this
body. Is it necessary to defend such acts? We felt that if each individual church could exercise
such power, and the principles of our Presbyterianism be scriptural, then could a body, composed
of the representatives of these churches, together with the Missionaries, with safety exercise
such power. It was approaching as nearly as possible to the practice of our Church at home.
We expected soon to be called to the performance of ecclesiastical acts more momentous. Already
had two of the churches chosen two of the native members, who were now engaged in careful study,
that in due time they might be set apart to the office of the Ministry of the Word, and ordained
pastors of the churches respectively choosing them. But for reasons given above we would not
go forward faster than we were plainly led by the hand of Providence. Therefore, while the
Missionaries, in presence of this assembly, examined these pastors-elect, in reference to their
qualifications for the office of Pastor, the body, as such, took no part in the examination.

This incipient Classis met next in the autumn of the same year at Peh-chui-ia, a church under
the care of the English Presbyterian brethren. At this meeting it became a real Classis, not
fully developed as a Classis in a mature Church, but possessing the constituent elements and
performing the functions of a Classis. Not only were there cases of discipline to act on, but
a distinct application was made by one of the churches, that a pastor be ordained, and placed
over them. The body decided, not only that they had the right, but that the plain call of the
Great Head of the Church made it their duty to go forward in this matter. Preliminary steps
were taken, other meetings of Classis were appointed and held, candidates were examined, calls
presented and approved, until early in the present year the First and Second Churches at Amoy
had each a native pastor ordained and installed over them. By the authority of this Classis,
in the early part of this year, a third church was organized at Amoy according to our order.
It is in the suburb called E-mng-kang, and is under the especial care of the English Presbyterian
brethren, as mentioned in a previous part of this paper. So now there are six organized churches,
all of the same order, and some others almost ready to be organized. If the Missionaries at
Amoy have been guilty of any great mistake, it has been in this matter of forming such a Classis,
and proceeding to the ordination and installation of native pastors, and the organization of
new churches. Therefore, this subject demands a careful examination.

When we commenced the work among the heathen, it was found that the Constitution of our Church
had made no provision for such work beyond the simple ordaining of men as Missionaries. We
might preach the gospel, but no provision was made for receiving into church fellowship, administering
the sacraments, electing and ordaining office-bearers, and all the incipient steps of the organization
of the Church from among the heathen. The Constitution was made for the government of a Church
already organized and matured, and in America; therefore, it is not strange that such things
were not provided for. Our duty seemed very plain. We must fall back on the great principles
of church government taught in the Word of God. We believed these principles to be set forth
in the Constitution, and other standards of our Church.

When, through the instrumentality of the preached Word, men gave satisfactory evidence that
they had experienced "the renewing of the Holy Ghost," without the advice of Consistories,
by virtue of our office of Ministers of the Word, we administered to them the sacrament of
baptism, thus admitting them into the church. Now the Lord's Supper must be administered to
these believers, baptism to their infant children, and to new converts, and the discipline
of God's house maintained. By virtue of that same office, and by virtue of the authority given
by the Master to his Church, we felt that we had the right, aye, that it was our bounden duty,
to perform such acts. We could not yet for a long time set apart a proper Consistory, but we
must not therefore be "lords over God's heritage." In receiving new members, and in all acts
of discipline, we must advise with the church already gathered.

The church grew, and in due time a Consistory was called for; must the work stop, because the
Constitution had made no provision? No. The little church had the right to choose men, and
having chosen suitable men, it was our duty to ordain them. The authority we thus exercised
was not usurped, but was implied in the commission we received from our Master through the
Church. The same may be said of the authority of the brethren at Amoy, when, in connection
with the representative elders of the various churches, they proceeded to the ordination of
native pastors, and the organization of new churches. It was not necessary for the performance
of every act to get a new commission from the Church. When the Church sent us out, the one
commission contained all the authority necessary for the complete organization of the church.
It is an absurdity to deny, on constitutional grounds, the right of the Missionaries to perform
these last acts unless you deny their right to perform all their other acts except the simple
preaching of the Gospel. Their acts were all extra, not contra constitutional. If their authority
thus to act be justified in reference to the former acts, and denied in reference to the latter,
the justification and denial must be on other grounds than the Constitution of our Church.

Will any one assert that the Classis thus formed at Amoy is not a Classis de facto? or that
the native pastors ordained and installed by that body are not scripturally set apart to their
offices, and that its other acts are null and void? If so, then, as yet, there are no organized
churches--no Consistories--at Amoy, and there have been no scriptural baptisms, for all ecclesiastical
acts performed there, have been performed on the same principles, and by the same authority.
No one will have the hardihood to assert such a doctrine. It will be admitted that there is
a Classis de facto at Amoy. Then it is competent to perform all the functions of a Classis.
But it will not be contended that that Classis is a part of the Dutch Church in America. Yet
it is essentially like a Classis in America, just so far as the present state of development
of the Church at Amoy, and its Chinese character, render likeness possible. It is Chinese,
not American. The organization of such a Church is what we always supposed required of us.
We never imagined that we were sent to organize the American Dutch Church in China. If your
Missionaries are allowed to proceed, and are not required to repel the English Presbyterian
brethren from their united labors with us, there will be but one Church at Amoy of the Presbyterian
order. With the continued blessing of God on such harmonious labor, it will be the Church of
that region. It will be dear to both the Presbyterian Church in England, and to our Church
in this land, and peculiarly dear to our Church in this country, because of its Dutch characteristics.
Your Missionaries will still be your agents, responsible to the Church at home, as they have
always been. The near relation to the Church in this land, which they have always held, they
desire to retain. The late action of Synod contemplates the formation of two denominations
at Amoy of the Presbyterian order, giving our peculiarities to one-half instead of to the whole,
thus producing rivalries, injuring the efficiency of the native churches, and making the relation
of the Missionaries to the Church at home more distant, thus weakening your hold on them, and
all, as we think, without any remunerating advantages. But before we proceed to the discussion
of this subject, a few other preliminaries demand some attention.

The English Presbyterians, as they are accustomed to speak of all the Classes of our Church
in America, call this Classis at Amoy "a Presbytery." Hence the question has been put to us
with all sincerity and gravity, "Is it a Classis, or is it a Presbytery?" Some seem to be afraid
that the Church we are forming will be half Dutch and half Presbyterian, and that it will soon
be swallowed up by the Presbyterians! Are there any ministers, or elders, or intelligent members
of the Dutch Church, who have yet to learn that a Classis is a Presbytery, and that the Dutch
Church is a Presbyterian Church? Surely not. Why, then, such questions and suggestions? Can
they be designed to prejudice the Church at home against the ecclesiastical body which has
grown up at Amoy? We will not impute such a motive, and, therefore, I merely say that we are
surprised at all such remarks. It is proper for the English Presbyterian brethren to speak
of the Presbytery at Amoy. They never speak of it as an English Presbytery. They do not regard
it as a part of the Church in England, but as a purely Chinese Church. They have liberality
enough to assist in building up such a Church, even though it has some things peculiar to us,
for it has all the essentials of their own order. Will it not seem to them that our Church
is deficient in liberality, when they learn the decision of the last Synod?

In connection with this subject, it is proper to speak more particularly of the liberality
of the English Presbyterian Church. When it is remembered that that Church is really a branch
of the Free Church of Scotland, it will not be supposed that their liberality is the result
of indifference to anything which they regard essential or important. Seldom has our world
witnessed such sacrifice for the sake of principle as was exhibited by that Church, when she
came out from the Establishment. Their liberality is a beautiful illustration of the Christian
spirit. The course of their Missionaries at the first organization of a church at Amoy, and
the approval thereof, have been already alluded to. In consequence of the recent formation
of a Classis, the subject naturally came up again this year. It was laid before their Synod,
which met a few weeks previous to ours. In the report of their Foreign Committee, which corresponds
to our Board of Foreign Missions, the following language is used in reference to the Church
at Amoy:

"As all the elements of Presbyterian organization thus existed [each church having native elders],
a further step was taken last April [1862], when a Presbytery was constituted at Amoy by mutual
consent, consisting of all the American brethren and our own, as well as representative elders
from the several congregations. Its name is neither the Greek 'Presbytery' employed in this
country, nor is it the Latin 'Classis,' which has long been used in Holland; but it is 'Tai
Tiong-lo-hoey,' or Great Meeting of Elders, genuine Chinese, and a hopeful earnest of the facility
with which our representative and consultative system of polity will find its way among a sensible
and self-governing people. Of course it is not intended that this Presbytery should in any
way come between the Missionaries themselves and the Committee or Board by which the respective
Missions are administered at home; but for the management of local matters, for disposing of
questions which may arise in the several congregations, and in regard to which a session may
require counsel or control; and for the very important purpose of exemplifying in the most
legitimate way ecclesiastical unity, it is essential that Missionaries and native office-bearers
should come together in some such capacity. The proceedings are conducted in Chinese, which
is the only language understood by all the members of Court, and it is in Chinese that the
minutes are kept. Three meetings have already been held. At the last, held in January, important
business was transacted affecting the 1st and 2d Congregations of Amoy, both of which are under
the immediate superintendence of the American Mission. Each congregation is desirous of the
settlement of a stated pastor, and each has agreed to call a minister, the one congregation
promising a stipend of $14 a month, and the other $13. The calls were sustained, and the Presbytery
agreed to meet on February 21st, to proceed with the 'trials' of the brethren thus elected.
As these proved satisfactory, Sabbath, the 29th of last month, was appointed as the day for
their ordination.

"Dr. Peltz, the esteemed Corresponding Secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions of the R.P.D.C.
of N.A., has apprised the Committee, that it is possible that a Presbytery of this composite
character may not secure the approval of their Synod. In separating from the A.B.C.F.M., and
in setting up a separate and ecclesiastically organized mission, that Synod was anxious to
introduce into its different Mission fields a system of Church government which it believed
to be scriptural, and adapted to all lands. Consequently, in these Mission fields it sought
to form Classes or Presbyteries which should be connected with Provincial and General Synods
in the same way as are the Classes on the American continent. And Dr. Peltz is apprehensive
lest the General Synod in America should regard as a deviation from this plan the amalgamation
in one Presbytery of their own agents with those of another Church.

It seems perfectly reasonable that two Churches of Christ so nearly alike, in attempting to
plant the Church of Christ in the same place in a heathen land, should strive, if possible,
to form their converts into one organization. The existence of different Denominations in the
same place in any Christian land, at the best, is only a necessary evil. God may bring some
good out of this evil, but this is not a sufficient reason why we should create such divisions,
for their own sake. Hence, the liberality of the English Presbyterian Church is so manifestly
in accordance with the Christian spirit, that it might have attracted no especial notice from
us. But the proceedings of our own Synod, by contrast, as it seems to us, have forced it out
in bold relief. They were willing to support their Missionaries in laboring with ours, and
building up a Chinese Church, not differing essentially from theirs, but with some characteristics
peculiar to ours. We, though the Church thus organized has not only all the essentials but
all the peculiarities of our own Church, still refuse such Christian co-operation, preferring
to rend asunder the Church already formed, and organize a part of it a distinct Denomination,
connected with the Church in America. I cannot yet believe that such is the sentiment of our
Church. There must be some great misapprehension. But such is really the decision of the last
Synod. Here is the language of the Committee which was adopted by the General Synod:

"Your Committee do not see any propriety in re-enacting the law of 1857 already quoted, because
it has never been repealed, and remains therefore in full force and virtue. Nor, if the reasoning
in this report be correct, would they have the law repealed, believing as they do, that the
maintenance of the principle contained in it is essential to the success of our Missionary
operations in foreign parts, and to the wholesome liberality of the Church at home.

"2.

"3.

The above is only an extract from the close of the Report of the Committee, and contains the
result at which they arrived. In reference to it we would make three remarks. (1). It (Res.
True, that Mission has been very successful since they formed what is called a Classis in connection
with the Synod in America. But has it been more successful than the Mission at Amoy? Compare
the amount of labor and the money expended on the two Missions, and then look at the results,
and thus decide about the tests. It is in no spirit of vainglory that we call for such a comparison.
Studiously have we avoided it, and the responsibility must rest on those who compel us to it.
(3.) No consideration is had for the feelings, wishes, or opinions of the native Churches.
Some consideration is shown for the feelings of the English Presbyterian Missionaries. This
is as it ought to be. Yet it is a matter of comparatively little importance.

It would have occupied too much space to have quoted the whole of the Report of the Committee.
The preceding part of it occupies nearly six pages of the Minutes of Synod. Yet we may not
pass that part over in silence, for, while with much of its contents we have no dispute, it
contains some grave mistakes of fact, and, as we think, some very grave errors of doctrine.
It grieves me to say thus much, and also to feel compelled to add the following strictures.
But, in order to discuss this subject, duty required the careful examination of the whole of
the Report, and, finding in it such errors, the clear statement of them. It might be easy,
perhaps, to account for the fact, that mistakes, in a report, unprinted, and of such length,
should escape the notice of Synod, but an attempt to apologize for that body might give occasion
to infer more disrespect than simply to point out the mistakes.

After some introductory remarks, chiefly concerning the difficulty of their task, the Committee
"begin with the assertion of principles." These they make three in number. The sum of the first
principle is that a Church, by divine arrangement, has government. The essential idea of their
second principle, so far as we can understand it, is, that the Dutch Church has a clearly defined
government. The Missionaries at Amoy, as well as the ministers in this country, admit both
these principles fully. But they do not affect the question in dispute. Not so with the third
principle of the Committee. Lest I might be supposed to misrepresent, I will quote their own
language: "No government can, voluntarily, relinquish its powers, and abnegate its authority
without thereby inviting disorder, disquietude, and, in the end, its destruction." Is this,
indeed, as the Committee assert, one of the "admitted principles" of our Church? one of the
"convictions in the mind of our Church, hardly separable in idea from its very existence?"
one of the "old truths maintained through blood and flame?" If the doctrine be true, the Church
in Holland had no right to relinquish its authority over the Church in America. If this doctrine
be a "principle" of our Church, never, never could your Missionaries consent to be instrumental
in bringing the Church in China, which now has liberty in Christ Jesus, into such perpetual
bondage. Once bring the Chinese churches under the authority of the Church in America, and
it matters not how great may be their growth, and how many centuries may pass away, the Church
in America can never relinquish her authority over them! But this is not an "admitted principle"
of our Church. The Dutch Church is protestant, not papal. Instead of the principle being one
of the "old truths maintained through blood and flame" by her, it is an old error of the Papacy,
for rejecting which she poured out her blood so freely, and would do the same to-day. Yet in
the Report of the Committee this error of Romanism, guilty of the blood of thousands upon thousands
of the saints of the Most High, is made to lie at the basis of the action of the last Synod!

The Committee next proceed to the statement of "certain historic facts." As with the "admitted
principles," so with the "historic facts." With some of them we have no dispute. But when they
come to describe the present condition and relations of the churches at Amoy, their language,
to say the least, is very unfortunate. "These six Churches," say they, "have grown up together
under such an interchange and community of labor on the part of our own Missionaries, and on
the part of those belonging to the English Presbyterian Church, that all are said to have a
two-fold ecclesiastical relation--one with England--one with America, and still a third, and
economical and domestic relation among themselves, which is covered and controlled by what
is styled 'The Great Presbyterial or Classical Council of Amoy.'"

We do not know by whom these native Churches "are said" to have a two-fold or three-fold ecclesiastical
relation. It is not so said by the Missionaries. They contend that the native churches are
neither English, nor American, but Chinese churches. They are ecclesiastically related to each
other, and ought to remain so. But the effort is now made to sever this ecclesiastical relation
to each other, and bring half of them into ecclesiastical relationship with the Church in America,
making them the Protestant Reformed Dutch Church of North America, in China! At present the
native churches have an intimate, but not an ecclesiastical, relation to both the Church in
England and America.

From the above mistaken statement the Committee have drawn out three "particulars" which they
seem to think especially worthy of note.

"1st. That while this Chinese Presbyterial or Classical Council is itself an autonomy--having
the right to ordain ministers, exercise discipline, and do whatever else a 'self-regulating
Classis' or Presbytery can or may do, still the whole in England is claimed to be the Presbytery
of Amoy, and to this Synod it is reported as the Classis of Amoy."

How dreadful! English Presbyterians call the body at Amoy a Presbytery, and American Dutchmen
call it a Classis! If this language is also meant to imply that the Classis at Amoy is usurping
authority, it is answered in other parts of this paper.

The next "particular" of the Committee is:

"2d. The Missionaries, while they are members of this Grand Presbyterial or Classical Council,
exercising full ministerial functions in it, are, at the same time, members either of Classes
in America, or of Presbyteries in Great Britain."

The meaning of this second "particular" is, that the Missionaries have a two-fold ecclesiastical
relation. Is there anything contrary to Scripture doctrine, or to Presbyterian principles,
or to common sense, that ecclesiastical relations should correspond to fact?--that the Missionaries
should have some sort of an ecclesiastical relation, both to the Church at home and to the
Church in China? They have a peculiar relationship to both these Churches. Why forget or ignore
the fact that they are Evangelists and not Pastors? Why object to an ecclesiastical relationship
exactly corresponding to, and required by, their office and position? The two parts of this
relationship do not contradict each other. They are altogether correlative. The Missionaries
are still agents of the Church which sent them out. Their ecclesiastical relation to it should
be direct, that they may be controlled by it, independent of any intermediate body. The Church
at home cannot afford to cut off her Missionaries from this immediate relationship so long
as they remain her agents. This does not conflict with, but requires some sort of a corresponding
relationship to the Churches planted and growing up through their instrumentality. Their relationship
to those Churches must have reference especially to local matters, for the proper organization,
and control, and development of the native churches, not at all to be controlled by them. When
they cease to be agents of the Church at home, and become the proper pastors of the native
churches, then will be the proper time to put themselves under the control of the native churches,
instead of the Church at home. We must not confound evangelization with colonization. Does
any one imagine that Paul and Barnabas, and Timothy and Titus, or any of them (for they were
not all apostles), had connection with the Church which sent them out, only through the churches
and ecclesiastical bodies organized by them? or that they were in any sense under the control
of those bodies?

The next and last "particular" of the Committee is "3d. That while the Churches, three at least,
are organized under and according to the Constitution of our Church, it is, nevertheless, claimed
that the members of said Churches are not more members of the Reformed Dutch Church here, than
they are members of the Presbyterian Church of England."

