It was the summer of the year 1491, and the armies of Ferdinand and Isabel invested the city
of Granada.

The night was not far advanced; and the moon, which broke through the transparent air of Andalusia,
shone calmly over the immense and murmuring encampment of the Spanish foe, and touched with
a hazy light the snow- capped summits of the Sierra Nevada, contrasting the verdure and luxuriance
which no devastation of man could utterly sweep from the beautiful vale below.

In the streets of the Moorish city many a group still lingered.  Some, as if unconscious of
the beleaguering war without, were listening in quiet indolence to the strings of the Moorish
lute, or the lively tale of an Arabian improrvisatore; others were conversing with such eager
and animated gestures, as no ordinary excitement could wring from the stately calm habitual
to every oriental people.  But the more public places in which gathered these different groups,
only the more impressively heightened the desolate and solemn repose that brooded over the
rest of the city.

At this time, a man, with downcast eyes, and arms folded within the sweeping gown which descended
to his feet, was seen passing through the streets, alone, and apparently unobservent of all
around him.  Yet this indifference was by no means shared by the struggling crowds through
which, from time to time, he musingly swept.

"God is great!" said one man; "it is the Enchanter Almamen."

"He hath locked up the manhood of Boabdil el Chico with the key of his spells," quoth another,
stroking his beard; "I would curse him, if I dared."

"But they say that he hath promised that when man fails, the genii will fight for Granada,"
observed a third, doubtingly.

"Allah Akbar! what is, is! what shall be, shall be!" said a fourth, with all the solemn sagacity
of a prophet.  Whatever their feelings, whether of awe or execration, terror or hope, each
group gave way as Almamen passed, and hushed the murmurs not intended for his ear.  Passing
through the Zacatin (the street which traversed the Great Bazaar), the reputed enchanter ascended
a narrow and winding street, and arrived at last before the walls that encircled the palace
and fortress of the Alhambra.

The sentry at the gate saluted and admitted him in silence; and in a few moments his form was
lost in the solitude of groves, amidst which, at frequent openings, the spray of Arabian fountains
glittered in the moonlight; while, above, rose the castled heights of the Alhambra; and on
the right those Vermilion Towers, whose origin veils itself in the furthest ages of Phoenician
enterprise. 

At the time of our visit, there were 600 of the rising population of the place doing their utmost
to unlearn the Welsh idiom, and to acquire the art of speaking and writing the English language with
propriety. We regret that we cannot dwell on this the most gratifying circumstance of our visit.
Messrs Vivian & Sons are unquestionably great copper-smelters, but,
in our humble opinion, the greatest action they ever did, and what
must ever commend them to all good minds, was the establishment of
these schools.

To us it was a change, a relief inexpressibly delightful, to emerge from the Stygian regions
of the copper-works, where for the last five or six days we had wandered like an 'unshriven
spirit,' and to find ourselves in contemplation of the happy faces
of the scholars, and to hear the hopeful, encouraging tones of their
intelligent teachers.

The popular song of Children go, to and fro, was being sung in the infant school at the moment
we took our leave, and we shall never forget the impression. It struck upon our senses, to
use an appropriate metaphor, like the crystal stream of the desert--like the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] See for some interesting information on the system of Cornish Mining, an article in No.
42 of the present series.

[4] On this point, we refer all who are desirous of pursuing the subject, to a valuable memoir in the
Annals of Philosophy, by John Henry Vivian, Esq., F.R.S., the proprietor
of the Hafod Works.

This paper, we may add, is the standard authority on the subject; and is, with some modification,
copied by Drs Ure and Lardner, and by most popular works upon metallurgy.

[5] The production of this curious substance is explained in an article
on the 'Value of Rubbish,' No. 385.

[6] Notwithstanding this, we were assured by a gentleman connected
with the copper-works, that there is no specific disease arising from
copper-smelting, as in the case of lead.

     Asthma, rheumatism, and colds, are the prevailing affections among
     the men; and even these are in a great measure due to their own carelessness.

THE
     KING OF YVETOT.
     
     There are few of our countrymen who have travelled in France but must
frequently have heard proverbial allusion made to a certain monarch
of Yvetot; and still fewer must be those who, having the slightest
knowledge of French literature, are unacquainted with Béranger's happy
lyric--

There reigned a monarch in Yvetot But little known in story,
Who, stranger all to grief and wo, Slept soundly without glory; His
night-cap tied by Jenny's care (The only crown this king would wear),
He'd snooze!

Ha, ha, ha! Ho, ho, ho! The merry monarch of Yvetot.

His jolly court he held each day, 'Neath humble roof of rushes green; And on a donkey riding gay,
Through all his kingdom might be seen: A happy soul, and thinking
well, His only guard was--sooth to tell-- His dog!

No harsh exacting lord was he, To grasp more than his folks could
give; But, mild howe'er a king may be, His majesty, you know, must
live; And no man e'er a bumper filled, Until the jovial prince had
swilled His share!

He ne'er sought to enlarge his states, But was a neighbour just and kind; A pattern to all
potentates, Would they his bright example mind. The only tears he e'er caused fall, Fell when
he died--which you'll not call His fault.

It is well known that Béranger's song, from which we have extracted the preceding four verses, as translated
by Anderson, was a friendly, though rather satirical remonstrance
with Napoleon--of course we mean the Napoleon--touching his ambitious
and bellicose policy.

But it is not so well known, that there really was a kingdom of Yvetot, and that its several dynasties
reigned peacefully for upwards of eleven centuries.

Anderson, in a note to the song, says: 'Yvetot, a district in the north of France, possesses
a monarch of its own, a sort of burlesque personage, whose royal
charger is a donkey; his guard, a dog; his crown, a night-cap; and
his revenue, a gratuitous draught of wine at the ale houses of his
liege subjects!' Young, another translator of Béranger, not any better
informed, tells us that 'the Lords of Yvetot claimed and exercised,
in the olden time, some such fantastical privileges as are here alluded
to.'

The translators have some excuse for their ignorance regarding
the king of Yvetot; for few Frenchmen of the present day, with the
exception of antiquaries, consider him to have been anything else
than a popular myth.

  The whole of
one side of this apartment was open to a broad and extensive balcony, which overhung the banks
of the winding and moonlit Darro; and in the clearness of the soft night might be distinctly
seen the undulating hills, the woods, and orange- groves, which still form the unrivalled landscapes
of Granada.

The pavement was spread with ottomans and couches of the richest azure, prodigally enriched
with quaint designs in broideries of gold and silver; and over that on which the Moor reclined,
facing the open balcony, were suspended on a pillar the round shield, the light javelin, and
the curving cimiter, of Moorish warfare.  So studded were these arms with jewels of rare cost,
that they might alone have sufficed to indicate the rank of the evident owner, even if his
own gorgeous vestments had not betrayed it.  An open manuscript, on a silver table, lay unread
before the Moor: as, leaning his face upon his hand, he looked with abstracted eyes along the
mountain summits dimly distinguished from the cloudless and far horizon.

No one could have gazed without a vague emotion of interest, mixed with melancholy, upon the
countenance of the inmate of that luxurious chamber.

Its beauty was singularly stamped with a grave and stately sadness, which was made still more
impressive by its air of youth and the unwonted fairness of the complexion: unlike the attributes
of the Moorish race, the hair and curling beard were of a deep golden colour; and on the broad
forehead and in the large eyes, was that settled and contemplative mildness which rarely softens
the swart lineaments of the fiery children of the sun.  Such was the personal appearance of
Boabdil el Chico, the last of the Moorish dynasty in Spain.

"These scrolls of Arabian learning," said Boabdil to himself, "what do they teach? to despise
wealth and power, to hold the heart to be the true empire.  This, then, is wisdom.  Yet, if
I follow these maxims, am I wise? alas! the whole world would call me a driveller and a madman.
Thus is it ever; the wisdom of the Intellect fills us with precepts which it is the wisdom
of Action to despise.  O Holy Prophet! what fools men would be, if their knavery did not eclipse
their folly!"

The young king listlessly threw himself back on his cushions as he uttered these words, too
philosophical for a king whose crown sate so loosely on his brow.

After a few moments of thought that appeared to dissatisfy and disquiet him, Boabdil again
turned impatiently round "My soul wants the bath of music," said he; "these journeys into a
pathless realm have wearied it, and the streams of sound supple and relax the travailed pilgrim."

He clapped his hands, and from one of the arcades a boy, hitherto invisible, started into sight;
at a slight and scarce perceptible sign from the king the boy again vanished, and in a few
moments afterwards, glancing through the fairy pillars, and by the glittering waterfalls, came
the small and twinkling feet of the maids of Araby.  As, with their transparent tunics and
white arms, they gleamed, without an echo, through that cool and voluptuous chamber, they might
well have seemed the Peris of the eastern magic, summoned to beguile the sated leisure of a
youthful Solomon.  With them came a maiden of more exquisite beauty, though smaller stature,
than the rest, bearing the light Moorish lute; and a faint and languid smile broke over the
beautiful face of Boabdil, as his eyes rested upon her graceful form and the dark yet glowing
lustre of her oriental countenance.  She alone approached the king, timidly kissed his hand,
and then, joining her comrades, commenced the following song, to the air and very words of
which the feet of the dancing-girls kept time, while with the chorus rang the silver bells
of the musical instrument which each of the dancers carried.

                       AMINE'S SONG.

               I.
               Softly, oh, softly glide,
               Gentle Music, thou silver tide,
               Bearing, the lulled air along,
               This leaf from the Rose of Song!
               To its port in his soul let it float,
               The frail, but the fragrant boat,
               Bear it, soft Air, along!

               II.
               With the burthen of sound we are laden,
               Like the bells on the trees of Aden,*
               When they thrill with a tinkling tone
               At the Wind from the Holy Throne,
               Hark, as we move around,
               We shake off the buds of sound;
               Thy presence, Beloved, is Aden.

               III.
               Sweet chime that I hear and wake
               I would, for my lov'd one's sake,
               That I were a sound like thee,
               To the depths of his heart to flee.
               If my breath had his senses blest;
               If my voice in his heart could rest;
               What pleasure to die like thee!

     *[The Mohammedans believe that musical bells hang on the trees of
     Paradise, and are put in motion by a wind from the throne of God.]

The music ceased; the dancers remained motionless in their graceful postures, as if arrested
into statues of alabaster; and the young songstress cast herself on a cushion at the feet of
the monarch, and looked up fondly, but silently, into his yet melancholy eyes,--when a man,
whose entrance had not been noticed, was seen to stand within the chamber.

He was about the middle stature,--lean, muscular, and strongly though sparely built.  A plain
black robe, something in the fashion of the Armenian gown, hung long and loosely over a tunic
of bright scarlet, girdled by a broad belt, from the centre of which was suspended a small
golden key, while at the left side appeared the jewelled hilt of a crooked dagger.  His features
were cast in a larger and grander mould than was common among the Moors of Spain; the forehead
was broad, massive, and singularly high, and the dark eyes of unusual size and brilliancy;
his beard, short, black, and glossy, curled upward, and concealed all the lower part of the
face, save a firm, compressed, and resolute expression in the lips, which were large and full;
the nose was high, aquiline, and well-shaped; and the whole character of the head (which was,
for symmetry, on too large and gigantic a scale as proportioned to the form) was indicative
of extraordinary energy and power.  At the first glance, the stranger might have seemed scarce
on the borders of middle age; but, on a more careful examination, the deep lines and wrinkles,
marked on the forehead and round the eyes, betrayed a more advanced period of life.  With arms
folded on his breast, he stood by the side of the king, waiting in silence the moment when
his presence should be perceived.

He did not wait long; the eyes and gesture of the girl nestled at the feet of Boabdil drew
the king's attention to the spot where the stranger stood: his eye brightened when it fell
upon him.

"Almamen," cried Boabdil, eagerly, "you are welcome."  As he spoke, he motioned to the dancing-girls
to withdraw.  "May I not rest?  O core of my heart, thy bird is in its home," murmured the
songstress at the king's feet.

"Sweet Amine," answered Boabdil, tenderly smoothing down her ringlets as he bent to kiss her
brow, "you should witness only my hours of delight. Toil and business have nought with thee;
I will join thee ere yet the nightingale hymns his last music to the moon."  Amine sighed,
rose, and vanished with her companions.

"My friend," said the king, when alone with Almamen, "your counsels often soothe me into quiet,
yet in such hours quiet is a crime.  But what do?-- how struggle?--how act?  Alas! at the hour
of his birth, rightly did they affix to the name of Boabdil, the epithet of El Zogoybi. [The
Unlucky]. Misfortune set upon my brow her dark and fated stamp ere yet my lips could shape
a prayer against her power.  My fierce father, whose frown was as the frown of Azrael, hated
me in my cradle; in my youth my name was invoked by rebels against my will; imprisoned by my
father, with the poison-bowl or the dagger hourly before my eyes, I was saved only by the artifice
of my mother.  When age and infirmity broke the iron sceptre of the king, my claims to the
throne were set aside, and my uncle, El Zagal, usurped my birthright.  Amidst open war and
secret treason I wrestled for my crown; and now, the sole sovereign of Granada, when, as I
fondly imagined, my uncle had lost all claim on the affections of my people by succumbing to
the Christian king, and accepting a fief under his dominion, I find that the very crime of
El Zagal is fixed upon me by my unhappy subjects--that they deem he would not have yielded
but for my supineness.  At the moment of my delivery from my rival, I am received with execration
by my subjects, and, driven into this my fortress of the Alhambra, dare not venture to head
my armies, or to face my people; yet am I called weak and irresolute, when strength and courage
are forbid me. And as the water glides from yonder rock, that hath no power to retain it, I
see the tide of empire welling from my hands."

The young king spoke warmly and bitterly; and, in the irritation of his thoughts, strode, while
he spoke, with rapid and irregular strides along the chamber.  Almamen marked his emotion with
an eye and lip of rigid composure.

"Light of the faithful," said he, when Boabdil had concluded, "the powers above never doom
man to perpetual sorrow, nor perpetual joy: the cloud and the sunshine are alike essential
to the heaven of our destinies; and if thou hast suffered in thy youth, thou hast exhausted
the calamities of fate, and thy manhood will be glorious, and thine age serene."

"Thou speakest as if the armies of Ferdinand were not already around my walls," said Boabdil,
impatiently.

"The armies of Sennacherib were as mighty," answered Almamen.

"Wise seer," returned the king, in a tone half sarcastic and half solemn, "we, the Mussulmans
of Spain, are not the blind fanatics of the Eastern world.  On us have fallen the lights of
philosophy and science; and if the more clear-sighted among us yet outwardly reverence the
forms and fables worshipped by the multitude, it is from the wisdom of policy, not the folly
of belief.  Talk not to me, then, of thine examples of the ancient and elder creeds: the agents
of God for this world are now, at least, in men, not angels; and if I wait till Ferdinand share
the destiny of Sennacherib, I wait only till the Standard of the Cross wave above the Vermilion
Towers."

"Yet," said Almamen, "while my lord the king rejects the fanaticism of belief, doth he reject
the fanaticism of persecution?  You disbelieve the stories of the Hebrews; yet you suffer the
Hebrews themselves, that ancient and kindred Arabian race, to be ground to the dust, condemned
and tortured by your judges, your informers, your soldiers, and your subjects."

"The base misers! they deserve their fate," answered Boabdil, loftily. "Gold is their god,
and the market-place their country; amidst the tears and groans of nations, they sympathise
only with the rise and fall of trade; and, the thieves of the universe! while their hand is
against every man's coffer, why wonder that they provoke the hand of every man against their
throats?  Worse than the tribe of Hanifa, who eat their god only in time of famine;--[The tribe
of Hanifa worshipped a lump of dough]--the race of Moisa--[Moses]--would sell the Seven Heavens
for the dent on the back of the date-stone."--[A proverb used in the Koran, signifying the
smallest possible trifle].

"Your laws leave them no ambition but that of avarice," replied Almamen; "and as the plant
will crook and distort its trunk, to raise its head through every obstacle to the sun, so the
mind of man twists and perverts itself, if legitimate openings are denied it, to find its natural
element in the gale of power, or the sunshine of esteem.  These Hebrews were not traffickers
and misers in their own sacred land when they routed your ancestors, the Arab armies of old;
and gnawed the flesh from their bones in famine, rather than yield a weaker city than Granada
to a mightier force than the holiday lords of Spain.  Let this pass.  My lord rejects the belief
in the agencies of the angels; doth he still retain belief in the wisdom of mortal men?"

"Yes!" returned Boabdil, quickly; "for of the one I know nought; of the other, mine own senses
can be the judge.  Almamen, my fiery kinsman, Muza, hath this evening been with me.  He hath
urged me to reject the fears of my people, which chain my panting spirit within these walls;
he hath urged me to gird on yonder shield and cimiter, and to appear in the Vivarrambla, at
the head of the nobles of Granada.  My heart leaps high at the thought! and if I cannot live,
at least I will die--a king!"

"It is nobly spoken," said Almamen, coldly.

"You approve, then, my design?"

"The friends of the king cannot approve the ambition of the king to die."

"Ha!" said Boabdil, in an altered voice, "thou thinkest, then, that I am doomed to perish in
this struggle?"

"As the hour shall be chosen, wilt thou fall or triumph."

"And that hour?"

"Is not yet come."

"Dost thou read the hour in the stars?"

"Let Moorish seers cultivate that frantic credulity: thy servant sees but in the stars worlds
mightier than this little earth, whose light would neither wane nor wink, if earth itself were
swept from the infinities of space."

"Mysterious man!" said Boabdil; "whence, then, is thy power?--whence thy knowledge of the future?"

Almamen approached the king, as he now stood by the open balcony.

"Behold!" said he, pointing to the waters of the Darro--"yonder stream is of an element in
which man cannot live nor breathe: above, in the thin and impalpable air, our steps cannot
find a footing, the armies of all earth cannot build an empire.  And yet, by the exercise of
a little art, the fishes and the birds, the inhabitants of the air and the water, minister
to our most humble wants, the most common of our enjoyments; so it is with the true science
of enchantment.  Thinkest thou that, while the petty surface of the world is crowded with living
things, there is no life in the vast centre within the earth, and the immense ether that surrounds
it?  As the fisherman snares his prey, as the fowler entraps the bird, so, by the art and genius
of our human mind, we may thrall and command the subtler beings of realms and elements which
our material bodies cannot enter--our gross senses cannot survey.  This, then, is my lore.
Of other worlds know I nought; but of the things of this world, whether men, or, as your legends
term them, ghouls and genii, I have learned something.  To the future, I myself am blind; but
I can invoke and conjure up those whose eyes are more piercing, whose natures are more gifted."

"Prove to me thy power," said Boabdil, awed less by the words than by the thrilling voice and
the impressive aspect of the enchanter.

"Is not the king's will my law?" answered Almamen; "be his will obeyed. To-morrow night I await
thee."

"Where?"

Almamen paused a moment, and then whispered a sentence in the king's ear: Boabdil started,
and turned pale.

"A fearful spot!"

"So is the Alhambra itself, great Boabdil; while Ferdinand is without the walls and Muza within
the city."

"Muza!  Darest thou mistrust my bravest warrior?"

"What wise king will trust the idol of the king's army?  Did Boabdil fall to-morrow by a chance
javelin, in the field, whom would the nobles and the warriors place upon his throne?  Doth
it require an enchanter's lore to whisper to thy heart the answer in the name of 'Muza'?"

"Oh, wretched state! oh, miserable king!" exclaimed Boabdil, in a tone of great anguish.  "I
never had a father.  I have now no people; a little while, and I shall have no country.  Am
I never to have a friend?"

"A friend! what king ever had?" returned Almamen, drily.

"Away, man--away!" cried Boabdil, as the impatient spirit of his rank and race shot dangerous
fire from his eyes; "your cold and bloodless wisdom freezes up all the veins of my manhood!
Glory, confidence, human sympathy, and feeling--your counsels annihilate them all.  Leave me!
I would be alone."

"We meet to-morrow, at midnight, mighty Boabdil," said Almamen, with his usual unmoved and
passionless tones.  "May the king live for ever."

The king turned; but his monitor had already disappeared.  He went as he came--noiseless and
sudden as a ghost.

CHAPTER III.

THE LOVERS.

When Muza parted from Almamen, he bent his steps towards the hill that rises opposite the ascent
crowned with the towers of the Alhambra; the sides and summit of which eminence were tenanted
by the luxurious population of the city.  He selected the more private and secluded paths;
and, half way up the hill, arrived, at last, before a low wall of considerable extent, which
girded the gardens of some wealthier inhabitant of the city.  He looked long and anxiously
round; all was solitary; nor was the stillness broken, save as an occasional breeze, from the
snowy heights of the Sierra Nevada, rustled the fragrant leaves of the citron and pomegranate;
or as the silver tinkling of waterfalls chimed melodiously within the gardens.  The Moor's
heart beat high: a moment more, and he had scaled the wall; and found himself upon a green
sward, variegated by the rich colours of many a sleeping flower, and shaded by groves and alleys
of luxuriant foliage and golden fruits.

It was not long before he stood beside a house that seemed of a construction anterior to the
Moorish dynasty.  It was built over low cloisters formed by heavy and timeworn pillars, concealed,
for the most part by a profusion of roses and creeping shrubs: the lattices above the cloisters
opened upon large gilded balconies, the super-addition of Moriscan taste.  In one only of the
casements a lamp was visible; the rest of the mansion was dark, as if, save in that chamber,
sleep kept watch over the inmates.  It was to this window that the Moor stole; and, after a
moment's pause, he murmured rather than sang, so low and whispered was his voice, the following
simple verses, slightly varied from an old Arabian poet:--

               Light of my soul, arise, arise!
               Thy sister lights are in the skies;
                         We want thine eyes,
                         Thy joyous eyes;
               The Night is mourning for thine eyes!
               The sacred verse is on my sword,
               But on my heart thy name
               The words on each alike adored;
               The truth of each the same,
               The same!--alas! too well I feel
               The heart is truer than the steel!
               Light of my soul! upon me shine;
               Night wakes her stars to envy mine.
                         Those eyes of thine,
                         Wild eyes of thine,
               What stars are like those eyes of thine?

As he concluded, the lattice softly opened; and a female form appeared on the balcony.

"Ah, Leila!" said the  Moor, "I see thee, and I am blessed!"

"Hush!" answered Leila; "speak low, nor tarry long I fear that our interviews are suspected;
and this," she added in a trembling voice, "may perhaps be the last time we shall meet."

"Holy Prophet!" exclaimed Muza, passionately, "what do I hear?  Why this mystery? why cannot
I learn thine origin, thy rank, thy parents?  Think you, beautiful Leila, that Granada holds
a rouse lofty enough to disdain the alliance with Muza Ben Abil Gazan? and oh!" he added (sinking
the haughty tones of his voice into accents of the softest tenderness), "if not too high to
scorn me, what should war against our loves and our bridals?  For worn equally on my heart
were the flower of thy sweet self, whether the mountain top or the valley gave birth to the
odour and the bloom."

"Alas!" answered Leila, weeping, "the mystery thou complainest of is as dark to myself as thee.
How often have I told thee that I know nothing of my birth or childish fortunes, save a dim
memory of a more distant and burning clime; where, amidst sands and wastes, springs the everlasting
cedar, and the camel grazes on stunted herbage withering in the fiery air?  Then, it seemed
to me that I had a mother: fond eyes looked on me, and soft songs hushed me into sleep."

"Thy mother's soul has passed into mine," said the Moor, tenderly.

Leila continued:--"Borne hither, I passed from childhood into youth within these walls.  Slaves
ministered to my slightest wish; and those who have seen both state and poverty, which I have
not, tell me that treasures and splendour, that might glad a monarch, are prodigalised around
me: but of ties and kindred know I little: my father, a stern and silent man, visits me but
rarely--sometimes months pass, and I see him not; but I feel he loves me; and, till I knew
thee, Muza, my brightest hours were in listening to the footsteps and flying to the arms of
that solitary friend."

"Know you not his name?"

"Nor, I nor any one of the household; save perhaps Ximen, the chief of the slaves, an old and
withered man, whose very eye chills me into fear and silence."

"Strange!" said the Moor, musingly; "yet why think you our love is discovered, or can be thwarted?"

"Hush!  Ximen sought me this day: 'Maiden,' said he, 'men's footsteps have been tracked within
the gardens; if your sire know this, you will have looked your last on Granada.  Learn,' he
added, in a softer voice, as he saw me tremble, 'that permission were easier given to thee
to wed the wild tiger than to mate with the loftiest noble of Morisca!  Beware!' He spoke,
and left me.  O Muza!" she continued, passionately wringing her hands, "my heart sinks within
me, and omen and doom rise dark before my sight!"

"By my father's head, these obstacles but fire my love, and I would scale to thy possession,
though every step in the ladder were the corpses of a hundred foes!"

Scarcely had the fiery and high-souled Moor uttered his boast, than, from some unseen hand
amidst the groves, a javelin whirred past him, and as the air it raised came sharp upon his
cheek, half buried its quivering shaft in the trunk of a tree behind him.

"Fly, fly, and save thyself!  O God, protect him!" cried Leila; and she vanished within the
chamber.

The Moor did not wait the result of a deadlier aim; he turned; yet, in the instinct of his
fierce nature, not from, but against, the foe; his drawn scimitar in his hand, the half-suppressed
cry of wrath trembling on his lips, he sprang forward in the direction the javelin had sped.
With eyes accustomed to the ambuscades of Moorish warfare, he searched eagerly, yet warily
through the dark and sighing foliage.  No sign of life met his gaze; and at length, grimly
and reluctantly, he retraced his steps, and quitted the demesnes; but just as he had cleared
the wall, a voice--low, but sharp and shrill--came from the gardens.

"Thou art spared," it said, "but, haply, for a more miserable doom!"

CHAPTER IV.

THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER.

The chamber into which Leila retreated bore out the character she had given of the interior
of her home.  The fashion of its ornament and decoration was foreign to that adopted by the
Moors of Granada.  It had a more massive and, if we may use the term, Egyptian gorgeousness.
The walls were covered with the stuffs of the East, stiff with gold, embroidered upon ground
of the deepest purple; strange characters, apparently in some foreign tongue, were wrought
in the tesselated cornices and on the heavy ceiling, which was supported by square pillars,
round which were twisted serpents of gold and enamel, with eyes to which enormous emeralds
gave a green and lifelike glare: various scrolls and musical instruments lay scattered upon
marble tables: and a solitary lamp of burnished silver cast a dim and subdued light around
the chamber.  The effect of the whole, though splendid, was gloomy, strange, and oppressive,
and rather suited to the thick and cave-like architecture which of old protected the inhabitants
of Thebes and Memphis from the rays of the African sun, than to the transparent heaven and
light pavilions of the graceful orientals of Granada.

Leila stood within this chamber, pale and breathless, with her lips apart, her hands clasped,
her very soul in her ears; nor was it possible to conceive a more perfect ideal of some delicate
and brilliant Peri, captured in the palace of a hostile and gloomy Genius.  Her form was of
the lightest shape consistent with the roundness of womanly beauty; and there was something
in it of that elastic and fawnlike grace which a sculptor seeks to embody in his dreams of
a being more aerial than those of earth.  Her luxuriant hair was dark indeed, but a purple
and glossy hue redeemed it from that heaviness of shade too common in the tresses of the Asiatics;
and her complexion, naturally pale but clear and lustrous, would have been deemed fair even
in the north.  Her features, slightly aquiline, were formed in the rarest mould of symmetry,
and her full rich lips disclosed teeth that might have shamed the pearl.  But the chief charm
of that exquisite countenance was in an expression of softness and purity, and intellectual
sentiment, that seldom accompanies that cast of loveliness, and was wholly foreign to the voluptuous
and dreamy languor of Moorish maidens; Leila had been educated, and the statue had received a soul.

After a few minutes of intense suspense, she again stole to the lattice, gently unclosed it,
and looked forth.  Far, through an opening amidst the trees, she descried for a single moment
the erect and stately figure of her lover, darkening the moonshine on the sward, as now, quitting
his fruitless search, he turned his lingering gaze towards the lattice of his beloved: the
thick and interlacing foliage quickly hid him from her eyes; but Leila had seen enough--she
turned within, and said, as grateful tears trickled clown her cheeks, and she sank on her knees
upon the piled cushions of the chamber: "God of my fathers!  I bless Thee--he is safe!"

"And yet (she added, as a painful thought crossed her), how may I pray for him? we kneel not
to the same Divinity; and I have been taught to loathe and shudder at his creed!  Alas! how
will this end?  Fatal was the hour when he first beheld me in yonder gardens; more fatal still
the hour in which he crossed the barrier, and told Leila that she was beloved by the hero whose
arm was the shelter, whose name is the blessing, of Granada.  Ah, me!  Ah, me!"

The young maiden covered her face with her hands, and sank into a passionate reverie, broken
only by her sobs.  Some time had passed in this undisturbed indulgence of her grief, when the
arras was gently put aside, and a man, of remarkable garb and mien, advanced into the chamber,
pausing as he beheld her dejected attitude, and gazing on her with a look on which pity and
tenderness seemed to struggle against habitual severity and sternness.

"Leila!" said the intruder.

Leila started, and and a deep blush suffused her countenance; she dashed the tears from her
eyes, and came forward with a vain attempt to smile.

"My father, welcome!"

The stranger seated himself on the cushions, and motioned Leila to his side.

"These tears are fresh upon thy cheek," said he, gravely; "they are the witness of thy race!
our daughters are born to weep, and our sons to groan! ashes are on the head of the mighty,
and the Fountains of the Beautiful run with gall!  Oh that we could but struggle--that we could
but dare--that we could raise up, our heads, and unite against the bondage of the evil doer!
It may not be--but one man shall avenge a nation!"

The dark face of Leila's father, well fitted to express powerful emotion, became terrible in
its wrath and passion; his brow and lip worked convulsively; but the paroxsym was brief; and
scarce could she shudder at its intensity ere it had subsided into calm.

"Enough of these thoughts, which thou, a woman and a child, art not formed to witness.  Leila,
thou hast been nurtured with tenderness, and schooled with care.  Harsh and unloving may I
have seemed to thee, but I would have shed the best drops of my heart to have saved thy young
years from a single pang.  Nay, listen to me silently.  That thou mightest one day be worthy
of thy race, and that thine hours might not pass in indolent and weary lassitude, thou hast
been taught lessons of a knowledge rarely to thy sex.  Not thine the lascivious arts of the
Moorish maidens; not thine their harlot songs, and their dances of lewd delight; thy delicate
limbs were but taught the attitude that Nature dedicates to the worship of a God, and the music
of thy voice was tuned to the songs of thy fallen country, sad with the memory of her wrongs,
animated with the names of her heroes, with the solemnity of her prayers. These scrolls, and
the lessons of our seers, have imparted to thee such of our science and our history as may
fit thy mind to aspire, and thy heart to feel for a sacred cause.  Thou listenest to me, Leila?"

Perplexed and wondering, for never before had her father addressed her in such a strain, the
maiden answered with an earnestness of manner that seemed to content the questioner; and he
resumed, with an altered, hollow, solemn voice:

"Then curse the persecutors.  Daughter of the great Hebrew race, arise and curse the Moorish
taskmaster and spoiler!"

As he spoke, the adjuror himself rose, lifting his right hand on high; while his left touched
the shoulder of the maiden.  But she, after gazing a moment in wild and terrified amazement
upon his face, fell cowering at his knees; and, clasping them imploringly, exclaimed in scarce
articulate murmurs:

"Oh, spare me! spare me!"

The Hebrew, for such he was, surveyed her, as she thus quailed at his feet, with a look of
rage and scorn: his hand wandered to his poniard, he half unsheathed it, thrust it back with
a muttered curse, and then, deliberately drawing it forth, cast it on the ground beside her.

"Degenerate girl!" he said, in accents that vainly struggled for calm, "if thou hast admitted
to thy heart one unworthy thought towards a Moorish infidel, dig deep and root it out, even
with the knife, and to the death--so wilt thou save this hand from that degrading task."

He drew himself hastily from her grasp, and left the unfortunate girl alone and senseless.

CHAPTER V.

AMBITION DISTORTED INTO VICE BY LAW.

On descending a broad flight of stairs from the apartment, the Hebrew encountered an old man,
habited in loose garments of silk and fur, upon whose withered and wrinkled face life seemed
scarcely to struggle against the advance of death--so haggard, wan, and corpse-like was its aspect.

"Ximen," said the Israelite, "trusty and beloved servant, follow me to the cavern."  He did
not tarry for an answer, but continued his way with rapid strides through various courts and
alleys, till he came at length into a narrow, dark, and damp gallery, that seemed cut from
the living rock.  At its entrance was a strong grate, which gave way to the Hebrew's touch
upon the spring, though the united strength of a hundred men could not have moved it from its
hinge.  Taking up a brazen lamp that burnt in a niche within it, the Hebrew paused impatiently
till the feeble steps of the old man reached the spot; and then, reclosing the grate, pursued
his winding way for a considerable distance, till he stopped suddenly by a part of the rock
which seemed in no respect different from the rest: and so artfully contrived and concealed
was the door which he now opened, and so suddenly did it yield to his hand, that it appeared
literally the effect of enchantment, when the rock yawned, and discovered a circular cavern,
lighted with brazen lamps, and spread with hangings and cushions of thick furs.  Upon rude
and seemingly natural pillars of rock, various antique and rusty arms were suspended; in large
niches were deposited scrolls, clasped and bound with iron; and a profusion of strange and
uncouth instruments and machines (in which modern science might, perhaps, discover the tools
of chemical invention) gave a magical and ominous aspect to the wild abode.

The Hebrew cast himself on a couch of furs; and, as the old man entered and closed the door,
"Ximen," said he, "fill out wine--it is a soothing counsellor, and I need it."

Extracting from one of the recesses of the cavern a flask and goblet, Ximen offered to his
lord a copious draught of the sparkling vintage of the Vega, which seemed to invigorate and
restore him.

"Old man," said he, concluding the potation with a deep-drawn sigh, "fill to thyself-drink
till thy veins feel young."

Ximen obeyed the mandate but imperfectly; the wine just touched his lips, and the goblet was
put aside.

"Ximen," resumed the Israelite, "how many of our race have been butchered by the avarice of
the Moorish kings since first thou didst set foot within the city?"

"Three thousand--the number was completed last winter, by the order of Jusef the vizier; and
their goods and coffers are transformed into shafts and cimiters against the dogs of Galilee."

"Three thousand--no more! three thousand only!  I would the number had been tripled, for the
interest is becoming due!"

"My brother, and my son, and my grandson, are among the number," said the old man, and his
face grew yet more deathlike.

"Their monuments shall be in hecatombs of their tyrants.  They shall not, at least, call the
Jews niggards in revenge."

"But pardon me, noble chief of a fallen people; thinkest thou we shall be less despoiled and
trodden under foot by yon haughty and stiff-necked Nazarenes, than by the Arabian misbelievers?"

"Accursed, in truth, are both," returned the Hebrew; "but the one promise more fairly than
the other.  I have seen this Ferdinand, and his proud queen; they are pledged to accord us
rights and immunities we have never known before in Europe."

"And they will not touch our traffic, our gains, our gold?"

"Out on thee!" cried the fiery Israelite, stamping on the ground.  "I would all the gold of
earth were sunk into the everlasting pit!  It is this mean, and miserable, and loathsome leprosy
of avarice, that gnaws away from our whole race the heart, the soul, nay--the very form, of
man! Many a time, when I have seen the lordly features of the descendants of Solomon and Joshua
(features that stamp the nobility of the eastern world born to mastery and command) sharpened
and furrowed by petty cares,--when I have looked upon the frame of the strong man bowed, like
a crawling reptile, to some huckstering bargainer of silks and unguents,--and heard the voice,
that should be raising the battle-cry, smoothed into fawning accents of base fear, or yet baser
hope,--I have asked myself, if I am indeed of the blood of Israel! and thanked the great Jehovah
that he hath spared me at least the curse that hath blasted my brotherhood into usurers and slaves"

Ximen prudently forbore an answer to enthusiasm which he neither shared nor understood; but,
after a brief silence, turned back the stream of the conversation.

"You resolve, then, upon prosecuting vengeance on the Moors, at whatsoever hazard of the broken
faith of these Nazarenes?"

"Ay, the vapour of human blood hath risen unto heaven, and, collected into thunder-clouds,
hangs over the doomed and guilty city.  And now, Ximen, I have a new cause for hatred to the
Moors: the flower that I have reared and watched, the spoiler hath sought to pluck it from
my hearth. Leila--thou hast guarded her ill, Ximen; and, wert thou not endeared to me by thy
very malice and vices, the rising sun should have seen thy trunk on the waters of the Darro."

"My lord," replied Ximen, "if thou, the wisest of our people, canst not guard a maiden from
love, how canst thou see crime in the dull eyes and numbed senses of a miserable old man?"

The Israelite did not answer, nor seem to hear this deprecatory remonstrance.  He appeared
rather occupied with his own thoughts; and, speaking to himself, he muttered, "It must be so:
the sacrifice is hard-- the danger great; but here, at least, it is more immediate.  It shall
be done.  Ximen," he continued, speaking aloud; "dost thou feel assured that even mine own
countrymen, mine own tribe, know me not as one of them? Were my despised birth and religion
published, my limbs would be torn asunder as an impostor; and all the arts of the Cabala could
not save me."

"Doubt not, great master; none in Granada, save thy faithful Ximen, know thy secret."

"So let me dream and hope.  And now to my work; for this night must be spent in toil."

The Hebrew drew before him some of the strange instruments we have described; and took from
the recesses in the rock several scrolls. The old man lay at his feet, ready to obey his behests;
but, to all appearance, rigid and motionless as the dead, whom his blanched hues and shrivelled
form resembled.  It was, indeed, as the picture of the enchanter at his work, and the corpse
of some man of old, revived from the grave to minister to his spells, and execute his commands.

Enough in the preceding conversation has transpired to convince the reader, that the Hebrew,
in whom he has already detected the Almamen of the Alhambra, was of no character common to
his tribe.  Of a lineage that shrouded itself in the darkness of his mysterious people, in
their day of power, and possessed of immense wealth, which threw into poverty the resources
of Gothic princes,--the youth of that remarkable man had been spent, not in traffic and merchandise
but travel and study.

As a child, his home had been in Granada.  He had seen his father butchered by the late king,
Muley Abul Hassan, without other crime than his reputed riches; and his body literally cut
open, to search for the jewels it was supposed he had swallowed.  He saw, and, boy as he was
he vowed revenge.  A distant kinsman bore the orphan to lands more secure from persecution;
and the art with which the Jews concealed their wealth, scattering it over various cities,
had secured to Almamen the treasures the tyrant of Granada had failed to grasp.

He had visited the greater part of the world then known; and resided for many years at the
court of the sultan of that hoary Egypt, which still retained its fame for abstruse science
and magic lore.  He had not in vain applied himself to such tempting and wild researches; and
had acquired many of those secrets now perhaps lost for ever to the world. We do not mean to
intimate that he attained to what legend and superstition impose upon our faith as the art
of sorcery.  He could neither command the elements nor pierce the veil of the future-scatter
armies with a word, nor pass from spot to spot by the utterance of a charmed formula.  But
men who, for ages, had passed their lives in attempting all the effects that can astonish and
awe the vulgar, could not but learn some secrets which all the more sober wisdom of modern
times would search ineffectually to solve or to revive.  And many of such arts, acquired mechanically
(their invention often the work of a chemical accident), those who attained to them could not
always explain, not account for the phenomena they created, so that the mightiness of their
own deceptions deceived themselves; and they often believed they were the masters of the Nature
to which they were, in reality, but erratic and wild disciples.  Of such was the student in
that grim cavern.  He was, in some measure, the dupe, partly of his own bewildered wisdom,
partly of the fervour of an imagination exceedingly high-wrought and enthusiastic. The last
product--the regulus--is again calcined, with the view of bringing the iron to the state of an oxide.
It is again melted, slagged, and run into pigs. In this last operation, the whole iron is
driven out in the slag, and the remainder--'white metal,' as it is called--is almost a pure
sulphuret of copper. The sulphur, having all along preserved its combination with the copper--a
fine illustration of the theory of chemical attraction--must now
at length be expelled.

This is effected by the last process of roasting. When in a state of fusion in the furnace, the
charge is exposed to a stream of air, in which case a double action ensues. Part of the oxygen
enters into combination with the sulphur, producing sulphurous acid, which is expelled in the
form of vapour, and part of it combines with the copper remaining in the furnace; this is
again run out into the form of pigs, and in this state it is termed 'blistered copper.' To produce
the finer kind of copper, another process has yet to be gone through; but for ordinary tough
copper, it is at once transferred to what we may describe as the last stage, and that is--

3. Refining.--We quote Mr Vivian:--'The pigs from the roasters are filled into the furnace through
a large door in the side: the heat is at first moderate, so as to complete the roasting or oxidising
process; after the charge is run down, and there is a good heat on the furnace, the front door
is taken down, and the slags skimmed off. An assay is then taken out by the refiner with a
small ladle, and broken in the vice; and from the general appearance of the metal in and out
of the furnace, the state of the fire, &c., he judges whether the toughening process may be proceeded
with, and can form some opinion as to the quantity of poles and charcoal
that will be required to render it malleable, or, as it is termed,
to bring it to the proper pitch.

The copper in this state is what is termed dry: it is brittle, of a deep-red colour, inclining to
purple, an open grain, and crystalline structure. In the process of toughening, the surface of the metal
in the furnace is first well covered with charcoal; a pole, commonly of birch, is then held into
the liquid metal, which causes considerable ebullition, owing to the evolution of gaseous matter;
and this operation of poling is continued, until, from the assays which the refiner from time
to time takes, he perceives that the grain, which gradually becomes finer, is perfectly closed.'
After some further manipulation of a similar kind, the refiner is at length satisfied of its
malleability, and that the copper is now in its proper place, as he terms it. It is then poured
out by means of iron ladles, coated with clay, into ingots or moulds of the different sizes required
by the manufacturer.

'This process of refining or toughening copper, is a delicate operation,
requiring great care and attention on the part of the refiner to keep
the metal in the malleable state.' It is also, beyond comparison,
the most beautiful sight in the copper-works.

At one particular stage of the process, we saw the mass of molten copper in the furnace--some
five or six tons--assume the most beautiful and resplendent appearance it was possible to imagine.
It was like a sea of 'burnished gold;' and, indeed, were it not for the intense heat, the
red-hot ladles of the workmen, and other little circumstances of the kind, the stranger would
have some difficulty in believing that he did not look upon a beautifully polished mirror.

We
have now come to the end of the smelting process; and have left ourselves
no room to describe the transformation into sheets, bars, bolts, and
boilerplates which the metal undergoes in the next department of the
works.

These, however, are a better understood series of operations, consisting, as they do, of the usual
and ordinary processes of rolling the hot metal between powerful iron rollers. Nor have we
space to allude even to the vastly numerous and varied applications of the metal; although we may
take the opportunity of briefly adverting to the recently discovered process of smelting copper
by electricity, and of inquiring into the probability of its ever
becoming an economical application.

It will be seen, in the first place, that the present mode of smelting copper, though simple in
theory, appears in practice extremely complex.

For this reason, within the last twenty-five years there have, we
believe, been as many patents taken out to simplify and hasten the
operation.


Presuming upon Boabdil's natural mildness, the vizier ventured to remonstrate,--to suggest
the danger of laying violent hands upon a chief so beloved,--and to inquire what cause should
be assigned for the outrage.

The veins swelled like cords upon Boabdil's brow, as he listened to the vizier; and his answer
was short and peremptory.

"Am I yet a king, that I should fear a subject, or excuse my will?  Thou hast my orders; there
are my signet and the firman: obedience or the bow-string!"

Never before had Boabdil so resembled his dread father in speech and air; the vizier trembled
to the soles of his feet, and withdrew in silence. Boabdil watched him depart; and then, clasping
his hands in great emotion, exclaimed, "O lips of the dead! ye have warned me; and to you I
sacrifice the friend of my youth."

On quitting Boabdil the vizier, taking with him some of those foreign slaves of a seraglio,
who know no sympathy with human passion outside its walls, bent his way to the palace of Muza,
sorely puzzled and perplexed. He did not, however, like to venture upon the hazard of the alarm
it might occasion throughout the neighbourhood, if he endeavoured, at so unseasonable an hour,
to force an entrance.  He resolved, rather, with his train to wait at a little distance, till,
with the growing dawn, the gates should be unclosed, and the inmates of the palace astir.

Accordingly, cursing his stars, and wondering at his mission, Jusef, and his silent and ominous
attendants, concealed themselves in a small copse adjoining the palace, until the daylight
fairly broke over the awakened city.  He then passed into the palace; and was conducted to
a hall, where he found the renowned Moslem already astir, and conferring with some Zegri captains
upon the tactics of a sortie designed for that day.

It was with so evident a reluctance and apprehension that Jusef approached the prince, that
the fierce and quick-sighted Zegris instantly suspected some evil intention in his visit; and
when Muza, in surprise, yielded to the prayer of the vizier for a private audience, it was
with scowling brows and sparkling eyes that the Moorish warriors left the darling of the nobles
alone with the messenger of their king.

"By the tomb of the prophet!" said one of the Zegris, as he quitted the hall, "the timid Boabdil
suspects our Ben Abil Gazan.  I learned of this before."

"Hush!" said another of the band; "let us watch.  If the king touch a hair of Muza's head,
Allah have mercy on his sins!"

Meanwhile, the vizier, in silence, showed to Muza the firman and the signet; and then, without
venturing to announce the place to which he was commissioned to conduct the prince, besought
him to follow at once.  Muza changed colour, but not with fear.

"Alas!" said he, in a tone of deep sorrow, "can it be that I have fallen under my royal kinsman's
suspicion or displeasure?  But no matter; proud to set to Granada an example of valour in her
defence, be it mine to set, also, an example of obedience to her king.  Go on--I will follow
thee. Yet stay, you will have no need of guards; let us depart by a private egress: the Zegris
might misgive, did they see me leave the palace with you at the very time the army are assembling
in the Vivarrambla, and awaiting my presence.  This way."

Thus saying, Muza, who, fierce as he was, obeyed every impulse that the oriental loyalty dictated
from a subject to a king, passed from the hall to a small door that admitted into the garden,
and in thoughtful silence accompanied the vizier towards the Alhambra. But however variable
the offers may be in this respect, they never vary much in regard to a single lot. Out of the return
of the twenty assayers of the different smelters, probably not a
half per cent. of difference will be found in their estimates of the
produce.  Muza thought
there was in those eyes a malign and hostile exultation; but Almamen, gravely saluting him,
passed on through the grove: the prince did not deign to look back, or he might once more have
encountered that withering gaze.

"Proud heathen!" muttered Almamen to himself, "thy father filled his treasuries from the gold
of many a tortured Hebrew; and even thou, too haughty to be the miser, hast been savage enough
to play the bigot.  Thy name is a curse in Israel; yet dost thou lust after the daughter of
our despised race, and, could defeated passion sting thee, I were avenged. Ay, sweep on, with
thy stately step and lofty crest-thou goest to chains, perhaps to death."

As Almamen thus vented his bitter spirit, the last gleam of the white robes of Muza vanished
from his gaze.  He paused a moment, turned away abruptly, and said, half aloud, "Vengeance,
not on one man only, but a whole race!  Now for the Nazarene."

