     5.  For not betraying the subject secretly, for a bribe, into the
     hands of bands of professional Thugs, to be murdered and robbed in
     the prince's back lot.

Those were rather common princely industries in the old times, but they and some others of
a harsh sort ceased long ago under English rule. Better industries have taken their place,
as this Address from the Jain community will show:

     "Your Highness,--We the undersigned members of the Jain community of
     Bombay have the pleasure to approach your Highness with the
     expression of our heartfelt congratulations on the recent conference
     on your Highness of the Knighthood of the Most Exalted Order of the
     Star of India.  Ten years ago we had the pleasure and privilege of
     welcoming your Highness to this city under circumstances which have
     made a memorable epoch in the history of your State, for had it not
     been for a generous and reasonable spirit that your Highness
     displayed in the negotiations between the Palitana Durbar and the
     Jain community, the conciliatory spirit that animated our people
     could not have borne fruit.  That was the first step in your
     Highness's administration, and it fitly elicited the praise of the
     Jain community, and of the Bombay Government.  A decade of your
     Highness's administration, combined with the abilities, training,
     and acquirements that your Highness brought to bear upon it, has
     justly earned for your Highness the unique and honourable
     distinction--the Knighthood of the Most Exalted Order of the Star of
     India, which we understand your Highness is the first to enjoy among
     Chiefs of your, Highness's rank and standing.  And we assure your
     Highness that for this mark of honour that has been conferred on you
     by Her Most Gracious Majesty, the Queen-Empress, we feel no less
     proud than your Highness.  Establishment of commercial factories,
     schools, hospitals, etc., by your Highness in your State has marked
     your Highness's career during these ten years, and we trust that
     your Highness will be spared to rule over your people with wisdom
     and foresight, and foster the many reforms that your Highness has
     been pleased to introduce in your State.  We again offer your
     Highness our warmest felicitations for the honour that has been
     conferred on you.  We beg to remain your Highness's obedient
     servants."

Factories, schools, hospitals, reforms.  The prince propagates that kind of things in the modern
times, and gets knighthood and guns for it.

After the address the prince responded with snap and brevity; spoke a moment with half a dozen
guests in English, and with an official or two in a native tongue; then the garlands were distributed
as usual, and the function ended.

CHAPTER XLII.

Each person is born to one possession which outvalues all his others--his
last breath.
                                  --Pudd'nhead Wilson's New Calendar.

Toward midnight, that night, there was another function.  This was a Hindoo wedding--no, I
think it was a betrothal ceremony.  Always before, we had driven through streets that were
multitudinous and tumultuous with picturesque native life, but now there was nothing of that.
We seemed to move through a city of the dead.  There was hardly a suggestion of life in those
still and vacant streets.  Even the crows were silent.  But everywhere on the ground lay sleeping
natives-hundreds and hundreds. They lay stretched at full length and tightly wrapped in blankets,
beads and all.  Their attitude and their rigidity counterfeited death.  The plague was not
in Bombay then, but it is devastating the city now.  The shops are deserted, now, half of the
people have fled, and of the remainder the smitten perish by shoals every day.  No doubt the
city looks now in the daytime as it looked then at night.  When we had pierced deep into the
native quarter and were threading its narrow dim lanes, we had to go carefully, for men were
stretched asleep all about and there was hardly room to drive between them.  And every now
and then a swarm of rats would scamper across past the horses' feet in the vague light--the
forbears of the rats that are carrying the plague from house to house in Bombay now. The shops
were but sheds, little booths open to the street; and the goods had been removed, and on the
counters families were sleeping, usually with an oil lamp present.  Recurrent dead  watches,
it looked like.

But at last we turned a corner and saw a great glare of light ahead.  It was the home of the
bride, wrapped in a perfect conflagration of illuminations,--mainly gas-work designs, gotten
up specially for the occasion.  Within was abundance of brilliancy--flames, costumes, colors,
decorations, mirrors--it was another Aladdin show.

The bride was a trim and comely little thing of twelve years, dressed as we would dress a boy,
though more expensively than we should do it, of course.  She moved about very much at her
ease, and stopped and talked with the guests and allowed her wedding jewelry to be examined.
It was very fine.  Particularly a rope of great diamonds, a lovely thing to look at and handle.
It had a great emerald hanging to it.

The bridegroom was not present.  He was having betrothal festivities of his own at his father's
house.  As I understood it, he and the bride were to entertain company every night and nearly
all night for a week or more, then get married, if alive.  Both of the children were a little
elderly, as brides and grooms go, in India--twelve; they ought to have been married a year
or two sooner; still to a, stranger twelve seems quite young enough.

A while after midnight a couple of celebrated and high-priced nautch-girls appeared in the
gorgeous place, and danced and sang.  With them were men who played upon strange instruments
which made uncanny noises of a sort to make one's flesh creep.  One of these instruments was
a pipe, and to its music the girls went through a performance which represented snake charming.
It seemed a doubtful sort of music to charm anything with, but a native gentleman assured me
that snakes like it and will come out of their holes and listen to it with every evidence of
refreshment And gratitude.  He said that at an entertainment in his grounds once, the pipe
brought out half a dozen snakes, and the music had to be stopped before they would be persuaded
to go.  Nobody wanted their company, for they were bold, familiar, and dangerous; but no one
would kill them, of course, for it is sinful for a Hindoo to kill any kind of a creature.

We withdrew from the festivities at two in the morning.  Another picture, then--but it has
lodged itself in my memory rather as a stage-scene than as a reality.  It is of a porch and
short flight of steps crowded with dark faces and ghostly-white draperies flooded with the
strong glare from the dazzling concentration of illuminations; and midway of the steps one
conspicuous figure for accent--a turbaned giant, with a name according to his size: Rao Bahadur
Baskirao Balinkanje Pitale, Vakeel to his Highness the Gaikwar of Baroda.  Without him the
picture would not have been complete; and if his name had been merely Smith, he wouldn't have
answered.  Close at hand on house-fronts on both sides of the narrow street were illuminations
of a kind commonly employed by the natives --scores of glass tumblers (containing tapers) fastened
a few in inches apart all over great latticed frames, forming starry constellations which showed
out vividly against their black back grounds.  As we  drew away into the distance down the
dim lanes the illuminations gathered together into a single mass, and glowed out of the enveloping
darkness like a sun.

Then again the deep silence, the skurrying rats, the dim forms stretched every-where on the
ground; and on either hand those open booths counterfeiting sepulchres, with counterfeit corpses
sleeping motionless in the flicker of the counterfeit death lamps.  And now, a year later,
when I read the cablegrams I seem to be reading of what I myself partly saw--saw before it
happened--in a prophetic dream, as it were.  One cablegram says, "Business in the native town
is about suspended.  Except the wailing and the tramp of the funerals.  There is but little
life or movement.  The closed shops exceed in number those that remain open." Another says
that 325,000 of the people have fled the city and are carrying the plague to the country. 
Three days later comes the news, "The population is reduced by half."  The refugees have carried
the disease to Karachi; "220 cases, 214 deaths."  A day or two later, "52 fresh cases, all
of which proved fatal."

The plague carries with it a terror which no other disease can excite; for of all diseases
known to men it is the deadliest--by far the deadliest.  "Fifty-two fresh cases--all fatal."
It is the Black Death alone that slays like that.  We can all imagine, after a fashion, the
desolation of a plague-stricken city, and the stupor of stillness broken at intervals by distant
bursts of wailing, marking the passing of funerals, here and there and yonder, but I suppose
it is not possible for us to realize to ourselves the nightmare of dread and fear that possesses
the living who are present in such a place and cannot get away.  That half million fled from
Bombay in a wild panic suggests to us something of what they were feeling, but perhaps not
even they could realize what the half million were feeling whom they left stranded behind to
face the stalking horror without chance of escape.

CHAPTER XLIII.

Hunger is the handmaid of genius
                                  --Pudd'nhead Wilson's New Calendar.

One day during our stay in Bombay there was a criminal trial of a most interesting sort, a
terribly realistic chapter out of the "Arabian Nights," a strange mixture of simplicities and
pieties and murderous practicalities, which brought back the forgotten days of Thuggee and
made them live again; in fact, even made them believable.  It was a case where a young girl
had been assassinated for the sake of her trifling ornaments, things not worth a laborer's
day's wages in America.  This thing could have been done in many other countries, but hardly
with the cold business-like depravity, absence of fear, absence of caution, destitution of
the sense of horror, repentance, remorse, exhibited in this case.  Elsewhere the murderer would
have done his crime secretly, by night, and without witnesses; his fears would have allowed
him no peace while the dead body was in his neighborhood; he would not have rested until he
had gotten it safe out of the way and hidden as effectually as he could hide it.  But this
Indian murderer does his deed in the full light of day, cares nothing for the society of witnesses,
is in no way incommoded by the presence of the corpse, takes his own time about disposing of
it, and the whole party are so indifferent, so phlegmatic, that they take their regular sleep
as if nothing was happening and no halters hanging over them; and these five bland people close
the episode with a religious service. The thing reads like a Meadows-Taylor Thug-tale of half
a century ago, as may be seen by the official report of the trial:

     "At the Mazagon Police Court yesterday, Superintendent Nolan again
     charged Tookaram Suntoo Savat Baya, woman, her daughter Krishni, and
     Gopal Yithoo Bhanayker, before Mr. Phiroze Hoshang Dastur, Fourth
     Presidency Magistrate, under sections 302 and 109 of the Code, with
     having on the night of the 30th of December last murdered a Hindoo
     girl named Cassi, aged 12, by strangulation, in the room of a chawl
     at Jakaria Bunder, on the Sewriroad, and also with aiding and
     abetting each other in the commission of the offense.

     "Mr. F. A. Little, Public Prosecutor, conducted the case on behalf
     of the Crown, the accused being undefended.

     "Mr. Little applied under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure
     Code to tender pardon to one of the accused, Krishni, woman, aged
     22, on her undertaking to make a true and full statement of facts
     under which the deceased girl Cassi was murdered.

     "The Magistrate having granted the Public Prosecutor's application,
     the accused Krishni went into the witness-box, and, on being
     examined by Mr. Little, made the following confession:--I am a
     mill-hand employed at the Jubilee Mill.  I recollect the day
     (Tuesday); on which the body of the deceased Cassi was found.
     Previous to that I attended the mill for half a day, and then
     returned home at 3 in the afternoon, when I saw five persons in the
     house, viz.: the first accused Tookaram, who is my paramour, my
     mother, the second accused Baya, the accused Gopal, and two guests
     named Ramji Daji and Annaji Gungaram.  Tookaram rented the room of
     the chawl situated at Jakaria Bunder-road from its owner,
     Girdharilal Radhakishan, and in that room I, my paramour, Tookaram,
     and his younger brother, Yesso Mahadhoo, live.  Since his arrival in
     Bombay from his native country Yesso came and lived with us.  When I
     returned from the mill on the afternoon of that day, I saw the two
     guests seated on a cot in the veranda, and a few minutes after the
     accused Gopal came and took his seat by their side, while I and my
     mother were seated inside the room.  Tookaram, who had gone out to
     fetch some 'pan' and betelnuts, on his return home had brought the
     two guests with him.  After returning home he gave them 'pan
     supari'.  While they were eating it my mother came out of the room
     and inquired of one of the guests, Ramji, what had happened to his
     foot, when he replied that he had tried many remedies, but they had
     done him no good.  My mother then took some rice in her hand and
     prophesied that the disease which Ramji was suffering from would not
     be cured until he returned to his native country.  In the meantime
     the deceased Casi came from the direction of an out-house, and stood
     in front on the threshold of our room with a 'lota' in her hand.
     Tookaram then told his two guests to leave the room, and they then
     went up the steps towards the quarry.  After the guests had gone
     away, Tookaram seized the deceased, who had come into the room, and
     he afterwards put a waistband around her, and tied her to a post
     which supports a loft. After doing this, he pressed the girl's
     throat, and, having tied her mouth with the 'dhotur' (now shown in
     Court), fastened it to the post.  Having killed the girl, Tookaram
     removed her gold head ornament and a gold 'putlee', and also took
     charge of her 'lota'. Besides these two ornaments Cassi had on her
     person ear-studs a nose-ring, some silver toe-rings, two necklaces,
     a pair of silver anklets and bracelets.  Tookaram afterwards tried
     to remove the silver amulets, the ear-studs, and the nose-ring; but
     he failed in his attempt.  While he was doing so, I, my mother, and
     Gopal were present.  After removing the two gold ornaments, he
     handed them over to Gopal, who was at the time standing near me.
     When he killed Cassi, Tookaram threatened to strangle me also if I
     informed any one of this.  Gopal and myself were then standing at
     the door of our room, and we both were threatened by Tookaram.  My
     mother, Baya, had seized the legs of the deceased at the time she
     was killed, and whilst she was being tied to the post.  Cassi then
     made a noise. Tookaram and my mother took part in killing the girl.
     After the murder her body was wrapped up in a mattress and kept on
     the loft over the door of our room.  When Cassi was strangled, the
     door of the room was fastened from the inside by Tookaram.  This
     deed was committed shortly after my return home from work in the
     mill. Tookaram put the body of the deceased in the mattress, and,
     after it was left on the loft, he went to have his head shaved by a
     barber named Sambhoo Raghoo, who lives only one door away from me.
     My mother and myself then remained in the possession of the
     information.  I was slapped and threatened by my paramour, Tookaram,
     and that was the only reason why I did not inform any one at that
     time.  When I told Tookaram that I would give information of the
     occurrence, he slapped me.  The accused Gopal was asked by Tookaram
     to go back to his room, and he did so, taking away with him the two
     gold ornaments and the 'lota'.  Yesso Mahadhoo, a brother-in-law of
     Tookaram, came to the house and asked Taokaram why he was washing,
     the water-pipe being just opposite.  Tookaram replied that he was
     washing his dhotur, as a fowl had polluted it.  About 6 o'clock of
     the evening of that day my mother gave me three pice and asked me to
     buy a cocoanut, and I gave the money to Yessoo, who went and fetched
     a cocoanut and some betel leaves.  When Yessoo and others were in
     the room I was bathing, and, after I finished my bath, my mother
     took the cocoanut and the betel leaves from Yessoo, and we five went
     to the sea.  The party consisted of Tookaram, my mother, Yessoo,
     Tookaram's younger brother, and myself.  On reaching the seashore,
     my mother made the offering to the sea, and prayed to be pardoned
     for what we had done.  Before we went to the sea, some one came to
     inquire after the girl Cassi.  The police and other people came to
     make these inquiries both before and after we left the house for the
     seashore.  The police questioned my mother about the girl, and she
     replied that Cassi had come to her door, but had left.  The next day
     the police questioned Tookaram, and he, too, gave a similar reply.
     This was said the same night when the search was made for the girl.
     After the offering was made to the sea, we partook of the cocoanut
     and returned home, when my mother gave me some food; but Tookaram
     did not partake of any food that night.  After dinner I and my
     mother slept inside the room, and Tookaram slept on a cot near his
     brother-in-law, Yessoo Mahadhoo, just outside the door.  That was
     not the usual place where Tookaram slept.  He usually slept inside
     the room.  The body of the deceased remained on the loft when I went
     to sleep.  The room in which we slept was locked, and I heard that
     my paramour, Tookaram, was restless outside.  About 3 o'clock the
     following morning Tookaram knocked at the door, when both myself and
     my mother opened it.  He then told me to go to the steps leading to
     the quarry, and see if any one was about.  Those steps lead to a
     stable, through which we go to the quarry at the back of the
     compound.  When I got to the steps I saw no one there.  Tookaram
     asked me if any one was there, and I replied that I could see no one
     about.  He then took the body of the deceased from the loft, and
     having wrapped it up in his saree, asked me to accompany him to the
     steps of the quarry, and I did so.  The 'saree' now produced here
     was the same.  Besides the 'saree', there was also a 'cholee' on the
     body.  He then carried the body in his arms, and went up the steps,
     through the stable, and then to the right hand towards a Sahib's
     bungalow, where Tookaram placed the body near a wall.  All the time
     I and my mother were with him.  When the body was taken down, Yessoo
     was lying on the cot.  After depositing the body under the wall, we
     all returned home, and soon after 5 a.m.  the police again came and
     took Tookaram away.  About an hour after they returned and took me
     and my mother away.  We were questioned about it, when I made a
     statement.  Two hours later I was taken to the room, and I pointed
     out this waistband, the 'dhotur', the mattress, and the wooden post
     to Superintendent Nolan and Inspectors Roberts and Rashanali, in the
     presence of my mother and Tookaram.  Tookaram killed the girl Cassi
     for her ornaments, which he wanted for the girl to whom he was
     shortly going to be married.  The body was found in the same place
     where it was deposited by Tookaram."

The criminal side of the native has always been picturesque, always readable.  The Thuggee
and one or two other particularly outrageous features of it have been suppressed by the English,
but there is enough of it left to keep it darkly interesting.  One finds evidence of these
survivals in the newspapers.

That was nearly a century and a quarter ago.  An article in one of the chief journals of India
(the Pioneer) shows that in some respects the native of to-day is just what his ancestor was
then.  Here are niceties of so subtle and delicate a sort that they lift their breed of rascality
to a place among the fine arts, and almost entitle it to respect:

     "The records of the Indian courts might certainly be relied upon to
     prove that swindlers as a class in the East come very close to, if
     they do not surpass, in brilliancy of execution and originality of
     design the most expert of their fraternity in Europe and America.
     India in especial is the home of forgery.  There are some particular
     districts which are noted as marts for the finest specimens of the
     forger's handiwork.  The business is carried on by firms who possess
     stores of stamped papers to suit every emergency.  They habitually
     lay in a store of fresh stamped papers every year, and some of the
     older and more thriving houses can supply documents for the past
     forty years, bearing the proper water-mark and possessing the
     genuine appearance of age.  Other districts have earned notoriety
     for skilled perjury, a pre-eminence that excites a respectful
     admiration when one thinks of the universal prevalence of the art,
     and persons desirous of succeeding in false suits are ready to pay
     handsomely to avail themselves of the services of these local
     experts as witnesses."

Various instances illustrative of the methods of these swindlers are given.  They exhibit deep
cunning and total depravity on the part of the swindler and his pals, and more obtuseness on
the part of the victim than one would expect to find in a country where suspicion of your neighbor
must surely be one of the earliest things learned.  The favorite subject is the young fool
who has just come into a fortune and is trying to see how poor a use he can put it to.  I will
quote one example:

     "Sometimes another form of confidence trick is adopted, which is
     invariably successful.  The particular pigeon is spotted, and, his
     acquaintance having been made, he is encouraged in every form of
     vice.  When the friendship is thoroughly established, the swindler
     remarks to the young man that he has a brother who has asked him to
     lend him Rs.10,000.  The swindler says he has the money and would
     lend it; but, as the borrower is his brother, he cannot charge
     interest.  So he proposes that he should hand the dupe the money,
     and the latter should lend it to the swindler's brother, exacting a
     heavy pre-payment of interest which, it is pointed out, they may
     equally enjoy in dissipation.  The dupe sees no objection, and on
     the appointed day receives Rs.7,000 from the swindler, which he
     hands over to the confederate.  The latter is profuse in his thanks,
     and executes a promissory note for Rs.10,000, payable to bearer.
     The swindler allows the scheme to remain quiescent for a time, and
     then suggests that, as the money has not been repaid and as it would
     be unpleasant to sue his brother, it would be better to sell the
     note in the bazaar.  The dupe hands the note over, for the money he
     advanced was not his, and, on being informed that it would be
     necessary to have his signature on the back so as to render the
     security negotiable, he signs without any hesitation.  The swindler
     passes it on to confederates, and the latter employ a respectable
     firm of solicitors to ask the dupe if his signature is genuine.  He
     admits it at once, and his fate is sealed.  A suit is filed by a
     confederate against the dupe, two accomplices being made
     co-defendants.  They admit their Signatures as indorsers, and the
     one swears he bought the note for value from the dupe.  The latter
     has no defense, for no court would believe the apparently idle
     explanation of the manner in which he came to endorse the note."

There is only one India!  It is the only country that has a monopoly of grand and imposing
specialties.  When another country has a remarkable thing, it cannot have it all to itself--some
other country has a duplicate.  But India--that is different.  Its marvels are its own; the
patents cannot be infringed; imitations are not possible.  And think of the size of them, the
majesty of them, the weird and outlandish character of the most of them!

There is the Plague, the Black Death: India invented it; India is the cradle of that mighty birth.

The Car of Juggernaut was India's invention.

So was the Suttee; and within the time of men still living eight hundred widows willingly,
and, in fact, rejoicingly, burned themselves to death on the bodies of their dead husbands
in a single year.  Eight hundred would do it this year if the British government would let them.

Famine is India's specialty.  Elsewhere famines are inconsequential incidents--in India they
are devastating cataclysms; in one case they annihilate hundreds; in the other, millions.

India had 2,000,000 gods, and worships them all.  In religion all other countries are paupers;
India is the only millionaire.

With her everything is on a giant scale--even her poverty; no other country can show anything
to compare with it.  And she has been used to wealth on so vast a scale that she has to shorten
to single words the expressions describing great sums.  She describes 100,000 with one word
--a 'lahk'; she describes ten millions with one word--a 'crore'.

In the bowels of the granite mountains she has patiently carved out dozens of vast temples,
and made them glorious with sculptured colonnades and stately groups of statuary, and has adorned
the eternal walls with noble paintings.  She has built fortresses of such magnitude that the
show-strongholds of the rest of the world are but modest little things by comparison; palaces
that are wonders for rarity of materials, delicacy and beauty of workmanship, and for cost;
and one tomb which men go around the globe to see.  It takes eighty nations, speaking eighty
languages, to people her, and they number three hundred millions.

