

Notwithstanding the inconveniences to which the men were subjected, and the advance to midwinter,
the weather was in our favor. The sun shone brightly, the days were warm and the roads dry.
It became evident that General Burnside was determined not to allow the delightful weather
and the excellent roads to pass unimproved. Indications of a general movement crowded upon
us, and on the 20th of January came the order to march.

The whole army broke camp and moved toward Banks' Ford, two miles up the river from White Oak
Church. On the march, an order from the commanding general was read to the troops, announcing
to them that the auspicious moment had at length arrived when we were to reap the glorious
fruits of our long toils. At five o'clock we halted in the thick woods at Banks' Ford, the
point selected for crossing the river, and in a few minutes were quietly and comfortably bivouacked
out of sight of rebels on the opposite side. Scarcely had we settled ourselves for a comfortable
night's rest, when the clouds, which had been gathering since morning, broke in rain, and the
delightful Indian summer gave way to the rainy winter of the south. All night long the rain
poured, and all the next day. It was evident we had waited too long. But the commander was
determined not to abandon his effort to outflank the enemy. By morning, the roads were so softened
by the rain, that horses could not haul artillery or pontoons into position. Men took the place
of horses. The whole Vermont brigade was detailed to drag the pontoons and guns to the river.
All day long, working and tugging with the mud above their knees; here a hundred men pulling
at a pontoon boat, there a party prying a cannon out of the mire with long levers, and still
other parties laying strips of corduroy road. The Vermonters passed a disagreeable day.

General Burnside was not idle all this while. Riding from one point to another, now personally
superintending the placing of a battery in position on the bank of the river, now encouraging
the men who lugged at the boats and guns, and now selecting places to cut new roads, he passed
the night and the day in fatiguing and anxious labor. As he rode through the camp of our division
in the afternoon, with only two staff officers, himself and his horse completely covered with
mud, the rim of his hat turned down to shed the rain, his face careworn with this unexpected
disarrangement of his plans, we could but think that the soldier on foot, arm oppressed with
the weight of knapsack, haversack and gun, bore an easy load compared with that of the commander
of the army, who now saw departing his hopes of redeeming the prestige he had lost at Fredericksburgh.

Men were detailed from each of the regiments of the corps to return to Falmouth, a distance
of five miles, to bring on their backs two days' rations; those brought by the men being nearly
exhausted. But during the night it was determined to abandon the attempt to cross the river.
The enemy, by this time fully aware of our intention, was prepared for us, and a crossing could
only be made at great sacrifice, perhaps with defeat. So at sunrise in the morning we were
on the road back to our old camp; this time for permanent winter quarters. All along the road
lay a multitude of dead horses and mules, which had fallen in the tremendous but unavailing
efforts of the day before. Artillery and wagons still stuck fast in the mud, and cannoniers
and teamsters lifted and tugged with rails and with poles to raise the piece or the wagon from
the mire.

The mud was deep, the day was gloomy and the men were discouraged. They straggled badly. Regiments
were not to be distinguished. The whole column became an unorganized crowd, pressing toward
the old camps. Tired and discouraged as were the men, they kept up their lively sallies and
jokes, as though all was smooth work. Toward evening the troops of our corps arrived on their
old ground, now to be our home until the opening of spring, and at once fell to work to restore
to some degree of comfort that most desolate of scenes, an abandoned camp. Unfortunately, on
leaving the place, little thinking that they were so soon to return, they had burned everything
combustible, and thus a strip of board or a piece of timber could hardly be found within the
limits of the corps. Nevertheless, comfortable quarters were soon erected, and the routine
of drills and picket was resumed.

Brigadier-General Neill, who was assigned to the command of the Third brigade, was active in
encouraging his men to provide good quarters, and in furnishing every facility in his power
to make them comfortable. The general was a portly gentleman, with light red hair and whiskers,
and a small blue eye, ceremonious in his style, and a perfect pattern of courtliness. He had,
at West Point, won the appellation of "Beau Neill," a title which never left him. He was a
good commander in camp. He originated the brigade dress parade that winter, often calling out
the brigade on fine evenings, and substituting the brigade for the regimental parade. The custom
was at length adopted in many brigades in the army of the Potomac; but few gave credit for
the improved parade to the originator of it.

The second failure of General Burnside rendered his removal from the command of the army a
thing to be expected; and no one was surprised when the order came relieving him, and assigning
General Hooker to the command. It must be confessed that our failure at Bank's Ford had done
much to demoralize the army and destroy the confidence in the commanding general so absolutely
necessary to success. On our way back from Bank's Ford, as we passed Fredericksburgh, we saw
huge placards posted up by the rebels with taunting inscriptions, such as "Burnside stuck in
the mud," printed in conspicuous letters. The men caught up the words, and "Burnside stuck
in the mud" passed from one end of the disordered column to the other. When we had failed at
Fredericksburgh, the men were as willing as ever to try again under the same commander. They
believed him to be at least earnest and brave. They knew that he was noble and self-sacrificing. In
the year eighteen-twenty the Reverend Patrick Brontë and his wife Maria brought their six
children, Maria, Elizabeth, Charlotte, Patrick Branwell, Emily, and Anne, from Thornton, where
they were born, to Haworth. Mr. Brontë was an Irishman, a village schoolmaster who won, marvellously,
a scholarship that admitted him to Cambridge and the Church of England. Tales have been told of his
fathers and his forefathers, peasants and peasant farmers of Ballynaskeagh
in County Down.

General Hooker had fairly won the title of "Fighting Joe" at the slaughter of Williamsburgh,
where, almost single-handed with his division, he had stemmed the tide of battle for hours,
until reinforced by Kearney, and then, with the help of that hero, had held the whole rebel
army until it was outflanked by our Second division.

In all the battles of the Peninsula he had been conspicuous, and at South Mountain and Antietam
his fighting propensities were exhibited in more than their wonted splendor. In person he was
of large stature, with fine features, brilliant eye, his side whiskers and ruddy countenance
giving a more youthful appearance than his light gray hair would indicate. His gleaming eye
told of the spirit which animated the man, and his determined air betokened the persistent
and fearless soldier. In battle or on review he rode a magnificent milk white steed, a powerful
animal and of extraordinary fleetness. Mounted on this superb war horse, he was the most conspicuous,
as he was always one of the handsomest men in the army.

The energy of the new commander soon began to be manifested in the reconstruction and reorganization
of the whole army. The first step in the progress of reconstruction, was the revocation of
the order making three grand divisions of the army. By the abolition of the grand divisions,
Generals Sumner and Franklin were relieved from their commands; and the corps commanders, no
longer subject to intermediate commanders, were again directly responsible to the general-in-chief
of the army. Doubtless General Hooker had seen that the creation of these grand divisions had
much to do with the failures of General Burnside.

The cavalry next engaged the attention of the general. The whole force was thoroughly reorganized
and put in an efficient condition, under command of Major-General Stoneman. Hereafter, men
were not to ask, "Who ever saw a dead cavalryman?" To General Hooker, the cavalry of the Army
of the Potomac owes its efficiency and the glorious record it from that time made for itself.

The superiority of the rebel cavalry, in the early part of the war, was generally attributed
to the supposed fact that the young men of the south were so much better horsemen than those
of the north. In reality, this had little, if anything, to do with it. It is even very doubtful
if there was any difference in favor of the superior horsemanship of the southern cavalry.
Their strength lay in their union. The rebel cavalry was organized from the beginning; ours
was an incoherent mass of men, having no proper relations or dependencies within itself. From
the day that it became organized, the superiority of the rebel cavalry passed away forever.
We had always better horses, and our men were certainly never inferior to the rebels. All that
was needed was the proper combination of action; and, as soon as this was secured, our cavalry
became the finest in the world.

The business departments were also thoroughly renovated. The changes in the medical, quartermasters'
and commissary departments were such as to bring each to a standard of perfection, which had
never before been reached by those departments of any army in the field. No army had ever been
provisioned as was ours that winter. Soft bread, potatoes, beets, carrots, onions, fresh beef,
flour, sugar and coffee, constituted the regular rations of the men, and facilities were afforded
for procuring luxuries not in the regular supply.

The medical department became so thoroughly systematized, that wounded and sick men were cared
for better than they had ever been in an army before. This radical change had commenced under
General Burnside; but was perfected under General Hooker, by the efficient and earnest medical
director of the army, Dr. Letterman; to whom belongs the honor of bringing about this most
desirable change.

By the new system, the surgeons were enabled to accomplish a far greater amount of work, and
in much better order than under the old; and the wounded were better and more quickly cared
for. By this system the hospital of the division was the unit. From the division, a medical
officer of good executive ability was selected, to whom was assigned the general oversight
of the hospital. One or more surgeons of well known skill and experience were detailed from
the medical force of the division, who were known as "operating surgeons;" to each of whom
was assigned three assistants, also known to be skillful men, who were either surgeons or assistant
surgeons. To the operating surgeons all cases requiring surgical operations were brought, and
thus the wounded men had the benefit of the very best talent and experience in the division,
in the decision of the question whether he should be submitted to the use of the knife, and
in the performance of the operation in case one was required. It was a mistaken impression
among those at home, that each medical officer was the operating surgeon for his own men. Only
about one in fifteen of the medical officers was intrusted with operations.

From each brigade an assistant surgeon was detailed to provide food and shelter for the wounded.
His duty was to superintend the erection of hospital tents as soon as there was a prospect
of an engagement, and to have hot coffee and rations of food ready for the wounded as soon
as they came to the hospital; he was to attend to their clothing, bedding and rations as long
as they remained in the hospital.

Another assistant surgeon from each brigade was selected to keep the records; to take the name
and character of wound of every one who was brought to the hospital, with the operation, if
any; and the list of deaths, the place of burial, and all other matters necessary to record.
An assistant surgeon was to remain with each regiment, and attend to getting the wounded from
the field into the ambulances, and to arrest hemorrhage in case of necessity.

Thus, all labor was systematized. Every officer and nurse knew exactly what to do: each had
his own part of the work assigned to him, and there was no conflicting of orders or clashing
of opinions.

Our ambulance system was also very perfect--so complete, indeed, that, after a year of trial
in the Army of the Potomac, congress adopted it as the ambulance system of the United States.
To Doctor Letterman, also, belongs the honor of originating this system.

The ambulances of each corps were under command of a captain, who acted under directions from
the medical director of the corps. In a final letter Branwell inquires whether Mr. Blackwood
thinks his magazine "so perfect that no addition to its power would be either possible or desirable", and whether
it is pride that actuates him, or custom, or prejudice, and conjures him: "Be a man, sir!"

Nothing came of it. Mr. Blackwood refused to be a man.

Yet Branwell had his chance. He went to London, but nothing came of it. He went to Bradford and
had a studio there, but nothing came of it. He lived for a brief
period in a small provincial Bohemia. It was his best and happiest
period, but nothing came of it beyond the letters and the reams of
verse he sent to Leyland the sculptor. There was something brilliant
and fantastic about the boy that fascinated Leyland.
As soon as a man was wounded, he was brought to the medical officer, put into an ambulance,
and taken to the division hospital. By this means, ordinarily, every man was carried to the
hospital of his own division.

The improvements in the quartermasters' department were nearly as great; and we have already
alluded to the abundant supplies furnished by the commissary department.

Great difficulty was experienced by the troops of our corps in getting wood. The men of our
Second division lugged wood on their backs a mile and a half, with which to do their cooking
and warm their tents. But notwithstanding the hardships they endured, the inclemency of the
winter, and their severe picket duty, the men were gay. In many of the regiments, the sounds
of the guitar and accordion could be heard every evening; and on pleasant afternoons and evenings,
parties assembled in the company streets and danced cotillions, and polkas, and jigs, to the
music of violins. When snow covered the ground, mimic battles with snowballs were a frequent
amusement. At times, one regiment would challenge another, and a general melee would follow.
Snowballing was, particularly, a favorite amusement with our friends of the Twenty-first New
Jersey, who never let an opportunity pass for indulging in their favorite sport. Each party
carried its flags and was led by officers chosen for the occasion. The capture of a flag, or
of a number of prisoners, from an opposite party, caused great glee among the victors. A good
deal of interest was excited throughout the Second division by a snowball battle between one
of the Vermont regiments and the Twenty-sixth New Jersey. Both regiments formed in line of
battle, each officered by its line and field officers, the latter mounted. At the signal, the
battle commenced; charges and counter-charges were made, prisoners were taken on either side,
the air was filled with the white missiles, and stentorian cheers went up as one or other party
gained an advantage. At length victory rested with the Vermonters, and the Jersey boys surrendered
the field, defeated.

Another favorite amusement in the corps was the game of base ball. There were many excellent
players in the different regiments, and it was common for the ball-players of one regiment
or brigade to challenge another regiment or brigade. These matches were watched by great crowds
of soldiers with intense interest.

In our Seventy-seventh regiment, matters went on much the same as in other regiments of the
corps. We had our share of disease and desertions. We had our ball-players and our violinists;
our singers and our story-tellers, as every regiment had. At regimental head-quarters, matters
went on gaily. It was the custom of the officers of the field and staff to collect in one of
the tents as evening came on, and, in company with friends from other regiments, pass the hours
in lively converse, in singing and relating amusing stories.

We had a glee book and an old copy of the "Carmina Sacra," and then our friend, Colonel, now
Major-General, Connor, was never at a loss for a song, and Colonel French often displayed his
genius with the violin, and our friend, the chaplain, could always tell a good story or perpetrate
a joke. Chaplain Norman Fox was an accession to our staff, who joined us when we first encamped
at White Oak Church. He was a gentleman of enterprise and talent, who, soon after his arrival
in camp, instituted a series of religious meetings on week days, in addition to the regular
services of the Sabbath, and a good deal of religious interest was awakened among the men.

Among other changes, we lost one of our most valuable and beloved officers. Dr. Campbell, who
had for weeks been declining in health, was obliged to resign. The doctor was a most genial
and companionable man, and an excellent officer. We greatly missed his hearty laugh, his fund
of stories and ready wit in our social gatherings. The doctor was afterward appointed surgeon
of the Fortieth New York, but was attacked with spotted fever, from which he recovered only
after a long illness, during which he again resigned.

The First brigade, Second division, which for some time past had been under command of General
Calvin A. Pratt, was broken up, and a new brigade, called the "Light division," was formed
from the regiments of the First brigade, and one regiment from each the First and Third divisions.
The regiments were, the Fifth Wisconsin, the Sixth Maine, the Thirty-first and Forty-third
New York, and the Sixty-first Pennsylvania. Colonel Burnham, of the Sixth Maine, was placed
in command.

Among other reviews in the Sixth corps during the winter, was one by General Hooker, of our
Second division and the Light division. The troops were formed in line, and the general and
staff were escorted to the ground by the Twentieth New York, of Neill's brigade, in splendid
style. The regiment was composed entirely of German Turners. Their drill surpassed that of
any regiment of regulars, and the exquisite neatness they displayed in their dress and in the
care of their equipments, together with the perfection of their movements, made them the finest
appearing regiment in the service, when on parade. It is to be regretted that the prestige
of the regiment was not always sustained on the battle-field. As the regiment and cavalcade
appeared on the field, it was a brilliant pageant; first came our brigade band, one of the
finest in the army, then the pioneers of the Twentieth, their axes, shovels and picks polished
so that they glistened in the sunlight like burnished silver; then the Twentieth regiment,
in column by company, marching with step as perfect as though all were directed by a single
will; following the regiment, rode General Hooker on his superb white horse, a head and shoulders
above all his cavalcade. The immense suite, consisting of General Hooker's own staff, and a
large number of major-generals and their staffs, completed the brilliant column. The division
was drawn up in a line, stretching a half a mile across the field, straight as the flight of
an arrow, with artillery on either flank. The general and his brilliant retinue, rode to the
right of the line, and advanced slowly along the front of the whole division, inspecting closely
each regiment as he passed, the bands playing "Hail to the Chief," the colors dipping, and
the bugles pealing notes of welcome. Having passed the entire front of the line, the chief
now rode at a rapid pace along its rear to the point of beginning. He then, with his attendants,
took a position on a slight elevation of ground at a distance from the line, when the whole
division, in column, marching to the place, passed in review before him, and the pageant was ended.

An important change in the command of our corps occurred about this time. General Smith, who
had so long commanded our division, and for some time past our Sixth corps, was relieved of
his command, and ordered to the department of North Carolina. His successor was General John
Sedgwick, then well known as one of our best division commanders, and one of the sternest soldiers
in the Army of the Potomac. Bred as a soldier, he had served with great distinction in Mexico,
and at the breaking out of the rebellion he had joined the Union army, and was soon placed
in command of a division in Sumner's corps, which, under his command, became the best division
of the corps, as the Sixth corps became the best in the army. Modest and retiring in his ordinary
intercourse with his fellows, he exhibited the most brilliant qualities in time of battle.
The dignity of his bearing fitted him to command, and he needed not the insignia of rank to
command the deference of those about him.

None who witnessed the farewell reception of General Smith, will forget the scene at corps
head-quarters. The two generals, the old and loved leader of the Second division and of the
corps, and the new commander, stood side by side. General Smith, tall, well dressed, his regulation
coat buttoned closely about him, his easy and graceful manner and conversation; General Sedgwick,
of stouter build, wearing a loose blouse and coarse blue pants, such as are furnished the private
soldier, strong and manly in his appearance, and somewhat abrupt in his manner. Officers returned
to their camps satisfied that although the corps had lost a favorite commander, it had also
gained a brave leader.

One of the grand events of the winter was the review of the whole army by President Lincoln.
The review continued two days. The first was occupied in reviewing the Second, Fifth, Sixth
and Third corps; the second of the remaining corps. It was a most imposing spectacle, never
to be forgotten by those who were actors or spectators. The President, in his civilian's dress
and tall hat, accompanied by General Hooker, and followed by an immense suite, was welcomed
by the thundering of artillery as it fired the national salute. The different corps were drawn
up in line, each occupying a plain within sight of the others. Riding in front of the corps,
the President and the immense cavalcade passed along the whole line, inspecting carefully each
regiment, then returned in the rear. This inspection over, the President and staff stationed
themselves in some favorable position, and the whole corps passed in review before him. The
same process was repeated with each corps.

How one unaccustomed to such physical fatigues could endure such labor, commencing early in
the morning and only resting at dark, was a wonder. It seemed as if the President's physical,
like his mental constitution, could bear up under the most trying and continued labors.

On Tuesday, the 28th of April, the Sixth corps received orders to break up its camp and be
ready to march at a moment's notice. Eight days' rations had been issued to the men, who were
in the highest spirits, having forgotten all their former discouragements, and were now only
anxious for an encounter with the enemy. A storm of rain of some violence set in on the morning
of the 28th, which rendered marching difficult. At twelve o'clock we received the order to
"fall in," and in five minutes we were on our way to take our place in the line of battle.
A march of six miles through thickets and bogs, brought us to the rear of Falmouth Station,
at a short distance from the river. Here we bivouacked for the night, and were awakened before
daylight in the morning by the sound of artillery and musketry at the river, where Russell's
brigade, of the First division, was forcing a passage across the stream. The Second division
only had been allowed to rest quietly during the night. The men of the Light brigade had toiled
from dark until nearly dawn, carrying the pontoon boats on their shoulders to the river side,
and launching them in the stream. So noiselessly had they conducted their operations, that
the pickets of the enemy took no alarm until they suddenly saw the braves of Russell's brigade
approaching in the boats, just as dawn was breaking. The astonished confederates fired a few
volleys of musketry, and our guns threw among them a few charges of cannister, and the rebels
fled precipitately. A number of prisoners were captured, among them the officer of the picket-guard.
Colonel Irwin, of the Forty-ninth Pennsylvania, who had, at Antietam, commanded the Third brigade
of the Second division, was among the wounded on our side.

At sunrise the Second division filed down to the river side, and took position in line of battle.
Our horses cropped the green blades which had sprung from the grain scattered for their food
nearly five months before. The division was upon the very spot where it lay before, at the
first battle of Fredericksburgh. The bridge also was in the same place that Franklin's bridge
had been. The point was known as Franklin's Crossing.

The First division of our corps (Brook's) was on the other side of the river, holding the plain
for some distance. The pickets of that division formed the half of a circle of about three-fourths
of a mile in diameter, the center being at the pontoon bridge, where some earthworks were thrown
up. At our left, about a mile down the river, the First corps had also effected a crossing.
The rebels had offered strong resistance, but the crossing was gallantly accomplished by Wadsworth's
division in boats. Like the First division of our own corps, Wadsworth's division was holding
a semi-circular portion of the plateau; but being able to maintain the position by some fighting.

Sickles' Third corps was upon the high ground in the rear, ready to come to the assistance
of the corps at the river. The three corps, First, Third and Sixth, were under command of General
Sedgwick.

The rebels spent the day in throwing up intrenchments and shelling Reynolds' position. Toward
night the artillery practice ceased, and the First and Sixth corps bivouacked where they had
stood during the day, but Sickles and his corps were ordered to the assistance of Hooker, on
the right.

The morning of the 30th was lowery, but the clouds dispersed as the day advanced. About noon
the troops were massed by brigades, and a congratulatory order from General Hooker was read
to them, amid great cheering. "The enemy," said the order, "must now come out and fight us
on our ground, or retreat ingloriously." Nothing more of interest occurred that day; but, in
the afternoon of the following day, the First corps became engaged in a fierce artillery duel
with the enemy, in which the corps lost a large number of its men in killed and wounded. At
sunset an order came from General Hooker, at Chancellorsville, for General Sedgwick to assume
a threatening attitude--to make a severe demonstration--but to make no attack. There was much
marching and getting into position, and regiments and divisions were marched and countermarched
in such a manner as to convey to the rebels the impression that a grand attack was to be made
at that point. The enemy was evidently deceived by these maneuvers, and heavy columns of rebel
infantry commenced to form upon the old battle-field. While we stood in line of battle, one
of our bands near the skirmish line struck up the air, "Dixie." The rebels, hearing the strains,
set up defiant cheers, which were answered by our army in the most tremendous shouts imaginable.
The contest seemed for the time to depend on strength of lung, and our boys certainly beat
them at shouting.

As the sun disappeared behind the hills, when Hooker's guns were thundering, we retired to
our tents. All day long the earth had been shaken by tremendous firing of artillery on the
right; and now, as darkness gathered over the scenes of conflict, the thundering of the guns
and the trembling of the earth seemed like a succession of earthquakes. The spirit of our boys
rose, as the battle on the right progressed, and there seemed to be indications of work for
them. Groups might be seen at any time, when we were not standing in line of battle, telling
yarns, singing songs, playing ball and pitching quoits, while they momentarily looked for the
order to advance upon the heights, into the very jaws of death.

Saturday morning, May 2d, the First corps was withdrawn from its position; its bridges were
taken up, and the corps moved past us up the river to join the main body of the army under
Hooker, on the right. The Seventy-seventh was sent to do picket duty on the ground occupied
by the First corps the night before. Our reserve was posted a little way from the river, in
a pleasant field, where the fresh clover furnished a soft bed for the men, and a dainty bite
for our horses. Just in front of us was a lovely spot--the residence of Doctor Morson, for
fifteen years a surgeon in the United States navy. Then, for a whole year, Charlotte was at Haworth,
doing housemaid's work, and writing poems, and amusing herself at the expense of her father's curates.
She had begun to find out the extent to which she could amuse herself.
She also had had "her chance".

We strolled along the banks of the beautiful river, gathering flowers and glancing at our "secesh"
neighbors on the opposite bank, only a few yards distant; or we lounged in the shade of our
tents, enjoying the charms of a lovely May day, while the terrible din of battle on the right,
where Hooker's forces were contending, shook the ground beneath us, and we knew that ere the
sun set, thousands of our brave comrades must be sacrificed.

As the evening drew near, we who were on the north side of the river saw our skirmishers, of
the "Light division", drive back the skirmish line of the enemy. It was a gallant feat, and
finely executed. Our hearts leaped for joy as we watched our brave fellows, their line as perfect
as though on drill, advance, firing rapidly, and pressing the enemy at "double-quick." They
made no halt until they had crossed the whole breadth of the plain and reached the base of
the hills.

Few who were then in the Sixth corps will ever forget that scene. The sun, just sinking behind
the hills where Hooker was at work, threw a beautiful golden light over the plain, and crowned
the heights with brilliant hues. It was one of those evenings of surpassing loveliness, such
as gladdened our hearts only at long intervals. Prominent in the foreground of the beautiful
scene was a noble white steed, with its gallant rider, dashing from one end of the skirmish
line to the other. None who witnessed the spectacle will forget the white horse and the fearless
rider; and few of the Second or Light divisions need be reminded that the horseman was Colonel
Baker, of the Forty-third New York, who was then in charge of the skirmish line.

The "Light division" was, as we have before stated, the First brigade of our Second division,
with regiments from the First and Third divisions which had been, a short time before leaving
camp, detached to form an independent organization. The arrangement was broken up immediately
after this battle, and the regiments put in the First and Second divisions again.

Immediately after the brilliant advance of the "Light division," the Seventy-seventh regiment
was ordered to leave the picket line and join its brigade. The Second division crossed the
river and took position, the Third brigade in front, the Vermont brigade in rear. The Thirty-third
and Forty-ninth New York, of the Third brigade, went forward as pickets in front of the hills,
relieving pickets of the "Light division," which moved to the right. We remained in line all
night, sometimes throwing ourselves upon the ground to catch a moment's sleep, then roused
in expectancy of an advance.

At four o'clock in the morning we did advance. Straight across the plain we went, until we
came nearly to the base of the heights, where the hosts of the enemy awaited us, then taking
the Bowling Green road, filed to the right and proceeded to the rear of Fredericksburgh; the
Seventy-seventh in front, the Twenty-first New Jersey, the Forty-ninth New York, Twentieth
New York, Seventh Maine and Thirty-third New York, constituting the Third brigade, under command
of General Neill, following in the order mentioned. Then came the Vermont brigade, Colonel
L. A. Grant commanding; these two brigades forming the whole of Howe's (Second) division of
the Sixth corps since the First brigade was detached.

As we gained the rear of the eastern part of the town, the batteries of the enemy opened upon
us, and swarms of infantry rose up in our front and poured volleys of bullets into our ranks.
The "Light division" and Newton's Third division of our corps had passed through the streets
of the town, and were now on our right. The skirmishers from Wheaton's and Shaler's brigades
had struck those of the enemy near a large mansion, where, each party dodging behind the garden
fence, the cherry trees and the outhouses, they kept up a lively engagement for several minutes,
but Newton's advance was forced to yield the ground.

In the meantime, the long line of rifled cannon which surmounted Stafford Heights, on the north
side of the river, as at the first battle of Fredericksburgh, were throwing huge shells across
the wide valley and stream into the works of the enemy. One or two field batteries near the
head of our own column, and some attached to the other divisions, got into position and opened
a fierce cannonade.

General Howe quickly formed his troops in line, as did the other division commanders.

The line of battle of the corps extended from the pontoon bridge at Franklin's Crossing to
the right of the town of Fredericksburgh. First, on the left, Brooks' division held the plain
in front of the crossing. Next, on the right, in front of Marye's Heights, was Howe's Second
division; then the "Light division," Colonel Burnham; and on the extreme right was Newton's
Third division. Gibbon's division of the Second corps, which, because its encampment was in
plain view of the enemy, had been left behind, also crossed into the town by a bridge which
it threw over, and took position on the right of the corps.

