CONTENTS:

CHAPTER I — FRANCE IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY. 1412-1423.

CHAPTER II — DOMREMY AND VAUCOULEURS. 1424-1429.

CHAPTER III — BEFORE THE KING. FEB.-APRIL, 1429.

CHAPTER IV — THE RELIEF OF ORLEANS. MAY 1-8, 1429.

CHAPTER V — THE CAMPAIGN OF THE LOIRE. JUNE, JULY, 1429.

CHAPTER VI — THE CORONATION. JULY 17, 1429.

CHAPTER VII — THE SECOND PERIOD. 1429-1430.

CHAPTER VIII — DEFEAT AND DISCOURAGEMENT. AUTUMN, 1429.

CHAPTER IX — COMPIÈGNE. 1430.

CHAPTER X — THE CAPTIVE. MAY, 1430-JAN., 1431.

CHAPTER XI — THE JUDGES. 1431.

CHAPTER XII — BEFORE THE TRIAL. LENT, 1431.

CHAPTER XIII — THE PUBLIC EXAMINATION. FEBRUARY, 1431.

CHAPTER XIV —THE EXAMINATION IN PRISON. LENT, 1431.

CHAPTER XV — RE-EXAMINATION. MARCH-MAY, 1431.

CHAPTER XVI — THE ABJURATION. MAY 24, 1431.

CHAPTER XVIII — THE SACRIFICE. MAY 31, 1431.

CHAPTER XVIII — AFTER.

JEANNE D'ARC

CHAPTER I -- FRANCE IN THE FIFTEENTH CENTURY. 1412-1423. 

Dresden Gallery......................... 57

Madonna and Child, with four Saints. Dresden Gallery............... 59

A Concert. Probably by Titian. Pitti Palace, Florence.............. 63

Portrait of a Man. Alte Pinakothek, Munich......................... 65

Alessandro de' Medici (so called). Hampton Court................... 67

The Worship of Venus. Prado Gallery, Madrid........................ 71

The Assunta. Accademia delle Belle Arti, Venice.................... 75

The Annunciation. Cathedral at Treviso............................. 79

Bacchus and Ariadne. National Gallery.............................. 81

St. Sebastian. Wing of altar-piece in the Church of SS. Nazzaro e Celso, Brescia.............................................................
85

La Vierge au Lapin. Louvre......................................... 87

St. Christopher with the Infant Christ. Fresco in the Doge's Palace, Venice ............................................................
89

The Madonna di Casa Pesaro. Church of S. Maria dei Frari, Venice... 93

Martyrdom of St. Peter the Dominican............................... 97

Tobias and the Angel. S. Marciliano, Venice........................ 99

THE EARLIER WORK OF TITIAN

INTRODUCTION

There is no greater name in Italian art--therefore no greater in art--than that of Titian.
If the Venetian master does not soar as high as Leonardo da Vinci or Michelangelo, those figures
so vast, so mysterious, that clouds even now gather round their heads and half-veil them from
our view; if he has not the divine suavity, the perfect balance, not less of spirit than of answering
hand, that makes Raphael an appearance unique in art, since the palmiest
days of Greece; he is wider in scope, more glowing with the life-blood
of humanity, more the poet-painter of the world and the world's fairest
creatures, than any one of these.

Titian is neither the loftiest, the most penetrating, nor the most profoundly moved among the
great exponents of sacred art, even of his time and country. Yet is it possible, remembering
the Entombment of the Louvre, the Assunta, the Madonna di Casa Pesaro, the St. Peter Martyr,
to say that he has, take him all in all, been surpassed in this the highest branch of his art?
Certainly nowhere else have the pomp and splendour of the painter's achievement at its apogee
been so consistently allied to a dignity and simplicity hardly ever overstepping the bounds of
nature. The sacred art of no other painter of the full sixteenth century--not even that of Raphael
himself--has to an equal degree influenced other painters, and moulded the style of the world,
in those great ceremonial altar-pieces in which sacred passion must perforce express itself with
an exaggeration that is not necessarily a distortion of truth.

And then as a portraitist--we are dealing, be it remembered, with Italian art only--there must
be conceded to him the first place, as a limner both of men and women, though each of us may
reserve a corner in his secret heart for some other master. One will remember the disquieting
power, the fascination in the true sense of the word, of Leonardo; the majesty, the penetration, the
uncompromising realism on occasion, of Raphael; the happy mixture of the Giorgionesque, the Raphaelesque,
and later on the Michelangelesque, in Sebastiano del Piombo.

Another will yearn for the poetic glamour, gilding realistic truth, of Giorgione; for the intensely
pathetic interpretation of Lorenzo Lotto, with its unique combination of the strongest subjective
and objective elements, the one serving to poetise and accentuate the other. Yet another will
cite the lofty melancholy, the aristocratic charm of the Brescian Moretto, or the marvellous
power of the Bergamasque Moroni to present in their natural union, with no indiscretion of
over-emphasis, the spiritual and physical elements which go to make up that mystery of mysteries,
the human individuality. There is, however, no advocate of any of these great masters who, having
vaunted the peculiar perfections in portraiture of his own favourite, will not end--with a
sigh perhaps--by according the palm to Titian.

In landscape his pre-eminence is even more absolute and unquestioned. He had great precursors here,
but no equal; and until Claude Lorrain long afterwards arose, there appeared no successor capable,
like himself, of expressing the quintessence of Nature's most significant beauties without
a too slavish adherence to any special set of natural facts. Giovanni Bellini from his earliest
Mantegnesque or Paduan days had, unlike his great brother-in-law, unlike the true Squarcionesques,
and the Ferrarese who more or less remotely came within the Squarcionesque influence, the
true gift of the landscape-painter. Atmospheric conditions formed invariably an important element
of his conceptions; and to see that this is so we need only remember
the chilly solemnity of the landscape in the great Pietà of the Brera,
the ominous sunset in our own Agony in the Garden of the National
Gallery, the cheerful all-pervading glow of the beautiful little Sacred
Conversation at the Uffizi, the mysterious illumination of the late
Baptism of Christ in the Church of S. Corona at Vicenza.

To attempt a discussion of the landscape of Giorgione would be to enter upon the most perilous,
as well as the most fascinating of subjects--so various is it even in the few well-established
examples of his art, so exquisite an instrument of expression always, so complete an exterioration
of the complex moods of his personages. Yet even the landscape of Giorgione--judging it from such
unassailable works of his riper time as the great altar-piece of Castelfranco, the so-called
Stormy Landscape with the Gipsy and the Soldier[1] in the Giovanelli Palace at Venice, and the so-called
Three Philosophers in the Imperial Gallery at Vienna--has in it still a slight flavour of the ripe
archaic just merging into full perfection. It was reserved for Titian to give in his early time
the fullest development to the Giorgionesque landscape, as in the Three Ages and the Sacred
and Profane Love. Then all himself, and with hardly a rival in art, he went on to unfold those
radiantly beautiful prospects of earth and sky which enframe the figures in the Worship of Venus,
the Bacchanal, and, above all, the Bacchus and Ariadne; to give back his impressions of Nature
in those rich backgrounds of reposeful beauty which so enhance the finest of the Holy Families
and Sacred Conversations. It was the ominous grandeur of the landscape in the St. Peter Martyr, even
more than the dramatic intensity, the academic amplitude of the figures,
that won for the picture its universal fame.

The same intimate relation between the landscape and the figures may be said to exist in the
late Jupiter and Antiope (Venere del Pardo) of the Louvre, with its marked return to Giorgionesque
repose and Giorgionesque communion with Nature; in the late Rape of Europa, the bold sweep and the
rainbow hues of the landscape in which recall the much earlier Bacchus and Ariadne. In the
exquisite Shepherd and Nymph of the Imperial Gallery at Vienna--a masterpiece in monotone
of quite the last period--the sensuousness of the early Giorgionesque time reappears, even more strongly
emphasised; yet it is kept in balance, as in the early days, by the imaginative temperament of the
poet, by that solemn atmosphere of mystery, above all, which belongs to the final years of Titian's
old age.

Thus, though there cannot be claimed for Titian that universality in art and science which
the lovers of Leonardo's painting must ever deplore, since it lured him into a thousand side-paths;
for the vastness of scope of Michelangelo, or even the all-embracing curiosity of Albrecht Dürer;
it must be seen that as a painter he covered more ground than any first-rate master of the
sixteenth century. While in more than one branch of the painter's art he stood forth supreme and
without a rival, in most others he remained second to none, alone in great pictorial decorations
of the monumental order yielding the palm to his younger rivals Tintoretto and Paolo Veronese,
who showed themselves more practised and more successfully daring in this particular branch.

To
find another instance of such supreme mastery of the brush, such parallel activity in all the
chief branches of oil-painting, one must go to Antwerp, the great merchant city of the North as Venice
was, or had been, the great merchant city of the South. Rubens, who might fairly be styled the
Flemish Titian, and who indeed owed much to his Venetian predecessor, though far less than did
his own pupil Van Dyck, was during the first forty years of the seventeenth century on the same
pinnacle of supremacy that the Cadorine master had occupied for a
much longer period during the Renaissance.

He, too, was without a rival in the creation of those vast altar-pieces which made the fame of the
churches that owned them; he, too, was the finest painter of landscape of his time, as an accessory
to the human figure. Moreover, he was a portrait-painter who, in his greatest efforts--those sumptuous
and almost truculent portraits d'apparat of princes, nobles, and splendid dames--knew no superior,
though his contemporaries were Van Dyck, Frans Hals, Rembrandt, and Velazquez. Rubens folded
his Mother Earth and his fellow-man in a more demonstrative, a seemingly closer embrace, drawing
from the contact a more exuberant vigour, but taking with him from its very closeness some of the stain
of earth. Titian, though he was at least as genuine a realist as his successor, and one less
content, indeed, with the mere outsides of things, was penetrated with the spirit of beauty
which was everywhere--in the mountain home of his birth as in the
radiant home of his adoption, in himself as in his everyday surroundings.

His art had ever, even in its most human and least aspiring phases, the divine harmony, the suavity
tempering natural truth and passion, that distinguishes Italian art of the great periods from
the finest art that is not Italian.

The relation of the two masters--both of them in the first line of the world's painters--was much
that of Venice to Antwerp. The apogee of each city in its different way represented the highest
point that modern Europe had reached of physical well-being and splendour,
of material as distinguished from mental culture.

But then Venice was wrapped in the transfiguring atmosphere of the Lagunes, and could see,
towering above the rich Venetian plains and the lower slopes of the Friulan mountains, the
higher, the more aspiring peaks of the purer region. Reality, with all its warmth and all its
truth, in Venetian art was still reality. But it was reality made at once truer, wider, and
more suave by the method of presentment. Idealisation, in the narrower sense of the word, could
add nothing to the loveliness of such a land, to the stateliness, the splendid sensuousness
devoid of the grosser elements of offence, to the genuine naturalness of such a mode of life. Art
itself could only add to it the right accent, the right emphasis, the larger scope in truth,
the colouring and illumination best suited to give the fullest expression to the beauties of
the land, to the force, character, and warm human charm of the people. This is what Titian,
supreme among his contemporaries of the greatest Venetian time, did with an incomparable mastery
to which, in the vast field which his productions cover, it would be vain to seek for a parallel.

Other
Venetians may, in one or the other way, more irresistibly enlist our sympathies, or may shine
out for the moment more brilliantly in some special branch of their art; yet, after all, we
find ourselves invariably comparing them to Titian, not Titian to them--taking him as the
standard for the measurement of even his greatest contemporaries and successors. Giorgione was
of a finer fibre, and more happily, it may be, combined all the subtlest qualities of the painter
and the poet, in his creation of a phase of art the penetrating exquisiteness of which has never
in the succeeding centuries lost its hold on the world. But then Titian, saturated with the
Giorgionesque, and only less truly the poet-painter than his master
and companion, carried the style to a higher pitch of material perfection
than its inventor himself had been able to achieve.

The gifted but unequal Pordenone, who showed himself so incapable of sustained rivalry with
our master in Venice, had moments of a higher sublimity than Titian reached until he came to the extreme
limits of old age. That this assertion is not a mere paradox, the great Madonna del Carmelo at
the Venice Academy and the magnificent Trinity in the sacristy of the Cathedral of San Daniele
near Udine may be taken to prove. Yet who would venture to compare him on equal terms to the
painter of the Assunta, the Entombment and the Christ at Emmaus? Tintoretto, at his best, has
lightning flashes of illumination, a Titanic vastness, an inexplicable power of perturbing the
spirit and placing it in his own atmosphere, which may cause the imaginative not altogether unreasonably
to put him forward as the greater figure in art. All the same, if it were necessary to make a definite
choice between the two, who would not uphold the saner and greater art of Titian, even though it
might leave us nearer to reality, though it might conceive the supreme tragedies, not less than
the happy interludes, of the sacred drama, in the purely human spirit
and with the pathos of earth?

A not dissimilar comparison might be instituted between the portraits of Lorenzo Lotto and those
of our master. No Venetian painter of the golden prime had that peculiar imaginativeness of
Lotto, which caused him, while seeking to penetrate into the depths of the human individuality
submitted to him, to infuse into it unconsciously much of his own tremulous sensitiveness and charm.
In this way no portraits of the sixteenth century provide so fascinating a series of riddles. Yet
in deciphering them it is very necessary to take into account the peculiar temperament of the
painter himself, as well as the physical and mental characteristics of the sitter and the
atmosphere of the time.[2]

Yet where is the critic bold enough to place even the finest of these exquisite productions
on the same level as Le Jeune Homme au Gant and L'Homme en Noir of the Louvre, the Ippolito
de' Medici, the Bella di Tiziano, the Aretino of the Pitti, the Charles V. at the Battle of
Mühlberg and the full-length Philip II. of the Prado Museum at Madrid?

Finally, in the domain of pure colour some will deem that Titian has serious rivals in those Veronese
developed into Venetians, the two elder Bonifazi and Paolo Veronese; that is, there will be
found lovers of painting who prefer a brilliant mastery over contrasting colours in frank juxtaposition
to a palette relatively restricted, used with an art more subtle, if less dazzling than theirs,
and resulting in a deeper, graver richness, a more significant beauty, if in a less stimulating
gaiety and variety of aspect. No less a critic than Morelli himself pronounced the elder Bonifazio
Veronese to be the most brilliant colourist of the Venetian school; and the Dives and Lazarus of
the Venice Academy, the Finding of Moses at the Brera are at hand to give solid support to such
an assertion.

In some ways Paolo Veronese may, without exaggeration, be held to be the greatest virtuoso among
colourists, the most marvellous executant to be found in the whole range of Italian art. Starting
from the cardinal principles in colour of the true Veronese, his precursors--painters such as
Domenico and Francesco Morone, Liberale, Girolamo dai Libri, Cavazzola, Antonio Badile, and the
rather later Brusasorci--Caliari dared combinations of colour the most trenchant in their brilliancy
as well as the subtlest and most unfamiliar. Unlike his predecessors, however, he preserved
the stimulating charm while abolishing the abruptness of sheer contrast. This he did mainly
by balancing and tempering his dazzling hues with huge architectural masses of a vibrant grey
and large depths of cool dark shadow--brown shot through with silver. No other Venetian master
could have painted the Mystic Marriage of St. Catherine in the church of that name at Venice,
the Allegory on the Victory of Lepanto in the Palazzo Ducale, or the vast Nozze di Cana of the
Louvre. All the same, this virtuosity, while it is in one sense a step in advance even of Giorgione,
Titian, Palma, and Paris Bordone--constituting as it does more particularly a further development
of painting from the purely decorative standpoint--must appear just a little superficial, a
little self-conscious, by the side of the nobler, graver, and more profound, if in some ways
more limited methods of Titian. With him, as with Giorgione, and, indeed, with Tintoretto, colour
was above all an instrument of expression. The main effort was to give a realisation, at once
splendid and penetrating in its truth, of the subject presented;
and colour in accordance with the true Venetian principle was used
not only as the decorative vesture, but as the very body and soul
of painting--as what it is, indeed, in Nature.

To put forward Paolo Veronese as merely the dazzling virtuoso would all the same be to show a singular
ignorance of the true scope of his art. He can rise as high in dramatic passion and pathos as
the greatest of them all, when he is in the vein; but these are precisely the occasions on which
he most resolutely subordinates his colour to his subject and makes the most poetic use of chiaroscuro;
as in the great altar-piece The Martyrdom of St. Sebastian in the church of that name, the too
little known St. Francis receiving the Stigmata on a ceiling compartment of the Academy of Arts
at Vienna, and the wonderful Crucifixion which not many years ago was brought down from the
sky-line of the Long Gallery in the Louvre, and placed, where it deserves to be, among the masterpieces.
And yet in this last piece the colour is not only in a singular degree interpretative of the
subject, but at the same time technically astonishing--with certain subtleties of unusual juxtaposition
and modulation, delightful to the craftsman, which are hardly seen again until we come to the
latter half of the present century. So that here we have the great Veneto-Veronese master escaping
altogether from our theory, and showing himself at one and the same time profoundly moving,
intensely significant, and admirably decorative in colour. Still what was with him the splendid
exception was with Titian, and those who have been grouped with Titian, the guiding rule of art. Though
our master remains, take him all in all, the greatest of Venetian colourists, he never condescends
to vaunt all that he knows, or to select his subjects as a groundwork
for bravura, even the most legitimate.

He is the greatest painter of the sixteenth century, just because, being the greatest colourist
of the higher order, and in legitimate mastery of the brush second to none, he makes the worthiest
use of his unrivalled accomplishment, not merely to call down the applause due to supreme pictorial
skill and the victory over self-set difficulties, but, above all, to give the fullest and most
legitimate expression to the subjects which he presents, and through them to himself.

CHAPTER I

Cadore and Venice--Early Giorgionesque works up to the date of the residence in Padua--New
interpretations of Giorgione's and Titian's pictures.

Tiziano Vecelli was born in or about the year 1477 at Pieve di Cadore,
a district of the southern Tyrol then belonging to the Republic of
Venice, and still within the Italian frontier.

He was the son of Gregorio di Conte Vecelli by his wife Lucia, his father being descended from
an ancient family of the name of Guecello (or Vecellio), established in the valley of Cadore. An
ancestor, Ser Guecello di Tommasro da Pozzale, had been elected Podesta of Cadore as far back
as 1321.[3] The name Tiziano would appear to have been a traditional one in the family. Among
others we find a contemporary Tiziano Vecelli, who is a lawyer of note concerned in the administration
of Cadore, keeping up a kind of obsequious friendship with his famous cousin at Venice. The Tizianello
who, in 1622, dedicated to the Countess of Arundel an anonymous Life of Titian known as Tizianello's
Anonimo, and died at Venice in 1650, was Titian's cousin thrice removed.

Gregorio Vecelli was a valiant soldier, distinguished for his bravery in the field and his wisdom in
the council of Cadore, but not, it may be assumed, possessed of wealth or, in a poor mountain
district like Cadore, endowed with the means of obtaining it. The other offspring of the marriage
with Lucia were Francesco,--supposed, though without substantial proof, to have been older than his
brother,--Caterina, and Orsa. At the age of nine, according to Dolce in the Dialogo della Pittura,
or of ten, according to Tizianello's Anonimo, Titian was taken from Cadore to Venice, there
to enter upon the serious study of painting. Whether he had previously received some slight
tuition in the rudiments of the art, or had only shown a natural inclination to become a painter,
cannot be ascertained with any precision; nor is the point, indeed,
one of any real importance. What is much more vital in our study of
the master's life-work is to ascertain how far the scenery of his
native Cadore left a permanent impress on his landscape art, and in
what way his descent from a family of mountaineers and soldiers, hardy,
yet of a certain birth and breeding, contributed to shape his individuality
in its development to maturity. It has been almost universally assumed
that Titian throughout his career made use of the mountain scenery
of Cadore in the backgrounds to his pictures; and yet, if we except
the great Battle of Cadore itself (now known only in Fontana's print,
in a reduced version of part of the composition to be found at the
Uffizi, and in a drawing of Rubens at the Albertina), this is only
true in a modified sense. Undoubtedly, both in the backgrounds to
altar-pieces, Holy Families, and Sacred Conversations, and in the
landscape drawings of the type so freely copied and adapted by Domenico
Campagnola, we find the jagged, naked peaks of the Dolomites aspiring
to the heavens. In the majority of instances, however, the middle
distance and foreground to these is not the scenery of the higher
Alps, with its abrupt contrasts, its monotonous vesture of fir or
pine forests clothing the mountain sides, and its relatively harsh
and cold colouring, but the richer vegetation of the Friulan mountains
in their lower slopes, or of the beautiful hills bordering upon the
overflowing richness of the Venetian plain. Here the painter found
greater variety, greater softness in the play of light, and a richness
more suitable to the character of Venetian art. All these tracts of
country, as well as the more grandiose scenery of his native Cadore
itself, he had the amplest opportunities for studying in the course
of his many journeyings from Venice to Pieve and back, as well as
in his shorter expeditions on the Venetian mainland. St. Margaret
was no warrior-saint, but she overcame the dragon with her cross, and was thus a kind of sister
spirit to the great archangel.

Sitting much of her time at or outside the cottage door with her needlework, in itself an occupation
so apt to encourage musing and dreams, the bells were one of Jeanne's great pleasures. We know
a traveller, of the calmest English temperament and sobriety of Protestant fancy, to whom the
midday Angelus always brings, he says, a touching reminder--which he never neglects wherever
he may be--to uncover the head and lift up the heart; how much more the devout peasant girl
softly startled in the midst of her dreaming by that call to prayer. She was so fond of those
bells that she bribed the careless bell-ringer with simple presents to be more attentive to
his duty. From the garden where she sat with her work, the cloudy foliage of the bois de chêne,
the oak wood, where were legends of fairies and a magic well, to which her imagination, better
inspired, seems to have given no great heed, filled up the prospect on one side. At a later
period, her accusers attempted to make out that she had been a devotee of these nameless woodland
spirits, but in vain. No doubt she was one of the procession on the holy day once a year, when
the curé of the parish went out through the wood to the Fairies' Well to say his mass, and
exorcise what evil enchantment might be there. But Jeanne's imagination was not of the kind
to require such stimulus. The saints were enough for her; and indeed they supplied to a great
extent the fairy tales of the age, though it was not of love and fame and living happy ever
after, but of sacrifice and suffering and valorous martyrdom that their glory was made up.

We hear of the woods, the fields, the cottages, the little church and its bells, the garden
where she sat and sewed, the mother's stories, the morning mass, in this quiet preface of the
little maiden's life; but nothing of the highroad with its wayfarers, the convoys of provisions
for the war, the fighting men that were coming and going. Yet these, too, must have filled
a large part in the village life, and it is evident that a strong impression of the pity of
it all, of the distraction of the country and all the cruelties and miseries of which she could
not but hear, must have early begun to work in Jeanne's being, and that while she kept silence
the fire burned in her heart. The love of God, and that love of country which has nothing to
say to political patriotism but translates itself in an ardent longing and desire to do "some
excelling thing" for the benefit and glory of that country, and to heal its wounds--were the
two principles of her life. We have not the slightest indication how much or how little of
this latter sentiment was shared by the simple community about her; unless from the fact that
the Domremy children fought with those of Maxey, their disaffected neighbours, to the occasional
effusion of blood. We do not know even of any volunteer from the village, or enthusiasm for
the King.(3) The district was voiceless, the little clusters of cottages fully occupied in
getting their own bread, and probably like most other village societies, disposed to treat
any military impulse among their sons as mere vagabondism and love of adventure and idleness.

Nothing, so far as anyone knows, came near the most unlikely volunteer of all, to lead her
thoughts to that art of war of which she knew nothing, and of which her little experience could
only have shown her the horrors and miseries, the sufferings of wounded fugitives and the ruin
of sacked houses. Of all people in the world, the little daughter of a peasant was the last
who could have been expected to respond to the appeal of the wretched country. She had three
brothers who might have served the King, and there was no doubt many a stout clodhopper about,
of that kind which in every country is the fittest material for fighting, and "food for powder."
But to none of these did the call come. Every detail goes to increase the profound impression
of peacefulness which fills the atmosphere--the slow river floating by, the roofs clustered
together, the church bells tinkling their continual summons, the girl with her work at the
cottage door in the shadow of the apple trees. To pack the little knapsack of a brother or
a lover, and to convoy him weeping a little way on his road to the army, coming back to the
silent church to pray there, with the soft natural tears which the uses of common life must
soon dry--that is all that imagination could have demanded of Jeanne. She was even too young
for any interposition of the lover, too undeveloped, the French historians tell us with their
astonishing frankness, to the end of her short life, to have been moved by any such thought.
She might have poured forth a song, a prayer, a rude but sweet lament for her country, out
of the still bosom of that rustic existence. Such things have been, the trouble of the age
forcing an utterance from the very depths of its inarticulate life. But it was not for this
that Jeanne d'Arc was born.

     (1) Mr. Andrew Lang informs me that the real proprietor was
     a certain "Dame d'Orgévillier." "On Jeanne's side of the
     burn," he adds, with a picturesque touch of realism, "the
     people were probably free as attached to the Royal
     Châtellenie of Vancouleurs, as described below."

     (2) This was probably not the God-dam of later French, a
     reflection of the supposed prevalent English oath, but most
     likely merely the God-den or good-day, the common
     salutation.

     (3) Domremy was split, Mr. Lang says, by the burn, and
     Jeanne's side were probably King's men. We have it on her
     own word that there was but one Burgundian in the village,
     but that might mean on her side.

CHAPTER II -- DOMREMY AND VAUCOULEURS. 1424-1429.

In the year 1424, the year in which, after the battle of Agincourt, France was delivered over
to Henry V., an extraordinary event occurred in the life of this little French peasant. We
have not the same horror of that treaty, naturally, as have the French. Henry V. is a favourite
of our history, probably not so much for his own merit as because of that master-magician,
Shakespeare, who of his supreme good pleasure, in the exercise of that voluntary preference,
which even God himself seems to show to some men, has made of that monarch one of the best
beloved of our hearts. Dear to us as he is, in Eastcheap as at Agincourt, and more in the former
than the latter, even our sense of the disgraceful character of that bargain, le traité infâme
of Troyes, by which Queen Isabeau betrayed her son, and gave her daughter and her country to
the invader, is softened a little by our high estimation of the hero. But this is simple national
prejudice; regarded from the French side, or even by the impartial judgment of general humanity,
it was an infamous treaty, and one which might well make the blood boil in French veins.

We look at it at present, however, through the atmosphere of the nineteenth century, when France
is all French, and when the royal house of England has no longer any French connection. If
George III., much more George II., on the basis of his kingdom of Hanover, had attempted to
make himself master of a large portion of Germany, the situation would have been more like
that of Henry V. in France than anything we can think of now. It is true the kings of England
were no longer dukes of Normandy--but they had been so within the memory of man: and that noble
duchy was a hereditary appanage of the family of the Conqueror; while to other portions of
France they had the link of temporary possession and inheritance through French wives and mothers;
added to which is the fact that Jean sans Peur of Burgundy, thirsting to avenge his father's
blood upon the Dauphin, would have been probably a more dangerous usurper than Henry, and that
the actual sovereign, the unfortunate, mad Charles VI., was in no condition to maintain his
own rights.

There is little evidence, however, that this treaty, or anything so distinct in detail, had
made much impression on the outlying borders of France. What was known there, was only that
the English were victorious, that the rightful King of France was still uncrowned and unacknowledged,
and that the country was oppressed and humiliated under the foot of the invader. The fact that
the new King was not yet the Lord's anointed, and had never received the seal of God, as it
were, to his commission, was a fact which struck the imagination of the village as of much
more importance than many greater things--being at once more visible and matter-of-fact, and
of more mystical and spiritual efficacy than any other circumstance in the dreadful tale.

Jeanne was in the garden as usual, seated, as we should say in Scotland, at "her seam," not
quite thirteen, a child in all the innocence of infancy, yet full of dreams, confused no doubt
and vague, with those impulses and wonderings--impatient of trouble, yearning to give help--which
tremble on the chaos of a young soul like the first lightening of dawn upon the earth. It was
summer, and afternoon, the time of dreams. It would be easy in the employment of legitimate
fancy to heighten the picturesqueness of that quiet scene--the little girl with her favourite
bells, the birds picking up the crumbs of brown bread at her feet. She was thinking of nothing,
most likely, in a vague suspense of musing, the wonder of youth, the awakening of thought,
as yet come to little definite in her child's heart--looking up from her work to note some
passing change of the sky, a something in the air which was new to her. All at once between
her and the church there shone a light on the right hand, unlike anything she had ever seen
before; and out of it came a voice equally unknown and wonderful. What did the voice say? Only
the simplest words, words fit for a child, no maxim or mandate above her faculties--"Jeanne,
sois bonne et sage enfant; va souvent à l'église." Jeanne, be good! What more could an archangel,
what less could the peasant mother within doors, say? The little girl was frightened, but soon
composed herself. The voice could be nothing but sacred and blessed which spoke thus. It would
not appear that she mentioned it to anyone. It is such a secret as a child, in that wavering
between the real and unreal, the world not realised of childhood, would keep, in mingled shyness
and awe, uncertain, rapt in the atmosphere of vision, within her own heart.

It is curious how often this wonderful scene has been repeated in France, never connected with
so high a mission, but yet embracing the same circumstances, the same situation, the same semi-angelic
nature of the woman-child. The little Bernadette of Lourdes is almost of our own day; she,
too is one who puts the scorner to silence. What her visions and her voices were, who can say?
The last historian of them is not a man credulous of good or moved towards the ideal; yet he
is silent, except in a wondering impression of the sacred and the true, before the little Bearnaise
in her sabots; and, notwithstanding the many sordid results that have followed and all that
sad machinery of expected miracle through which even, repulsive as it must always be, a something
breaks forth from time to time which no man can define and account for except in ways more
incredible than miracle--so is the rest of the world. Why has this logical, sceptical, doubting
country, so able to quench with an epigram, or blow away with a breath of ridicule the finest
vision--become the special sphere and birthplace of these spotless infant-saints? This is one
of the wonders which nobody attempts to account for. Yet Bernadette is as Jeanne, though there
are more than four hundred years between.

After what intervals the vision returned we are not told, nor in what circumstances. It seems
to have come chiefly out-of-doors, in the silence and freedom of the fields or garden. Presently
the heavenly radiance shaped itself into some semblance of forms and figures, one of which,
clearer than the others, was like a man, but with wings and a crown on his head and the air
"d'un vrai prud' homme"; a noble apparition before whom at first the little maid trembled,
but whose majestic, honest regard soon gave her confidence. He bade her once more to be good,
and that God would help her; then he told her the sad story of her own suffering country, la
pitié qui estoit au royaume de France. Was it the pity of heaven that the archangel reported
to the little trembling girl, or only that which woke with the word in her own childish soul?
He has chosen the small things of this world to confound the great. Jeanne's young heart was
full of pity already, and of yearning over the helpless mother-country which had no champion
to stand for her. "She had great doubts at first whether it was St. Michael, but afterwards
when he had instructed her and shown her many things, she believed firmly that it was he."

It was this warrior-angel who opened the matter to her, and disclosed her mission. "Jeanne,"
he said, "you must go to the help of the King of France; and it is you who shall give him back
his kingdom." Like a still greater Maid, trembling, casting in her mind what this might mean,
she replied, confused, as if that simple detail were all: "Messire, I am only a poor girl;
I cannot ride or lead armed men." The vision took no notice of this plea. He became minute
in his directions, indicating exactly what she was to do. "Go to Messire de Baudricourt, captain
of Vaucouleurs, and he will take you to the King. St. Catherine and St. Margaret will come
and help you." Jeanne was overwhelmed by this exactness, by the sensation of receiving direct
orders. She cried, weeping and helpless, terrified to the bottom of her soul--What was she
that she should do this? a little girl, able to guide nothing but her needle or her distaff,
to lend her simple aid in nursing a sick child. But behind all her fright and hesitation, her
heart was filled with the emotion thus suggested to her--the immeasurable pitié que estoit
au royaume de France. Her heart became heavy with this burden. By degrees it came about that
she could think of nothing else; and her little life was confused by expectations and recollections
of the celestial visitant, who might arrive upon her at any moment, in the midst perhaps of
some innocent play, or when she sat sewing in the garden before her father's humble door.

After a while the vrai prud' homme came seldom; other figures more like herself, soft forms
of women, white and shining, with golden circlets and ornaments, appeared to her in the great
halo of the light; they bowed their heads, naming themselves, as to a sister spirit, Catherine,
and the other Margaret. Their voices were sweet and soft with a sound that made you weep. They
were both martyrs, encouraging and strengthening the little martyr that was to be. "A lady
is there in the heavens who loves thee": Virgil could not say more to rouse the flagging strength
of Dante. When these gentle figures disappeared, the little maid wept in an anguish of tenderness,
longing if only they would take her with them. It is curious that though she describes in this
vague rapture the appearance of her visitors, it is always as "mes voix" that she names them--the
sight must always have been more imperfect than the message. Their outlines and their lovely
faces might shine uncertain in the excess of light; but the words were always plain. The pity
for France that was in their hearts spread itself into the silent rural atmosphere, touching
every sensitive chord in the nature of little Jeanne. It was as if her mother lay dying there
before her eyes.

Curious to think how little anyone could have suspected such meetings as these, in the cottage
hard by, where the weary ploughmen from the fields would come clamping in for their meal, and
Dame Isabeau would call to the child, even sharply perhaps now and then, to leave that all-absorbing
needlework and come in and help, as Martha called Mary fourteen hundred years before; and where
the priest, mumbling his mass of a cold morning in the little church, would smile indulgent
on the faithful little worshipper when it was done, sure of seeing Jeanne there whoever might
be absent. She was a shy girl, blushing and drooping her head when a stranger spoke to her,
red and shame-faced when they laughed at her in the village as a dévote before her time; but
with nothing else to blush about in all her simple record.

Neither to her parents, nor to the curé when she made her confession, does she seem to have
communicated these strange experiences, though they had lasted for some time before she felt
impelled to act upon them, and could keep silence no longer. She was but thirteen when the
revelations began and she was seventeen when at last she set forth to fulfil her mission. She
had no guidance from her voices, she herself says, as to whether she should tell or not tell
what had been communicated to her; and no doubt was kept back by her shyness, and by the dreamy
confusion of childhood between the real and unreal. One would have thought that a life in which
these visions were of constant recurrence would have been rapt altogether out of wholesome
use and wont, and all practical service. But this does not seem for a moment to have been the
case. Jeanne was no hysterical girl, living with her head in a mist, abstracted from the world.
She had all the enthusiasms even of youthful friendship, other girls surrounding her with the
intimacy of the village, paying her visits, staying all night, sharing her room and her bed.
She was ready to be sent for by any poor woman that needed help or nursing, she was always
industrious at her needle; one would love to know if perhaps in the Trésor at Rheims there
was some stole or maniple with flowers on it, wrought by her hands. But the Trésor at Rheims
is nowadays rather vulgar if truth must be told, and the bottles and vases for the consecration
of Charles X., that pauvre sire, are more thought of than relics of an earlier age.

At length, however, one does not know how, the secret of her double life came out. No doubt
long brooding over these voices, long intercourse with such celestial visitors, and the mission
continually pressed upon her--meaningless to the child at first, a thing only to shed terrified
tears over and wonder at--ripened her intelligence so that she came at last to perceive that
it was practicable, a thing to be done, a charge to be obeyed. She had this before her, as
a girl in ordinary circumstances has the new developments of life to think of, and how to be
a wife and mother. And the news brought by every passer-by would prove doubly interesting,
doubly important to Jeanne, in her daily growing comprehension of what she was called upon
to do. As she felt the current more and more catching her feet, sweeping her on, overcoming
all resistance in her own mind, she must have been more and more anxious to know what was going
on in the distracted world, more and more touched by that great pity which had awakened her
soul. And all these reports were of a nature to increase that pity till it became overwhelming.
The tales she would hear of the English must have been tales of cruelty and horror; not so
many years ago what tales did not we hear of German ferocity in the French villages, perhaps
not true at all, yet making their impression always; and it was more probable in that age that
every such story should be true. Then the compassion which no one can help feeling for a young
man deprived of his rights, his inheritance taken from him, his very life in danger, threatened
by the stranger and usurper, was deepened in every particular by the fact that it was the King,
the very impersonation of France, appointed by God as the head of the country, who was in danger.
Everything that Jeanne heard would help to swell the stream.

Thus she must have come step by step--this extraordinary, impossible suggestion once sown in
her dreaming soul--to perceive a kind of miraculous reasonableness in it, to see its necessity,
and how everything pointed towards such a deliverance. It would have seemed natural to believe
that the prophecies of the countryside which promised a virgin from an oak grove, a maiden
from Lorraine, to deliver France, might have affected her mind, did we not have it from her
own voice that she had never heard that prophecy(1); but the word of the blessed Michael, so
often repeated, was more than an old wife's tale; and the child's alarm would seem to have
died away as she came to her full growth. And Jeanne was no ethereal spirit lost in visions,
but a robust and capable peasant girl, fearing little, and full of sense and determination,
as well as of an inspiration so far above the level of the crowd. We hear with wonder afterwards
that she had the making of a great general in her untutored female soul,--which is perhaps
the most wonderful thing in her career,--and saw with the eye of an experienced and able soldier,
as even Dunois did not always see it, the fit order of an attack, the best arrangement of the
forces at her command. This I honestly avow is to me the most incredible point in the story.
I am not disturbed by the apparition of the saints; there is in them an ineffable appropriateness
and fitness against which the imagination, at least, has not a word to say. The wonder is not,
to the natural mind, that such interpositions of heaven come, but that they come so seldom.
But that Jacques d'Arc's daughter, the little girl over her sewing, whose only fault was that
she went to church too often, should have the genius of a soldier, is too bewildering for words
to say. A poet, yes, an inspiring influence leading on to miraculous victory; but a general,
skilful with the rude artillery of the time, divining the better way in strategy,--this is
a wonder beyond the reach of our faculties; yet according to Alençon, Dunois, and other military
authorities, it was true.

We have little means of finding out how it was that Jeanne's long musings came at last to a
point at which they could be hidden no longer, nor what it was which induced her at last to
select the confidant she did. No doubt she must have been considering and weighing the matter
for a long time before she fixed upon the man who was her relation, yet did not belong to Domremy,
and was safer than a townsman for the extraordinary revelations she had to make. One of her
neighbours, her gossip, Gerard of Epinal, to whose child she was godmother, had perhaps at
one moment seemed to her a likely helper. But he belonged to the opposite party. "If you were
not a Burgundian," she said to him once, "there is something I might tell you." The honest
fellow took this to mean that she had some thought of marriage, the most likely and natural
supposition. It was at this moment, when her heart was burning with her great secret, the voices
urging her on day by day, and her power of self-constraint almost at an end, that Providence
sent Durand Laxart, her uncle by marriage, to Domremy on some family visit. She would seem
to have taken advantage of the opportunity with eagerness, asking him privately to take her
home with him, and to explain to her father and mother that he wanted her to take care of his
wife. No doubt the girl, devoured with so many thoughts, would have the air of requiring "a
change" as we say, and that the mother would be very ready to accept for her an invitation
which might bring back the brightness to her child. Laxart was a peasant like the rest, a prud'
homme well thought of among his people. He lived in Burey le Petit, near to Vaucouleurs, the
chief place of the district, and Jeanne already knew that it was to the captain of Vaucouleurs
that she was to address herself. Thus she secured her object in the simplest and most natural way.

Yet the reader cannot but hold his breath at the thought of what that amazing revelation must
have been to the homely, rustic soul, her companion, communicated as they went along the common
road in the common daylight. "She said to the witness that she must go to France to the Dauphin,
to make him to be crowned King." It must have been as if a thunderbolt had fallen at his feet
when the girl whom he had known in every development of her little life, thus suddenly disclosed
to him her secret purpose and determination. All her simple excellence the good man knew, and
that she was no fantastic chatterer, but truly une bonne douce fille, bold in nothing but kindness,
with nothing to blush for but the fault of going too often to church. "Did you never hear that
France should be made desolate by a woman and restored by a maid?" she said; and this would
seem to have been an unanswerable argument. He had, henceforth, nothing to do but to promote
her purpose as best he could in every way.

It would not seem at all unlikely to this good man that the Archangel Michael, if Jeanne's
revelation to him went so far, should have named Robert de Baudricourt, the chief of the district,
captain of the town and its forces, the principal personage in all the neighbourhood, as the
person to whom Jeanne's purpose was to be revealed, but rather a guarantee of St. Michael himself,
familiar with good society; and the Seigneur must have been more or less in good intelligence
with his people, not too alarming to be referred to, even on so insignificant a subject as
the vagaries of a country girl--though these by this time must have begun to seem something
more than vagaries to the half-convinced peasant. And it was no doubt a great relief to his
mind thus to put the decision of the question into the hands of a man better informed than
himself. Laxart proceeded to Vaucouleurs upon his mission, shyly yet with confidence. He would
seem to have had a preliminary interview with Baudricourt before introducing Jeanne. The stammering
countryman, the bluff, rustic noble and soldier, cheerfully contemptuous, receiving, with a
loud laugh into all the echoes, the extraordinary demand that he should send a little girl
from Domremy to the King, to deliver France, come before us like a picture in the countryman's
simple words. Robert de Baudricourt would scarcely hear the story out. "Box her ears," he said,
"and send her home to her mother." The little fool! What did she know of the English, those
brutal, downright fighters, against whom no élan was sufficient, who stood their ground and
set up vulgar posts around their lines, instead of trusting to the rush of sudden valour, and
the tactics of the tournament! She deliver France! On a much smaller argument and to put down
a less ambition, the half serious, half amused adviser has bidden a young fanatic's ears to
be boxed on many an unimportant occasion, and has often been justified in so doing. There would
be a half hour of gaiety after poor Laxart, crestfallen, had got his dismissal. The good man
must have turned back to Jeanne, where she waited for him in courtyard or antechamber, with
a heavy heart. No boxing of ears was possible to him. The mere thought of it was blasphemy.
This was on Ascension Day the 13 May, 1428.

Jeanne, however, was not discouraged by M. de Baudricourt's joke, and her interview with him
changed his views completely. She appears indeed from the moment of setting out from her father's
house to have taken a new attitude. These great personages of the country before whom all the
peasants trembled, were nothing to this village maid, except, perhaps, instruments in the hand
of God to speed her on her way if they could see their privileges--if not, to be swept out
of it like straws by the wind. It had no doubt been hard for her to leave her father's house;
but after that disruption what did anything matter? And she had gone through five years of
gradual training of which no one knew. The tears and terror, the plea, "I am a poor girl; I
cannot even ride," of her first childlike alarm had given place to a profound acquaintance
with the voices and their meaning. They were now her familiar friends guiding her at every
step; and what was the commonplace burly Seigneur, with his roar of laughter, to Jeanne? She
went to her audience with none of the alarm of the peasant. A certain young man of Baudricourt's
suite, Bertrand de Poulengy, another young D'Artagnan seeking his fortune, was present in the
hall and witnessed the scene. The joke would seem to have been exhausted by the time Jeanne
appeared, or her perfect gravity and simplicity, and beautiful manners--so unlike her rustic
dress and village coif--imposed upon the Seigneur and his little court. This is how the story
is told, twenty-five years after, by the witness, then an elderly knight, recalling the story
of his youth.

"She said that she came to Robert on the part of her Lord, that he should send to the Dauphin,
and tell him to hold out, and have no fear, for the Lord would send him succour before the
middle of Lent. She also said that France did not belong to the Dauphin but to her Lord; but
her Lord willed that the Dauphin should be its King, and hold it in command, and that in spite
of his enemies she herself would conduct him to be consecrated. Robert then asked her who was
this Lord? She answered, 'The King of Heaven.' This being done (the witness adds) she returned
to her father's house with her uncle, Durand Laxart of Burey le Petit."

This brief and sudden preface to her career passed over and had no immediate effect; indeed
but for Bertrand we should have been unable to separate it from the confused narrative to which
all these witnesses brought what recollection they had, often without sequence or order, Durand
himself taking no notice of any interval between this first visit to Vaucouleurs and the final
one.(2) The episode of Ascension Day appears like the formal sommation of French law, made
as a matter of form before the appellant takes action on his own responsibility; but Baudricourt
had probably more to do with it than appears to be at all certain from the after evidence.
One of the persons present, at all events, young Poulengy above mentioned, bore it in mind
and pondered it in his heart.

Meantime, Jeanne returned home--the strangest home-going,--for by this time her mission and
her aspirations could no longer be hid, and rumour must have carried the news almost as quickly
as any modern telegraph, to startle all the echoes of the village, heretofore unaware of any
difference between Jeanne and her companions save the greater goodness to which everybody bears
testimony. No doubt, it must have reached Jacques d'Arc's cottage even before she came back
with the kind Durand, a changed creature, already the consecrated Maid of France, La Pucelle,
apart from all others. The French peasant is a hard man, more fierce in his terror of the unconventional,
of having his domestic affairs exposed to the public eye, or his family disgraced by an exhibition
of anything unusual either in act or feeling, than almost any other class of beings. And it
is evident that he took his daughter's intention according to the coarsest interpretation,
as a wild desire for adventure and intention of joining herself to the roving troopers, the
soldiers always hated and dreaded in rural life. He suddenly appears in the narrative in a
fever of apprehension, with no imaginative alarm or anxiety about his girl, but the fiercest
suspicion of her, and dread of disgrace to ensue. We do not know what passed when she returned,
further than that her father had a dream, no doubt after the first astounding explanation of
the purpose that had so long been ripening in her mind. He dreamed that he saw her surrounded
by armed men, in the midst of the troopers, the most evident and natural interpretation of
her purpose, for who could divine that she meant to be their leader and general, on a level
not with the common men-at-arms, but of princes and nobles? In the morning he told his dream
to his wife and also to his sons. "If I could think that the thing would happen that I dreamed,
I would wish that she should be drowned; and if you would not do it, I should do it with my
own hands." The reader remembers with a shudder the Meuse flowing at the foot of the garden,
while the fierce peasant, mad with fear lest shame should be coming to his family, clenched
his strong fist and made this outcry of dismay.

No doubt his wife smoothed the matter over as well as she could, and, whatever alarms were
in her own mind, hastily thought of a feminine expedient to mend matters, and persuaded the
angry father that to substitute other dreams for these would be an easier way. Isabeau most
probably knew the village lad who would fain have had her child, so good a housewife, so industrious
a workwoman, and always so friendly and so helpful, for his wife. At all events there was such
a one, too willing to exert himself, not discouraged by any refusal, who could be egged up
to the very strong point of appearing before the bishop at Toul and swearing that Jeanne had
been promised to him from her childhood. So timid a girl, they all thought, so devout a Catholic,
would simply obey the bishop's decision and would not be bold enough even to remonstrate, though
it is curious that with the spectacle of her grave determination before them, and sorrowful
sense of that necessity of her mission which had steeled her to dispense with their consent,
they should have expected such an expedient to arrest her steps. The affair, we must suppose,
had gone through all the more usual stages of entreaty on the lover's part, and persuasion
on that of the parents, before such an attempt was finally made. But the shy Jeanne had by
this time attained that courage of desperation which is not inconsistent with the most gentle
nature; and without saying anything to anyone, she too went to Toul, appeared before the bishop,
and easily freed herself from the pretended engagement, though whether with any reference to
her very different destination we are not told.(3)

These proceedings, however, and the father's dreams and the remonstrances of the mother, must
have made troubled days in the cottage, and scenes of wrath and contradiction, hard to bear.
The winter passed distracted by these contentions, and it is difficult to imagine how Jeanne
could have borne this had it not been that the period of her outset had already been indicated,
and that it was only in the middle of Lent that her succour was to reach the King. The village,
no doubt, was almost as much distracted as her father's house to hear of these strange discussions
and of the incredible purpose of the bonne douce fille, whose qualities everybody knew and
about whom there was nothing eccentric, nothing unnatural, but only simple goodness, to distinguish
her above her neighbours. In the meantime her voices called her continually to her work. They
set her free from the ordinary yoke of obedience, always so strong in the mind of a French
girl. The dreadful step of abandoning her home, not to be thought of under any other circumstances,
was more and more urgently pressed upon her. Could it indeed be saints and angels who ordained
a step which was outside of all the habits and first duties of nature? But we have no reason
to believe that this nineteenth-century doubt of her visitors, and of whether their mandates
were right, entered into the mind of a girl who was of her own period and not of ours. She
went on steadfastly, certain of her mission now, and inaccessible either to remonstrance or appeal.

It was towards the beginning of Lent, as Poulengy tells us, that the decision was made, and
she left home finally, to go "to France" as is always said. But it seems to have been in January
that she set out once more for Vaucouleurs, accompanied by her uncle, who took her to the house
of some humble folk they knew, a carter and his wife, where they lodged. Jeanne wore her peasant
dress of heavy red homespun, her rude heavy shoes, her village coif. She never made any pretence
of ladyhood or superiority to her class, but was always equal to the finest society in which
she found herself, by dint of that simple good faith, sense, and seriousness, without excitement
or exaggeration, and radiant purity and straightforwardness which were apparent to all seeing
eyes. By this time all the little world about knew something of her purpose and followed her
every step with wonder and quickly rising curiosity: and no doubt the whole town was astir,
women gazing at their doors, all on her side from the first moment, the men half interested,
half insolent, as she went once more to the chateau to make her personal appeal. Simple as
she was, the bonne douce fille was not intimidated by the guard at the gates, the lounging
soldiers, the no doubt impudent glances flung at her by these rude companions. She was inaccessible
to alarms of that kind--which, perhaps, is one of the greatest safeguards against them even
in more ordinary cases. We find little record of her second interview with Baudricourt. The
Journal du Siège d'Orleans and the Chronique de la Pucelle both mention it as if it had been
one of several, which may well have been the case, as she was for three weeks in Vaucouleurs.
It is almost impossible to arrange the incidents of this interval between her arrival there
and her final departure for Chinon on the 23d February, during which time she made a pilgrimage
to a shrine of St. Nicolas and also a visit to the Duke of Lorraine. It is clear, however,
that she must have repeated her demand with such stress and urgency that the Captain of Vaucouleurs
was a much perplexed man. It was a very natural idea then, and in accordance with every sentiment
of the time that he should suspect this wonderful girl, who would not be daunted, of being
a witch and capable of bringing an evil fate on all who crossed her. All thought of boxing
her ears must ere this have departed from his mind. He hastened to consult the curé, which
was the most reasonable thing to do. The curé was as much puzzled as the Captain. The Church,
it must be said, if always ready to take advantage afterwards of such revelations, has always
been timid, even sceptical about them at first. The wisdom of the rulers, secular and ecclesiastic,
suggested only one thing to do, which was to exorcise, and perhaps to overawe and frighten,
the young visionary. They paid a joint and solemn visit to the carter's house, where no doubt
their entrance together was spied by many eager eyes; and there the priest solemnly taking
out his stole invested himself in his priestly robes and exorcised the evil spirits, bidding
them come out of the girl if they were her inspiration. There seems a certain absurdity in
this sudden assault upon the evil one, taking him as it were by surprise: but it was not ridiculous
to any of the performers, though Jeanne no doubt looked on with serene and smiling eyes. She
remarked afterwards to her hostess, that the curé had done wrong, as he had already heard her
in confession.

Outside, the populace were in no uncertainty at all as to her mission. A little mob hung about
the door to see her come and go, chiefly to church, with her good hostess in attendance, as
was right and seemly, and a crowd streaming after them who perhaps of their own accord might
have neglected mass, but who would not, if they could help it, lose a look at the new wonder.
One day a young gentleman of the neighbourhood was passing by, and amused by the commotion,
came through the crowd to have a word with the peasant lass. "What are you doing here, ma mie?"
the young man said. "Is the King to be driven out of the kingdom, and are we all to be made
English?" There is a tone of banter in the speech, but he had already heard of the Maid from
his friend, Bertrand, and had been affected by the other's enthusiasm. "Robert de Baudricourt
will have none of me or my words," she replied, "nevertheless before Mid-Lent I must be with
the King, if I should wear my feet up to my knees; for nobody in the world, be it king, duke,
or the King of Scotland's daughter, can save the kingdom of France except me alone: though
I would rather spin beside my poor mother, and this is not my work: but I must go and do it,
because my Lord so wills it." "And who is your Seigneur?" he asked. "God," said the girl. The
young man was moved, he too, by that wind which bloweth where it listeth. He stretched out
his hands through the gaping crowd and took hers, holding them between his own, to give her
his pledge: and so swore by his faith, her hands in his hands, that he himself would conduct
her to the King. "When will you go?" he said. "Rather to-day than to-morrow," answered the
messenger of God.

This was the second convert of La Pucelle. The peasant bonhomme first, the noble gentleman
after him; not to say all the women wherever she went, the gazing, weeping, admiring crowd
which now followed her steps, and watched every opening of the door which concealed her from
their eyes. The young gentleman was Jean de Novelonpont, "surnamed Jean de Metz": and so moved
was he by the fervour of the girl, and by her strong sense of the necessity of immediate operations,
that he proceeded at once to make preparations for the journey. They would seem to have discussed
the dress she ought to wear, and Jeanne decided for many obvious reasons to adopt the costume
of a man--or rather boy. She must, one would imagine have been tall, for no remark is ever
made on this subject, as if her dress had dwarfed her, which is generally the case when a woman
assumes the habit of a man: and probably with her peasant birth and training, she was, though
slim, strongly made and well knit, besides being at the age when the difference between boy
and girl is sometimes but little noticeable. 

Honoured abroad as loved at home, how ample, The tribute to that modest spirit paid! To pushing
quackery a high example, A calm rebuke to egotist parade!

Irreparable loss to Art, deep sorrow To those his comrades, who so loved the man, And who had
hoped for many a sunny morrow To greet that gallant spirit in the van.

That tall, spare form, that curl-crowned head, the knitting Of supple hands behind it as he sat,
That quaint face-wrinkling smile like sunshine flitting, The droll, dry comment, the quotation
pat;

The small oft-loaded pipe, of ancient moulding, The brazen box that held the well-loved weed;
Who shall forget who once was graced by holding In friendship's clasp the hand now still indeed?

Farewell,
great artist, comrade staunch and loyal! Few simpler lives our feverish age hath seen. Could pomp high-pinnacled,
or trappings royal, Add honour to the memory of CHARLES KEENE?

* * * * *

* * * * *

THE SHAH (LEFEVRE) AND THE SULTAN.

Over a series of weeks preceding Christmas, Europe was disturbed by rumours of a momentous interview
reported to have taken place on the banks of the unsuspecting Bosphorus. One of the parties
to the conference was his Imperial Majesty the SULTAN. The other was an English Statesman,
the trusted counsellor of an Ex-Premier, and believed in family circles to be the real author of
some of his supreme measures. The naturally retiring disposition of the Statesman in question,
and his inviolable reticence in respect of any matter concerning himself, made it difficult to
arrive at the truth. Doubtless the stupendous event--the possible consequences of which on European
affairs Time will work out--would have remained for ever hidden but for the ruthless action of
"the London Correspondents of various provincial papers, who gave in their London letters more
or less inaccurate reports of the event." How they came to know anything about it admits of only
one conclusion. The SULTAN must have told them.

The event was too important to be left to this haphazard kind of record, and, accordingly,
the Speaker has been favoured with a narrative of what took place, the signature disclosing the
fact that the other party to the interview was the SHAH LEFEVRE.

The SHAH's account, regarded as a record of a historical event, is
manifestly hampered by that modest and insatiable desire for self-effacement
which marks this eminent man.

We see anonymous "persons who had access to the SULTAN approaching" the SHAH, and "suggesting to
him that he ought to apply for an audience." We see him "declining to do so on the ground that, having
taken an active part in the agitation in England on the subject of the Bulgarian atrocities in
1877, it would not be right that I should thrust myself on the attention of the SULTAN." It
is generally thought at Stamboul and elsewhere that Mr. GLADSTONE was chiefly responsible for
the memorable agitation referred to. But the SHAH is not the man to hide the truth. Also, "I
wished to be free to say what I thought about the condition of Turkey on my return to England."
That was only fair to waiting England. No use the SULTAN trying to "nobble" this relentless man.
So it came to pass that he went to the Palace, reluctant, but "feeling we could not refuse such
a command from the Sovereign of the country." He talked with CHAKIR PACHA and WAHAN EFFENDI; saw
the SULTAN's horse; hung about for hours; no SULTAN appeared; went back to hotel quivering under
the insult. Had framed telegram ordering the British Fleet to the Bosphorus, when VAMBÉRY turned
up, pale and trembling; besought the SHAH to do nothing rash; explained it was all a mistake.
This followed up by invitation to dine at the Palace the following day.

All this, and what followed at the dinner; how there were "excellent wines, electric lights, and a
great display of plate"; how the SULTAN, concentrating his attention on the SHAH, and forgetful
of poor FREDERICK HARRISON, who had, somehow, been elbowed into obscurity, paid court to this powerful
personality; how he received him on the daïs, and now cunningly, though ineffectually, he endeavoured
to secure on the spot the evacuation of Egypt, is told in the SHAH'S delicious narrative.

Mr. Punch, sharing in the thrilling interest this disclosure has created
throughout the civilised world, has been anxious to complete the record
by supplementing the SHAH's account of the interview, with the SULTAN's
own version.

This was, at the outset, difficult. Obstacles were thrown in the way, but they were overcome
by the pertinacity and ingenuity of Our Representative, who at last found himself seated with the
SULTAN on the very daïs from which SHAH LEFEVRE had conferred with his Imperial Majesty whilst
other of the forty guests, "including the Austrian Ambassador," looked on, green with envy.

"It's
a curious thing," said the SULTAN, laying down a book he had been reading when Our Representative
entered, "that, when you were announced, I had just come upon a reference by your great Poet
to your still greater Statesman. You know the line in Lockandkey Hall,--

"'Oh the dreary, drear LEFEVRE! Oh the barren, barren SHAW!'"

"That," Our Representative writes, "is not precisely the line as I remember it; but I make it
a rule never to correct a SULTAN."

Accordingly His Majesty proceeded: "And so, my good Cousin, Mr. Punch, wants to know all about
this interview, the bruit of which has shaken the Universe. His wishes are commands to me.
In the first place, I will tell you (though this is not for publication), that it was by the merest
accident I had the advantage of knowing your great countryman. I heard there had come to Constantinople
one FREDERICK HARRISON, head of a sect called the Positivists. I am, you know, in my way,
and within the limits of my kingdom, one of the most absolute Positivists of the age. I wanted
to see the English apostle, and told them to ask him to dinner. Somehow things got mixed up,
and, at the preliminary morning call, the SHAH LEFEVRE walked in. Had never heard of him before,
but gathered from CHAKIR PACHA, who had been talking to WAHAN EFFENDI, who, had seen WOODS PACHA,
who had spent an hour with VAMBÉRY, upon whom SHAH LEFEVRE had called,
that the SHAH was really the mainspring of the Liberal Party in England,
GLADSTONE being merely figure-head, HARCOURT in his pay, and CHAMBERLAIN
suffering in exile under his displeasure.

Allah is Good! Here was a chance thrown into my hands. I forgot all about FREDERICK HARRISON; told
CHAKIR PACHA and WAHAN EFFENDI to entertain the SHAH in the ante-chamber with coffee and cigarettes,
drawing him out on Armenia and Egypt. Meanwhile I crept under the sofa, and heard every word.
The SHAH very stern about Armenia, could not be drawn about Egypt. At end of hour and half
began to get tired under sofa; managed to stick in WAHAN EFFENDI's Wellington boot a note, on which
I had written, 'Take him to see my horse.' So they went off to stable, and, as soon as coast was
clear, I crept out; shut myself up in room for rest of day. Heard afterwards that they came
back, the SHAH much impressed with appearance of my horse; resumed conversation on Armenia and Egypt
for another hour; at last got rid of SHAH.

"At night VAMBÉRY, disguised as melon-seller, entered Palace and gained access to my room. Told
me fearful mess had been made of matters. The SHAH really didn't care about seeing the horse;
wanted to see me. Talks about ordering round the Fleet. 'Better ask him to dinner,' said VAMBÉRY;
so despatched Grand Chamberlain in carriage and six. The SHAH mollified; gave him a good dinner:
plenty of electric lights. Afterwards he was good enough to see me on the daïs. Tried to get
him to promise alteration in attitude of English Liberal Party towards me; also wanted him to
settle at once withdrawal of troops from Egypt, But, though most urbane in manner, exceedingly
cautious. Not to be drawn. Talk about Eastern statecraft! nothing to you English, as represented
by jour SHAH LEFEVRES. When I pressed him to come to point about Egypt, he said, 'On this subject
I can only speak my own views. I am not authorised to speak on behalf of those I am politically
associated with, but personally I am opposed to the occupation of Egypt by English troops.'
There's an answer for you! Your MACHIAVELLIS, your TALLEYRANDS not in it. Felt I had wasted
some time, and given away a dinner all for nothing, except the memory that will ever rest with
me of having been privileged to see this remarkable man standing on my daïs."

Here the SULTAN clapped his hands three times, and Our Representative,
being carefully placed in a sack, was dropped into the Bosphorus,
whence he was rescued in time to send off this despatch for publication
in the current Number.

     
     
     * * * * *
     

     ACCIDENT ON THE ICE.--The other day a gentleman, well known in
     the world of Sport and Art, was skating on the Serpentine, and fell
in with a friend.

     Both were getting on well when our reporter left.
     
     * * * * *
     

     EXTRACT FROM REPORT OF THE G.O.M.'S BIRTHDAY SPEECH AT HAWARDEN:--

"And
     I do not hesitate to betray to you this secret, that not infrequently
     in the summer months, when winding my way homewards after midnight,
     sometimes very long after it, from the House of Commons, I have
     stopped my course for a moment by the side of the drinking fountain
in Great George Street, Westminster, when there was nobody to look
at me, and have indulged in the refreshing draught which was there
afforded me, feeling at the same time that I was not performing any
action which could expose me to the resentment or displeasure of my
excellent friend whose name is well known to you all--Sir WILFRID
LAWSON."

     
     
     * * * * *
     
     I'D BE A CRIMINAL.
     
     A SONG OF THE RULING SENSATION.

TUNE--I'D BE A BUTTERFLY.

I'd be a criminal, born in a slum, Where refuse, and rowdies, and raggedness meet; For when to
the court for my trial I come, I'll be gazed on by all that is gracious and sweet.

Fair dames of the land will acknowledge my power, And Scientists sage will be slaves at my feet;
Offers of marriage I'll get in full shower, And fools in my cause in their thousands will meet.

They'll
trot out each new "scientific" vagary, Some hope of escape to my prison to bring, And scribes
on my case will be sportive and airy And tell how I look, eat, sleep, dress, talk or sing.

Those I have butchered will get scant attention, Interest's sure to be centred in me. Painters
will picture me, poets may mention, Beauties discuss me at five o'clock tea.

Mad doctors will fight o'er my mental condition, Hypnotists swear I was somebody's tool; And
if I'm condemned, why a Monster Petition Will promptly be signed by each faddist and fool.

Murder--and good Dr. LIÈGOIS of Nancy Will back you, LABRUYÈRE will help you away. I'd be a Murderer,
that is my fancy, He is the only true Hero to-day!

* * * * *

THE AMUSING RATTLE'S TOPICAL NOTEBOOK.

(FOR THE USE OF DINERS-OUT AND OTHER AMATEUR ENTERTAINERS.)

The Strike in Scotland.--You might suggest, that were it in Ireland, one might see a rail way out
of it, or rather in it. This jest may be expected to be appreciated by a parson's wife of the
sharper sort. Something ought to be got out of the visit of the agitator BURNS to the North.
Example of what can be done in this direction:--"People who play with fire (persons who go in
for strikes) must expect BURNS." However, be careful not to say this to a Scotchman, or he may
want your blood before you get to the cigarettes. North Britons are very jealous of the reputation
of their national poet, and permit no jokes upon the subject. You see, in letting off your witticism
at a Scotchman, you would have to explain that it was a joke. You might also hint that it was "hard
lines" for the Railway Companies concerned; but this will provoke gloom rather than gaiety
amongst those who have invested in Caledonians and North British. If you talk about the riots in
connection with the movement, you might say that the pugnacious rioters
remind you of safety matches, "for they not only strike, but strike
on the box!"

The Parnell Negociations in France.--You can say something about O'BRIEN's invitation to Mr.
PARNELL to pay him an evening visit on the French coast, reminds you of the once popular song,
"Meet me by Moonlight, Boulogne." If you are told that "Boulogne" should be "Alone," return,
"Precisely--borrowed a word--Boulogne was a loan." This ought to go with roars. At a Smoking
Concert you might suggest that Mr. O'BRIEN was just the man to settle a quarrel, because even
when he was in prison he took an absorbing interest in the proper adjustment of breeches!

The Row at the Post Office.--As the Savings' Bank Department has for years been the Cinderella
of the Civil Service, this is a subject that will not create much interest; however, you might
possibly extract a pleasantry out of the name of the present Postmaster-General in connection
with the now-appeased employés. With a little trouble you should be able to say something
quite sparkling about what the "officers" hoe to Raikes!
The Portuguese Difficulty in Africa.--Rather a good subject at a
Christmas Dinner, where relatives (on particularly affectionate and
intimate terms) are gathered together. Say you have got to the dessert,
and you start the subject. Observe that it is fortunate that the SULTAN
OF TURKEY is not interested in the matter, or there would be further
trouble of a like character. To the question, "Why?" reply, taking
up a bottle of red wine to point your witticism, "would it not be
a second difficulty with the Porte, you geese?" To make the jest perfect,
connect Turkey in Europe with the dindon aux marrons, of which you
will have just partaken.

The Weather.--If forced to fall back upon
this venerable subject (which should only be broached in the wilds
of Cornwall, or other equally primitive spots), of course you can
speak of a hard frost being "an ice day for a hunting-man, although
he is sure to swear at it." If the weather breaks, you may observe,
"You thaw so," but not when you have to shout the quibble through
the ear-trumpet of a deaf old maid. And this, with the other witticisms
recorded above, should carry you (by desire) into the middle of next
week.

* * * * *

The young stranger looked round upon all those amused, light-minded, sceptical faces, and without
a moment's hesitation went forward and knelt down before him. "Gentil Dauphin," she said, "God
give you good life." "But it is not I that am the King; there is the King," said Charles. "Gentil
Prince, it is you and no other," she said; then rising from her knee: "Gentil Dauphin, I am
Jeanne the Maid. I am sent to you by the King of Heaven to tell you that you shall be consecrated
and crowned at Rheims, and shall be lieutenant of the King of Heaven, who is King of France."
The little masquerade had failed, the jest was over. There would be little more laughing among
the courtiers, when they saw the face of Charles grow grave. He took the new-comer aside, perhaps
to that deep recess of the window where in the darkening night the glimmer of the clear, flowing
river, the great vault of sky would still be visible dimly, outside the circle of the blazing
interior with all its smoky lights.

Charles VII. of France was, like many of his predecessors, a pauvre Sire enough. He had thought
more of his amusements than of the troubles of his country; but a wild and senseless gaiety
will sometimes spring from despair as well as from lightness of heart; and after all, the dread
responsibility, the sense that in all his helplessness and inability to do anything he was
still the man who ought to do all, would seem to have moved him from time to time. A secret
doubt in his heart, divulged to no man, had added bitterness to the conviction of his own weakness.
Was he indeed the heir of France? Had he any right to that sustaining confidence which would
have borne up his heart in the midst of every discouragement? His very mother had given him
up and set him aside. He was described as the so-called Dauphin in treaties signed by Charles
and Isabeau his parents. If anyone knew, she knew; and was it possible that more powerful even
than the English, more cruel than the Burgundians, this stain of illegitimacy was upon him,
making all effort vain? There is no telling where the sensitive point is in any man's heart,
and little worthy as was this King, the story we are here told has a thrill of truth in it.
It is reported by a certain Sala, who declares that he had it from the lips of Charles's favourite
and close follower, the Seigneur de Boisi, a courtier who, after the curious custom of the
time, shared even the bed of his master. This was confided to Boisi by the King in the deepest
confidence, in the silence of the wakeful night:

"This was in the time of the good King Charles, when he knew not what step to take, and did
nothing but think how to redeem his life: for as I have told you he was surrounded by enemies
on all sides. The King in this extreme thought, went in one morning to his oratory all alone;
and there he made a prayer to our Lord, in his heart, without pronouncing any words, in which
he asked of Him devoutly that if he were indeed the true heir, descended from the royal House
of France, and that justly the kingdom was his, that He would be pleased to guard and defend
him, or at the worst to give him grace to escape into Spain or Scotland, whose people, from
all antiquity, were brothers-in-arms, friends and allies of the kings of France, and that he
might find a refuge there."

Perhaps there is some excuse for a young man's endeavour to forget himself in folly or even
in dissipation when his secret thoughts are so despairing as these.

It was soon after this melancholy moment that the arrival of Jeanne took place. The King led
her aside, touched as all were, by her look of perfect sincerity and good faith; but it is
she herself, not Charles, who repeats what she said to him. "I have to tell you," said the
young messenger of God, "on the part of my Lord (Messire) that you are the true heir of France
and the son of the King; He has sent me to conduct you to Rheims that you may receive your
consecration and your crown,"--perhaps here, Jeanne caught some look which she did not understand
in his eyes, for she adds with, one cannot but think a touch of sternness--"if you will."

Was it a direct message from God in answer to his prayer, uttered within his own heart, without
words, so that no one could have guessed that secret? At least it would appear that Charles
thought so: for how should this peasant maid know the secret fear that had gnawed at his heart?
"When thou wast in the garden under the fig-tree I saw thee." Great was the difference between
the Israelite without guile and the troubled young man, with whose fate the career of a great
nation was entangled; but it is not difficult to imagine what the effect must have been on
the mind of Charles when he was met by this strange, authoritative statement, uttered like
all that Jeanne said, de la part de Dieu.

The impression thus made, however, was on Charles alone, and he was surrounded by councillors,
so much the more pedantic and punctilious as they were incapable, and placed amidst pressing
necessities with which in themselves they had no power to cope. It may easily be allowed, also,
that to risk any hopes still belonging to the hapless young King on the word of a peasant girl
was in itself, according to every law of reason, madness and folly. She would seem to have
had the women on her side always and at every point. The Church did not stir, or else was hostile;
the commanders and military men about, regarded with scornful disgust the idea that an enterprise
which they considered hopeless should be confided to an ignorant woman--all with perfect reason
we are obliged to allow. Probably it was to gain time--yet without losing the aid of such a
stimulus to the superstitious among the masses--and to retard any rash undertaking--that it
was proposed to subject Jeanne to an examination of doctors and learned men touching her faith
and the character of her visions, which all this time had been of continual recurrence, yet
charged with no further revelation, no mystic creed, but only with the one simple, constantly
repeated command.

Accordingly, after some preliminary handling by half a dozen bishops, Jeanne was taken to Poitiers--where
the university and the local parliament, all the learning, law, and ecclesiastical wisdom which
were on the side of the King, were assembled--to undergo this investigation. It is curious
that the entire history of this wildest and strangest of all visionary occurrences is to be
found in a series of processes at law, each part recorded and certified under oath; but so
it is. The village maid was placed at the bar, before a number of acute legists, ecclesiastics,
and statesmen, to submit her to a not-too-benevolent cross-examination. Several of these men
were still alive at the time of the Rehabilitation and gave their recollections of this examination,
though its formal records have not been preserved. A Dominican monk, Aymer, one of an order
she loved, addressed her gravely with the severity with which that institution is always credited.
"You say that God will deliver France; if He has so determined, He has no need of men-at-arms."
"Ah!" cried the girl, with perhaps a note of irritation in her voice, "the men must fight;
it is God who gives the victory." To another discomfited Brother, Jeanne, exasperated, answered
with a little roughness, showing that our Maid, though gentle as a child to all gentle souls,
was no piece of subdued perfection, but a woman of the fields, and lately much in the company
of rough-spoken men. He was of Limoges, a certain Brother Seguin, "bien aigre homme," and disposed
apparently to weaken the trial by questions without importance: he asked her what language
her celestial visitors spoke? "Better than yours," answered the peasant girl. He could not
have been, as we say in Scotland, altogether "an ill man," for he acknowledged that he spoke
the patois of his district, and therefore that the blow was fair. But perhaps for the moment
he was irritated too. He asked her, a question equally unnecessary, "do you believe in God?"
to which with more and more impatience she made a similar answer: "Better than you do." There
was nothing to be made of one so well able to defend herself. "Words are all very well," said
the monk, "but God would not have us believe you, unless you show us some sign." To this Jeanne
made an answer more dignified, though still showing signs of exasperation, "I have not come
to Poitiers to give signs," she said; "but take me to Orleans--I will then show the signs I
am sent to show. Give me as small a band as you please, but let me go."

The situation of Orleans was at the time a desperate one. It was besieged by a strong army
of English, who had built a succession of towers round the city, from which to assail it, after
the manner of the times. The town lies in the midst of the plain of the Loire, with not so
much as a hillock to offer any advantage to the besiegers. Therefore these great works were
necessary in face of a very strenuous resistance, and the possibility of provisioning the besieged,
which their river secured. The English from their high towers kept up a disastrous fire, which,
though their artillery was of the rudest kind, did great execution. The siege was conducted
by eminent generals. The works were of themselves great fortifications, the assailants numerous,
and strengthened by the prestige of almost unbroken success; there seemed no human hope of
the deliverance of the town unless by an overwhelming army, which the King's party did not
possess, or by some wonderful and utterly unexpected event. Jeanne had always declared the
destruction of the English and the relief of Orleans to be the first step in her mission.

Besides the formal and official examination of her faith and character, held at Poitiers, private
inquests of all kinds were made concerning of the claims of the miraculous maid. She was visited
by every curious person, man or woman, in the neighbourhood, and plied with endless questions,
so that her simple personal story, and that of her revelations--mes voix, as she called them--became
familiarly known from her own report, to the whole country round about. The women pressed a
question specially interesting--for no doubt, many a good mother half convinced otherwise,
shook her head at Jeanne's costume--Why she wore the dress of a man? for which the Maid gave
very good reasons: in the first place because it was the only dress for fighting, which, though
so far from her desires or from the habits of her life, was henceforward to be her work; and
also because in her strange circumstances, constrained as she was to live among men, she considered
it safest for herself--statements which evidently convinced the minds of the questioners. It
was, no doubt, good policy to make her thus widely and generally known, and the result was
a daily growing enthusiasm for her and belief in her, in all classes. The result of the formal
process was that the doctors could find nothing against her, and they reluctantly allowed that
the King might lawfully take what advantage he could of her offered services.

Jeanne was then brought back to Chinon, where she was lodged in one of the great towers still
standing, though no special room is pointed out as hers. And there she was subjected to another
process, more penetrating still than the interrogations of the graver tribunals. The Queens
and their ladies and all the women of the Court took her in hand. They inquired into her history
in every subtle and intimate feminine way, testing her innocence and purity; and once more
she came out triumphant. The final judgment was given as follows: "After hearing all these
reports, the King taking into consideration the great goodness that was in the Maid, and that
she declared herself to be sent by God, it was by the said Seigneur and his council determined
that from henceforward he should make use of her for his wars, since it was for this that she
was sent."

It was now necessary to equip Jeanne for her service. She had a maison, an état majeur, or
staff, formed for her, the chief of which, Jean d'Aulon, already distinguished and worthy of
such a trust never left her thenceforward until the end of her active career. Her chaplain,
Jean Pasquerel, also followed her fortunes faithfully. Charles would have given her a sword
to replace the probably indifferent weapon given her by Baudricourt at Vaucouleurs; but Jeanne
knew where to find the sword destined for her. She gave orders that someone should be sent
to Fierbois, the village at which she had paused on her way to Chinon, to fetch a sword which
would be found there buried behind the high altar of the church of St. Catherine. To make this
as little miraculous as possible, we are told by some historians that it was common for knights
to be buried with their arms, and that Jeanne, in her visit to this church, where she heard
three masses in succession to make up for the absence of constant religious services on her
journey--had probably seen some tomb or other token that such an interment had taken place.
However, as we are compelled to receive the far greater miracle of Jeanne herself and her work,
without explanation, it is foolish to take the trouble to attempt any explanation of so small
a matter as this. The sword in fact was found, by the clergy of the church, and was by them
cleaned and polished and put in a scabbard of crimson velvet, scattered over with fleur-de-lys
in gold, for her use. Her standard, which she considered of the greatest importance was made
apparently at Tours. It was of white linen, fringed with silk and embroidered with a figure
of the Saviour holding a globe in His hands, while an angel knelt at either side in adoration.
Jhesus' Maria was inscribed at the foot. A repetition of this banner, which must have been
re-copied from age to age is to be seen now at Tours. Having indicated the exact device to
be emblazoned upon the banner, as dictated to her by her saints,--Margaret and Catherine--Jeanne
announced her intention of carrying it herself, a somewhat surprising office for one who was
to act as a general. But it was the command of her heavenly guides. "Take the standard on the
part of God, and carry it boldly," they had said. She had, besides, a simple, half-childish
intention of her own in this, which she explained shame-faced--she had no wish to use her sword
though she loved it, and would kill no man. The banner was a more safe occupation, and saved
her from all possibility of blood-shedding; it must however, have required the robust arm of
a peasant to sustain the heavy weight.

It will show how long a time all these examinations and preparations had taken when we read
that Jeanne set out from Blois, where she had passed some time in military preparations, only
on the 27th day of April; nearly two whole months had thus been taken up in testing her truth,
and arranging details, trifling and unnecessary in her eyes:--a period which had been passed
in great anxiety by the people of Orleans, with the huge bastilles of the English--three of
which were named Paris, Rouen, and London--towering round them, their provisions often intercepted,
all the business of life come to a standstill, and the overwhelming responsibility upon them
of being almost the last barrier between the invader and the final subjugation of France. It
is strange to add that, judging by ordinary rules, the garrison of Orleans ought to have been
quite sufficient in itself in numbers and science of war, to have beaten and dispersed the
English force which had thus succeeded in shutting them in; there were many notable captains
among them, with Dunois, known as the Bastard of Orleans, one of the most celebrated and brave
of French generals, at their head. Dunois was in no way inferior to the generals of the English
army; he was popular, beloved by the people and soldiers alike, and though illegitimate, of
the House of Orleans, one of the native seigneurs of the place. The wonder is how he and his
officers permitted the building of these towers, and the shutting in of the town which they
were quite strong enough to protect. But it was a losing game which they were playing, a part
which does not suit the genius of the nation; and the superstition in favour of the English
who had won so many battles with all the disadvantages on their side,--cutting the finest armies
to pieces--was strong upon the imagination of the time. It seemed a fate which no valour or
skill upon the side of the French could avert. Dunois, himself an unlikely person, one would
have thought, to yield the honour of the fight to a woman, seems to have perceived that without
a strong counter-motive, not within the range of ordinary methods, the situation was beyond hope.

Accordingly, on the 27th or 28th of April, Jeanne set out at the head of her little army, accompanied
by a great number of generals and captains. She had been equipped by the Queen of Sicily (with
a touch of that keen sense of decorative effect which belonged to the age) in white armour
inlaid with silver--all shining like her own St. Michael himself, a radiance of whiteness and
glory under the sun--armed de toutes pièces sauve la teste, her uncovered head rising in full
relief from the dazzling breastplate and gorget. This is the description given of her by an
eye-witness a little later. The country is flat as the palm of one's hand. The white armour
must have flashed back the sun for miles and miles of the level road, to the eyes which from
the height of any neighbouring tower watched the party setting out. It is all fertile now,
the richest plain, and even then, corn and wine must have been in full bourgeon, the great
fresh greenness of the big leaves coming out upon such low stumps of vine as were left in the
soil; but the devastated country was in those days covered with a wild growth like the macchia
of Italian wilds, which half hid the movements of the expedition. They went by the Loire to
Tours, where Jeanne had been assigned a dwelling of her own, with the estate of a general;
and from thence to Blois, where they had to wait for some days while the convoy of provisions,
which they were to convey to Orleans, was being prepared. And there Jeanne fulfilled one of
the preliminary duties of her mission. She had informed her examiners at Poitiers that she
had been commanded to write to the English generals before attacking them, appealing to them
de la part de Dieu, to give up their conquests, and leave France to the French. The letter
which we quote would seem to have been dictated by her at Poitiers, probably to the confessor
who now formed part of her suite and who attended her wherever she went:

JHESUS MARIA.

King of England, and you Duke of Bedford calling yourself Regent of France, you, William de
la Poule, Comte de Sulford, John, Lord of Talbot, and you Thomas, Lord of Scales, who call
yourself lieutenants of the said Bedford, listen to the King of Heaven: Give back to the Maid
who is here sent on the part of God the King of Heaven, the keys of all the good towns which
you have taken by violence in His France. She is ready to make peace if you will hear reason
and be just towards France and pay for what you have taken. And you archers, brothers-in-arms,
gentles and others who are before the town of Orleans, go in peace on the part of God; if you
do not so you will soon have news of the Maid who will see you shortly to your great damage. Spirit.
"In brief, you know nothing whatever about it?"

Myself. "Uncommonly little."

Spirit. "Do you remember your lives as elementals?"

Myself (definitely). "No!"

Spirit. "Then where do you suppose yourselves to begin?"

Myself. "We don't know. There are various guesses. None of them particularly likely."

Spirit. "Such as?"

Myself.

"Oh, some of us believe that the soul or spirit is a special creation made by a higher power
we call God, and breathed into the body at birth. And some that the soul or spirit, itself eternal,
finds a temporary house in the body, and progresses from one to another with intervals between
each incarnation."

Spirit. "Then this being born is what we should call dying?"

Myself. "Quite. It makes no difference. And, as a matter of fact, the overwhelming majority of
us--that is to say, all but about one in every million--never bother our heads where we came from,
or what's likely to happen to us when we die, or are born, as you would call it."

I have a note here that after this we were both silent for about ten minutes.

Spirit (despondently). "I wish I could get some sort of idea what you do all the time and what
you think about. I thought, when I so unexpectedly got into touch with someone in the future
state, that I should be able to learn everything. And I have, so far, learnt nothing--absolutely
nothing. In fact, except that I have been able to correct my inferences with regard to one or two purely
material experiments, I may say that I know less now than I did before. And, by the way, those
things over there--he pointed to the washstand--I noticed that at certain times you go through some
ceremony with them upstairs, and as I wished to discover if there was any reason why you should
not perform the same ceremony downstairs, I moved the things. Well, I noticed that the spirit
who was here before you was apparently very annoyed.

Can you give me any explanation of that?"

Myself. "Our bodies become soiled by contact with matter, and we wash
ourselves in water. We prefer to do it in our bedrooms."

Spirit.
"Why?"

Myself. "We use a certain set of rooms for one purpose and
another set for other purposes."

Spirit. "Why?"

Myself. "I don't
know why. We do."

Spirit. "But you are sure of the fact, even if
you can give no reason?"

Myself. "Absolutely."

Spirit. "I wish I
could prove that. One of my fellow-scientists, who has recently been
able to press his investigations even further than I have up to the
present time, has recently brought forward good evidence to prove
that spirits are all black, wear no coverings on their bodies, live
in the simplest of dwellings, and, although they have a few ceremonies,
certainly have none which in any way corresponds to that you have
just described."

Myself. "He has probably been investigating the
habits of the Australian aborigines."

Spirit. "What are they?"

Myself.
"Men, or, as you would say, spirits, like us in a few respects, but
utterly different in most."

Spirit. "Have you ever seen them?"

Myself.
"No."

Spirit. "Or met anyone who has?"

Myself. "No."

Spirit. "Then
this account of them tallies with nothing in your experience."

Myself.
"No, but they exist all right. There's no doubt of that."

Spirit.
"I question it. In any case, I could not accept your word as evidence,
seeing that you have neither seen them yourself nor met with anyone
who has."

And so on, you know (the Researcher muttered, flicking
over the pages of his note-book). There could not be found more unlikely companions than these two, to conduct to a
great battle the country maid who was to carry the honours of the day from them both, and make
men fight like heroes, who under them did nothing but run away. The candour and true courage
of such leaders in circumstances so extraordinary, are beyond praise, for it was an offence
both to their pride and skill in their profession, had she been anything less than the messenger
of God which she claimed to be; and these rude soldiers were not men to be easily moved by
devout imaginations. There would seem, however, even in the case of the greater of the two,
to have arisen a strange friendship and mutual understanding between the famous man of war
and the peasant girl. Jeanne, always straightforward and simple, speaks to him, not with the
downcast eyes of her humility, but as an equal, as if the great Dunois had been a prud' homme
of her own degree. There is no appearance indeed that the Maid allowed herself to be overborne
now by any shyness or undue humility. She speaks loudly, so as to be heard by those fighting
men, taking something of their own brief and decisive tone, often even impatient, as one who
would not be put aside either by cunning or force.

Her meeting with Dunois makes this at once evident. She had been deceived in the manner of
her approach to Orleans, her companions, among whom there were several field-marshals and distinguished
leaders, taking advantage of her ignorance of the place to lead her by the opposite bank of
the river instead of that on which the English towers were built, which she desired to attack
at once. This was the beginning of a long series of deceits and hostile combinations, by which
at every step of her way she was met and retarded; but it turned, as these devices generally
did, to the discomfiture of the adverse captains. She crossed the river at Chécy above Orleans,
to meet Dunois who had come so far to meet her. It will be seen by the conversation which she
held with him on his first appearance, how completely Jeanne had learnt to assert herself,
and how much she had overcome any fear of man. "Are you the Bastard of Orleans?" she said.
"I am; and glad of your coming," he replied. "Is it you who have had me led to this side of
the river and not to the bank on which Talbot is and his English?" He answered that he and
the wisest of the leaders had thought it the best and safest way. "The counsel of God, our
Lord, is more sure and more powerful than yours," she replied. The expedition, as a matter
of fact, had to turn back, and to lose precious time, there being, it is to be presumed, no
means of transporting so large a force across the river. The large convoy of provisions which
Jeanne brought was embarked in boats while the majority of the army returned to Blois, in order
to cross by the bridge.

Jeanne, however, having freely expressed her opinion, adapted herself to the circumstances,
though extremely averse to separate herself from her soldiers, good men who had confessed and
prepared their souls for every emergency. She finally consented, however, to ride on with Dunois
and La Hire. The wind was against the convoy, so that the heavy boats, deeply laden with beeves
and corn, had a dangerous and slow voyage before them. "Have patience," cried Jeanne; "by the
help of God all will go well"; and immediately the wind changed, to the astonishment and joy
of all, and the boats arrived in safety "in spite of the English, who offered no hindrance
whatever," as she had predicted. The little party made their way along the bank, and in the
twilight of the April evening, about eight o'clock, entered Orleans. The Deliverer, it need
not be said, was hailed with joy indescribable. She was on a white horse, and carried, Dunois
says, the banner in her hand, though it was carried before her when she entered the town. The
white figure in the midst of those darkly gleaming mailed men, would in itself throw a certain
glory through the dimness of the night, as she passed the gates and came into view by the blaze
of all the torches, and the lights in the windows, over the dark swarming crowds of the citizens.
Her white banner waving, her white armour shining, it was little wonder that the throng that
filled the streets received the Maid "as if they had seen God descending among them." "And
they had good reason," says the Chronicle, "for they had suffered many disturbances, labours,
and pains, and, what is worse, great doubt whether they ever should be delivered. But now all
were comforted, as if the siege were over, by the divine strength that was in this simple Maid
whom they regarded most affectionately, men, women, and little children. There was a marvellous
press around her to touch her or the horse on which she rode, so much so that one of the torchbearers
approached too near and set fire to her pennon; upon which she touched her horse with her spurs,
and turning him cleverly, extinguished the flame, as if she had long followed the wars."

There could have been nothing she resembled so much as St. Michael, the warrior-angel, who,
as all the world knew, was her chief counsellor and guide, and who, no doubt, blazed, a familiar
figure, from some window in the cathedral to which this his living picture rode without a pause,
to give thanks to God before she thought of refreshment or rest. She spoke to the people who
surrounded her on every side as she went on through the tumultuous streets, bidding them be
of good courage and that if they had faith they should escape from all their troubles. And
it was only after she had said her prayers and rendered her thanksgiving, that she returned
to the house selected for her--the house of an important personage, Jacques Boucher, treasurer
to the Duke of Orleans, not like the humble places where she had formerly lodged. The houses
of that age were beautiful, airy and light, with much graceful ornament and solid comfort,
the arched and vaulted Gothic beginning to give place to those models of domestic architecture
which followed the Renaissance, with their ample windows and pleasant space and breadth. There
the table was spread with a joyous meal in honour of this wonderful guest, to which, let us
hope, Dunois and La Hire and the rest did full justice. But Jeanne was indifferent to the feast.
She mixed with water the wine poured for her into a silver cup, and dipped her bread in it,
five or six small slices. The visionary peasant girl cared for none of the dainty meats. And
then she retired to the comfort of a peaceful chamber, where the little daughter of the house
shared her bed: strange return to the days when Hauvette and Mengette in Domremy lay by her
side and talked as girls love to do, through half the silent night. Perhaps little Charlotte,
too, lay awake with awe to wonder at that other young head on the pillow, a little while ago
shut into the silver helmet, and shining like the archangel's. The état majeur, the Chevalier
d'Aulon, Jean de Metz, and Bertrand de Poulengy, who had never left her, first friends and
most faithful, and her brother Pierre d'Arc, were lodged in the same house. It was the last
night of April, 1429.

     (1) The dates must of course be reckoned by the old style.--
     This letter was dispatched from Tours, during her pause
     there.

CHAPTER IV -- THE RELIEF OF ORLEANS. MAY 1-8, 1429.

Next morning there was a council of war among the many leaders now collected within the town.
It was the eager desire of Jeanne that an assault should be made at once, in all the enthusiasm
of the moment, upon the English towers, without waiting even for the arrival of the little
army which she had preceded. But the captains of the defence who had borne the heat and burden
of the day, and who might naturally enough be irritated by the enthusiasm with which this stranger
had been received, were of a different opinion. I quote here a story, for which I am told there
is no foundation whatever, touching a personage who probably never existed, so that the reader
may take it as he pleases, with indulgence for the writer's weakness, or indignation at her
credulity. It seems to me, however, to express very naturally a sentiment which must have existed
among the many captains who had been fighting unsuccessfully for months in defence of the beleaguered
city. A certain Guillaume de Gamache felt himself insulted above all by the suggestion. "What,"
he cried, "is the advice of this hussy from the fields (une péronnelle de bas lieu) to be taken
against that of a knight and captain! I will fold up my banner and become again a simple soldier.
I would rather have a nobleman for my master than a woman whom nobody knows."

Dunois, who was too wise to weaken the forces at his command by such a quarrel, is said to
have done his best to reconcile and soothe the angry captain. This, however, if it was true,
was only a mild instance of the perpetual opposition which the Maid encountered from the very
beginning of her career and wherever she went. Notwithstanding her victories, she remained
through all her career a péronnelle to these men of war (with the noble exception, of course,
of Alençon, Dunois, Xaintrailles, La Hire, and others). They were sore and wounded by her appearance
and her claims. If they could cheat her, balk her designs, steal a march in any way, they did
so, from first to last, always excepting the few who were faithful to her. Dunois could afford
to be magnanimous, but the lesser men were jealous, envious, embittered. A péronnelle, a woman
nobody knew! And they themselves were belted knights, experienced soldiers, of the best blood
of France. It was not unnatural; but this atmosphere of hate, malice, and mortification forms
the background of the picture wherever the Maid moves in her whiteness, illuminating to us
the whole scene. The English hated her lustily as their enemy and a witch, casting spells and
enchantments so that the strength was sucked out of a man's arm and the courage from his heart:
but the Frenchmen, all but those who were devoted to her, regarded her with an ungenerous opposition,
the hate of men shamed and mortified by every triumph she achieved.

Jeanne was angry, too, and disappointed, more than she had been by all discouragements before.
She had believed, perhaps, that once in the field these oppositions would be over, and that
her mission would be rapidly accomplished. But she neither rebelled nor complained. What she
did was to occupy herself about what she felt to be her business, without reference to any
commander. She sent out two heralds,(1) who were attached to her staff, and therefore at her
personal disposal, to summon once more Talbot and Glasdale (Classidas, as the French called
him) de la part de Dieu to evacuate their towers and return home. It would seem that in her
miraculous soul she had a visionary hope that this appeal might be successful. What so noble,
what so Christian, as that the one nation should give up, of free-will, its attempt upon the
freedom and rights of another, if once the duty were put simply before it--and both together
joining hands, march off, as she had already suggested, to do the noblest deed that had ever
yet been done for Christianity? That same evening she rode forth with her little train; and
placing herself on the town end of the bridge (which had been broken in the middle), as near
as the breach would permit to the bastille, or fort of the Tourelles, which was built across
the further end of the bridge, on the left side of the Loire--called out to the enemy, summoning
them once more to withdraw while there was time. She was overwhelmed, as might have been expected,
with a storm of abusive shouts and evil words, Classidas and his captains hurrying to the walls
to carry on the fierce exchange of abuse. To be called dairy-maid and péronnelle was a light
matter, but some of the terms used were so cruel that, according to some accounts, she betrayed
her womanhood by tears, not prepared apparently for the use of such foul weapons against her. And
yet we need not for all that shatter our old ideals, or force ourselves too persistently to
look at Venetian art from another and a more prosaic, because a more
precise and literal, standpoint.

CHAPTER II

Frescoes of the Scuola del Santo--The "Herodias" type of picture--Holy Families and Sacred Conversations--Date
of the "Cristo della Moneta" Is the "Concert" of the Pitti by Titian?--The "Bacchanal" of Alnwick
Castle.

It has been pointed out by Titian's biographers that the wars which followed upon the League
of Cambrai had the effect of dispersing all over North Italy the chief Venetian artists of the
younger generation. It was not long after this--on the death of his master Giorgione--that Sebastiano
Luciani migrated to Rome and, so far as he could, shook off his allegiance to the new Venetian
art; it was then that Titian temporarily left the city of his adoption to do work in fresco at Padua
and Vicenza.

If the date 1508, given by Vasari for the great frieze-like wood-engraving, The Triumph of Faith,
be accepted, it must be held that it was executed before the journey to Padua. Ridolfi[23] cites
painted compositions of the Triumph as either the originals or the repetitions of the wood-engravings,
for which Titian himself drew the blocks. The frescoes themselves, if indeed Titian carried them
out on the walls of his house at Padua, as has been suggested, have perished; but that they ever
came into existence there would not appear to be any direct evidence. The types, though broadened
and coarsened in the process of translation into wood-engraving, are not materially at variance
with those in the frescoes of the Scuola del Santo. But the movement, the spirit of the whole
is essentially different. This mighty, onward-sweeping procession, with Adam and Eve, the Patriarchs,
the Prophets and Sibyls, the martyred Innocents, the great chariot with Christ enthroned, drawn
by the four Doctors of the Church and impelled forward by the Emblems of the four Evangelists,
with a great company of Apostles and Martyrs following, has all the vigour and elasticity, all
the decorative amplitude that is wanting in the frescoes of the Santo. It is obvious that inspiration
was derived from the Triumphs of Mantegna, then already so widely popularised by numerous engravings.
Titian and those under whose inspiration he worked here obviously intended an antithesis to
the great series of canvases presenting the apotheosis of Julius Caesar, which were then to be
seen in the not far distant Mantua. Have we here another pictorial commentary, like the famous
Cristo detta Moneta, with which we shall have to deal presently, on the "Quod est Caesaris Caesari,
quod est Dei Deo," which was the favourite device of Alfonso of Ferrara
and the legend round his gold coins?

The whole question is interesting, and deserves more careful consideration than can be accorded
to it on the present occasion. Hardly again, until he reached extreme old age, did such an
impulse of sacred passion colour the art of the painter of Cadore as here. In the earlier section
of his life-work the Triumph of Faith constitutes a striking exception.

Passing over, as relatively unimportant, Titian's share in the much-defaced fresco decorations of the
Scuola del Carmine, we come now to those more celebrated ones in the Scuola del Santo. Out of the
sixteen frescoes executed in 1510-11 by Titian, in concert with Domenico Campagnola and other
assistants of less fame, the following three are from the brush of the master himself:--St.
Anthony causes a new-born Infant to speak, testifying to the innocence of its Mother; St. Anthony
heals the leg of a Youth; A jealous Husband puts to death his Wife, whom the Saint afterwards
restores to life. Here the figures, the composition, the beautiful landscape backgrounds bear
unmistakably the trace of Giorgione's influence. The composition has just the timidity, the lack
of rhythm and variety, that to the last marks that of Barbarelli. The figures have his naïve
truth, his warmth and splendour of life, but not his gilding touch of spirituality to lift the uninspiring
subjects a little above the actual. The Nobleman putting to death his Wife is dramatic, almost
terrible in its fierce, awkward realism, yet it does not rise much higher in interpretation
than what our neighbours would to-day call the drame passionel. The interest is much the same
that is aroused in a student of Elizabethan literature by that study of murder, Arden of Feversham,
not that higher attraction that he feels--horrors notwithstanding--for The Maid's Tragedy of
Beaumont and Fletcher, or The Duchess of Malfi of Webster.[24]

A convenient date for the magnificent St. Mark enthroned, with SS. Sebastian, Roch, Cosmas, and Damianus,
is 1512, when Titian, having completed his share of the work at the Scuola del Santo, returned
to Venice. True, it is still thoroughly Giorgionesque, except in the truculent St. Mark; but,
then, as essentially so were the frescoes just terminated. The noble altar-piece[25] symbolises,
or rather commemorates, the steadfastness of the State face to face
with the terrors of the League of Cambrai:--on the one side St. Sebastian,
standing, perhaps, for martyrdom by superior force of arms, St. Roch
for plague (the plague of Venice in 1510); on the other, SS.

Cosmas and Damianus, suggesting the healing of these evils. The colour is Giorgionesque in that
truer sense in which Barbarelli's own is so to be described. Especially does it show points
of contact with that of the so-called Three Philosophers, which, on the authority of Marcantonio
Michiel (the Anonimo), is rightly or wrongly held to be one of the last works of the Castelfranco
master. That is to say, it is both sumptuous and boldly contrasted in the local hues, the
sovereign unity of general tone not being attained by any sacrifice or attenuation, by any
undue fusion of these, as in some of the second-rate Giorgionesques. Common to both is the
use of a brilliant scarlet, which Giorgione successfully employs in the robe of the Trojan Aeneas,
and Titian on a more extensive scale in that of one of the healing saints. These last are among
the most admirable portrait-figures in the life-work of Titian. In them a simplicity, a concentration
akin to that of Giovanni Bellini and Bartolommeo Montagna is combined with the suavity and
flexibility of Barbarelli. The St. Sebastian is the most beautiful among the youthful male figures,
as the Venus of Giorgione and the Venus of the Sacred and Profane Love are the most beautiful among
the female figures to be found in the Venetian art of a century in which such presentments of
youth in its flower abounded. There is something androgynous, in the true sense of the word,
in the union of the strength and pride of lusty youth with a grace which is almost feminine in
its suavity, yet not offensively effeminate. It should be noted that a delight in portraying the
fresh comeliness, the elastic beauty of form proper to the youth just passing into the man was
common to many Venetian painters at this stage, and coloured their art as it had coloured the
whole art of Greece.

Hereabouts the writer would like to place the singularly attractive, yet a little puzzling,
Madonna and Child with St. Joseph and a Shepherd, which is No. 4
in the National Gallery.

The type of the landscape is early, and even for that time the execution in this particular
is, for Titian, curiously small and wanting in breadth. Especially the projecting rock, with
its fringe of half-bare shrubs profiled against the sky, recalls the backgrounds of the Scuola
del Santo frescoes. The noble type and the stilted attitude of the St. Joseph suggest the St.
Mark of the Salute. The frank note of bright scarlet in the jacket of the thick-set young shepherd,
who calls up rather the downrightness of Palma than the idyllic charm of Giorgione, is to be
found again in the Salute picture. The unusually pensive Madonna reminds the spectator, by a
certain fleshiness and matronly amplitude of proportion, though by no means in sentiment, of
the sumptuous dames who look on so unconcernedly in the St. Anthony causing a new-born Infant
to speak, of the Scuola. Her draperies show, too, the jagged breaks and close parallel folds
of the early time before complete freedom of design was attained.

The splendidly beautiful Herodias with the head of St. John the Baptist, in the Doria Gallery, formerly
attributed to Pordenone, but by Morelli definitively placed among the Giorgionesque works of Titian,
belongs to about the same time as the Sacred and Profane Love, and would therefore come in rather
before than after the sojourn at Padua and Vicenza. The intention has been not so much to
emphasise the tragic character of the motive as to exhibit to the
highest advantage the voluptuous charm, the languid indifference of
a Venetian beauty posing for Herod's baleful consort.

Repetitions of this Herodias exist in the Northbrook Collection and in that of Mr. R.H. Benson.
The latter, which is presumably from the workshop of the master, and shows variations in one
or two unimportant particulars from the Doria picture, is here, failing the original, reproduced
with the kind permission of the owner. A conception traceable back to Giorgione would appear
to underlie, not only this Doria picture, but that Herodias which at Dorchester House is, for not
obvious reasons, attributed to Pordenone, and another similar one by Palma Vecchio, of which
a late copy exists in the collection of the Earl of Chichester. Especially is this community of origin
noticeable in the head of St. John on the charger, as it appears in each of these works. All
of them again show a family resemblance in this particular respect to the interesting full-length
Judith at the Hermitage, now ascribed to Giorgione, to the over-painted half-length Judith in
the Querini-Stampalia Collection at Venice, and to Hollar's print after a picture supposed by
the engraver to give the portrait of Giorgione himself in the character of David, the slayer
of Goliath.[26] The sumptuous but much-injured Vanitas, which is No. 1110 in the Alte Pinakothek
of Munich--a beautiful woman of the same opulent type as the Herodias, holding a mirror which reflects
jewels and other symbols of earthly vanity--may be classed with the last-named work. Again
we owe it to Morelli[27] that this painting, ascribed by Crowe and Cavalcaselle--as the Herodias
was ascribed--to Pordenone, has been with general acceptance classed among the early works
of Titian. The popular Flora of the Uffizi, a beautiful thing still, though all the bloom of its
beauty has been effaced, must be placed rather later in this section of Titian's life-work, displaying
as it does a technique more facile and accomplished, and a conception
of a somewhat higher individuality.

The model is surely the same as that which has served for the Venus of the Sacred and Profane
Love, though the picture comes some years after that piece. Later still comes the so-called Alfonso
d'Este and Laura Dianti, as to which something will be said farther on. Another puzzle is
provided by the beautiful "Noli me tangere" of the National Gallery, which must necessarily have
its place somewhere here among the early works. Giorgionesque the picture still is, and most
markedly so in the character of the beautiful landscape; yet the execution shows an altogether
unusual freedom and mastery for that period. The Magdalen is, appropriately enough, of the
same type as the exquisite, golden blond courtezans--or, if you will, models--who constantly
appear and reappear in this period of Venetian art. Hardly anywhere has the painter exhibited
a more wonderful freedom and subtlety of brush than in the figure of the Christ, in which glowing
flesh is so finely set off by the white of fluttering, half-transparent draperies. The canvas
has exquisite colour, almost without colours; the only local tint of any very defined character
being the dark red of the Magdalen's robe. Yet a certain affectation, a certain exaggeration
of fluttering movement and strained attitude repel the beholder a little at first, and neutralise
for him the rare beauties of the canvas. It is as if a wave of some strange transient influence
had passed over Titian at this moment, then again to be dissipated.

But to turn now once more to the series of our master's Holy Families and Sacred Conversations
which began with La Zingarella, and was continued with the Virgin and Child with SS. Ulfo
and Brigida of Madrid. The most popular of all those belonging to this still early time is the
Virgin with the Cherries in the Vienna Gallery. Here the painter is already completely himself.
He will go much farther in breadth if not in polish, in transparency, in forcefulness, if not in
attractiveness of colour; but he is now, in sacred art at any rate, practically free from outside
influences. For the pensive girl-Madonna of Giorgione we now have the radiant young matron of Titian,
joyous yet calm in her play with the infant Christ, while the Madonna of his master and friend was
unrestful and full of tender foreboding even in seeming repose.

Pretty close on this must have followed the Madonna and Child with St. Stephen, St. Ambrose
and St. Maurice, No 439 in the Louvre, in which the rich colour-harmonies strike a somewhat
deeper note. An atelier repetition of this fine original is No. 166 in the Vienna Gallery;
the only material variation traceable in this last-named example being that in lieu of St.
Ambrose, wearing a kind of biretta, we have St. Jerome bareheaded.

Very near in time and style to this particular series, with which it may safely be grouped,
is the beautiful and finely preserved Holy Family in the Bridgewater Gallery, where it is still
erroneously attributed to Palma Vecchio. It is to be found in the same private apartment on
the groundfloor of Bridgewater House, that contains the Three Ages. Deep glowing richness
of colour and smooth perfection without smallness of finish make this picture remarkable, notwithstanding
its lack of any deeper significance. Nor must there be forgotten in an enumeration of the early
Holy Families, one of the loveliest of all, the Madonna and Child with the infant St. John and St.
Anthony Abbot, which adorns the Venetian section of the Uffizi Gallery. Here the relationship
to Giorgione is more clearly shown than in any of these Holy Families of the first period,
and in so far the painting, which cannot be placed very early among
them, constitutes a partial exception in the series.

The Virgin is of a more refined and pensive type than in the Madonna with the Cherries of Vienna,
or the Madonna with Saints, No. 439 in the Louvre, and the divine Bambino less robust in build
and aspect. The magnificent St. Anthony is quite Giorgionesque in the serenity tinged with
sadness of his contemplative mood.

Last of all in this particular group--another work in respect of which Morelli has played the rescuer--is
the Madonna and Child with four Saints, No. 168 in the Dresden Gallery, a much-injured but
eminently Titianesque work, which may be said to bring this particular series to within a
couple of years or so of the Assunta--that great landmark of the first period of maturity.
The type of the Madonna here is still very similar to that in the Madonna with the Cherries.

Apart
from all these sacred works, and in every respect an exceptional production, is the world-famous
Cristo della Moneta of the Dresden Gallery. As to the exact date to be assigned to this panel
among the early works of Titian considerable difficulty exists. For once agreeing with Crowe and
Cavalcaselle, Morelli is inclined to disregard the testimony of Vasari, from whose text it would
result that it was painted in or after the year 1514, and to place it as far back as 1508. Notwithstanding
this weight of authority the writer is strongly inclined, following Vasari in this instance, and
trusting to certain indications furnished by the picture itself, to return to the date 1514 or thereabouts.
According to Vasari, it was painted nella porta d'un armario--that is to say, in the door of a
press or wardrobe. But this statement need not be taken in its most
literal sense. If it were to be assumed from this passage that the
picture was painted on the spot, its date must be advanced to 1516,
since Titian did not pay his first visit to Ferrara before that year.
There is no sufficient ground, however, for assuming that he did not
execute his wonderful panel in the usual fashion--that is to say,
at home in Venice. The last finishing touches might, perhaps, have
been given to it in situ, as they were to Bellini's Bacchanal, done
also for the Duke of Ferrara. The dazzling rays that shot from her armour seemed like butterflies, like doves, like
angels floating about her head. They had thought her dead, yet here she stood again without
a sign of injury; or was it Michael himself, the great archangel whom she resembled do much?
Arrows flew round her on every side but never touched her. She struck no blow, but the folds
of her standard blew against the wall, and her voice rose through all the tumult. "On! Enter!
de la part de Dieu! for all is yours."

The Maid had other words to say, "Renty, renty, Classidas!" she cried, "you called me vile
names, but I have a great pity for your soul." He on his side showered down blasphemies. He
was at the last gasp; one desperate last effort he made with a handful of men to escape from
the boulevard by the drawbridge to Les Tourelles, which crossed a narrow strip of the river.
But the bridge had been fired by a fire-ship from Orleans and gave way under the rush of the
heavily-armed men; and the fierce Classidas and his companions were plunged into the river,
where a knight in armour, like a tower falling, went to the bottom in a moment. Nearly thirty
of them, it is said, plunged thus into the great Loire and were seen no more.

It was the end of the struggle. The French flag swung forth on the parapet, the French shout
rose to heaven. Meanwhile a strange sight was to be seen--the St. Michael in shining armour,
who had led that assault, shedding tears for the ferocious Classidas, who had cursed her with
his last breath. "J'ai grande pitié de ton âme." Had he but had time to clear his soul and
reconcile himself with God!

This was virtually the end of the siege of Orleans. The broken bridge on the Loire had been
rudely mended, with a great gouttière and planks, and the people of Orleans had poured out
over it to take the Tourelles in flank--the English being thus taken between Jeanne's army
on the one side and the citizens on the other. The whole south bank of the river was cleared,
not an Englishman left to threaten the richest part of France, the land flowing with milk and
honey. And though there still remained several great generals on the other side with strong
fortifications to fall back upon, they seem to have been paralysed, and did not strike a blow.
Jeanne was not afraid of them, but her ardour to continue the fight dropped all at once; enough
had been done. She awaited the conclusion with confidence. Needless to say that Orleans was
half mad with joy, every church sounding its bells, singing its song of triumph and praise,
the streets so crowded that it was with difficulty that the Maid could make her progress through
them, with throngs of people pressing round to kiss her hand, if might be, her greaves, her
mailed shoes, her charger, the floating folds of her banner. She had said she would be wounded
and so she was, as might be seen, the envious rent of the arrow showing through the white plates
of metal on her shoulder. She had said all should be theirs de par Dieu: and all was theirs,
thanks to our Lord and also to St. Aignan and St. Euvert, patrons of Orleans, and to St. Louis
and St. Charlemagne in heaven who had so great pity of the kingdom of France: and to the Maid
on earth, the Heaven-sent deliverer, the spotless virgin, the celestial warrior--happy he who
could reach to kiss it, the point of her mailed shoe.

Someone says that she rode through all this half-delirious joy like a creature in a dream,--fatigue,
pain, the happy languor of the end attained, and also the profound pity that was the very inspiration
of her spirit, for all those souls of men gone to their account without help of Church or comfort
of priest--overwhelming her. But next day, which was Sunday, she was up again and eagerly watching
all that went on. A strange sight was Orleans on that Sunday of May. On the south side of the
Loire, all those half-ruined bastilles smoking and silenced, which once had threatened not
the city only but all the south of France; on the north the remaining bands of English drawn
up in order of battle. The excitement of the town and of the generals in it, was intense; worn
as they were with three days of continuous fighting, should they sally forth again and meet
that compact, silent, doubly defiant army, which was more or less fresh and unexhausted? Jeanne's
opinion was, No; there had been enough of fighting, and it was Sunday, the holy day; but apparently
the French did go out though keeping at a distance, watching the enemy. By orders of the Maid
an altar was raised between the two armies in full sight of both sides, and there mass was
celebrated, under the sunshine, by the side of the river which had swallowed Classidas and
all his men. French and English together devoutly turned towards and responded to that Mass
in the pause of bewildering uncertainty. "Which way are their heads turned?" Jeanne asked when
it was over. "They are turned away from us, they are turned to Meung," was the reply. "Then
let them go, de par Dieu," the Maid replied.

The siege had lasted for seven months, but eight days of the Maid were enough to bring it to
an end. The people of Orleans still, every year, on the 8th of May, make a procession round
the town and give thanks to God for its deliverance. Henceforth, the Maid was known no longer
as Jeanne d'Arc, the peasant of Domremy, but as La Pucelle d'Orléans, in the same manner in
which one might speak of the Prince of Waterloo, or the Duc de Malakoff.

     (1) Their special mission seems to have been a demand for
     the return of a herald previously sent who had never come
     back. As Dunois accompanied the demand by a threat to kill
     the English prisoners in Orleans if the herald was not sent
     back, the request was at once accorded, with fierce
     defiances to the Maid, the dairy-maid as she is called,
     bidding her go back to her cows, and threatening to burn her
     if they caught her.

     (2) I avail myself here as elsewhere of Mr. Lang's lucid
     description. "It is really perfectly intelligible. The
     Council wanted a feint on the left bank, Jeanne an attack on
     the right. She knew their scheme, untold, but entered into
     it. There was, however, no feint. She deliberately forced
     the fighting. There was grand fighting, well worth telling,"
     adds my martial critic, who understands it so much better
     than I do, and who I am happy to think is himself telling
     the tale in another way.

     (3) She had made this prophecy a month before, and it was
     recorded three weeks before the event in the Town Book of
     Brabant.--A. L.

CHAPTER V -- THE CAMPAIGN OF THE LOIRE. JUNE, JULY, 1429.

The rescue of Orleans and the defeat of the invincible English were news to move France from
one end to the other, and especially to raise the spirits and restore the courage of that part
of France which had no sympathy with the invaders and to which the English yoke was unaccustomed
and disgraceful. The news flew up and down the Loire from point to point, arousing every village,
and breathing new heart and encouragement everywhere; while in the meantime Jeanne, partially
healed of her wound (on May 9th she rode out in a maillet, a light coat of chain-mail), after
a few days' rest in the joyful city which she had saved with all its treasures, set out on
her return to Chinon. She found the King at Loches, another of the strong places on the Loire
where there was room for a Court, and means of defence for a siege should such be necessary,
as is the case with so many of these wonderful castles upon the great French river. Hot with
eagerness to follow up her first great success and accomplish her mission, Jeanne's object
was to march on at once with the young Prince, with or without his immense retinue, to Rheims
where he should be crowned and anointed King as she had promised. Her instinctive sense of
the necessities of the position, if we use that language--more justly, her boundless faith
in the orders which she believed had been give her from Heaven, to accomplish this great act
without delay, urged her on. She was straitened, if we may quote the most divine of words,
till it should be accomplished.

But the Maid, flushed with victory, with the shouts of Orleans still ringing in her ears, the
applause of her fellow-soldiers, the sound of the triumphant bells, was plunged all at once
into the indolence, the intrigues, the busy nothingness of the Court, in which whispering favourites
surrounded a foolish young prince, beguiling him into foolish amusements, alarming him with
coward fears. Wise men and buffoons alike dragged him down into that paltry abyss, the one
always counselling caution, the other inventing amusements. "Let us eat and drink for to-morrow
we die." Was it worth while to lose everything that was enjoyable in the present moment, to
subject a young sovereign to toils and excitement, and probable loss, for the uncertain advantage
of a vain ceremony, when he might be enjoying himself safely and at his ease, throughout the
summer months, on the cheerful banks of the Loire? On the other hand, the Chancellor, the Chamberlains,
the Church, all his graver advisers (with the exception of Gerson, the great theologian to
whom has been ascribed the authorship of the Imitation of Christ, who is reported to have said,
"If France deserts her, and she fails, she is none the less inspired") shook their hands and
advised that the way should be quite safe and free of danger before the King risked himself
upon it. It was thus that Jeanne was received when, newly alighted from her charger, her shoulder
still but half healed, her eyes scarcely clear of the dust and smoke, she found herself once
more in the ante-chamber, wasting the days, waiting in vain behind closed doors, tormented
by the lutes and madrigals, the light women and lighter men, useless and contemptible, of a
foolish Court. The Maid, in all the energy and impulse of a success which had proved all her
claims, had also a premonition that her own time was short, if not a direct intimation, as
some believe, to that effect: and mingled her remonstrances and appeals with the cry of warning:
"I shall only last a year: take the good of me as long as it is possible."

No doubt she was a very great entertainment to the idle seigneurs and ladies who would try
to persuade her to tell them what was to happen to them, she who had prophesied the death of
Glasdale and her own wound and so many other things. The Duke of Lorraine on her first setting
out had attempted to discover from Jeanne what course his illness would take, and whether he
should get better; and all the demoiselles and demoiseaux, the flutterers of the ante-chamber,
would be still more likely to surround with their foolish questions the stout-hearted, impatient
girl who had acquired a little of the roughness of her soldier comrades, and had never been
slow at any time in answering a fool according to his folly; for Jeanne was no meek or sentimental
maiden, but a robust and vigorous young woman, ready with a quick response, as well as with
a ready blow did any one touch her unadvisedly, or use any inappropriate freedom. At last,
one day while she waited vainly outside the cabinet in which the King was retired with a few
of his councillors, Jeanne's patience failed her altogether. She knocked at the door, and being
admitted threw herself at the feet of the King. To Jeanne he was no king till he had received
the consecration necessary for every sovereign of France. "Noble Dauphin," she cried, "why
should you hold such long and tedious councils? Rather come to Rheims and receive your worthy
crown."

The Bishop of Castres, Christopher de Harcourt, who was present, asked her if she would not
now in the presence of the King describe to them the manner in which her council instructed
her, when they talked with her. Jeanne reddened and replied: "I understand that you would like
to know, and I would gladly satisfy you." "Jeanne," said the King in his turn, "it would be
very good if you could do what they ask, in the presence of those here." She answered at once
and with great feeling: "When I am vexed to find myself disbelieved in the things I say from
God, I retire by myself and pray to God, complaining and asking of Him why I am not listened
to. And when I have prayed I hear a voice which says, 'Daughter of God, go, go, go! I will
help thee, go!' And when I hear that voice I feel a great joy." Her face shone as she spoke,
"lifting her eyes to heaven," like the face of Moses while still it bore the reflection of
the glory of God, so that the men were dazzled who sat, speechless, looking on.

The result was that Charles kindly promised to set out as soon as the road between him and
Rheims should be free of the English, especially the towns on the Loire in which a great part
of the army dispersed from Orleans had taken refuge, with the addition of the auxiliary forces
of Sir John Fastolfe, a name so much feared by the French, but at which the English reader
can scarcely forbear a smile. That the young King did not think of putting himself at the head
of the troops or of taking part in the campaign shows sufficiently that he was indeed a pauvre
sire, unworthy his gallant people. Jeanne, however, nothing better being possible, seems to
have accepted this mission with readiness, and instantly began her preparations to carry it
out. It is here that the young Seigneur Guy de Laval comes in with his description of her already
quoted. He was no humble squire but a great personage to whom the King was civil and pleased
to show courtesy. The young man writes to ses mères, that is, it seems, his mother and grandmother,
to whom, in their distant château, anxiously awaiting news of the two youths gone to the wars,
their faithful son makes his report of himself and his brother. The King, he says, sent for
the Maid, in order, Sir Guy believes, that he might see her. And afterwards the young man went
to Selles where she was just setting out on the campaign.

From Selles, he writes on the 8th June, exactly a month after the deliverance of Orleans:

"I went to her lodging to see her, and she sent for wine and told me we should soon drink wine
in Paris. It was a miraculous thing (toute divine) to see her and hear her. She left Selles
on Monday at the hour of vespers for Romorantin, the Marshal de Boussac and a great many armed
men with her. I saw her mount her horse, all in white armour excepting the head, a little axe
in her hand. The great black charger was very restive at her door and would not let her mount.
'Lead him,' she said, 'to the cross which is in front of the church,' and there she mounted,
the horse standing still as if he had been bound. Then turning towards the church which was
close by she said in a womanly voice (assez voix de femme), 'You priests and people of the
Church, make processions and prayers to God for us'; then turning to the road, 'Forward,' she
said. Her unfolded standard was carried by a page; she had her little axe in her hand, and
by her side rode a brother who had joined her eight days before. The Maid told me in her lodging
that she had sent you, grandmother, a small gold ring, which was indeed a very small affair,
and that she would fain have sent you something better, considering your recommendation. To-day
M. d'Alençon, the Bastard of Orleans, and Gaucourt were to leave Selles, following the Maid.
And men are arriving from all parts every day, all with good hope in God who I believe will
help us. But money there is none at the Court, so that for the present I have no hope of any
help or assistance. Therefore I desire you, Madame ma mère, who have my seal, spare not the
land neither in sale nor mortgage . . . . My much honoured ladies and mothers, I pray the blessed
Son of God that you have a good life and long; and both of us recommend ourselves to our brother
Louis. And we send our greetings to the reader of this letter. Written from Selles, Wednesday,
8th June, 1429. This afternoon are arrived M. de Vendôme, M. de Boussac, and others, and La
Hire has joined the army, and we shall soon be at work (on besognera bientôt)--May God grant
that it should be according to your desire."

It was with difficulty that the Duc d'Alençon had been got to start, his wife consenting with
great reluctance. He had been long a prisoner in England, and had lately been ransomed for
a great sum of money; "Was not that a sufficient sacrifice?" the Duchess asked indignantly.
To risk once more a husband so costly was naturally a painful thing to do, and why could not
Jeanne be content and stay where she was? Jeanne comforted the lady, perhaps with a little
good-humoured contempt. "Fear nothing, Madame," she said; "I will bring him back to you safe
and sound." Probably Alençon himself had no great desire to be second in command to this country
lass, even though she had delivered Orleans; and if he set out at all he would have preferred
to take another direction and to protect his own property and province. The gathering of the
army thus becomes visible to us; parties are continually coming in; and no doubt, as they marched
along, many a little château--and they abound through the country each with its attendant hamlet--gave
forth its master or heir, poor but noble, followed by as many men-at-arms, perhaps only two
or three, as the little property could raise, to swell the forces with the best and surest
of material, the trained gentlemen with hearts full of chivalry and pride, but with the same
hardy, self-denying habits as the sturdy peasants who followed them, ready for any privation;
with a proud delight to hear that on besognera bientôt--with that St. Michael at their head,
and no longer any fear of the English in their hearts.

The first besogne on which this army entered was the siege of Jargeau, June 11th, into which
town Suffolk had thrown himself and his troops when the siege of Orleans was raised. The town
was strong and so was the garrison, experienced too in all the arts of war, and already aware
of the wild enthusiasm by which Jeanne was surrounded. She passed through Orleans on the 10th
of June, and had there been joined by various new detachments. The number of her army was now
raised, we are told, to twelve hundred lances, which means, as each "lance" was a separate
party, about three thousand six hundred men, though the Journal du Siège gives a much larger
number; at all events it was a small army with which to decide a quarrel between the two greatest
nations of Christendom. Her associates in command were here once more seized by the prevailing
sin of hesitation, and many arguments were used to induce her to postpone the assault. It would
seem that this hesitation continued until the very moment of attack, and was only put an end
to when Jeanne herself impatiently seized her banner from the hand of her squire, and planting
herself at the foot of the walls let loose the fervour of the troops and cheered them on to
the irresistible rush in which lay their strength. For it was with the commanders, not with
the followers, that the weakness lay. The Maid herself was struck on the head by a stone from
the battlements which threw her down; but she sprang up again in a moment unhurt. "Sus! Sus!
Our Lord has condemned the English--all is yours!" she cried. She would seem to have stood
there in her place with her banner, a rallying-point and centre in the midst of all the confusion
of the fight, taking this for her part in it, and though she is always in the thick of the
combat, never, so far as we are told, striking a blow, exposed to all the instruments of war,
but injured by none. The effect of her mere attitude, the steadiness of her stand, under the
terrible rain of stone bullets and dreadful arrows, must of itself have been indescribable.

In the midst of the fiery struggle, there is almost a comic point in her watch over Alençon,
for whose safety she had pledged herself, now dragging him from a dangerous spot with a cry
of warning, now pushing him forward with an encouraging word. On the first of these occasions
a gentleman of Anjou, M. de Lude, who took his place in the front was killed, which seems hard
upon the poor gentleman, who was probably quite as well worth caring for as Alençon. "Avant,
gentil duc," she cried at another moment, "forward! Are you afraid? you know I promised your
wife to bring you safe home." Thus her voice keeps ringing through the din, her white armour
gleams. "Sus! Sus!" the bold cry is almost audible, sibilant, whistling amid the whistling
of the arrows.

Suffolk, the English Bayard, the most chivalrous of knights, was at last forced to yield. One
story tells us that he would give up his sword only to Jeanne herself,(1) but there is a more
authentic description of his selection of one youth among his assailants whom the quick perceptions
of the leader had singled out. "Are you noble?" Suffolk asks in the brevity of such a crisis.
"Yes; Guillame Regnault, gentleman of Auvergne." "Are you a knight?" "Not yet." The victor
put a knee to the ground before his captive, the vanquished touched him lightly on the shoulder
with the sword which he then gave over to him. Suffolk was always the finest gentleman, the
most perfect gentle knight of his time.

"Now let us go and see the English of Meung," cried Jeanne, unwearying, as soon as this victory
was assured. That place fell easily; it is called the bridge of Meung, in the Chronicle, without
further description, therefore presumably the fortress was not attacked--and they proceeded
onward to Beaugency. These towns still shine over the plain, along the line of the Loire, visible
as far as the eye will carry over the long levels, the great stream linking one to another
like pearls on a thread. There is nothing in the landscape now to give even a moment's shelter
to the progress of a marching army which must have been seen from afar, wherever it moved;
or to veil the shining battlements, and piled up citadels rising here and there, concentrated
points and centres of life. The great white Castle of Blois, the darker tower of Beaugency,
still stand where they stood when Jeanne and her men drew near, as conspicuous in their elevation
of walls and towers as if they had been planted on a mountain top. On more than one occasion
during this wonderful progress from victory to victory, the triumphant leaders returned for
a day or two to Orleans to tell their good tidings, and to celebrate their success.

And there is but one voice as to the military skill which she displayed in these repeated operations.
The reader sees her, with her banner, posted in the middle of the fight, guiding her men with
a sort of infallible instinct which adds force to her absolute quick perception of every difficulty
and advantage, the unhesitating promptitude, attending like so many servants upon the inspiration
which is the soul of all. These are things to which a writer ignorant of war is quite unable
to do justice. What was almost more wonderful still was the manner in which the Maid held her
place among the captains, most of whom would have thwarted her if they could, with a consciousness
of her own superior place, in which there is never the slightest token of presumption or self-esteem.
She guarded and guided Alençon with a good-natured and affectionate disdain; and when there
was risk of a great quarrel and a splitting of forces she held the balance like an old and
experienced guide of men.

This latter crisis occurred before Beaugency on the 15th of June, when the Comte de Richemont,
Constable of France, the brother of the Duc de Bretagne, a great nobleman and famous leader,
but in disgrace with the King and exiled from the Court, suddenly appeared with a considerable
army to join himself to the royalist forces, probably with the hope of securing the leading
place. Richemont was no friend to Jeanne; though he apparently asked her help and influence
to reconcile him with the King. He seems indeed to have thought it a disgrace to France that
her troops should be led, and victories gained by no properly appointed general, but by a woman,
probably a witch, a creature unworthy to stand before armed men. It must not be forgotten that
even now this was the general opinion of her out of the range of her immediate influence. The
English held it like a religion. Bedford, in his description of the siege of Orleans and its
total failure, reports to England that the discomfiture of the hitherto always triumphant army
was "caused in great part by the fatal faith and vain fear that the French had, of a disciple
and servant of the enemy of man, called the Maid, who uses many false enchantments, and witchcraft,
by which not only is the number of our soldiers diminished but their courage marvellously beaten
down, and the boldness of our enemies increased." Richemont was a sworn enemy of all such.
"Never man hated more, all heresies, sorcerers, and sorceresses, than he; for he burned more
in France, in Poitou, and Bretagne, than any other of his time." The French generals were divided
as to the merits of Richemont and the advantages to be derived from his support. Alençon, the
nominal commander, declared that he would leave the army if Richemont were permitted to join
it. The letters of the King were equally hostile to him; but on the other hand there were some
who held that the accession of the Constable was of more importance than all the Maids in France.
It was a moment which demanded very wary guidance. Jeanne, it would seem, did not regard his
arrival with much pleasure; probably even the increase of her forces did not please her as
it would have pleased most commanders, holding so strongly as she did, to the miraculous character
of her own mission and that it was not so much the strength of her troops as the help of God
that got her the victory. But it was not her part to reject or alienate any champion of France.
We have an account of their meeting given by a retainer of Richemont, which is picturesque
enough. "The Maid alighted from her horse, and the Constable also. 'Jeanne,' he said, 'they
tell me that you are against me. I know not if you are from God (de la part de Dieu) or not.
If you are from God I do not fear you; if you are of the devil, I fear you still less.' 'Brave
Constable,' said Jeanne, 'you have not come here by any will of mine; but since you are here
you are welcome.'"

Armed neutrality but suspicion on one side, dignified indifference but acceptance on the other,
could not be better shown.

These successes, however, had been attended by various escarmouches going on behind. The English,
who had been driven out of one town after another, had now drawn together under the command
of Talbot, and a party of troops under Fastolfe, who came to relieve them, had turned back
as Jeanne proceeded, making various unsuccessful attempts to recover what had been lost. Failing
in all their efforts they returned across the country to Genville, and were continuing their
retreat to Paris when the two enemies came within reach of each other. An encounter in open
field was a new experience of which Jeanne as yet had known nothing. She had been successful
in assault, in the operations of the siege, but to meet the enemy hand to hand in battle was
what she had never been required to do; and every tradition, every experience, was in favour
of the English. From Agincourt to the Battle of the Herrings at Rouvray near Orleans, which
had taken place in the beginning of the year (a fight so named because the field of battle
had been covered with herrings, the conquerors in this case being merely the convoy in charge
of provisions for the English, which Fastolfe commanded), such a thing had not been known as
that the French should hold their own, much less attain any victory over the invaders. In these
circumstances there was much talk of falling back upon the camp near Beaugency and of retreating
or avoiding an engagement; anything rather than hazard one of those encounters which had infallibly
ended in disaster. But Jeanne was of the same mind as always, to go forward and fear nothing.
"Fall upon them! Go at them boldly," she cried. "If they were in the clouds we should have
them. The gentle King will now gain the greatest victory he has ever had."

It is curious to hear that in that great plain of the Beauce, so flat, so fertile, with nothing
but vines and cornfields now against the horizon, the two armies at last almost stumbled upon
each other by accident, in the midst of the brushwood by which the country was wildly overgrown.
The story is that a stag roused by the French scouts rushed into the midst of the English,
who were advantageously placed among the brushwood to arrest the enemy on their march; the
wild creature terrified and flying before an army blundered into the midst of the others, was
fired at and thus betrayed the vicinity of the foe. The English had no time to form or set
up their usual defences. They were so taken by surprise that the rush of the French came without
warning, with a suddenness which gave it double force. La Hire made the first attack as leader
of the van, and there was thus emulation between the two parties, which should be first upon
the enemy. When Alençon asked Jeanne what was to be the issue of the fight, she said calmly,
"Have you good spurs?" "What! You mean we shall turn our backs on our enemies?" cried her questioner.
"Not so," she replied. "The English will not fight, they will fly, and you will want good spurs
to pursue them." Even this somewhat fantastic prophecy put heart into the men, who up to this
time had been wont to fly and not to fight.

And this was what happened, strange as it may seem. Talbot himself was with the English forces,
and many a gallant captain beside: but the men and their leaders were alike broken in spirit
and filled with superstitious terrors. Whether these were the forces of hell or those of heaven
that came against them no one could be sure; but it was a power beyond that of earth. The dazzled
eyes which seemed to see flights of white butterflies fluttering about the standard of the
Maid, could scarcely belong to one who thought her a servant of the enemy of men. But she was
a pernicious witch to Talbot, and strangely enough to Richemont also, who was on her own side.
The English force was thrown into confusion, partly, we may suppose, from the broken ground
on which they were discovered, the undergrowth of the wood which hid both armies from each
other. But soon that disorder turned into the wildest panic and flight. It would almost seem
as if between these two hereditary opponents one must always be forced into this miserable
part. Not all the chivalry of France had been able to prevent it at the long string of battles
in which they were, before the revelation of the Maid; and not the desperate and furious valour
of Talbot could preserve his English force from the infection now. Fastolfe, with the philosophy
of an old soldier, deciding that it was vain to risk his men when the field was already lost,
rode off with all his band. Talbot fought with desperation, half mad with rage to be thus a
second time overcome by so unlikely an adversary, and finally was taken prisoner; while the
whole force behind him fled and were killed in their flight, the plain being scattered with
their dead bodies.

Jeanne herself made use of those spurs concerning which she had enquired, and carried away
by the passion of battle, followed in the pursuit, we are told, until she met a Frenchman brutally
ill-using a prisoner whom he had taken, upon which the Maid, indignant, flung herself from
her horse, and, seating herself on the ground beside the unfortunate Englishman, took his bleeding
head upon her lap and, sending for a priest, made his departure from life at least as easy
as pity and spiritual consolation could make it on such a disastrous field. In all the records
there is no mention of any actual fighting on her part. She stands in the thick of the flying
arrows with her banner, exposing herself to every danger; in moments of alarm, when her forces
seem flagging, she seizes and places a ladder against the wall for an assault, and climbs the
first as some say; but we never see her strike a blow. On the banks of the Loire the fate of
the mail-clad Glasdale, hopeless in the strong stream underneath the ruined bridge, brought
tears to her eyes, and now all the excitement of the pursuit vanished in an instant from her
mind, when she saw the English man-at-arms dying without the succour of the Church. Pity was
always in her heart; she was ever on the side of the angels, though an angel of war and not
of peace.

It is perhaps because the numbers engaged were so few that this flight or "Chasse de Patay,"
has not taken a more important place in the records of French historians. In general it is
only by means of Fontenoy that the amour propre of the French nation defends itself against
the overwhelming list of battles in which the English have had the better of it. But this was
probably the most complete victory that has ever been gained over the stubborn enemy whom French
tactics are so seldom able to touch; and the conquerors were purely French without any alloy
of alien arms, except a few Scots, to help them. The entire campaign on the Loire was one of
triumph for the French arms, and of disaster for the English. They--it is perhaps a point of
national pride to admit it frankly--were as well beaten as heart of Frenchman could desire,
beaten not only in the result, but in the conduct of the campaign, in heart and in courage,
in skill and in genius. There is no reason in the world why it should not be admitted. But
it was not the French generals, not even Dunois, who secured these victories. It was the young
peasant woman, the dauntless Maid, who underneath the white mantle of her inspiration, miraculous
indeed, but not so miraculous as this, had already developed the genius of a soldier, and who
in her simplicity, thinking nothing but of her "voices" and the counsel they gave her, was
already the best general of them all.

When Talbot stood before the French generals, no less a person than Alençon himself is reported
to have made a remark to him, of that ungenerous kind which we call in feminine language "spiteful,"
and which is not foreign to the habit of that great nation. "You did not think this morning
what would have happened to you before sunset," said the Duc d'Alençon to the prisoner. "It
is the fortune of war," replied the English chief.

Once more, however it is like a sudden fall from the open air and sunshine when the victorious
army and its chiefs turned back to the Court where the King and his councillors sat idle, waiting
for news of what was being done for them. A battle-field is no fine sight; the excitement of
the conflict, the great end to be served by it, the sense of God's special protection, even
the tremendous uproar of the fight, the intoxication of personal action, danger, and success
have, we do not doubt a rapture and passion in them for the moment, which carry the mind away;
but the bravest soldier holds his breath when he remembers the after scene, the dead and dying,
the horrible injuries inflicted, the loss and misery. However, not even the miserable scene
of the Chasse de Patay is so painful as the reverse of the dismal picture, the halls of the
royal habitation where, while men died for him almost within hearing of the fiddling and the
dances, the young King trifled away his useless days among his idle favourites, and the musicians
played, the assemblies were held, and all went on as in the Tuileries. We feel as if we had
fallen fathoms deep into the meannesses of mankind when we come back from the bloodshed and
the horror outside, to the King's presence within. The troops which had gone out in uncertainty,
on an enterprise which might well have proved too great for them, had returned in full flush
of triumph, having at last fully broken the spell of the English superiority--which was the
greatest victory that could have been achieved: besides gaining the substantial advantage of
three important towns brought back to the King's allegiance--only to find themselves as little
advanced as before, coming back to the self-same struggle with indolent complaining, indifference,
and ingratitude.

Jeanne had given the signs that had been demanded from her. She had delivered Orleans, she
cleared the King's road toward the north. She had filled the French forces with an enthusiasm
and transport of valour which swept away all the traditions of ill fortune. From every point
of view the instant march upon Rheims and the accomplishment of the great object of her mission
had not only become practicable, but was the wisest and most prudent thing to do.

But this was not the opinion of the Chancellor of France, the Archbishop of Rheims, and La
Tremouille, or of the indolent young King himself, who was very willing to rejoice in the relief
from all immediate danger, the restoration of the surrounding country, and even the victory
itself, if only they would have left him in quiet where he was, sufficiently comfortable, amused,
and happy, without forcing necessary dangers. Jeanne's successes and her unseasonable zeal
and the commotion that she and her train of captains made, pouring in, in all the excitement
of their triumph, into the midst of the madrigals--seem to have been anything but welcome.
Go to Rheims to be crowned? yes, some time when it was convenient, when it was safe. But in
the meantime what was more important was to forbid Richemont, whom the Chancellor hated and
the King did not love, to come into the presence or to have any share either in warfare or
in pageant. This was not only in itself an extremely foolish thing to do, which is always a
recommendation, but it was at the same time an excuse for wasting a little precious time. When
this was at last accomplished, and Richemont, though deeply wounded and offended, proved himself
so much a man of honour and a patriot, that though dismissed by the King he still upheld, if
languidly, his cause--there was yet a great deal of resistance to be overcome. Paris though
so far off was thrown into great excitement and alarm by the flight at Patay, and the whole
city was in commotion fearing an immediate advance and attack. But in Loches, or wherever Charles
may have been, it was all taken very easily. Fastolfe, the fugitive, had his Garter taken from
him as the greatest disgrace that could be inflicted, for his shameful flight, about the time
when Richemont, one of the victors, was being sent off and disgraced on the other side for
the crime of having helped to inflict, without the consent of the King, the greatest blow which
had yet been given to the English domination! So the Court held on its ridiculous and fatal course. 

About seven in the evening, as Lady Pomfret and Lady Charlotte were sitting by her, the first notice
they had of her immediate danger, was her sighing and saying, "I feel death come very fast upon
me!" She repeated the same words frequently-remained perfectly in her senses and calm, and died
about eleven at night. Her mother and sister sat by her till she was cold. It is very shocking
for any body so young, so handsome, so arrived at the height of happiness, so sensible of
it, and on whom all the joy and grandeur of her family depended, to be so quickly snatched away!
Poor Uguccioni! he will be very sorry and simple about it.

For the rebels, they have made no figure since Their victory. The Castle of Edinburgh has made
a sally and taken twenty head of cattle, and about thirty head of Highlanders. We heard yesterday,
that they are coming this way. The troops from Flanders are expected to land in Yorkshire to-morrow.
A privateer of Bristol has taken a large Spanish ship, laden with arms and money for Scotland.
A piece of a plot has been discovered in Dorsetshire, and one Mr. Weld(1122) taken up. The
French have declared to the Dutch, that the House of Stuart is their ally, and that the Dutch troops
must not act against them; but we expect they shall. The Parliament meets next Thursday, and
by that time, probably, the armies will too. The rebels are not above eight thousand, and have
little artillery; so you may wear what ministerial spirits you will.

The Venetian ambassador has been making his entries this week: he was at Leicester-fields to-day
with the Prince, and very pretty compliments passed between them in Italian. Do excuse this
letter; i really have not a word more to say; the next shall be all arma virumque cano!

(1122) Edward Weld, Esq. of Lulworth Castle. Adieu!

(1123) "At three several councils did Charles propose to march into England and fight Marshal Wade;
but as often was his proposal overruled. At length he declared in a very peremptory manner,
'I see, gentlemen, you are determined to stay in Scotland and defend your country; but I am not
less resolved to try my fate in England, though I should go alone.'" Lord Mahon, vol. iii. P.241.-E.

(1124)
Brother of the titular Duke of Perth.

(1125) "As to the Parliament," writes Horatio Walpole to Mr. Milling, on the 29th of October,
"although the address was unanimous the first day, yesterday, upon a motion 'to enquire into
the causes of the progress of the rebellion' the House was so fully convinced of the necessity
of immediately putting an end to it, and that the fire should be quenched before we should enquire
who kindled or promoted it, that it was carried, not to put the question at this time, by 194
against 112."-E.

(1126) A nonjuror who travelled with Mr. George Pitt.

447 Letter 185 To Sir Horace Mann. Arlington Street, Nov. 4, 1745.

It is just a fortnight since I wrote to you last: in all that time the rebellion has made no progress,
nor produced any incidents worth mentioning. They have entrenched themselves very strongly in the Duke
of Buccleuch's park, whose seat, about seven miles from Edinburgh, they have seized. We had
an account last week of the Boy's being retired to Dunkirk, but it was not true. Kelly,(1127)
who is gone to solicit succour from France, was seized at Helvoet, but by a stupid burgher
released. Lord Loudon is very brisk in the north of Scotland, and has intercepted and beat some
of their parties. Marshal Wade was to march from Newcastle yesterday.

But the rebellion does not make half the noise here that one of its consequences does.

Fourteen lords (most of them I have named to you), at the beginning,
offered to raise regiments; these regiments, so handsomely tendered
at first, have been since put on the regular establishment; not much
to the honour of the undertakers or of the firmness of the ministry,
and the King is to pay them.

One of the great grievances of this is, that these most disinterested colonels have named none
but their own relations and dependents for the officers, who are to have rank; and consequently,
both colonels and subalterns will interfere with the brave old part of the army, who have served
all the war. This has made great clamour. The King was against their having rank, but would
not refuse it; yet wished that the House of Commons would address him not to grant it. This notification
of his royal mind encouraged some of the old part of the ministry, particularly Winnington
and Fox, to undertake to procure this Address. Friday it came on in the committee; the Jacobites
and patriots (such as are not included in the coalition) violently opposed the regiments themselves;
so did Fox, in a very warm speech, levelled particularly at the Duke of Montagu, who, besides
his old regiment, has one Of horse and one of foot on this new plan.(1128) Pitt defended them
as warmly: the Duke of Bedford, Lord Gower, and Lord Halifax, being at the head of this job.
At last, at ten at night, the thirteen regiments of foot were voted without a division, and the
two of horse carried by 192 to 82. Then came the motion for the address, and in an hour and
half more, was rejected by 126 to 124. Of this latter number were several of the old corps;
I among the rest. It is to be reported to the House to-morrow, and will, I conclude, be at
least as warm a day as the former. The King is now against the address, and all sides are using
their utmost efforts.

The fourteen lords threaten to throw up, unless their whole terms are complied with; and the Duke
of Bedford is not moderately insolent against such of the King's servants as voted against him.
Mr. Pelham espouses him; not recollecting that at least twice a-week
all his new allies are suffered to oppose him as they please.

I should be sorry, for the appearance, to have the regiments given
up; but I am sure our affair is over, if our two old armies are beaten
and we should come to want these new ones; four only of which are
pretended to be raised.

Pitt, who has alternately bullied and flattered Mr. Pelham, is at last to be secretary-at-war;(1129)
Sir W. Yonge to be removed to vice-treasurer of Ireland, and Lord
Torrington(1130) to have a pension in lieu of it.

An ungracious parallel between the mercenary views Of these patriot
heroes, the regiment-factors, and of their acquiescent agents, the
ministry, with the disinterested behaviour of m Lord Kildare,(1131)
was drawn on Friday by Lord Doneraile; who read the very proposals
of the latter for raising, clothing, and arming a regiment at his
own expense, and for which he had been told, but the very day before
this question, that the King had no occasion.--"And how," said Lord
Doneraile, "can one account for this, but by saying, that we have
a ministry who are either too good-natured to refuse a wrong thing,
or too irresolute to do a right one!"

I am extremely pleased with the, purchase of the Eagle and Altar, and think them cheap: and
I even begin to believe that I shall be able to pay for them.

The gesse statues are all arrived safe.

Your last letter was dated Oct. 19, N. S. and left you up to the chin in water(1132) just as
we were drowned five years ago.

Good night, if you are alive still! (1127) He had been confined in the Tower ever since the assassination
plot, in the reign of King William; but at last made his escape.

(1128) This circumstance is thus alluded to in Sir C. H. Williams's ballad of "The heroes.

"Three regiments one Duke contents, With two more places you know: Since his Bath Knights, his
Grace delights In Tri-a junct' in U-no."

The Duke of Montagu was master of the great wardrobe, a place worth eight thousand pounds a-year. He was
also grand-master of the order of the Bath.-D.

(1129) In the May following, Mr. Pitt was appointed paymaster of the forces.-E.

(1130) Pattee Byng, second Viscount Torrington. He had been made vice-treasurer of Ireland upon
the going out of the Walpole administration.-D.

(1131) @ James Fitzgerald, twentieth Earl of Kildare; created in 1761, Marquis of Kildare, and
in 1766 Duke of Leinster- -Irish honours.-D.

(1132) By an inundation of the Arno.

449 Letter 186 To Sir Horace Mann. Arlington Street, Nov. 15, 1745.

I told you in my last what disturbance there had been about the new regiments; the affair of
rank was again disputed on the report till ten at night, and carried by a majority of 23. The
King had been persuaded to appear for it, though Lord Granville made it a party point against Mr.
Pelham. Winnington did not speak. I was not there, for I could not vote for it, and yielded
not to give any hindrance to a public measure (or at least what was called so) ' just now.
The Prince acted openly, and influenced his people against it; but it, only served to let Mr.
Pelham see, what, like every thing else, he did not know, how strong he is. The King will scarce
speak to him, and he cannot yet get Pitt into place.

The rebels are come into England: for two days we believed them near Lancaster, but the ministry
now own that they don't know if they have passed Carlisle. Some think they will besiege that
town, which has an old wall, and the militia in it of Cumberland and Westmoreland; but as they
can pass by it, I don't see why they should take it; for they are not strong enough to leave
garrisons. Several desert them as they advance south; and altogether, good men and bad, nobody
believes them ten thousand. By their marching westward to avoid Wade, it is evident they are
not strong enough to fight him. They may yet retire back into their mountains, but if once
they get to Lancaster, their retreat is cut off; for Wade 'will not stir from Newcastle, till
he has embarked them deep into England, and then he will be behind them. He has sent General Handasyde
from Berwick with two regiments to take possession of Edinburgh. The rebels are certainly
in a Very desperate situation: they dared not meet Wade; and if they had waited for him their
troops would have deserted. Unless they meet with great risings in their favour in Lancashire,
I don't see what they can hope, except from a continuation of our
neglect.

That, indeed, has nobly exerted itself for them. They were suffered to march the whole length
of Scotland, and take possession of the capital, without a man appearing against them. Then
two thousand men sailed to them, to run from them. Till the flight of Cope's army, Wade was not
sent. 'Two roads still lay into England, and till they had chosen that which Wade had not taken,
no army was thought of being sent to secure the other. Now Ligonier, with seven old regiments,
and six of the new, is ordered to Lancashire: before this first division of the army could get
to Coventry, they are forced to order it to halt, for fear the enemy should be up with it before
it was all assembled. It is uncertain if the rebels will march to the north of Wales, to Bristol,
or towards London. If to the latter, Ligonier must fight the n: if to either of the other, I
hope, the two armies may join and drive them into a corner, where they must all perish. They
cannot subsist in Wales, but by being supplied by the' Papists in Ireland(. The best is, that
we are in no fear from France; there is no preparation for invasions in any of their ports.
Lord Clancarty,(1133) a Scotchman of great parts, but mad and drunken, and whose family forfeited
90,000 pounds a-@ear for King James, is made vice-admiral at Brest. The Duke of Bedford goes
in his little round person with his regiment: he now takes to the land, and says he is tired
of being a pen and ink man. Lord Gower too, insisted upon going with his regiment, but is laid up with
the gout.

With the rebels in England, you may imagine we have no private news, nor think of foreign. From
this account you may judge, that our case is far from desperate, though disagreeable, The Prince,
while the Princess lies-in, has taken to give dinners, to which he
asks two of the ladies of the bedchamber, two of the maids of honour,
etc. by turns, and five or six others.

He sits at the head of the table, drinks and harangues to all this medley till nine at night;
and the other day, after the affair of the regiments, drank Mr. Fox's health in a bumper, with three
huzzas, for opposing Mr. Pelham--

"Si quel fata aspera rumpas, Tu Marcellus eris!"

You put me in pain for my eagle, and in more for the Chutes; whose zeal is very heroic, but very
ill-placed. I long to hear that all my Chutes and eagles are safe out of the Pope's hands! Pray
wish the Suares's joy of all their espousals. Does the Princess pray abundantly for her friend the Pretender?
Is she extremely abbatue with her devotion? and does she fast till she has got a violent appetite
for supper?

And then, does she eat so long that old Sarrasin is quite impatient to go to cards again?
Good night! I intend you shall be resident from King George.

P. S. I forgot to tell you, that the other day I concluded the ministry knew the danger was
all over; for the Duke of Newcastle ventured to have the Pretender's declaration burnt at the
Royal Exchange.

453 Letter 188 To Sir Horace Mann. Arlington Street, Nov. 29, 1745.

We have had your story here this week of the pretended pretender, but with the unlucky circumstance
of its coming from the Roman Catholics. With all the faith you have in your little spy, I cannot
believe it; though, to be sure, it has a Stuart-air, the not exposing the real boy to danger.
The Duke of Newcastle mentioned your account this morning to my uncle; but they don't give
any credit to the courier's relation. It grows so near being necessary for the young man to get off by
any evasion, that I am persuaded all that party will try to have it believed. We are so far
from thinking that they have not sent us one son, that two days ago we believed we had got
the other too. A small ship has taken the Soleil privateer from Dunkirk, going to Montrose, with
twenty French officers, sixty others, and the brother of the beheaded Lord Derwentwater and
his son,(1134) who at first was believed to be the second boy. News came yesterday of a second
privateer, taken with arms and money; of another lost on the Dutch coast, and of Vernon being
in pursuit of two more.

     All this must be a great damp to the party, who are coming on--fast--fast
     to their destruction. Last night they were to be at Preston,
     but several repeated accounts make them under five thousand--none
     above seven; they must have diminished greatly by desertion.

The country is so far from rising for them, that the towns are left
desolate on their approach, and the people hide and bury their effects,
even to their pewter.

Warrington bridge is broken down, which will turn them some miles aside. The Duke, with the flower
of that brave army which stood all the fire at Fontenoy, will rendezvous at Stone, beyond
Litchfield, the day after to-morrow: Wade is advancing behind them, and will be at Wetherby
in Yorkshire to-morrow. In short, I have no conception of their daring to fight either army,
nor see any visible possibility of their not being very soon destroyed. My fears have been great,
from the greatness of our stake; but I now write in the greatest confidence of our getting
over this ugly business. We have another very disagreeable affair, that may have fatal consequences:
there rages a murrain among the cows; we dare not eat milk, butter, beef, nor any thing from
that species. Unless there is snow or frost soon, it is likely to @spread dreadfully though
hitherto it has not reached many miles from London. At first, it was imagined that the Papists
had empoisoned the pools; but the physicians have pronounced it infectious, and brought from
abroad.

I forgot to tell you, that my uncle begged the Duke of Newcastle to stifle this report of the
sham Pretender lest the King should hear it and recall the Duke, as too great to fight a counterfeit.
It is certain that the army adore the Duke, and are gone in the greatest spirits; and on the parade,
as they began their march, the Guards vowed that they would neither give nor take quarter. For
bravery, his Royal Highness is certainly no Stuart, but literally loves to be in the act of
fighting. His brother has so far the same taste, that the night of his new son's christening,
he had the citadel of Carlisle in sugar at supper, and the company besieged it with sugar-plums.
It was well imagined, considering the time and the circumstances. One thing was very proper;
old Marshal Stair was there, who is grown child enough to be fit to war only with such artillery.
Another piece of ingenuity of that court was on the report of Pitt being named secretary at war.
The Prince hates him, since the fall of Lord Granville: he said, Miss Chudleigh,(1135) one of
the maids, was fitter for the employment; and dictated a letter which he made her write to Lord
Harrington, to desire he would draw the warrant for her. There were fourteen people at table,
and all were to sign it: the Duke of Queensberry(1136 would not, as being a friend of Pitt,
nor Mrs. Layton, one of the dressers: however, it was actually sent, and the footman ordered
not to deliver it till Sir William Yonge was at Lord Harrington's-alas!
it would be endless to tell you all his Caligulisms!

A ridiculous thing happened when the Princess saw company: the new-born babe was shown in a
mighty pretty cradle, designed by Kent, under a canopy in the great drawing-room. Sir William
Stanhope went to look at it; Mrs. Herbert, the governess, advanced to unmantle it; he said, "In
wax, I suppose."--"Sir!"--"In wax, Madam?"--"The young Prince, Sir."--"Yes, in wax, I suppose."
This is his odd humour? when he went to see this duke at his birth,
he said, "Lord! it sees!"

The good Provost of Edinburgh has been
with Marshal Wade at Newcastle, and it is said, is coming to London-he
must trust hugely to the inactivity of the ministry! They have taken
an agent there going with large contributions from the- Roman Catholics,
who have pretended to be so quiet! The Duchess of Richmond, while
her husband is at the army, was going to her grace of Norfolk:(1137)
when he was very uneasy at her intention, she showed him letters from
the Norfolk, "wherein she prays God that this wicked rebellion may
be soon suppressed, lest it hurt the poor Roman Catholics." But this
wise jaunt has made such a noise that it is laid aside.

Your friend
Lord Sandwich has got one of the Duke of Montagu's regiments: he stayed
quietly till all the noise was over. He is now lord of the admiralty,
lieutenant-colonel to the Duke of Bedford, aide-de-camp to the Duke
of Richmond, and colonel of a regiment!

A friend of mine, Mr. Talbot,
who has a good estate in Cheshire, with the great tithes, which he
takes in kind, and has generally fifteen hundred pounds stock, has
expressly ordered his steward to burn it, if the rebels come that
way: I don't think this will make a bad figure in Mr. Chute's brave
gazette. As we go on prospering, I will take care to furnish him with
paragraphs, till he kills Riviera(1138) and all the faction. When
my lovely eagle comes, I will consecrate it to his Roman memory; don't
think I want spirits more than he, when I beg you to send me a case
of drams: I remember your getting one for Mr. Trevor. And if there is a soul here which has any objection to make, let
him speak and we will answer him. And to-morrow he shall be consecrated by the grace of the
Holy Spirit if you have nothing to say against it." The people replied by cries of "Noël, Noël!"
It is not to be supposed that the veto of the people of Rheims would have been effectual had
they opposed: but the scene is wonderfully picturesque. No doubt Jeanne too was there, watching
over her King, as she seems to have done, like a mother over her child, at this crisis of his
affairs.

That night there was little sleep in Rheims, for everything had to be prepared in haste, the
decorations of the cathedral, the provisions for the ceremonial. Many of the necessary articles
were at Saint Denis in the hands of the English, and the treasury of the cathedral had to be
ransacked to find the fitting vessels. Fortunately it was rich, more rich probably than it
is now, when the commonplace silver of the beginning of this century has replaced the ancient
vials. Through the short summer night everyone was at work in these preparations; and by the
dawn of day visitors began to flow into the city, great personages and small, to attend the
great ceremonial and to pay their homage. The greatest of all was the Duke of Lorraine, he
who had consulted Jeanne about his health, husband of the heiress of that rich principality,
and son of Queen Yolande who was no doubt with the Court. All France seemed to pour into the
famous town, where so important an act was about to be accomplished, with money and wine flowing
on all hands, and the enthusiasm growing along with the popular excitement and profit. Even
great London is stirred to its limits, many miles off from the centre of proceedings, by such
a great event; how much more the little mediæval city, in which every one might hope to see
something of the pageant, as one shining group after another, with armour blazing in the sun,
and sleek horses caracoling, arrived at the great gates of the Archevêché: and lesser parties
scarcely less interesting poured in in need of lodging, of equipment and provisions; while
every housewife searched her stores for a piece of brilliant stuff, of old silk or embroidery,
to make her house shine like the rest.

Early in the morning, a wonderful procession came out of the Archbishop's house. Four splendid
peers of France, in full armour with their banners, rode through the streets to the old Abbey
of Saint Remy--the old church which Leo IX. consecrated, in the eleventh century, on an equally
splendid occasion, and which may still be seen to-day--to fetch from its shrine, where it was
strictly guarded by the monks, the Sainte Ampoule, the holy and sacred vial in which the oil
of consecration had been sent to Clovis out of Heaven. These noble messengers were the "hostages"
of this sacred charge, engaging themselves by an oath never to lose sight of it by night or
day, till it was restored to its appointed guardians. This vow having been made, the Abbot
of St. Remy, in his richest robes, appeared surrounded by his monks, carrying the treasure
in his hands; and under a splendid canopy, blazing in the sunshine with cloth of gold, marched
towards the cathedral under the escort of the Knights Hostages, blazing also in the flashes
of their armour. This procession was met half-way, before the Church of St. Denis, by another,
that of the Archbishop and his train, to whom the holy oil was solemnly confided, and carried
by them to the cathedral, already filled by a dazzled and dazzling crowd.

The Maid had her occupations this July morning like the rest. We hear nothing of any interview
with her father, or with Durand the good uncle who had helped her in the beginning of her career;
though it was Durand who was sent for to the King and questioned as to Jeanne's life in her
childhood and early youth; which we may take as proof that Jacques d'Arc still stood aloof,
dour, as a Scotch peasant father might have been, suspicious of his daughter's intimacy with
all these fine people, and in no way cured of his objections to the publicity which is little
less than shame to such rugged folk. And there were his two sons who would take him about,
and with whom probably in their easier commonplace he was more at home than with Jeanne. What
the Maid had to do on the morning of the coronation day was something very different from any
home talk with her relations. She who felt herself commissioned not only to lead the armies
of France, but to deal with her princes and take part in her councils, occupied the morning
in dictating a letter to the Duke of Burgundy. She had summoned the English by letter three
times repeated, to withdraw peaceably from the possessions which by God's will were French.
It was with still better reason that she summoned Philip of Burgundy to renounce his feud with
his cousin, and thus to heal the breach which had torn France in two:

JHESUS, MARIA.

High and redoubtable Prince, Duke of Burgundy. Jeanne the Maid requires on the part of the
King of Heaven, my most just sovereign and Lord (mon droicturier souverain seigneur), that
the King of France and you make peace between yourselves, firm, strong and that will endure.
Pardon each other of good heart, entirely, as loyal Christians ought to do, and if you desire
to fight let it be against the Saracens. Prince of Burgundy, I pray, supplicate, and require,
as humbly as may be, fight no longer against the holy kingdom of France: withdraw, at once
and speedily, your people who are in any strongholds or fortresses of the said holy kingdom;
and on the part of the gentle King of France, he is ready to make peace with you, having respect
to his honour, and upon your life that you never will gain a battle against loyal Frenchmen
and that all those who war against the said holy kingdom of France, war against the King Jesus,
King of Heaven and of all the world and my just and sovereign Lord. And I pray and require
with clasped hands that you fight not, nor make any battle against us, neither your friends
nor your subjects; but believe always however great in number may be the men you lead against
us, that you will never win, and it would be great pity for the great battle and the blood
that would be shed of those who came against us. Three weeks ago I sent you a letter by a herald
that you should be present at the consecration of the King, which to-day, Sunday, the seventeenth
of the present month of July, is done in the city of Rheims: to which I have had no answer,
nor even any news by the said herald. To God I commend you, and may He be your guard if it
pleases Him, and I pray God to make good peace.

Written at the aforesaid Rheims, the seventeenth day of July, 1429.

When the letter was finished Jeanne put on her armour and prepared for the great ceremony.
We are not told what part she took in it, nor is any more prominent position assigned to her
than among the noble crowd of peers and generals who surrounded the altar, where her place
would naturally be, upon the broad raised platform of the choir, so excellently adapted for
such ceremonies. Her banner we are told was borne into the cathedral, in order, as she proudly
explained afterwards, that having been foremost in the danger it should share the honour.

But we have no right to suppose that the Maid took the position of the chief actor in the pageant
and stood alone by the side of Charles, as the exigencies of the pictorial art have required
her to do. When, however, the ceremony was completed, and he had received on his knees the
anointing which separated him as king from every other class of men, and while the lofty vaults
echoed with the cries of Noël! Noël! by which the people hailed the completed ceremony, Jeanne
could contain herself no longer. The object was attained for which she had laboured and struggled,
and overcome every opponent. She stepped forward out of the brilliant crowd, and threw herself
at the feet of the now crowned monarch, embracing his knees. "Gentle King," she cried with
tears, "now is the pleasure of God fulfilled--whose will it was that I should raise the siege
of Orleans and lead you to this city of Rheims to receive your consecration. Now has He shown
that you are true King, and that the kingdom of France truly belongs to you alone."

Those broken words, her tears, the cry of that profound satisfaction which is almost anguish,
the "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace," which is so suitable to the lips
of the old, so poignant from those of the young, pierced all hearts. It is added that she asked
leave to withdraw, her work being done, and that all who saw her were filled with sympathy.
It was no doubt the irresistible outburst of a heart too full; and though that fulness was
all joy and triumph, yet there was in it a sense of completed work, a rending asunder and tearing
away from life, the end of a wonderful and triumphant tale.

There is a considerable controversy as to the precise meaning of that outburst of emotion.
Did the Maid mean that her work was over, and her divine mission fulfilled? Was this all that
she believed herself to be appointed to do? or did she expect, as she sometimes said, to bouter
the English out of France altogether? In the one case she ought to have relinquished her work,
and in not doing so she acted without the protection of God which had hitherto made her invulnerable.
In the other, her "voices," her inspiration, must have failed her, for her course of triumph
went no farther. It is impossible to decide between these contending theories. She did speak
in both senses, sometimes declaring that she was to take Paris, sometimes, her intention to
bouter the English out of the kingdom. At the same time she betrayed a constant conviction
that her office had limitations and must come to an end. "I will last but a year," she said
to the King and to Alençon. The testimony of Dunois seems to be the best we can have on this
point. He says in his deposition, made many years after her death: "Although Jeanne sometimes
talked playfully to amuse people, of things concerning the war which were not afterwards accomplished,
yet when she spoke seriously of the war, and of her own career and her vocation, she never
affirmed anything but that she was sent to raise the siege of Orleans and to lead the King
to Rheims to be crowned."

If this were so was she wrong in continuing her warfare, and did she place herself in the position
of one who goes on her own charges, finding the mission from on high unnecessary? Or in the
other case did her inspiration fail her, or were the intrigues of Charles and his Court sufficient
to balk the designs of Heaven? We prefer to think that Jeanne's commission concerned only those
two things which she accomplished so completely; but that in continuing the war, she acted
only as a well inspired and honourable young soldier might, though no longer as the direct
messenger of God. She had as much right to do so as to return to her distaff or her needle
in her native village; but she became subject to all the ordinary laws of war by so doing,
exposed herself to be taken or overthrown like any man-at-arms, and accepted that risk. What
is certain is, that every intrigue sprang up again afresh on the evening of that brilliant
and triumphant ceremonial, and that from the moment of the accomplishment of her great work
the failure of the Maid began.

These intrigues had been in her way since her very first beginning, as has been seen. At Orleans,
in the very field as well as in the council chamber and the presence, everything was done to
balk her, and to cross her plans, but in vain; she triumphed over every contrivance against
her, and broke through the plots, and overcame the plotters. But after Rheims the combination
of dangers became ever greater and greater, and we may say that no merely human general would
have had a chance in face of the many and bewildering influences of evil. Charles who was himself,
at least at this period of his career, sufficiently indolent and unenterprising to have damped
the energies of any commander, was, in addition, surrounded by advisers who had always been
impatient and jealous of the interference of Jeanne, and would have cast her off as a witch,
or passed her by as an impostor, had that been possible, without permitting her to strike a
blow. They had now grudgingly made use of her, or rather, for this is too much to say, had
permitted her action where they had no power to restrain it: but they were as little friendly,
as malignant in their treatment of the Maid as ever, and more hopeful, now that so much had
been done by her means, of being able to shake her off and pursue their fate in their own way.

The position of Charles crowned King of France with all the traditional pomp, master of the
Orleannais, with fresh bands of supporters coming in to swell his army day by day, and Paris
itself almost within his reach, was very different from that of the discredited Dauphin at
Chinon, whom half the world believed to have no right to the crown which his own mother had
signed away from him, and who wasted his idle days in folly to the profit of the greedy councillors
who schemed and trafficked with his enemies, and to the destruction of all his hopes. The strange
apparition of virginal purity, energy, and faith which had taken up and saved him against his
will and all his efforts had not ceased for a moment to be hateful to La Tremouille and his
party; and Charles--though he seems to have had a certain appreciation of the Maid, and even
a liking for her frank and fearless character, apart from any faith in her mission--was far
too ready to accept the facts of the moment, and probably to believe that, after all, his own
worth and favour with Heaven had a great deal to do with this dazzling triumph and success:
certainly he was not the man to make any stand for his deliverer. But that she was an auxiliary
too important to be sent away was reluctantly apparent to them all. To keep her as a sort of
tame angel about the Court in order to be produced when she was wanted, to put heart into the
soldiers and frighten the English as she certainly had the gift of doing, no doubt appeared
to all as a thing desirable enough. And they dared not let her go "because of the people,"
nor, may we believe, would Alençon, Dunois, La Hire, and the rest have tolerated thus the abandonment
of their comrade. To dismiss her even at her own word would have been impossible, and it is
hard to believe that Jeanne, after that extraordinary brief career as a triumphant general
and leader, could have gone back to her father's cottage of the village, though she thought
she would fain have done so. If we are to believe that she felt her mission to be fulfilled,
she was yet mistress of her fate to serve France and the King as seemed best.

And we have no evidence that her "voices" forsook her, or discouraged her. They seem to have
changed a little in their burden, they began to mingle a sadder tone in their intimations.
It began to be breathed into her mind though not immediately, that something was to happen
to her, some disaster not explained, yet that God was to be with her. It seems to me that all
the circumstances are compatible with a change in Jeanne's consciousness, from the moment of
the coronation. It might have been a grander thing had she retired there and then, her work
being accomplished as she declared it to be; but it would not have been human. She was still
a power, if no longer the direct messenger from Heaven; a general, with much skill and natural
aptitude if not the Sent of God; and the ardour of a military career had got into her veins.
No doubt she was much more good for that, now, than for sitting by the side of Isabeau d'Arc
at Domremy, and working even into a piece of embroidery for the altar, her remembrances and
visions of camp and siege and the intoxication of victory. She remained, conscious that she
was no longer exactly as of old, to fight not only against the English, but with intimate enemies,
far more bitter, whom now she knew, against the ordinary fortune of war, and against that which
is a thousand times worse, the hatred and envy, the cruel carelessness, and the malignant schemes
of her own countrymen for whom she had fought.

This, so far as we can judge, appears to be the position of Jeanne in the second portion of
her career; perhaps only dimly apprehended and at moments, by herself; not much thought of
probably by those around her, the wisest of whom had always been sceptical of her divine commission;
while the populace never saw any change in her, and believed that at one time as well as at
another the Maid was the Maid, and had victory at her command. And no doubt that influence
would have endured for some time at least, and her dauntless rush against every obstacle would
have carried success with it, had she been able to carry out her plans, and fly forth upon
Paris as she had done upon Orleans, carrying on the campaign swiftly, promptly, without pause
or uncertainty. Bedford himself said that Paris "would fall at a blow," if she came on. It
had been hard enough, however, to do that, as we have seen, when she was the only hope of France
and had the fire of the divine enthusiasm in her veins; but it was still more hard now to mould
a young King elated with triumph, beginning to feel the crown safe upon his head, and to feel
that if there was still much to gain, there was now a great deal to be lost. The position was
complicated and made more difficult for Jeanne by every advantage she had gained.

In the meantime the secret negotiations, which were always being carried on under the surface,
had come to this point, that Charles had made a private treaty with Philip of Burgundy by which
that prince pledged himself to give up Paris into the King's hands within fifteen days. This
agreement furnished a sufficient pretext for the delay in marching against Paris, delay which
was Charles's invariable method, and which but for Jeanne's hardihood and determination, had
all but crushed the expedition to Rheims itself. It was never with any will of his or of his
adviser, La Tremouille, that any stronghold was assailed. He would fain have passed by Troyes,
as the reader will remember, he would fain have delayed going to Rheims; in each case he had
been forced to move by the impetuosity of the Maid. But a treaty which touched the honour of
the King was a different matter. Philip of Burgundy, with whom it was made, seems to have held
the key of the position. He was called to Paris by Bedford on one side to defend the city against
its lawful King; he had pledged himself on the other to Charles to give it up. He had in his
hands, though it is uncertain whether he ever read it, that missive of the sorceress, the letter
of Jeanne which I have quoted, calling upon him on the part of God to make peace. What was
he to do? There were reasons drawing him to both sides. He was the enemy of Charles on account
of the murder of his father, and therefore had every interest in keeping Paris from him; he
was angry with the English on account of the marriage of the Duke of Gloucester with Jacqueline
of Brabant, which interfered with his own rights and safety in Flanders, and therefore might
have served himself by giving up the capital to the King. As for the appeal of Jeanne, what
was the letter of that mad creature to a prince and statesman? The progress of affairs was
arrested by this double problem. Jeanne had been the prominent, the only important figure in
the history of France for some months past. Now that shining figure was jostled aside, and
the ordinary laws of life, with all the counter changes of negotiation, the ineffectual comings
and goings, the meaner half-seen persons, the fierce contending personal interests--in which
there was no love of either God or man, or any elevated notion of patriotism--came again into play.

Jeanne would seem to have already foreseen and felt this change even before she left Rheims;
there is a new tone of sadness in some of her recorded words; or if not of sadness, at least
of consciousness that an end was approaching to all these triumphs and splendours. The following
tale is told in various different versions, as occurring with different people; but the account
I give is taken from the lips of Dunois himself, a very competent witness. As the King, after
his coronation, wended his way through the country, receiving submission and joyous welcome
from every village and little town, it happened that while passing through the town of La Ferté,
Jeanne rode between the Archbishop of Rheims and Dunois. The Archbishop had never been friendly
to the Maid, and now it was clear, watched her with that half satirical, half amused look of
the wise man, curious and cynical in presence of the incomprehensible, observing her ways and
very ready to catch her tripping and to entangle her if possible in her own words. The people
thronged the way, full of enthusiasm, acclaiming the King and shouting their joyful exclamations
of "Noël!" though it does not appear that any part of their devotion was addressed to Jeanne
herself. "Oh, the good people," she cried with tears in her eyes, "how joyful they are to see
their noble King! And how happy should I be to end my days and be buried here among them!"
The priest unmoved by such an exclamation from so young a mouth attempted instantly, like the
Jewish doctors with our Lord, to catch her in her words and draw from her some expression that
might be used against her. "Jeanne," he said, "in what place do you expect to die?" It was
a direct challenge to the messenger of Heaven to take upon herself the gift of prophecy. But
Jeanne in her simplicity shattered the snare which probably she did not even perceive: "When
it pleases God," she said. "I know neither the place nor the time."

It was enough, however, that she should think of death and of the sweetness of it, after her
work accomplished, in the very moment of her height of triumph--to show something of a new
leaven working in her virgin soul.

One characteristic reward, however, Jeanne did receive. Her father and uncle were lodged at
the public cost as benefactors of the kingdom, as may still be seen by the inscription on the
old inn in the great Place at Rheims; and when Jacques d'Arc left the city he carried with
him a patent--better than one of nobility which, however, came to the family later--of exemption
for the villages of Domremy and Greux of all taxes and tributes; "an exemption maintained and
confirmed up to the Revolution, in favour of the said Maid, native of that parish, in which
are her relations." "In the register of the Exchequer," says M. Blaze de Bury, "at the name
of the parish of Greux and Domremy, the place for the receipt is blank, with these words as
explanation: à cause de la Pucelle, on account of the Maid." There could not have been a more
delightful reward or one more after her own heart. It would be a graceful act of the France
of to-day, which has so warmly revived the name and image of her maiden deliverer, to renew
so touching a distinction to her native place.

We are told that Jeanne parted with her father and uncle with tears, longing that she might
return with them and go back to her mother who would rejoice to see her again. This was no
doubt quite true, though it might be equally true that she could not have gone back. Did not
the father return, a little sullen, grasping the present he had himself received, not sure
still that it was not disreputable to have a daughter who wore coat armour and rode by the
side of the King, a position certainly not proper for maidens of humble birth? The dazzled
peasants turned their backs upon her while she was thus at the height of glory, and never,
so far as appears, saw her face again.

CHAPTER VII -- THE SECOND PERIOD. 1429-1430.

The epic so brief, so exciting, so full of wonder had now reached its climax. Whatever we may
think on the question as to whether Jeanne had now reached the limit of her commission, it
is at least evident that she had reached the highest point of her triumph, and that her short
day of glory and success came to an end in the great act which she had always spoken of as
her chief object. She had crowned her King; she had recovered for him one of the richest of
his provinces, and established a strong base for further action on his part. She had taught
Frenchmen how not to fly before the English, and she had filled those stout-hearted English,
who for a time had the Frenchmen in their powerful steel-clad grip, with terror and panic,
and taught them how to fly in their turn. This was, from the first, what she had said she was
appointed to do, and not one of her promises had been broken. Her career had been a short one,
begun in April, ending in July, one brief continuous course of glory. But this triumphant career
had come to its conclusion. The messenger of God had done her work; the servant must not desire
to be greater than his Lord. There have been heroes in this world whose career has continued
a glorious and a happy one to the end. Our hearts follow them in their noble career, but when
the strain and pain are over they come into their kingdom and reap their reward the interest
fails. We are glad, very glad, that they should live happy ever after, but their happiness
does not attract us like their struggle.

It is different with those whose work and whose motives are not those of this world. When they
step out of the brilliant lights of triumph into sorrow and suffering, all that is most human
in us rises to follow the bleeding feet, our hearts swell with indignation, with sorrow and
love, and that instinctive admiration for the noble and pure, which proves that our birthright
too is of Heaven, however we may tarnish or even deny that highest pedigree. The chivalrous
romance of that age would have made of Jeanne d'Arc the heroine of human story. She would have
had a noble lover, say our young Guy de Laval, or some other generous and brilliant Seigneur
of France, and after her achievements she would have laid by her sword, and clothed herself
with the beautiful garments of the age, and would have grown to be a noble lady in some half
regal chateau, to which her name would have given new lustre. The young reader will probably
long that it should be so; he will feel it an injustice, a wrong to humanity that so generous
a soul should have no reward; it will seem to him almost a personal injury that there should
not be a noble chevalier at hand to snatch that devoted Maid out of the danger that threatened
her, out of the horrible fate that befell her; and we can imagine a generous boy, and enthusiastic
girl, ready to gnash their teeth at the terrible and dishonouring thought that it was by English
hands that this noble creature was tied to the stake and perished in the flames. For the last
it becomes us(1) to repent, for it was to our everlasting shame; but not more to us than to
France who condemned her, who lifted no finger to help her, who raised not even a cry, a protest,
against the cruelty and wrong. But for her fate in itself let us not mourn over-much. Had the
Maid become a great and honoured lady should not we all have said as Satan says in the Book
of Job: Did Jeanne serve God for nought? We should say: See what she made by it. Honour and
fame and love and happiness. She did nobly, but nobly has she been rewarded.

But that is not God's way. The highest saint is born to martyrdom. To serve God for nought
is the greatest distinction which He reserves for His chosen. And this was the fate to which
the Maid of France was consecrated from the moment she set out upon her mission. She had the
supreme glory of accomplishing that which she believed herself to be sent to do, and which
I also believe she was sent to do, miraculously, by means undreamed of, and in which no one
beforehand could have believed. But when that was done a higher consecration awaited her. She
had to drink of the cup of which our Lord drank, and to be baptised with the baptism with which
He was baptised. It was involved in every step of the progress that it should be so. And she
was herself aware of it, vaguely, at heart, as soon as the object of her mission was attained.
What else could have put the thought of dying into the mind of a girl of eighteen in the midst
of the adoring crowd, to whom to see her, to touch her, was a benediction? When she went forth
from those gates she was going to her execution, though the end was not to be yet. There was
still a long struggle before her, lingering and slow, more bitter than death, the preface of
discouragement, of disappointment, of failure when she had most hoped to succeed.

She was on the threshold of this second period when she rode out of Rheims all brilliant in
the summer weather, her banner faded now, but glorious, her shining armour bearing signs of
warfare, her end achieved--yet all the while her heart troubled, uncertain, and full of unrest.
And it is impossible not to note that from this time her plans were less defined than before.
Up to the coronation she had known exactly what she meant to do, and in spite of all obstructions
had done it, keeping her genial humour and her patience, steering her simple way through all
the intrigues of the Court, without bitterness and without fear. But now a vague mist seems
to fall about the path which was so open and so clear. Paris! Yes, the best policy, the true
generalship would have been to march straight upon Paris, to lose no time, to leave as little
leisure as possible to the intriguers to resume their old plots. So the generals thought as
well as Jeanne: but the courtiers were not of that mind. The weak and foolish notion of falling
back upon what they had gained, and of contenting themselves with that, was all they thought
of; and the un-French, unpatriotic temper of Paris which wanted no native king, but was content
with the foreigner, gave them a certain excuse. We could not even imagine London as being ever,
at any time, contented with an alien rule. But Paris evidently was so, and was ready to defend
itself to the death against its lawful sovereign. Jeanne had never before been brought face
to face with such a complication. It had been a straightforward struggle, each man for his
own side, up to this time. But now other things had to be taken into consideration. Here was
no faithful Orleans holding out eager arms to its deliverer, but a crafty, self-seeking city,
deaf to patriotism, indifferent to freedom, calculating which was most to its profit--and deciding
that the stranger, with Philip of Burgundy at his back, was the safer guide. This was enough
of itself to make a simple mind pause in astonishment and dismay.

There is no evidence that the supernatural leaders who had shaped the course of the Maid failed
her now. She still heard her "voices." She still held communion with the three saints who,
she believed devoutly, came out of Heaven to aid her. The whole question of this supernatural
guidance is one which is of course open to discussion. There are many in these days who do
not believe in it at all, who believe in the exaltation of Jeanne's brain, in the excitement
of her nerves, in some strange complication of bodily conditions, which made her believe she
saw and heard what she did not really see or hear. For our part, we confess frankly that these
explanations are no explanation at all so far as we are concerned; we are far more inclined
to believe that the Maid spoke truth, she who never told a lie, she who fulfilled all the promises
she made in the name of her guides, than that those people are right who tell us on their own
authority that such interpositions of Heaven are impossible. Nobody in Jeanne's day doubted
that Heaven did interpose directly in human affairs. The only question was, Was it Heaven in
this instance? Was it not rather the evil one? Was it sorcery and witchcraft, or was it the
agency of God? The English believed firmly that it was witchcraft; they could not imagine that
it was God, the God of battles, who had always been on their side, who now took the courage
out of their hearts and taught their feet to fly for the first time. It was the devil, and
the Maid herself was a wicked witch. Neither one side nor the other believed that it was from
Jeanne's excited nerves that these great things came. There were plenty of women with excited
nerves in France, nerves much more excited than those of Jeanne, who was always reasonable
at the height of her inspiration; but to none of them did it happen to mount the breach, to
take the city, to drive the enemy--up to that moment invincible,--flying from the field. 

Moreover, if the word "a deacon" in the "Book of Armagh" is the true reading, it must surely
be a matter for surprise that St. Patrick, who sternly enforced the law of celibacy in Ireland
as part of the discipline of the Catholic Church, should describe himself as the son of a deacon
without either comment or explanation, and more especially when we remember that the Council of
Elvira, A.D. 305, and the Council of Aries, A.D. 314, had enforced the laws of celibacy--"The
severe discipline of the Councils of Elvira and Aries," writes Alzog, "obtained the force of law
and became general throughout the Western Church" ("Universal Church History," vol. i., chap, iv.,
pp. 280, 281). The practice of clerical celibacy, therefore, existed in the Western Church probably
before Calphurnius was born, and certainly before he was old enough to get married.

Calphurnius was admittedly a decurion, or Roman officer. Now Pope Innocent I., in his Letter to
Exuperius, Bishop of Toulouse, in the year 405, in answer to a number of questions submitted
to him by the Bishop, stated that there was an impediment to the ordination of men who had served
in the army on account of the loose morality prevalent in the camp. As the Pope was simply laying
down the rules of discipline already existing in the Church, Calphurnius, being a Roman officer,
could not have been ordained without the removal of the impediment. All this tends at least to
prove that we should read "decurion" for "deacon" in the "Confession."

According to the "Book of Sligo," St. Patrick was born on Wednesday (373), baptized on Wednesday,
and died on Wednesday, March 17th, A.D. 493.

THE DIFFERENT BIRTHPLACES ASSIGNED TO ST. PATRICK

BARONIUS and Matthew of Westminster declare that St. Patrick was born in Ireland, but scarcely
any writer of the present day ventures to express that view. O'Sullivan, Keating, Lanigan, and many
French writers contend that he was a native of Armoric Gaul, or Britain in France. Welshmen are strongly
of opinion that Ross Vale, Pembrokeshire, was the honoured place; whilst Canon Sylvester Malone
attributed the glory to Burrium, Monmouthshire, a town situated, as Camden narrates, near the
spot where the River Brydhin empties itself into the Usk. The Scholiast, Colgan, and Archbishop
Healy seem to have no doubt as to the Saint's birth at Dumbarton. Ware believes that a town that
once stood almost under the shadow of the crag possessed a stronger claim; Usher and the Aberdeen Breviary
are equally positive that Kilpatrick was the town. Cardinal Moran, on the other hand, has convinced
himself that St. Patrick first saw the light of day at a place that once stood near the present
town of Hamilton, just where the river Avon discharges itself into the Clyde. Some English writers
have strongly advocated the claims of a Roman town named Bannaventa that once stood near the present
site of Davantry, Northamptonshire. Professor Bury, in his "Life of St. Patrick," had the doubtful
honour of inventing a new birthplace for the Saint; he tells us that St. Patrick was born
at a Bannaventa, "which was probably situated in the regions of the Lower Severn."

ST. PATRICK WAS NOT BORN IN WALES.

The belief that St. Patrick was born in Ross Vale, Pembrokeshire, is founded principally on the supposed
acceptance of that view by Camden, and on an old tradition to the effect that St. Patrick, having
completed his missionary labours in Ireland, founded a monastery at Menevia and died there.

As
the authority of the learned Camden carries with it great weight, it will here be not out
of place to quote his own declaration, which is as follows: "Beyond Ross Vale is a spacious
promontory called by Ptolemy Octopitarum, by the Britons Pebidiog and Kantev-Dewi, and by
the English St. David's land. . . . It was the retiring place and nursery of several Saints,
for Calphurnius, a British priest--as some have written, I know not hew truly--begot there
St. Patrick, the Apostle of Ireland" ("Britannia," vol. ii., p. 32). The same author, in another
place, gives expression to his own views on the subject, to which, indeed, he does not seem to have
devoted very serious study. "St. Patrick," he writes, "was a Briton born in Clydesdale, and
related to St. Martin, Bishop of Tours, and he was a disciple of
St. Germanus" ("Britannia," vol. ii., p. 326).

The Ross Vale theory has, in truth, as little in its favour as the old, but groundless, tradition
that St. Patrick founded a monastery and ended his days at Menevia. This is plainly contradicted
by the Saint's assertion that after he had landed as a missionary in Ireland he never once
left, and ended his days in the land of his adoption. "Though I could have wished to leave them"
(the Irish), writes the Saint in his "Confession," "and had been desirous of going to Britain,
as if to my own country and parents, and not that alone, but even to Gaul to visit my brethren,
and see the face of the Lord's Saints. But I am bound in the spirit, and He who witnesseth
all will account me guilty if I do it, and I fear to lose the labour which I have begun; and
not I, but the Lord Christ, who commanded me to come and remain with them for the rest of my
life, if the Lord prolongs it, and keeps me from all sin before Him." This statement, which
was made by St. Patrick just before his death, when he wrote the "Confession," could never have
been volunteered if he had once left the country where the Lord had commanded him to remain for
the rest of his life.

THE SCOTCH THEORIES ON THIS SUBJECT.

The Scholiast and Colgan, who identify the Crag of Dumbarton with the Nemthur of the Saint's
nativity, are faced by the unanswerable difficulty that though Nemthur may be the name of
a tower, or may be the name of the district in which the tower stood, it cannot be the name
of a town. The Saint in his "Confession" states that his father hailed from the suburban district
of a town called Bonaven Tabernise, where he possessed a country seat, from which he (the Saint)
was carried off into captivity. Bonaven, therefore, is rightly regarded as St. Patrick's native
town. St. Fiacc simply states that St. Patrick was born at Nemthur, but he does not assart that
Nemthur was a town, otherwise he would be at variance with his Patron, who plainly gives us
to understand that he was born at Bonaven Tabernise, The only way of reconciling this apparent conflict
of evidence is to assume that St. Fiacc is giving the name either of the tower or the district
in which St. Patrick was born, while the Saint is giving the name of the town of which he
was a native, but not the name of the district which was honoured by his birth.

Dr. Lanigan, however, objects "that no sensible writer, wishing to inform his readers where
the Saint was born, would say that he came into the world in a tower" ("Eccl. Hist.," vol. i.,
p. 101).

Nemthur may indeed be a corruption of Neustria, as Dr. Lanigan suggests; but it must not be forgotten
that districts not unfrequently derive their names from famous monuments that either stand or
have stood in their midst. We have an illustration of this in the very locality where many
believe that St. Patrick was born. The high level on the north-eastern cliff's of Boulogne is
called even at the present time "Tour d'Ordre," deriving its name from Caligula's tower, which the
Romans called Turris Ordinis, and the Gaulish Celts called Nemtor,
which once stood on the lofty plateau, but is no longer in existence.

Ware's theory, in his own words, is this: "I must dissent from the Scholiast that Nemthur and
Alcuid were the same place; though it must be granted that they stood near each other, as appears
from a passage of Jocelin: 'there was a promontory hanging over the town of Empthor, a certain
fortification, the ruins of which are yet visible,' and a little later: 'this celebrated place,
seated in the valley of the Clyde, is, in the language of the country, called "Dunbreaton," that
is, the Fort of the Britons'" (Ware, vol. i., p. 6).

Relying also on Jocelin's statement that Tabernise signified a "Field of Tents"--"Tabernaculorum
Campus"--and on his unwarranted assertion that the habitation of Calphurnius was "not far from
the Irish Sea," Usher pointed out Kilpatrick, a town situated between Dumbarton and the city
of Glasgow, as St. Patrick's native town.

Jocelin's "Life of St. Patrick," as Canon O'Hanlon has said, is "incomparably the worst" of the
Latin lives of the Saint, and yet it is on this untrustworthy foundation, and on the contradictions
of the Scholiast, that Usher and Ware rest their respective theories. Usher discovered a Roman
camp at Kilpatrick, and found that the town was "not far from the Irish Sea," and it is upon this
weak hypothesis that the Kilpatrick theory rests.

The Aberdeen Breviary coincides with Usher, and the lesson referring to St. Patrick is as follows:
"St. Patrick, the Apostle of Ireland, was born of Calphurnius, a man of illustrious Celtic descent,
and of Conchessa, a native of Gaul and a sister of St. Martin, Bishop of Tours. He was conceived
with many miraculous signs at Dumbarton Castle, but was born and
reared at Kilpatrick in Scotland, near the Castle."

But if the Aberdeen Breviary asserts that St. Patrick was born at Kilpatrick, the Continental Breviaries,
as Colgan freely admits, are equally positive that he was a native
of Armoric Gaul.

Cardinal Moran, in an article contributed to the Dublin Review in the spring of 1880, insisted
rightly that the solution of the difficulty is to be found in the
word Bonaven.

Bon, or Ban, he tells us, is a Celtic word which signifies the mouth of a river, and Avon is the
river itself. From this, he argues that the Saint was born at a town which once stood on the
present site of Hamilton, which is situated at the mouth of the Avon, just where that river
discharges itself into the Clyde. The same argument would apply with equal force to a town
situated at the mouth of the River Aven on the French coast, which flows into the harbour of
Concarneu in Brittany.

Anyone who accepts the authority of Probus, who asserts that Bonaven Tabernise "was not far
from the Western sea," or of the Scholiast, who is the author of the Dumbarton theory, will
see a grave objection to accepting the Cardinal's solution of the problem: Hamilton is about
fifty miles distant from Dumbarton, and far away from the Atlantic Ocean.

None of the authors mentioned make any attempt to reconcile the two contradictory statements of the
Scholiast: (1) that St. Patrick was born at Dumbarton, and (2) that
he was captured in Armorica.

They have failed to notice that, if the Saint was captured in Armorica, he could not have
been born at Dumbarton, because he assures us in his "Confession" that he was captured at his
father's home. Even according to the admissions of the Scholiast, therefore, Bonaven Tabernise,
St. Patrick's home, was situated in Armorica. Usher, Ware, and Cardinal Moran, while contending
that the Apostle of Ireland was born in North Britain, refuse to accept the Scholiast's statement
that he was a native of Dumbarton.

ST. PATRICK WAS NOT BORN IN GREAT BRITAIN.

Ignoring altogether both the Scotch and Welsh theories as to the birthplace
of St. Patrick, Professor Bury, in his Life of the Saint, holds that
Ireland's Apostle was born in a village named Bannaventa; not, however,
Bannaventa now known as Daventry in Northamptonshire, seeing that
that town would be too far "from the Western sea," but another Bannaventa
somewhere on the sea coast, and "perhaps in the region of the Severn"

(chap, ii., p. 17, and Appendix, 323).

The whole of Professor Bury's new theory rests on a very faint similarity between Bonaven or
Bannaven--the name which the Saint gives to the town of his birth--and Bannaventa; and on an
entirely gratuitous assumption that there must have been a town named Bannaventa "in the regions
of the lower Severn."

Professor Bury is recognised as a very able historian by the literary
world; his Appendix alone to the "Life of St. Patrick" affords ample
proof of his learning and genius.

Nevertheless, he occasionally indulges in some obiter dicta without historical proof, and
at times lays himself open to the charge of want of historical accuracy. For instance, he ascribes
the origin of the Papal power to a decree of the Emperor Valintinian III., issued in A.D.
445 at the instance of Pope Leo, which is supposed to have conferred "on the Bishop of Rome
sovran authority in the Western provinces which were under the imperial sway." Before that
period, he tells us, "the Roman See was recognised by imperial decrees of Valintinian I. and Gratian
as a Court to which the clergy might appeal from the decisions of Provincial Councils in any
part of the Western portion of the Empire"; that "the answers to such were called Decretals";
that there were no Decretals before those of Damasus (366, 384); "that those who consulted
the Roman Pontiff were not bound in any way to accept his ruling"; and that when Pope Zosimus
endeavoured to enforce his Decretals "he was smitten on one cheek by the Synods of Africa; he was
smitten on the other by the Gallic Bishops at the Council of Turin." "By tact and adroitness,"
Pope Leo induced the Emperor Valintinian III. to issue an edict which established the Papal power
over the Western provinces of the Roman Empire. The Professor explains how Ireland, on account
of its geographical position, was drawn into the Roman Confederation; and it is on that account
that he admits the genuineness of the decree of a Synod held by St. Patrick, to the effect
that in cases of ecclesiastical difficulties, which the Irish Bishops could not solve themselves,
the Sovereign Pontiff should be asked to give a decision ("Life of St. Patrick," pp. 59--66).

The Professor's perversion of ecclesiastical history is a blot on his otherwise excellent "Life of
St. Patrick." How can he reconcile these statements with St. Clement's Epistle to the Corinthians,
which Eusebius admits to be genuine, or with Pope Stephen's exercise of pontifical authority
in the case of St. Cyprian and the question of validity of baptism conferred by heretics; or with
the celebrated declaration of St. Irenaeus on the authority of the Church of Rome, which is
as follows: "It is a matter of necessity that every Church should
agree with this Church on account of its pre-eminent authority, that
is, the faithful of all nations"?

("Irenseus contra Hereses," vol. L, lib. iii., cap. iii., sect. 2, translated by Rev. A. Roberts,
Edinburgh, 1868). Now St. Clement lived in Apostolic times, St. Cyprian from 200 to 258, and
St. Irenaeus flourished between A.D. 150 to 202, while the Roman Emperors were persecuting
the Church. Leaving the well-defined path of history, the Professor indulges in speculations
which will seem to most people to be without warrant.

St. Patrick's home, he tells us, was in "a village named Bannaventa, but we cannot with any certainty
identify its locality. The only Bannaventa that we know lays near Daventry; but this position
does not agree with an ancient indication that the village of Calphurnius was close to the Western
sea. As the two elements of the name Bannaventa were probably not uncommon in British geographical
nomenclature, it is not rash to suppose that there were other small places so called besides
the only Bannaventa that happens to appear in Roman geographical sources, and we may be inclined
to look for the Bannaventa of Calphurnius in South-Western Britain, perhaps in the regions
of the lower Severn. The village must have been in the neighbourhood of a town in possession
of a municipal council of decurions" (chap, ii., pp. 16, 17).

The Professor quietly assumes without proof that Bonaven and Bannaventa are one and the same;
that "vicus" is used in its secondary meaning of "a village," and not in its primary signification,
"a district or quarter of a town," in the "Confession"; and while admitting that there was no
other town in Britain named Bannaventa except Bannaventa in Northampton, as far as can be gathered
from "Roman sources of information," and passing over the fact that Camden's "Britannia,"
which gives the history of every old town in the kingdom, and Horsley's "Britannia Romana," which
performs the same task, make no mention of any other Bannaventa, whilst old maps and itineraries
are equally silent, the Professor seemingly rests satisfied with
his own mere conjecture, that there may have been another Bannaventa,
which was probably situated in the regions of the lower Severn.

Surely a speculation of this kind may well be called unwarranted.

ST. PATRICK WAS A NATIVE OF ARMORIC GAUL.

Colgan, when he published his "Trias Thaumaturga" in 1647, admitted that there was "A constant
tradition amongst the inhabitants of that country that St. Patrick was a native of Armorican
Britain, which tradition several Irishmen endorse," (In Britannia Armorica regione Gallise natum
esse vetus est traditio incolarum istius terrae cui nonulli suffragantur Hiberni.) (Appendix
5, p. 2.)

Don Philip O'Sullivan, who published "Patriciana Decas" in 1621, strongly upheld this view. Attempts,
however, have more recently been made to prove that St. Patrick was
a native of Scotland, but there undoubtedly existed a tradition in
favour of the belief that St. Patrick came from Gaul to Ireland, and
this view is firmly held by Keating and Lanigan, two of our ablest
Irish historians.

St. Patrick narrates in his "Confession" that he
was born in the suburbs of a town called Bonaven, where there was
a Roman encampment, and that, when a youth in his fifteenth year,
he was taken prisoner by the Irish Scots, "the nation to whom he showed
tender forgiveness." The very year of his capture corresponds with
the raid of Niall of the Nine Hostages into Armorica. As the Irish
Scots invaded that country just when St. Patrick had attained his
fifteenth year, and as the Saint declared that he had been taken prisoner
by men of the nation which he had converted, it is more than probable
that he was taken prisoner during that raid.

As Bononia, or Boulogne-sur-Mer,
was called Bonauen by the Gaulish Celts, and as the "v" and "u" are
convertible in Gaelic, the Bonauen of the Gaulish Celts and the Bonaven
of St. Patrick's "Confession" may well be one and the same place.
Indeed, there are arguments which seem to place their identity beyond
reasonable doubt.

St. Fiacc declares that the Apostle of Ireland
was born at Nemthur. Now, Nemtor was the name given by the Gaulish
Celts to Caligula's tower in the suburbs, and close to the City of
Bononia, or Boulogne. St. Fiacc, therefore, gives the name of the
district--for the district about Nemthur was named after the prominent
landmark in its midst, and St. Patrick the name of the town in the
suburbs of which he was born.

According to the Celtic legend, Calphurnius
was a Roman officer in charge of the tower, and was slain on the occasion
when his son Patrick was made prisoner by the Irish Scots.

A close
examination, however, of the "Confession" and of the old Latin lives
of the Saint, will, it seems to us, securely determine which of the
four theories--the Scotch, the Welsh, the English, or the French--
concerning St. Patrick's native country, carried with it the greatest
amount of probability.

BONAVEN TABERNIAE WAS WELL KNOWN TO THE IRISH
SCOTS.

THIS will appear evident from a close study of the "Confession":
"Ego Patritius, peccator, rustissimus et minimus omnium fidelium,
et contemptabilissimus apud plurimos, patrem habui Calphurnium diaconum,
filium quondam Potiti, presbyteri, qui fuit vico Bonaven Taberniae,
villulam enim prope habuit ubi ego in capturam dedi. Annorum tune
eram fere XVI."

"I, Patrick, a sinner, the most uncultured and humblest
of all the Faithful, and, in the eyes of many, the most contemptible,
had for father Calphurnius, a deacon, and the son of Potitus, a priest,
who hailed from the suburbs of Bonaven, where the encampment stood,
for he possessed a little country seat close by, from whence I was
taken captive when I had almost attained my sixteenth year."

The
primary meaning of "vicus" is a district, or a quarter of a city,
and "villula" signifies "a little country seat" At Senlis they made a pause, perhaps to await the King, who,
it was hoped, would have been constrained to follow; then carrying with them all the forces
that could be spared from that town, they spurred on to St. Denis where they arrived on the
27th: St. Denis, the other sacred town of France, the place of the tomb, as Rheims was the
place of the crown.

The royalty of France was Jeanne's passion. I do not say the King, which might be capable of
malinterpretation, but the kings, the monarchy, the anointed of the Lord, by whom France was
represented, embodied and made into a living thing. She had loved Rheims, its associations,
its triumphs, the rejoicing of its citizens. These had been the accompaniments of her own highest
victory. She came to St. Denis in a different mood, her heart hot with disappointment and the
thwarting of all her plans. From whatever cause it might spring, it was clear that she was
no longer buoyed up by that certainty which only a little while before had carried her through
every danger and over every obstacle. But to have reached St. Denis at least was something.
It was a place doubly sacred, consecrated to that royal House for which she would so willingly
have given her life. And at last she was within sight of Paris, the greatest prize of all.
Up to this time she had known in actual warfare nothing but victory. If her heart for the first
time wavered and feared, there was still no certain reason that, de par Dieu, she might not
win the day again.

At St. Denis there was once more a cruel delay. Nearly a fortnight passed and there was no
news of the King. The Maid employed the time in skirmishes and reconnoissances, but does not
seem to have ventured on an attack without the sanction of Charles, whom Alençon, finally,
going back on two several occasions, succeeded in setting in motion. Charles had remained at
Compiègne to carry out his treaty with Burgundy, and the last thing he desired was this attack;
but when he could resist no longer he moved on reluctantly to St. Denis, where his arrival
was hailed with great delight. This was not until the 5th of September, and the army, wrought
up to a high pitch of excitement and expectation, was eager for the fight. "There was no one
of whatever condition, who did not say, 'She will lead the King into Paris, if he will let
her,'" says the chronicler.

In the meantime the authorities in Paris were at work, strengthening its fortifications, frightening
the populace with threats of the vengeance of Charles, persuading every citizen of the danger
of submission.

The Bourgeois tells us that letters came from "les Arminoz," that is, the party of the King,
sealed with the seal of the Duc d'Alençon, and addressed to the heads of the city guilds and
municipality inviting their co-operation as Frenchmen. "But," adds the Parisian, "it was easy
to see through their meaning, and an answer was returned that they need not throw away their
paper as no attention was paid to it." There is no sign at all that any national feeling existed
to respond to such an appeal. Paris--its courts of law, Parliaments (salaried by Bedford),
University, Church--every department, was English in the first place, Burgundian in the second,
dependent on English support and money. There was no French party existing. The Maid was to
them an evil sorceress, a creature in the form of a woman, exercising the blackest arts. Perhaps
there was even a breath of consciousness in the air that Charles himself had no desire for
the fall of the city. He had left the Parisians full time to make every preparation, he had
held back as long as was possible. His favour was all on the side of his enemies; for his own
forces and their leaders, and especially for the Maid, he had nothing but discouragement, distrust,
and auguries of evil.

Nevertheless, these oppositions came to an end, and Jeanne, though less ready and eager for
the assault, found herself under the walls of Paris at last.

     (1) "The English, not US," says Mr. Andrew Lang: and it is
     pleasant to a Scot to know that this is true. England and
     Scotland were then twain, and the Scots fought in the ranks
     of our auld Ally. But for the present age the distinction
     lasts no longer, and to the writer of an English book on
     English soil it would be ungenerous to take the advantage.

     (2) It is taken as a miraculous sign by another chronicler,
     Jean Chartier, who tells us that when this fact came to the
     knowledge of the King the sword was given by him to the
     workmen to be re-founded--"but they could not do it, nor put
     the pieces together again: which is a great proof (grant
     approbation) that the sword came to her divinely. And it is
     notorious that since the breaking of that sword, the said
     Jeanne neither prospered in arms to the profit of the King
     nor otherwise as she had done before."

     (3) "It was her oath," adds the chronicler; no one is quite
     sure what it means, but Quicherat is of opinion that it was
     her baton, her stick or staff. Perceval de Cagny puts in
     this exclamation in almost all the speeches of the Maid. It
     must have struck him as a curious adjuration. Perhaps it
     explains why La Hire, unable to do without something to
     swear by, was permitted by Jeanne in their frank and
     humorous camaraderie to swear by his stick, the same
     rustic oath.

CHAPTER VIII -- DEFEAT AND DISCOURAGEMENT. AUTUMN, 1429.

It was on the 7th September that Jeanne and her immediate followers reached the village of
La Chapelle, where they encamped for the night. The next day was the day of the Nativity of
the Blessed Virgin, a great festival of the Church. It could scarcely be a matter of choice
on the part of so devout a Catholic as Jeanne to take this day of all others, when every church
bell was tinkling forth a summons to the faithful, for the day of assault. In all probability
she was not now acting on her own impulse but on that of the other generals and nobles. Had
she refused, might it not have been alleged against her that after all her impatience it was
she who was the cause of delay? The forces with Jeanne were not very large, a great proportion
of the army remaining with Charles no one seems to know where, either at St. Denis or at some
intermediate spot, possibly to form a reserve force which could be brought up when wanted.
The best informed historian only knows that Charles was not with the active force. But Alençon
was at the head of the troops, along with many other names well known to us, La Hire, and young
Guy de Laval, and Xantrailles, all mighty men of valour and the devoted friends of Jeanne.
There is a something, a mist, an incertitude in the beginning of the assault which was unlike
the previous achievements of Jeanne, a certain want of precaution or knowledge of the difficulties
which does not reflect honour upon the generals with her. Absolutely new to warfare as she
was before Orleans she had ridden out at once on her arrival there to inspect the fortifications
of the besiegers. But probably the continual skirmishing of which we are told made this impossible
here, so that, though the Maid studied the situation of the town in order to choose the best
point for attack, it was only when already engaged that the army discovered a double ditch
round the walls, the inner one of which was full of water. By sheer impetuosity the French
took the gate of St. Honoré and its "boulevard" or tower, driving its defenders back into the
city: but their further progress was arrested by that discovery. It was on this occasion that
Jeanne is supposed to have seized from a Burgundian in the mêlée, a sword, of which she boasted
afterwards that it was a good sword capable of good blows, though we have no certain record
that in all her battles she ever gave one blow, or shed blood at all.

It would seem to have been only after the taking of this gate that the discovery was made as
to the two deep ditches, one dry, the other filled with water. Jeanne, whose place had always
been with her standard at the immediate foot of the wall, from whence to direct and cheer on
her soldiers, pressed forward to this point of peril, descending into the first fosse, and
climbing up again on the second, the dos d'ane, which separated them, where she stood in the
midst of a rain of arrows, fully exposed to all the enraged crowd of archers and gunners on
the ramparts above, testing with her lance the depth of the water. We seem in the story to
see her all alone or with her standard-bearer only by her side making this investigation; but
that of course is only a pictorial suggestion, though it might for a moment be the fact. She
remained there, however, from two in the afternoon till night, when she was forced away. The
struggle must have raged around while she stood on the dark edge of the ditch probing the muddy
water to see where it could best be crossed, shouting directions to her men in that voice assez
femme, which penetrated the noise of battle, and summoning the active and desperate enemy overhead.
"Renty! Renty!" she cried as she had done at Orleans--"surrender to the King of France!"

We hear nothing now of the white armour; it must have been dimmed and worn by much fighting,
and the banner torn and glorious with the chances of the war; but it still waved over her head,
and she still stood fast, on the ridge between the two ditches, shouting her summons, cheering
the men, a spot of light still, amid all the steely glimmering of the mail-coats and the dark
downpour of that iron rain. Half a hundred war cries rending the air, shrieks from the walls
of "Witch, Devil, Ribaude," and names still more insulting to her purity, could not silence
that treble shout, the most wonderful, surely, that ever ran through such an infernal clamour,
so prodigious, the chronicler says, that it was a marvel to hear it. De par Dieu, Rendez vous,
rendez vous, au roy de France. If as we believe she never struck a blow, the aspect of that
wonderful figure becomes more extraordinary still. While the boldest of her companions struggled
across to fling themselves and what beams and ladders they could drag with them against the
wall, she stood without even such shelter as close proximity to it might have given, cheering
them on, exposed to every shot.

The fight was desperate, and though there was no marked success on the part of the besiegers,
yet there seems to have been nothing to discourage them, as the fight raged on. Few were wounded,
notwithstanding the noise of the cannons and culverins, "by the grace of God and the good luck
of the Maid." But towards the evening Jeanne herself suddenly swayed and fell, an arrow having
pierced her thigh; she seems, however, to have struggled to her feet again, undismayed, when
a still greater misfortune befell: her standard-bearer was hit, first in the foot, and then,
as he raised his visor to pull the arrow from the wound, between his eyes, falling dead at
her feet. What happened to the banner, we are not told; Jeanne most likely herself caught it
as it fell. But at this stroke, more dreadful than her own wound, her strength failed her,
and she crept behind a bush or heap of stones, where she lay, refusing to quit the place. Some
say she managed to slide into the dry ditch where there was a little shelter, but resisted
all attempts to carry her away, and some add that while she lay there she employed herself
in a vain attempt to throw faggots into the ditch to make it passable. It is said that she
kept calling out to them to persevere, to go on and Paris would be won. She had promised, they
say, to sleep that night within the conquered city; but this promise comes to us with no seal
of authority. Jeanne knew that it had taken her eight days to free Orleans, and she could scarcely
have promised so sudden a success in the more formidable achievement. But she was at least
determined in her conviction that perseverance only was needed. She must have lain for hours
on the slope of the outer moat, urging on the troops with such force as her dauntless voice
could give, repeating again and again that the place could be taken if they but held on. But
when night came Alençon and some other of the captains overcame her resistance, and there being
clearly no further possibility for the moment, succeeded in setting her upon her horse, and
conveyed her back to the camp. While they rode with her, supporting her on her charger, she
did nothing but repeat "Quel dommage!" Oh, what a misfortune, that the siege of Paris should
fail, all for want of constancy and courage. "If they had but gone on till morning," she cried,
"the inhabitants would have known." It is evident from this that she must have expected a rising
within, and could not yet believe that no such thing was to be looked for. "Par mon martin,
the place would have been taken," she said in the hearing one cannot but feel of the chronicler,
who reports so often those homely words.

Thus Jeanne was led back after the first day's attack. Her wound was not serious, and she had
been repulsed during one of the day's fighting at Orleans without losing courage. But something
had changed her spirit as well as the spirit of the army she led. There is a curious glimpse
given us into her camp at this point, which indeed comes to us through the observation of an
enemy, yet seems to have in it an unmistakable gleam of truth. It comes from one of the parties
which had been granted a safe-conduct to carry away the dead of the English and Burgundian
side. They tell us, among other circumstances,--such as that the French burnt their dead, a
manifest falsehood, but admirably calculated to make them a horror to their neighbours,--that
many in the ranks cursed the Maid who had promised that they should without any doubt sleep
that night in Paris and plunder the wealthy city. The men with their safe-conduct creeping
among the dead, to recover those bodies which had fallen on their own side, and furtively to
count the fallen on the other--who were delighted to bring a report that the Maid was no longer
the fountain of strength and blessing, but secretly cursed by her own forces--are sinister
figures groping their way through the darkness of the September night.

Next morning, however, her wound being slight, Jeanne was up early and in conference with Alençon,
begging him to sound his trumpets and set forth once more. "I shall not budge from here, till
Paris is taken," she said. No doubt her spirit was up, and a determination to recover lost
ground strong in her mind. While the commanders consulted together, there came a band of joyful
augury into the camp, the Seigneur of Montmorency with sixty gentlemen, who had left the party
of Burgundy in order to take service under the banner of the Maid. No doubt this important
and welcome addition to their number exhilarated the entire camp, in the commotion of the reveillé,
while each man looked to his weapons, wiping off from breastplate and helmet the heavy dew
of the September morning, greeting the new friends and brothers-in-arms who had come in, and
arranging, with a better knowledge of the ground than that of yesterday, the mode of attack.
Jeanne would not confess that she felt her wound, in her eagerness to begin the assault a second
time. And all were in good spirits, the disappointment of the night having blown away, and
the determination to do or die being stronger than ever. Were the men-at-arms perhaps less
amenable? Were they whispering to each other that Jeanne had promised them Paris yesterday,
and for the first time had not kept her word? It would almost require such a fact as this to
explain what follows. For as they began to set out, the whole field in movement, there was
suddenly seen approaching another party of cavaliers--perhaps another reinforcement like that
of Montmorency? This new band, however, consisted but of two gentlemen and their immediate
attendants, the Duc de Bar and the Comte de Clermont,(1) always a bird of evil omen, riding
hot from St. Denis with orders from the King. These orders were abrupt and peremptory--to turn
back. Jeanne and her companions were struck dumb for the moment. To turn back, and Paris at
their feet! There must have burst forth a storm of remonstrance and appeal. We cannot tell
how long the indignant parley lasted; the historians do not enlarge upon the disastrous incident.
But at last the generals yielded to the orders of the King--Jeanne humiliated, miserable, and
almost in despair. We cannot but feel that on no former occasion would she have given way so
completely; she would have rushed to the King's presence, overwhelmed him with impetuous prayers,
extorted somehow the permission to go on. But Charles was safe at seven miles' distance, and
his envoys were imperious and peremptory, like men able to enforce obedience if it were not
given. She obeyed at last, recovering courage a little in the hope of being able to persuade
Charles to change his mind, and sanction another assault on Paris from the other side, by means
of a bridge over the Seine towards St. Denis, which Alençon had constructed. Next morning it
appears that without even asking that permission a portion of the army set out very early for
this bridge: but the King had divined their project, and when they reached the river side the
first thing they saw was their bridge in ruins. It had been treacherously destroyed in the
night, not by their enemies, but by their King.

It is natural that the French historians should exhaust themselves in explanation of this fatal
change of policy. Quicherat, who was the first to bring to light all the most important records
of this period of history, lays the entire blame upon La Tremoïlle, the chief adviser of Charles.
But that Charles himself was at heart equally guilty no one can doubt. He was a man who proved
himself in the end of his career to possess both sense and energy, though tardily developed.
It was to him that Jeanne had given that private sign of the truth of her mission, by which
he was overawed and convinced in the first moment of their intercourse. Within the few months
which had elapsed since she appeared at Chinon every thing that was wonderful had been done
for him by her means. He was then a fugitive pretender, not even very certain of his own claim,
driven into a corner of his lawful dominions, and fully prepared to abandon even that small
standing ground, to fly into Spain or Scotland, and give up the attempt to hold his place as
King of France. Now he was the consecrated King, with the holy oil upon his brows, and the
crown of his ancestors on his head, accepted and proclaimed, all France stirring to her old
allegiance, new conquests falling into his hands every day, and the richest portion of his
kingdom secure under his sway. To check thus peremptorily the career of the deliverer who had
done so much for him, degrading her from her place, throwing more than doubt upon her inspiration,
falsifying by force the promises which she had made--promises which had never failed before,--was
a worse and deeper sin on the part of a young man, by right of his kingly office the very head
of knighthood and every chivalrous undertaking, than it could be on the part of an old and
subtle diplomatist who had never believed in such wild measures, and all through had clogged
the steps and endeavoured to neutralise the mission of the warrior Maid. It is very clear,
however, that between them it was the King and his chamberlain who made this assault upon Paris
so evident and complete a failure. One day's repulse was nothing in a siege. There had been
one great repulse and several lesser ones at Orleans. Jeanne, even though weakened by her wound,
had sprung up that morning full of confidence and courage. In no way was the failure to be
laid to her charge.

But this could never, perhaps, have been explained to the whole body of the army, who had believed
her word without a doubt and taken her success for granted. If they had been wavering before,
which seems possible--for they must have been, to a considerable extent, new levies, the campaigners
of the Loire having accomplished their period of feudal service,--this sudden downfall must
have strengthened every doubt and damped every enthusiasm. The Maid of whom such wonderful
tales had been told, she who had been the angel of triumph, the irresistible, before whom the
English fled, and the very walls fell down--was she after all only a sorceress, as the others
called her, a creature whose incantations had failed after the flash of momentary success?
Such impressions are too apt to come like clouds over every popular enthusiasm, quenching the
light and chilling the heart.

Jeanne was thus dragged back to St. Denis against her will and every instinct of her being,
and there ensued three days of passionate debate and discussion. For a moment it appeared as
if she would have thrown off the bonds of loyal obedience and pursued her mission at all hazards.
Her "voices," if they had previously given her uncertain sound, promising only the support
and succour of God, but no success, now spoke more plainly and urged the continuance of the
siege; and the Maid was torn in pieces between the requirements of her celestial guardians
and the force of authority around her. If she had broken out into open rebellion who would
have followed her? She had never yet done so; when the King was against her she had pleaded
or forced an agreement, and received or snatched a consent from the malevolent chamberlain,
as at Jargeau and Troyes. Never yet had she set herself in public opposition to the will of
her sovereign. She had submitted to all kinds of tests and trials rather than this. And to
have lain half a day wounded outside Paris and to stand there pleading her cause with her wound
still unhealed were not likely things to strengthen her powers of resistance. "The Voices bade
me remain at St. Denis," she said afterwards at her trial, "and I desired to remain; but the
seigneurs took me away in spite of myself. If I had not been wounded I should never have left."
Added to the force of these circumstances, it was no doubt apparent to all that to resume operations
after that forced retreat, and the betrayal it gave of divided counsels, would be less hopeful
than ever. These arguments even convinced the bold La Hire, who for his part, being no better
than a Free Lance, could move hither and thither as he would; and thus the first defeat of
the Maid, a disaster involving all the misfortunes that followed in its train, was accomplished.

Jeanne's last act in St. Denis was one to which perhaps the modern reader gives undue significance,
but which certainly must have had a certain melancholy meaning. Before she left, dragged almost
a captive in the train of the King, we are told that she laid on the altar of the cathedral
the armour she had worn on that evil day before Paris. It was not an unusual act for a warrior
to do this on his return from the wars. And if she had been about to renounce her mission it
would have been easily comprehensible. But no such thought was in her mind. Was it a movement
of despair, was it with some womanish fancy that the arms in which she had suffered defeat
should not be borne again?--or was it done in some gleam of higher revelation made to her that
defeat, too, was a part of victory, and that not without that bitterness of failure could the
fame of the soldier of Christ be perfected? I have remarked already that we hear no more of
the white armour, inlaid with silver and dazzling like a mirror, in which she had begun her
career; perhaps it was the remains of that panoply of triumph which she laid out before the
altar of the patron saint of France, all dim now with hard work and the shadow of defeat. It
must have marked a renunciation of one kind or another, the sacrifice of some hope. She was
no longer Jeanne the invincible, the triumphant, whose very look made the enemy tremble and
flee, and gave double force to every Frenchman's arm. Was she then and there abdicating, becoming
to her own consciousness Jeanne the champion only, honest and true, but no longer the inspired
Maid, the Envoy of God? To these questions we can give no answer; but the act is pathetic,
and fills the mind with suggestions. She who had carried every force triumphantly with her,
and quenched every opposition, bitter and determined though that had been, was now a thrall
to be dragged almost by force in an unworthy train. It is evident that she felt the humiliation
to the bottom of her heart. It is not for human nature to have the triumph alone: the humiliation,
the overthrow, the chill and tragic shadow must follow. Jeanne had entered into that cloud
when she offered the armour, that had been like a star in front of the battle, at the shrine
of St. Denis.(2) Hers was now to be a sadder, a humbler, perhaps a still nobler part.

It is enough to trace the further movements of the King to perceive how at every step the iron
must have entered deeper and deeper into the heart of the Maid. He made his arrangements for
the government of each of the towns which had acknowledged him: Beauvais, Compiègne, Senlis,
and the rest. He appointed commissioners for the due regulation of the truce with Philip of
Burgundy. And then the retreating army took its march southward towards the mild and wealthy
country, all fertility and quiet, where a recreant prince might feel himself safe and amuse
himself at his leisure--by Lagny, by Provins, by Bercy-sur Seine, where he had been checked
before in his retreat and almost forced to the march on Paris--by Sens, and Montargis: until
at last on the 29th of September, no doubt diminished by the withdrawal of many a local troop
and knight whose service was over, the forces arrived at Gien, whence they had set forth at
the end of June for a series of victories. It is to be supposed that the King was well enough
satisfied with the conquests accomplished in three months. And, indeed, in ordinary circumstances
they would have formed a triumphant list. Charles must have felt himself free to play after
the work which he had not done; and to leave his good fortune and the able negotiators, who
hoped to get Paris and other good things from Philip of Burgundy without paying anything for
them, to do the rest.

We can imagine nothing more dreadful for the Maid than the months that followed. The Court
was not ungrateful to her; she received the warmest welcome from the Queen; she had a maison
arranged for her like the household of a noble chief, with the addition of women and maidens
of rank to her existing staff, and everything which could serve to show that she was one whom
the King delighted to honour. And Charles would have her apparelled gloriously like the king's
daughter in the psalm. "He gave her a mantle of cloth of gold, open at both sides, to wear
over her armour," and apparently did his best to make her, if not a noble lady, yet into the
semblance of a noble young chevalière, one the glories of his Court, with all the distinction
of her achievements and all the complacences of a carpet knight. It was said afterwards, in
the absence of any graver possibility of accusation, that she liked her fine clothes. The tears
rise to the eyes at such a suggestion. She was so natural that let us hope she did, the martyr
Maid whose torture had already begun. If that mantle of gold gave her a moment of pleasure,
it is something to be thankful for in the midst of the dismal shadows that were already closing
round her. They were ready to give her any shining mantle, any beautiful dress, even a title
and a noble name if she would; but what the King and his counsellors were determined on, was,
that she should no more have the fame of individual triumph, or do anything save under their
orders.

Alençon, the gentle duke, with whom she had taken so much trouble, and who had grown into a
true and noble comrade, made one effort to free his friend and leader. He planned an expedition
into Normandy, where, with the help of Jeanne, he hoped to inflict upon the English a loss
so tremendous, the destruction of their base of operations, that they would be compelled to
abandon the centre of France altogether, and leave the way open to Paris and to the recovery
of the entire kingdom; but the King, or La Tremoïlle, as the historians prefer to say, would
not permit Jeanne to accompany him, and this hope came to nothing. Alençon disbanded his troops,
everything in the form of an army was broken up--the short period of feudal service making
this inevitable, unless new levies were made--and no forces were left under arms except those
bands which formed the body-guard of the King. Nevertheless, there was plenty of work to be
done still, and the breaking up of the French forces encouraged many a little garrison of English
partisans, which would have yielded naturally and easily to a strong national party.

In the midst of the winter, however, it seemed appropriate to the Court to launch forth an
expedition against some of the unsubdued towns, perhaps on account of the mortal languishment
of Jeanne herself, perhaps for some other reason of its own. The first necessity was to collect
the necessary forces, and for this reason Jeanne came to Bourges, where she was lodged in one
of the great houses of the city, that of Raynard de Bouligny, conseiller de roi, and his wife,
Marguerite, one of the Queen's ladies. Morelli[5] would prefer to leave Giovanni Bellini altogether
out of Titian's artistic descent. However this may be, certain traces of Gentile's influence
may be observed in the art of the Cadorine painter, especially in
the earlier portraiture, but indeed in the methods of technical execution
generally.

On the other hand, no extant work of his beginnings suggests the view that he was one of the inner
circle of Gian Bellino's pupils--one of the discipuli, as some of these were fond of describing
themselves. No young artist painting in Venice in the last years of the fifteenth century could,
however, entirely withdraw himself from the influence of the veteran master, whether he actually
belonged to his following or not. Gian Bellino exercised upon the contemporary art of Venice and
the Veneto an influence not less strong of its kind than that which radiated from Leonardo over
Milan and the adjacent regions during his Milanese period. The latter not only stamped his art
on the works of his own special school, but fascinated in the long run the painters of the specifically
Milanese group which sprang from Foppa and Borgognone--such men as Ambrogio de' Predis, Bernardino
de' Conti, and, indeed, the somewhat later Bernardino Luini himself. To the fashion for the
Bellinesque conceptions of a certain class, even Alvise Vivarini, the vigorous head of the opposite
school in its latest Quattrocento development, bowed when he painted the Madonnas of the Redentore
and S. Giovanni in Bragora at Venice, and that similar one now in the Vienna Gallery. Lorenzo
Lotto, whose artistic connection with Alvise Mr. Bernard Berenson was the first to trace, is to a
marked extent under the paramount influence of Giovanni Bellini in such works as the altar-piece
of S. Cristina near Treviso, the Madonna and Child with Saints in the Ellesmere collection,
and the Madonna and Child with St. Peter Martyr in the Naples Gallery, while in the Marriage
of St. Catherine at Munich, though it belongs to the early time, he is, both as regards exaggerations
of movement and delightful peculiarities of colour, essentially himself. Marco Basaiti, who, up to
the date of Alvise's death, was intimately connected with him, and, so far as he could, faithfully
reproduced the characteristics of his incisive style, in his later
years was transformed into something very like a satellite of Giovanni
Bellini.

Cima, who in his technical processes belongs rather to the Vivarini than to the Bellini group,
is to a great extent overshadowed, though never, as some would have it, absorbed to the point of
absolute imitation, by his greater contemporary.

What may legitimately excite surprise in the beginnings both of Giorgione and Titian, so far as
they are at present ascertained, is not so much that in their earliest productions they to
a certain extent lean on Giovanni Bellini, as that they are so soon themselves. Neither of them
is in any extant work seen to stand in the same absolutely dependent relation to the veteran
Quattrocentist which Raphael for a time held towards Perugino, which Sebastiano Luciani in
his earliest manhood held towards Giorgione. This holds good to a certain extent also of Lorenzo
Lotto, who, in the earliest known examples--the so-called Danaë of Sir Martin Conway's collection,
and the St. Jerome of the Louvre--is already emphatically Lotto, though, as his art passes through
successive developments, he will still show himself open to more or less enduring influences from
the one side and the other. Sebastiano del Piombo, on the other hand, great master as he must
undoubtedly be accounted in every successive phase, is never throughout his career out of leading-strings.
First, as a boy, he paints the puzzling Pietà in the Layard Collection at Venice, which, notwithstanding
the authentic inscription, "Bastian Luciani fuit descipulus Johannes Bellinus (sic)," is so astonishingly
like a Cima that, without this piece of documentary evidence, it would even now pass as such.
Next, he becomes the most accomplished exponent of the Giorgionesque manner, save perhaps Titian
himself. Then, migrating to Rome, he produces, in a quasi-Raphaelesque style still strongly tinged
with the Giorgionesque, that series of superb portraits which, under the name of Sanzio, have acquired
a world-wide fame.

Finally, surrendering himself body and soul to Michelangelo, and only unconsciously, from the
force of early training and association, allowing his Venetian origin to reveal itself, he
remains enslaved by the tremendous genius of the Florentine to the very end of his career.

Giorgione
and Titian were as nearly as possible of the same age, being both of them born in or about 1477.
Lorenzo Lotto's birth is to be placed about the year 1476--or, as others would have it, 1480.
Palma saw the light about 1480, Pordenone in 1483, Sebastiano Luciani in 1485. So that most
of the great protagonists of Venetian art during the earlier half of the Cinquecento were
born within the short period of eight years--between 1477 and 1485.

In Crowe and Cavalcaselle's Life and Times of Titian a revolutionary theory, foreshadowed in their
Painting in North Italy, was for the first time deliberately put forward and elaborately sustained.
They sought to convince the student, as they had convinced themselves, that Palma, issuing from Gian
Bellino and Giorgione, strongly influenced and shaped the art of his contemporary Titian, instead
of having been influenced by him, as the relative position and age of the two artists would have
induced the student to believe. Crowe and Cavalcaselle's theory rested in the main, though not
so entirely as Giovanni Morelli appears to have held, on the signature and the early date (1500)
to be found on a Santa Conversazione, once in the collection of M. Reiset, and now at Chantilly
in that of the late Due d'Aumale. This date now proves with the artist's signature to be a
forgery, and the picture in question, which, with strong traces still of the Bellinesque mode
of conception and the Bellinesque style, shows a larger and more modern technique, can no longer
be cited as proving the priority of Palma in the development of the full Renaissance types and
the full Renaissance methods of execution. There can be small doubt that this particular theory
of the indefatigable critics, to whom the history of Italian art owes so much, will little by
little be allowed to die a natural death, if it be not, indeed, already defunct. More and more will
the view so forcibly stated by Giovanni Morelli recommend itself, that Palma in many of those elements
of his art most distinctively Palmesque leans upon the master of Cadore. The Bergamasque painter
was not indeed a personality in art sufficiently strong and individual to dominate a Titian, or
to leave upon his style and methods profound and enduring traces. As such, Crowe and Cavalcaselle
themselves hesitate to put him forward, though they cling with great
persistency to their pet theory of his influence.

This exquisite artist, though by no means inventive genius, did, on the other hand, permanently
shape the style of Cariani and the two elder Bonifazi; imparting, it may be, also some of
his voluptuous charm in the rendering of female loveliness to Paris Bordone, though the latter must,
in the main, be looked upon as the artistic offspring of Titian.

It is by no means certain, all the same, that this question of influence imparted and submitted
to can with advantage be argued with such absoluteness of statement as has been the rule up to the present
time, both on the one side and the other. It should be remembered that we are dealing with three
young painters of about the same age, working in the same art-centre, perhaps, even, for a time
in the same studio--issuing, at any rate, all three from the flank of Giovanni Bellini. In a
situation like this, it is not only the preponderance of age--two or three years at the most,
one way or the other--that is to be taken into account, but the preponderance
of genius and the magic gift of influence.

     It is easy to understand how the complete renewal, brought
     about by Giorgione on the basis of Bellini's teaching and example,
operated to revolutionise the art of his own generation.

     He threw open to art the gates of life in its mysterious
     complexity, in its fulness of sensuous yearning commingled
     with spiritual aspiration. Irresistible was the fascination
     exercised both by his art and his personality over his youthful
     contemporaries; more and more did the circle of his influence widen,
until it might almost be said that the veteran Gian Bellino himself
was brought within it.

With Barbarelli, at any rate, there could be no question of light
received back from painters of his own generation in exchange for
that diffused around him; but with Titian and Palma the case was different.

The germs of the Giorgionesque fell here in each case upon a fruitful soil, and in each case
produced a vigorous plant of the same family, yet with all its Giorgionesque colour of a quite
distinctive loveliness. Titian, we shall see, carried the style to its highest point of material
development, and made of it in many ways a new thing. Palma, with all his love of beauty in
colour and form, in nature as in man, had a less finely attuned artistic temperament than Giorgione,
Titian, or Lotto. Morelli has called attention to that element of downright energy in his
mountain nature which in a way counteracts the marked sensuousness of his art, save when he interprets
the charms of the full-blown Venetian woman. The great Milanese critic attributes this to the
Bergamasque origin of the artist, showing itself beneath Venetian training. Is it not possible
that a little of this frank unquestioning sensuousness on the one hand, of this terre à terre
energy on the other, may have been reflected in the early work of Titian, though it be conceded
that he influenced far more than he was influenced?[6] There is undoubtedly in his personal
development of the Giorgionesque a superadded element of something much nearer to the everyday world
than is to be found in the work of his prototype, and this not easily definable element is
peculiar also to Palma's art, in which, indeed, it endures to the
end.

Thus there is a singular resemblance between the type of his fairly fashioned Eve in the important
Adam and Eve of his earlier time in the Brunswick Gallery--once, like so many other things,
attributed to Giorgione--and the preferred type of youthful female loveliness as it is to be
found in Titian's Three Ages at Bridgewater House, in his so-called Sacred and Profane Love
(Medea and Venus) of the Borghese Gallery, in such sacred pieces as the Madonna and Child with
SS. Ulfo and Brigida at the Prado Gallery of Madrid, and the large Madonna and Child with four Saints
at Dresden. In both instances we have the Giorgionesque conception stripped of a little of
its poetic glamour, but retaining unabashed its splendid sensuousness, which is thus made
the more markedly to stand out. We notice, too, in Titian's works belonging to this particular
group another characteristic which may be styled Palmesque, if only because Palma indulged in it in
a great number of his Sacred Conversations and similar pieces. This is the contrasting of the rich
brown skin, the muscular form, of some male saint, or it may be some shepherd of the uplands,
with the dazzling fairness, set off with hair of pale or ruddy gold, of a female saint, or a
fair Venetian doing duty as a shepherdess or a heroine of antiquity. Are we to look upon such
distinguishing characteristics as these--and others that could easily be singled out--as wholly
and solely Titianesque of the early time? If so, we ought to assume that what is most distinctively
Palmesque in the art of Palma came from the painter of Cadore, who in this case should be taken
to have transmitted to his brother in art the Giorgionesque in the less subtle shape into which
he had already transmuted it. But should not such an assumption as this, well founded as it may appear
in the main, be made with all the allowances which the situation demands?

That, when a group of young and enthusiastic artists, eager to overturn barriers, are found painting
more or less together, it is not so easy to unravel the tangle of influences and draw hard-and-fast
lines everywhere, one or two modern examples much nearer to our own time may roughly serve to
illustrate. Take, for instance, the friendship that developed itself between the youthful Bonington
and the youthful Delacroix while they copied together in the galleries of the Louvre: the one
communicating to the other something of the stimulating quality, the frankness, and variety
of colour which at that moment distinguished the English from the French school; the other contributing
to shape, with the fire of his romantic temperament, the art of the
young Englishman who was some three years his junior.

And with the famous trio of the P.R.B.--Millais, Rossetti, and Mr. Holman Hunt--who is to state
ex cathedra where influence was received, where transmitted; or whether the first may fairly be
held to have been, during the short time of their complete union, the master-hand, the second
the poet-soul, the third the conscience of the group? A similar puzzle would await him who should
strive to unravel the delicate thread which winds itself round the artistic relation between
Frederick Walker and the noted landscapist Mr. J.W. North. Though we at once recognise Walker
as the dominant spirit, and see his influence even to-day, more than twenty years after his death,
affirmed rather than weakened, there are certain characteristics of the style recognised and
imitated as his, of which it would be unsafe to declare that he and not his companion originated
them.

In days of artistic upheaval and growth like the last years of the fifteenth century and the
first years of the sixteenth, the milieu must count for a great deal. It must be remembered
that the men who most influence a time, whether in art or letters, are just those who, deeply
rooted in it, come forth as its most natural development. Let it not be doubted that when in Giorgione's
breast had been lighted the first sparks of the Promethean fire, which, with the soft intensity
of its glow, warmed into full-blown perfection the art of Venice, that fire ran like lightning
through the veins of all the artistic youth, his contemporaries and juniors, just because
their blood was of the stuff to ignite and flame like his own.

The great Giorgionesque movement in Venetian art was not a question merely of school, of standpoint,
of methods adopted and developed by a brilliant galaxy of young painters. It was not alone
that "they who were excellent confessed, that he (Giorgione) was born to put the breath of life
into painted figures, and to imitate the elasticity and colour of flesh, etc."[7] It was also that
the Giorgionesque in conception and style was the outcome of the moment in art and life, just
as the Pheidian mode had been the necessary climax of Attic art and Attic life aspiring to reach
complete perfection in the fifth century B.C.; just as the Raphaelesque appeared the inevitable
outcome of those elements of lofty generalisation, divine harmony, grace clothing strength,
which, in Florence and Rome, as elsewhere in Italy, were culminating in the first years of
the Cinquecento.

This was the moment, too, when--to take one instance only among many--the Ex-Queen of Cyprus,
the noble Venetian Caterina Cornaro, held her little court at Asolo, where, in accordance with
the spirit of the moment, the chief discourse was ever of love. In that reposeful kingdom,
which could in miniature offer to Caterina's courtiers all the pomp and charm without the drawbacks
of sovereignty, Pietro Bembo wrote for "Madonna Lucretia Estense Borgia Duchessa illustrissima
di Ferrara," and caused to be printed by Aldus Manutius, the leaflets which, under the title
Gli Asolani, ne' quali si ragiona d' amore,[8] soon became a famous book in Italy.

The most Bellinesque work of Titian's youth with which we are acquainted is the curious Man of
Sorrows of the Scuola di S. Rocco at Venice, a work so faded, so injured by restoration that
to dogmatise as to its technique would be in the highest degree unsafe. The type approaches, among
the numerous versions of the Pietà by and ascribed to Giovanni Bellini, most nearly to that in
the Palazzo del Commune at Rimini. Seeing that Titian was in 1500 twenty-three years old, and
a student of painting of some thirteen years' standing, there may well exist, or at any rate
there may well have existed, from his hand things in a yet earlier and more distinctively Quattrocento-style
than anything with which we are at present acquainted. This Man of Sorrows itself may well
be a little earlier than 1500, but on this point it is not easy to form a definite conclusion.
Perhaps it is reserved in the future to some student uniting the qualities of patience and
keen insight to do for the youthful Titian what Morelli and his school
have done for Correggio--that is, to restore to him a series of paintings
earlier in date than those which criticism has, up to the present
time, been content to accept as showing his first independent steps
in art.

Everything else that we can at present safely attribute to the youthful Vecelli is deeply coloured
with the style and feeling of Giorgione, though never, as is the case with the inferior Giorgionesques,
so entirely as to obliterate the strongly marked individuality of the painter himself. The Virgin
and Child in the Imperial Gallery of Vienna, popularly known as La Zingarella, which, by general
consent, is accepted as the first in order of date among the works of this class, is still to
a certain extent Bellinesque in the mode of conception and arrangement. Nay, even here Titian,
above all, asserts himself, and lays the foundation of his own manner.


From Lagny Jeanne went on to various other places in danger, or which wanted encouragement
and help. She made two or three hurried visits to Compiègne, which was threatened by both parties
of the enemy; at one time raising the siege of Choicy, near Compiègne, in company with the
Archbishop of Rheims, a strange brother in arms. On another of her visits to Compiègne there
is said to have occurred an incident which, if true, reveals to us with very sad reality the
trouble that overshadowed the Maid. She had gone to early mass in the Church of St. Jacques,
and communicated, as was her custom. It must have been near Easter--perhaps the occasion of
the first communion of some of the children who are so often referred to, among whom she loved
to worship. She had retired behind a pillar on which she leaned as she stood, and a number
of people, among whom were many children, drew near after the service to gaze at her. Jeanne's
heart was full, and she had no one near to whom she could open it and relieve her soul. As
she stood against the pillar her trouble burst forth. "Dear friends and children," she said,
"I have to tell you that I have been sold and betrayed, and will soon be given up to death.
I beg of you to pray for me; for soon I shall no longer have any power to serve the King and
the kingdom." These words were told to the writer who records them, in the year 1498, by two
very old men who had heard them, being children at the time. The scene was one to dwell in
a child's recollection, and, if true, it throws a melancholy light upon the thoughts that filled
the mind of Jeanne, though her actions may have seemed as energetic and her impulses as strong
as in her best days.

At last the news came speeding through the country that Compiègne was being invested on all
sides. It had been the headquarters of Charles and had received him with acclamations, and
therefore the alarm of the townsfolk for the retribution awaiting them, should they fall into
the hands of the enemy, was great; it was besides a very important position. Jeanne was at
Crespy en Valois when this news reached her. She set out immediately (May 22, 1430) to carry
aid to the garrison: "F'irai voir mes bons amis de Compiègne," she said. The words are on the
base of her statue which now stands in the Place of that town. Something of her early impetuosity
was in this impulse, and no apparent dread of any fatality. She rode all night at the head
of her party, and arrived before the dawn, a May morning, the 23d, still a month from the fatal
"St. Jean." Though the prophecy was always in her ears, she must have felt that whole month
still before her, with a sensation of almost greater safety because the dangerous moment was
fixed. The town received her with joy, and no doubt the satisfaction and relief which hailed
her and her reinforcements gave additional fervour to the Maid, and drove out of her mind for
a moment the fatal knowledge which oppressed it. There is some difficulty in understanding
the events of this day, but the lucid narrative of Quicherat, which we shall now quote, gives
a very vivid picture of it. Jeanne had timed her arrival so early in the morning, probably
with the intention of keeping the adversaries in their camps unaware of so important an addition
to the garrison, in order that she might surprise them by the sortie she had determined upon;
but no doubt the news had leaked forth somehow, if through no other means, by the sudden ringing
of the bells and sounds of joy from the city. She paid her usual visits to the churches, and
noted and made all her arrangements for the sortie with her usual care, occupying the long
summer day in these preparations. And it was not till five o'clock in the evening that everything
was complete, and she sallied forth. We hear nothing of the state of the town, or of any suspicion
existing at the time as to the governor Flavy who was afterwards believed by some to be the
man who sold and betrayed her. It is a question debated warmly like all these questions. He
was a man of bad reputation, but there is no evidence that he was a traitor. The incidents
are all natural enough, and seem to indicate clearly the mere fortune of war upon which no
man can calculate. We add from Quicherat the description of the field and what took place there:

"Compiègne is situated on the left bank of the Oise. On the other side extends a great meadow,
nearly a mile broad, at the end of which the rising ground of Picardy rises suddenly like a
wall, shutting in the horizon. The meadow is so low and so subject to floods that it is crossed
by an ancient foot of the low hills. Three village churches mark the extent of the landscape
visible from the walls of Compiègne; Margny (sometimes spelt Marigny) at the end of the road;
Clairoix three quarters of a league higher up, at the confluence of the two rivers, the Aronde
and the Oise, close to the spot where another tributary, the Aisne, also flows into the Oise;
and Venette a mile and a half lower down. The Burgundians had one camp at Margny, another at
Clairoix; the headquarters of the English were at Venette. As for the inhabitants of Compiègne,
their first defence facing the enemy was one of those redoubts or towers which the chronicles
of the fifteenth century called a boulevard. It was placed at the end of the bridge and commanded
the road.

"The plan of the Maid was to make a sortie towards the evening, to attack Margny and afterwards
Clairoix, and then at the opening of the Aronde valley to meet the Duke of Burgundy and his
forces who were lodged there, and who would naturally come to the aid of his other troops when
attacked. She took no thought for the English, having already carefully arranged with Flavy
how they should be prevented from cutting off her retreat. The governor provided against any
chance of this by arming the boulevard strongly with archers to drive off any advancing force,
and also by keeping ready on the Oise a number of covered boats to receive the foot-soldiers
in case of a retrograde movement.

"The action began well: the garrison of Margny yielded in the twinkling of an eye. That of
Clairoix rushing to the support of their brothers in arms was repulsed, then in its turn repulsed
the French; and three times this alternative of advance and retreat took place on the flat
ground of the meadow without serious injury to either party. This gave time to the English
to take part in the fray;(1) though thanks to the precautions of Flavy all they could do was
to swell the ranks of the Burgundians. But unfortunately the rear of the Maid's army was struck
with the possibility that a diversion might be attempted from behind, and their retreat cut
off. A panic seized them; they broke their ranks, turned back and fled, some to the boats,
some to the barrier of the boulevard. The English witnessing this flight rushed after them,
secure now on the side of Compiègne, where the archers no longer ventured to shoot lest they
should kill the fugitives instead of the enemies. They (the English) thus got possession of
the raised road, and pushed on so hotly after the fugitives that their horses' heads touched
the backs of the crowd. It thus became necessary for the safety of the town to close the gates
until the barrier of the boulevard should be set up again."

*****

These disastrous accidents had taken place while Jeanne, charging in front with her companions
and body-guard, remained quite unaware of any misfortune. She would hear no call to retreat,
even when her companions were roused to the dangers of their position. "Forward, they are ours!"
was all her cry. As at St. Pierre-le-Moutier she was ready to defeat the Burgundian army alone.
At length the others perceiving something of what had happened seized her bridle and forced
her to retire. She was of herself too remarkable a figure to be concealed amid the group of
armed men who rode with her, encircling her, defending the rear of the flying party. Over her
armour she wore a crimson tunic, or according to some authorities a short cloak, of gorgeous
material embroidered with gold, and though by this time the twilight must have afforded a partial
shelter, yet the knowledge that she was there gave keenness to every eye. Behind, the scattered
Burgundians had rallied and begun to pursue, while the armour and spears of the English glittered
in front between the little party and the barrier which was blocked by a terrified crowd of
fugitives. Even then a party of horsemen might have cut their way through; but at the moment
when Jeanne and her followers drew near, the barrier was sharply closed and the wild, confused,
and fighting crowd, treading each other down, struggling for life, were forced back upon the
English lances. Thus the retreating band riding hard along the raised road, in order and unbroken,
found the path suddenly barred by the forces of the enemy, the fugitives of their own army,
and the closed gates of the town.

An attempt was then made by the Maid and her companions to turn towards the western gate where
there still might have been a chance of safety; but by this time the smaller figure among all
those steel-clad men, and the waving mantle, must have been distinguished through the dusk
and the dust. There was a wild rush of combat and confusion, and in a moment she was surrounded,
seized, her horse and her person, notwithstanding all resistance. With cries of "Rendez vous,"
and many an evil name, fierce faces and threatening weapons closed round her. One of her assailants--a
Burgundian knight, a Picard archer, the accounts differ--caught her by her mantle and dragged
her from her horse; no Englishman let us be thankful, though no doubt all were equally eager
and ready. Into the midst of that shouting mass of men, in the blinding cloud of dust, in the
darkening of the night, the Maid of France disappeared for one terrible moment, and was lost
to view. And then, and not till then, came a clamour of bells into the night, and all the steeples
of Compiègne trembled with the call to arms, a sally to save the deliverer. Was it treachery?
Was it only a perception, too late, of the danger? There are not wanting voices to say that
a prompt sally might have saved Jeanne, and that it was quite within the power of the Governor
and city had they chosen. Who can answer so dreadful a suggestion? it is too much shame to
human nature to believe it. Perhaps within Compiègne as without, they were too slow to perceive
the supreme moment, too much overwhelmed to snatch any chance of rescue till it was too late.

Happily we have no light upon the tumult around the prisoner, the ugly triumph, the shouts
and exultation of the captors who had seized the sorceress at last; nor upon the thoughts of
Jeanne, with her threatened doom fulfilled and unknown horrors before her, upon which imagination
must have thrown the most dreadful light, however strongly her courage was sustained by the
promise of succour from on high. She had not been sent upon this mission as of old. No heavenly
voice had said to her "Go and deliver Compiègne." She had undertaken that warfare on her own
charges with no promise to encourage her, only the certainty of being overthrown "before the
St. Jean." But the St. Jean was still far off, a long month of summer days between her and
that moment of fate! So far as we can see Jeanne showed no unseemly weakness in this dark hour.
One account tells us that she held her sword high over her head declaring that it was given
by a higher than any who could claim its surrender there. But she neither struggled nor wept.
Not a word against her constancy and courage could any one, then or after, find to say. The
Burgundian chronicler tells us one thing, the French another. "The Maid, easily recognised
by her costume of crimson and by the standard which she carried in her hand, alone continued
to defend herself," says one; but that we are sure could not have been the case as long as
d'Aulon, who accompanied her, was still able to keep on his horse. "She yielded and gave her
parole to Lyonnel, bâtard de Wandomme," says another; but Jeanne herself declares that she
gave her faith to no one, reserving to herself the right to escape if she could. In that dark
evening scene nothing is clear except the fact that the Maid was taken, to the exultation and
delight of her captors and to the terror and grief of the unhappy town, vainly screaming with
all its bells to arms,--and with its sons and champions by hundreds dying under the English
lances and in the dark waves of the Oise.

The archer or whoever it was who secured this prize, took Jeanne back, along the bloody road
with its relics of the fight, to Margny, the Burgundian camp, where the leaders crowded together
to see so important a prisoner. "Thither came soon after," says Monstrelet, "the Duke of Burgundy
from his camp of Coudon, and there assembled the English, the said Duke and those of the other
camps in great numbers, making, one with the other, great cries and rejoicings on the taking
of the Maid: whom the said Duke went to see in the lodging where she was and spoke some words
to her which I cannot call to mind, though I was there present; after which the said Duke and
the others withdrew for the night, leaving the Maid in the keeping of Messer John of Luxembourg"--to
whom she had been immediately sold by her first captor. The same night, Philip, this noble
Duke and Prince of France, wrote a letter to convey the blessed information:

"The great news of this capture should be spread everywhere and brought to the knowledge of
all, that they may see the error of those who could believe and lend themselves to the pretensions
of such a woman. We write this in the hope of giving you joy, comfort, and consolation, and
that you may thank God our Creator. Pray that it may be His holy will to be more and more favourable
to the enterprises of our royal master and to the restoration of his sway over all his good
and faithful subjects."

This royal master was Henry VI. of England, the baby king, doomed already to expiate sins that
were not his, by the saddest life and reign. The French historians whimsically but perhaps
not unnaturally, have the air of putting down this baseness on Philip's part, and on that of
his contemporaries in general, to the score of the English, which is hard measure, seeing that
the treachery of a Frenchman could in no way be attributed to the other nation of which he
was the natural enemy, or at least, antagonist. Very naturally the subsequent proceedings in
all their horror and cruelty are equally put down to the English account, although Frenchmen
took, exulted over as a prisoner, tried and condemned as an enemy of God and the Church, the
spotless creature who was France incarnate, the very embodiment of her country in all that
was purest and noblest. We shall see with what spontaneous zeal all France, except her own
small party, set to work to accomplish this noble office.

Almost before one could draw breath the University of Paris claimed her as a proper victim
for the Inquisition. Compiègne made no sally for her deliverance; Charles, no attempt to ransom
her. From end to end of France not a finger was lifted for her rescue; the women wept over
her, the poor people still crowded around the prisoner wherever seen, but the France of every
public document, of every practical power, the living nation, when it did not utter cries of
hatred, kept silence. We in England have over and over again acknowledged with shame our guilty
part in her murder; but still to this day the Frenchman tries to shield his under cover of
the English influence and terror. He cannot deny La Tremoïlle, nor Cauchon, nor the University,
nor the learned doctors who did the deed; individually he is ready to give them all up to the
everlasting fires which one cannot but hope are kept alive for some people in spite of all
modern benevolences; but he skilfully turns back to the English as a moving cause of everything.
Nothing can be more untrue. The English were not better than the French, but they had the excuse
at least of being the enemy. France saved by a happy chance her blanches mains from the actual
blood of the pure and spotless Maid; but with exultation she prepared the victim for the stake,
sent her thither, played with her like a cat with a mouse and condemned her to the fire. This
is not to free us from our share: but it is the height of hypocrisy to lay the blood of Jeanne,
entirely to our door.

Thus Jeanne's inspiration proved itself over again in blood and tears; it had been proved already
on battle-field and city wall, with loud trumpets of joy and victory. But the "voices" had
spoken again, sounding another strain; not always of glory--it is not the way of God; but of
prison, downfall, distress. "Be not astonished at it," they said to her; "God will be with
you." From day to day they had spoken in the same strain, with no joyful commands to go forth
and conquer, but the one refrain: "Before the St. Jean." Perhaps there was a certain relief
in her mind at first when the blow fell and the prophecy was accomplished. All she had to do
now was to suffer, not to be surprised, to trust in God that He would support her. To Jeanne,
no doubt, in the confidence and inexperience of her youth, that meant that God would deliver
her. And so He did; but not as she expected. The sunshine of her life was over, and now the
long shadow, the bitter storm was to come.

Nothing could be more remarkable than the response of France in general to this extraordinary
event. In Paris there were bonfires lighted to show their joy, the Te Deum was sung at Notre
Dame. At the Court Charles and his counsellors amused themselves with another prophet, a shepherd
from the hills who was to rival Jeanne's best achievements, but never did so. Only the towns
which she had delivered had still a tender thought for Jeanne. At Tours the entire population
appeared in the streets with bare feet, singing the Miserere in penance and affliction. Orleans
and Blois made public prayers for her safety. Rheims, in which there was much independent interest
in Jeanne and her truth, had to be specially soothed by a letter from the Archbishop, in which
he made out with great cleverness that it was the fault of Jeanne alone that she was taken. Although
Conchessa was sold as a slave "at the command of her father," she is said to have succeeded in
captivating and marrying her master Calphurnius.

Whilst Ware and Usher sneer at Jocelin's statement that Calphurnius and Conchessa took the
vow of celibacy and devoted themselves to a religious life immediately after St. Patrick's
birth, they eagerly adopt Jocelin's statement that the Apostle of Ireland was born at "Empthor,"
and that the home of The Sixth "Life," Calphurnius was "not far from the Irish Sea," although
this untrustworthy author stands alone among the ancient writers in making this assertion.

     Although Jocelin is responsible for the statement that St.
     Patrick fled to the island of Britain after his escape from
     captivity in Ireland, the subsequent three days' voyage by sea and
twenty-eight days' journey by land before reaching his home are fatal
to Jocelin's contention, as Professor Bury clearly demonstrates.

Ware's Empthor was near Dumbarton; Colgan's, Dumbarton itself; Usher and the "Aberdeen Breviary"
identify it as Kilpatrick; Cardinal Moran rests sure that it is Hamilton, at the mouth of the
Avon in Scotland; but St. Patrick's ship, chartered by Heaven to carry him to his "own native
land," could, if any of the places named were St. Patrick's native town, have borne him directly
almost to his destination, and saved part at least of the three days' journey by sea and the
whole of the twenty-eight days' journey by wilderness before joining his relatives.

THE FIFTH "LIFE," BY PROBUS, PROVES THAT ST. PATRICK WAS BORN IN BONONIA.

THE Fifth "Life," written by Probus, an Irish monk, who died at Meyence in the year 859, is
regarded as the best of the old Latin "Lives" of St. Patrick; it is considered to be an amended
edition of the "Book of Armagh," written by Muirchu Macc-Mactheni, so truly that the blank left
by the missing folio in that famous book can be filled in by copying the "History of Probus."
(Canon O'Hanlon's "Lives of the Irish Saints," March 17th.)

The "Life of St. Patrick," by Probus, commences as follows:--

"Cap. I.--St. Patrick, who was also called Suchet, was a Briton by nationality. . . . He was
born in Britain [in Britanniis], being the son of Calphurnius, a deacon, who was the son of Potitus,
a priest, and his mother was named Conchessa, in a district within the region of Bannaue Tiburniae,
not far from the Western Sea, which district, as we have discovered beyond doubt, was situated
in the province of Nentria, where the giants are said to have formerly dwelt."

"XII.--When he was in his own country with his father Calphurnius and his mother Conchessa, in
their own seaside city [city Arimuric] there was a great outbreak of hostilities in these
parts. The sons of King Rithmit, coming from Britain, laid Arimuric and the surrounding country
waste. They massacred Calphurnius and his wife Conchessa; but their children, Patrick and his
brother Ruchti, together with their sister Mila, they took captives to Ireland. They sold Patrick
to Prince Milcho, but his brother Ruchti and his sister Mila to another Prince."

Colgan, in his annotations, substitutes Neutria for Nentria (4), and Armorica for Arimuric,
Caesar testifies that all the towus on the sea coast of Armorica were called Armoricse (Britannia,
vol i. p. 13). "In his own city Armuric" has therefore been rendered "in his own seaside city."

When Probus wrote his history there was no province in existence called either Nentria or Neutria;
but there was a province called Neustria, which embraced Armorica
or the northern sea coast of Gaul, where St. Patrick was residing
in his own native country (in patria) with his parents, when he was
made captive.

It follows, likewise, that St. Patrick's native town, "Bannaue Tiburnise," according to Probus,
was the seaside city in Armorica referred to. The Bannaue Tiburniae of Probus and the Bonaven Taberniae
of St. Patrick are evidently one and the same as Bononia, where the Romans were encamped, which,
as it has already been proved, was called Bonauen Armorik by the Gaulish Celts.

If any other proof were needed, the description of the province given by Probus as the country
formerly inhabited by giants can leave no doubt on the subject.

Sammes, in his "Antiquities of Ancient Britain," published in 1676, narrates that the Scythians,
or Cymri, were called the offspring of Magog by Josephus. Pouring out in mighty hordes from
Scythia, they sacked Rome and plundered the Temple of Apollo in Greece. Some of them settled
down in Sarmatia, Germany, and Northern Gaul, generally adopting the name of the lands in which
they settled. Strabo is quoted as saying "that the very youths (of the Cymri) were half a foot
taller than the tallest men," and Manlius for declaring "that the Cymri were a race so exceedingly
tall that other nations seemed nothing in their eyes." The same authority narrates that "when one
of the Cymri stood in the ranks he seemed of the same proportion as the others, but when he
stepped out a few paces, and came near to the Romans, they all began to be amazed at the sight."
On that account the Roman soldiers, as Caesar admits, were filled with consternation at the giants
they were called upon to encounter when he marched against their
leader, Ariovistus.

The Cymri were also remarkable for their exceeding swiftness. Csesar witnessed that they "could
lay their hands on the manes of horses and keep pace with them in the race." Tully testifies that
it was "their joy and delight to die on the battlefield, and that nothing so tormented them as
to die idly in their beds." "No wonder," says Sammes, "that they conquered many nations; distressed
the Romans themselves, and were a constant thorn in the side of the Gauls" ("Antiquities of
Ancient Britain," cap. 2).

Dr. Smith, in his "History of France," narrates that the Cymri "acquired permanent possession
of an extensive territory north of the Loire, including the peninsula of Armorica" (p. 13). Bononia,
or Boulogne, St. Patrick's native town, was, therefore, situated in Belgic Gaul during the
days of Julius Caesar; but, later on, when the descendants of the Cymri, the Belgic Gauls,
were almost annihilated in their fierce contests with the Romans, the same province came to
be called Armorica. Sulpicius Severus, as we shall see presently, named the same country Britannia
at the time of the Council of Ariminium in the year 359--just fourteen years before St. Patrick
was born.

In the year 597 Armorica, or Britannia, became absorbed in the province of Neustria, when the
kingdom of the Franks was sub-divided into three separate kingdoms, as Dr. Smith relates: "Sigebert
became King of Austrasia (in the Prankish tongue, Oster-rike), or the kingdom of the Eastern
Franks; Chilperic was recognised as King Neustria (Ne-oster- rike), the land of the Western Franks.
The limits of the two kingdoms are somewhat uncertain; but the river Meuse and the Forest of
Ardennes may be taken generally as the line of demarcation. Austrasia extended from the Meuse
to the Rhine; Neustria extended from the Meuse to the ocean. Gouthran ruled over the division
of Gaul which now acquired the name of Burgundy" ("History of France," p. 42).

Neustria, extending from the Meuse to the ocean, necessarily embraced
the whole province of Britannia, or Armorica.

That province still retained the name of Neustria when Probus, in the tenth century, wrote the
"History of St. Patrick."

The change of the name Armorica to Britannia, and from Britannia to Neustria, together with
the fact that the name Britannia, or Brittany, as applied to that particular province in Gaul
was forgotten for centuries before any of the old Latin "Lives" of St. Patrick, except the
first, were written, must have induced some old biographers of the Saint to interpret the name
Britain, mentioned in the "Lives" and in the "Confession," as referring only to the Island of Britain,

With
the exception of Probus, who had travelled abroad, the old biographers of St. Patrick, on account
of their very limited sources of information, had very little knowledge
of the histories of foreign countries, and it is not surprising to
find them erroneously supposing that St. Patrick was born in Great
Britain, because he mentioned in his "Confession" that he was born
in Britain, and had relatives among the Britons.

St. Patrick, according to Probus, was one of the Gaulish Britons, being born at Bonaven, or
Boulogne-sur-Mer. Although the Saint, according to Canon O'Hanlon, was a little man, he was descended
from a race of giants--the bold Cymri, or Celts. That fact established a relationship of race
between the Saint and the nation which he converted.

Camden and Keating narrate that King Milesius and his bold Scots, who successfully invaded Ireland,
were descended from the Cymri; and it is remarkable that a fierce battle was fought between
the Irish Scots and the Tautha de Danans at Mount Slemish, not far from Tralee, in Kerry, which
is identical in name with Mount Slemish, in Antrim--the scene of the Saint's captivity ("Britannia,"
vol. ii., p. 123; "History of Ireland," vol. i., p. 123).

Eochaid O'Flin, a poet quoted by Keating, has left a record of this historical battle:

"The stout Gadalians first the courage try At Sliabh-mis, and rout the enemy: Where heroes
pierced with many a deadly wound, Choked in their blood, lay gasping on the ground: Heroes whose
brave exploits may justly claim Triumphant laurels and immortal fame."

Scota, the relict of King Milesius and mother of Heber and Heremon, Kings of Ireland, was slain
while fighting in this battle, and buried in the valley at the foot of Mount Sleabh-mis, which
after her interment was called Glean Scoithin, or the Valley of Scota. From her the Irish Scots
derived their name. The same old bard has sung a lamentation over her grave:--

"Beneath, the vale its bosom doth display, With meadows green, with flowers profusely gay, Where
Scota lies, unfortunately slain, And with her royal tomb gives honour to the plain. Mixed with the
first the fair virago fought, Sustained the toil of arms and danger sought: From her the fruitful
valley hath the name O Glean Scoith, and we may trust to fame."

ST. PATRICK'S FLIGHT TO MARMOUTIER, DESCRIBED BY PROBUS.

IN the XIVth section of the "Vita Quinta" Probus narrates St. Patrick's arrival in Brotgalum,
then his journey to Trajectus, from whence he hastened to Marmoutier
to join St. Martin, Bishop of Tours, with whom he remained for four
years.

Colgan, in his annotations (14), identifies Brotgalum as Burdigalum, or Bordeaux. So, too,
does Professor Bury, who tells us that Brodgal was the Irish for Bordeaux, and that "Bordeaux
was a regular port for travellers from Ireland to South Gaul" ("Life of St. Patrick," Appendix,
p. 341).

Trajectus, according to the old maps, was situated on the river Dordogne, about sixty miles from Tours.
From Trajectus St. Patrick had to walk a distance of about two hundred miles through a desert
before reaching Tours.

"A glance at the map of ancient Gaul," writes Father Bullen Morris, "will show that in St.
Patrick's time a great part of the country between Trajectus and Tours well deserved the name
of a desert. The network of rivers, tributaries of the Loire, and now known as La Vienne, La
Claire, La Gartempe, &c., must have exposed the country to periodical
inundations in those days.

So from Tours in the north to Limonum, Alerea, and Legora in the south, east and west, we find
some 5,000 square miles, which, as far as the ancient map is concerned, give no signs of possession
by man. Travellers entangled amidst these rivers and morasses must have advanced very slowly, and
thus it appears that both places and time fit in with St. Patrick's narrative. Nature has changed
her face along the line of St. Patrick's journey, and there is little now to remind us of
its primeval desolation, save that the rivers still preserve some of their old habits, and now
and then combine with the inundations of the giant Loire in setting man at defiance.

"Time, however, with its alternative gifts and ravages, has left untouched the traditions regarding
St. Patrick's journey. There is something more than antiquarian interest in the feelings of
the Christian traveller who visits the spot on the banks of the Loire, where immemorial tradition
and an ancient monument mark the place at which the Saint crossed the river on his way to Marmoutier.
At about twenty miles from Tours the railway between that city and Angers stops at the station
of St. Patrice; the commune is also named after the Saint, and, as we shall see, there is historical
evidence that it has been thus designated for at least nine hundred years."

"The first witness whose evidence we shall take on the subject of the Saint's arrival at St.
Patrice is one which many believe to have survived since his time, but on this point the reader
must form his own opinion. Above the station, on the side of the hill which rises from the banks
of the Loire, we find the famous tree which bears 'the flowers of St. Patrice.' For ages past it
has been an object of religious veneration with the people of Touraine, and now in our time it
is particularly interesting to find that this devotion was shared by that eminent servant of
God, Leon Dupont, the Thaumaturgus of Tours. Monsignor C. Chevalier, President of the Archaeological
Society, has published a very full account of the tree and of the traditions connected with it,
the subtance of which we subjoin, together with the result of personal investigations made
on the spot in August, 1881.

At this season the tree was covered with foliage so luxuriant, from the ground upwards, that
it was impossible to distinguish the stem, and in every respect it presented the appearance
of a tree in its prime, without a sign of decay. It belongs to the botanical class Prunus Spinosa,
or blackthorn, and it was covered with berries at the time of our visit. These, however, were
the evidence of a second efflorescence in the spring. The celebrity of the tree arises from
the fact that every year at Christmas time it is seen covered with flowers, and the tradition at
St. Patrice, handed down from father to son, affirms that for fifteen hundred years this phenomenon
has been repeated at the same sacred season. It matters not how intense the cold of any particular
winter; while the ground beneath and the country around lie covered in their white shroud, the "flowers
of St. Patrice" unfold their blossoms and bid defiance to the fierce north winds which sweep
the valley of the Loire."

The next witness is the old parish church, dedicated to St. Patrick, which stands about thirty
yards from the tree. Its old charters and records show that it dates back from the beginning
of the tenth century. One old charter, bearing the date of 1035, contains a deed of gift of some
lands adjoining the church of St. Patrick. The church stood on the Roman road between Anjou
and Tours. "Thus," concludes Father Bullen Morris, "ancient records and immemorial traditions
complete our story, and set St. Patrick on the high road to St. Martin at Marmoutier" ("Ireland
and St. Patrick," pp. 35--40).

BRITAIN IN GAUL ST. PATRICK'S NATIVE COUNTRY.

UNLESS it can be proved that there was a province called Britain in Gaul, and another Britain quite
distinct from the Island of Britain, it would be useless to argue that St. Patrick was a native
of Gaul. The Saint represents himself as a native of Britain; and even Probus, who is credited
with believing that St. Patrick was a native of Armoric Gaul, distinctly states that the Saint
was born in Britain (natus in Britanniis).

It is, however, not difficult to prove that there was a province in Gaul called Britain (Britannia)
even before the birth of St. Patrick.

Strabo, in his "Description of Europe," narrates in the Fourth Book that about 220 years before
Christ, Publius Cornelius Scipio, the father of Scipio Africanus, consulted the Roman deputies
at Marseilles about the cities of Gaul named Britannia, Narbonne, and Corbillo. Sanson identifies
Britannia with the present town of Abbeville on the Somme. Dionysius, the author of "Perigesis,"
who wrote in the early part of the first century, mentions the Britanni as settled on the south
of the Rhine, near the coast of Flanders.

Pliny, in his "Natural History," when recounting the various tribes on the coast of Gaul, mentions
the Morini and Oramfaci as inhabiting the district of Boulogne, and places the Britanni between
the last-named tribe and Amiens. (Pliny, lib. i., cap. xxxi.; Carte's "General History of England,"
vol i., p. 5).

"The Britanni on the Continent extended themselves farther along the coast than when first known
to the Romans, and the branch of that tribe mentioned by Dionysius as settled on the coast
of Flanders, and the Britons of Picardy mentioned by Pliny, were of the same nation and contiguous
to each other. Dionysius further adds that they spread themselves farther south, even to the
mouth of the Loire, and to the extremity of Armorica, which several writers say was called Britain
long before it came into general use (Carte, p. 6).

"Sulpicius Severus, in his "Sacred Histories," gives an account of the Bishops summoned by the
Emperor Constantius in the year 359 to the Council of Ariminium n Italy. Four hundred Bishops
from Italy, Africa, Spain, and Gaul answered the summons, and the Emperor gave an order that
all the Bishops were to be boarded and lodged, whilst the Council
lasted, at the expense of the treasury.

Whereupon Sulpicius, writing with pride of the action taken by the Bishops of the three provinces,
Gallia, Aquitania, and Britannia, makes use of the following words: "Sed id nostris, id est.
Aquitanis, Gallis, et Britannis, idecens visum; repudiatis fiscalibus propries sumptibus vivere maluerunt.
Tres autem ex Britannia inopia proprii, publico usi sunt, cum oblatum a ceteris collationem
respuissent; sanctius putantes, fescum gravare, quam singulos" (Lib. ji,, p. 401).

"The proposal seemed shameful to us, Aquitanians, Gauls, and Britons, who, rejecting the offer of
help from the treasury, preferred to live at our own expense. Three, however, of the Bishops
from Britannia, possessing no means of their own, refused to accept the maintenance offered by their
brethren, deeming it a holier thing to burden the treasury than to accept aid from individuals"
(Lib. ii., p. 401).

If any doubt exists as to the Britannia referred to, it is solved in the same book, p. 431.
Sulpicius Severusi an Aquitanian by birth, speaks of the trial, condemnation
and punishment of the Priscillian heretics by the secular Court at
Treves in the year 389.

Prisciallanus and his followers, Felicissimus, Armenianus, and a woman named Euchrosia were
condemned to death and beheaded, but Instantias and Liberianus were banished to the Island of
Sylena, "quas ultra Britanniarn sita est" (which is situated beyond Britain). Although it is not
precisely known where the Island of Sylena was situated, except that it was somewhere beyond
Britain, the Britain referred to surely must be Britain in Gaul, for it is incredible that the
Gauls should possess a penal settlement in the North of Scotland, where Sylena must have been
situated, if the words "beyond Britain" refer to the Island of Britain.

It is evident that if Sulpicius, who was born in 360--thirteen years before St. Patrick--could speak
of Armorica as Britannia, and the Armorican Bishops as Britons, when he wrote his "Sacred Histories,"
it cannot be a matter of surprise that St. Patrick, if born in Armorica at a later period,
should speak of himself as a Briton, and say that he had relatives
among the Britons.

Armorica was called Britannia by Sulpicius Severus,
but Sidonius Apollinarus, who flourished some time after, called the
same country Armorica. It was not, however, unusual, as Carte points
out, for the same people and the same country to be called by different
names; for example, the Armorici and the Morini were one and the same
people, whose names had the same signification--dwellers on the sea
coast. (Carte, p. 16; Whitaker's "Genuine History of the Briton,"
pp. 216-- 219.)

As the historians just quoted are not concerned with
the history of St. Patrick, but are simply tracing the origin and
history of the Britons, their testimony is impartial.

Even Camden
admits that Dionysius places the Britons on the maritime coast of
Gaul, and renders his verses into English:--

"Near the great pillars
of the farthest land, The old Iberians, haughty souls, command Along
the continent, where northern seas Roll their vast tides, and in cold
billows rise: Where British nations in long tracts appear And fair-haired
Germans ever famed in war."

The early existence of the Britons in
Armorica did not depend on the settlement of the veteran Britons,
who, having served under Constantino the Great, were rewarded by a
gift of the vacant lands in Armorica, as William of Malmesbury narrates
in his "History of the Kings"; or on the still larger settlement of
Britons who fought for the usurper Maximus, which Ninius mentions,
in the mysterious reference which embraced the whole country "from
the Great St. Bernard in Piedmont to Cantavic in Picardy, and from
Picardy to the western coast of France." The latter settlement took
place between the years 383 and 388. The British refugees, who fled
in terror from the Picts, Scots, and Saxons, may indeed have added
to the numbers of Britons in Gaul from time immemorial, but they certainly
were not the first to give the name Britannia to that country.

BRITANNIAE
IN THE PLURAL NOT APPROPRIATED TO GREAT BRITAIN.

IT has been often
urged, without any solid reason, that the plural Britannise used for
Britain in the "Confession" can only refer to Great Britain, because
that country was sub-divided by the Romans into five distinct provinces.
The reason given cannot be convincing, because Catullus, who died
in the year 54, used the plural for Britain before the Roman sub-divisions
were made, when he wrote, "Nunc timent Galliae, timent Britanniae"--Caesar,
"the Gauls and the Britons fear." The plural was used by St. Patrick
when writing the "Confession" nearly one hundred years after the Romans
with their divisions had left the country. It was used by Probus,
who undoubtedly referred to Armoric Britain when writing about St.
Patrick's native country, for he tells us in the plural that the Saint
was born in Britain (natus in Britanniis). The plural was, therefore,
used both for Britain in Gaul and for the Island of Britain.

The
word Britannia occurs three times in the "Confession." In the "Book
of Armagh" the name appears always in the plural, whilst in the Bollandist's
copy of the "Confession" the name is printed once in the singular
and twice in the plural. St. Jerome uses the singular always when
referring to Britannia; and St. Bede, in his "History," uses the plural
and singular indiscriminately. Whenever Britannia is mentioned, the
context alone can guide us in distinguishing which Britain is meant.
("Ireland and St. Patrick," by the Rev. Bullen Morris, pp. 24, 25). She arrived in Rouen in the beginning of the year 1431, having thus
been already for nearly eight months in close custody. But there were no further ministrations
of kind women for Jeanne. She was now distinctly in the hands of her enemies, those who had
no sympathy or natural softening of feeling towards her.

The severities inflicted upon her in her new prison at Rouen were terrible, almost incredible.
We are told that she was kept in an iron cage (like the Countess of Buchan in earlier days
by Edward I.), bound hands, and feet, and throat, to a pillar, and watched incessantly by English
soldiers--the latter being an abominable and hideous method of torture which was never departed
from during the rest of her life. Afterwards, at the beginning of her trial she was relieved
from the cage, but never from the presence and scrutiny of this fierce and hateful bodyguard.
Such detestable cruelties were in the manner of the time, which does not make us the less sicken
at them with burning indignation and the rage of shame. For this aggravation of her sufferings
England alone was responsible. The Burgundians at their worst had not used her so. It is true
that she was to them a piece of valuable property worth so much good money; which is a powerful
argument everywhere. But to the English she meant no money: no one offered to ransom Jeanne
on the side of her own party, for whom she had done so much. Even at Tours and Orleans, so
far as appears, there was no subscription--to speak in modern terms,--no cry among the burghers
to gather their crowns for her redemption--not a word, not an effort, only a barefooted procession,
a mass, a Miserere, which had no issue. France stood silent to see what would come of it; and
her scholars and divines swarmed towards Rouen to make sure that nothing but harm should come
of it to the ignorant country lass, who had set up such pretences of knowing better than others.
The King congratulated himself that he had another prophetess as good as she, and a Heaven-sent
boy from the mountains who would do as well and better than Jeanne. Where was Dunois? Where
was La Hire,(1) a soldier bound by no conventions, a captain whose troop went like the wind
where it listed, and whose valour was known? Where was young Guy de Laval, so ready to sell
his lands that his men might be fit for service? All silent; no man drawing a sword or saying
a word. It is evident that in this frightful pause of fate, Jeanne had become to France as
to England, the Witch whom it was perhaps a danger to have had anything to do with, whose spells
had turned the world upside down for a moment: but these spells had become ineffectual or worn
out as is the nature of sorcery. No explanation, not even the well-worn and so often valid
one of human baseness, could explain the terrible situation, if not this.

     (1) La Hire was at Louvain, which we hear a little later the
     new English levies would not march to besiege till the Maid
     was dead, and where Dunois joined him in March of this fatal
     year. These two at Louvain within a few leagues of Rouen and
     not a sword drawn for Jeanne!--the wonder grows.

CHAPTER XI -- THE JUDGES. 1431.

The name of Pierre Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, appears to us at this long distance as arising
out of the infernal mists, into which, when his ministry of shame was accomplished, he disappeared
again, bearing with him nothing but hatred and ill fame. Yet in his own day and to his contemporaries,
he was not an inconsiderable man. He was of Rheims, a great student, and excellent scholar,
the friend of many good men, highly esteemed among the ranks of the learned, a good man of
business, which is not always the attribute of a scholar, and at the same time a Burgundian
of pronounced sentiments, holding for his Duke, against the King. When Beauvais was summoned
by Charles, after his coronation, at that moment of universal triumph when all seemed open
for him to march upon Paris if he would, the city had joyfully thrown open its doors to the
royal army, and in doing so had driven out its Bishop, who was hot on the other side. He would
not seem to have been wanted in Paris at that moment. The "triste Bedford," as Michelet calls
him, had no means of employing an ambitious priest, no dirty work for the moment to give him.
It is natural to suppose that a man so admirably adapted for that employment went in search
of it to the ecclesiastical court, not beloved of England, which the Cardinal Bishop of Winchester
held there. Winchester was the only one of the House of Lancaster who had money to carry on
the government either at home or abroad. The two priests, as the historians are always pleased
to insinuate in respect to ecclesiastics, soon understood each other, and Winchester became
aware that he had in Cauchon a tool ready for any shameful enterprise. It is not, however,
necessary to assume so much as this, for we have not the least reason to believe that either
one or the other of them had the slightest doubt on the subject of Jeanne, or as to her character.
She was a pernicious witch, filling a hitherto invincible army with that savage fright which
is but too well understood among men, and which produces cruel outrages as well as cowardly
panic. The air of this very day, while I write, is ringing with the story of a woman burnt
to death by her own family under the influence of that same horrible panic and terror. Cauchon
was the countryman, almost the pays--an untranslatable expression,--of Jeanne; but he did not
believe in her any more than the loftier ecclesiastics of France believed in Bernadette of
Lourdes, who was of the spiritual lineage of Jeanne, nor than we should believe to-day in a
similar pretender. It seems unnecessary then to think of dark plots hatched between these two
dark priests against the white, angelic apparition of the Maid.

What services Cauchon had done to recommend him to the favour of Winchester we are not told,
but he was so much in favour that the Cardinal had recommended him to the Pope for the vacant
archbishopric of Rouen a few months before there was any immediate question of Jeanne. The
appointment was opposed by the clergy of Rouen, and the Pope had not come to any decision as
yet on the subject. But no doubt the ambition of Cauchon made him very eager, with such a tempting
prize before him, to recommend himself to his English patron by every means in his power. And
he it was who undertook the office of negotiating the ransom of Jeanne from the hands of Jean
de Luxembourg. We doubt whether after all it would be just even to call this a nefarious bargain.
To the careless seigneur it would probably be very much a matter of course. The ransom offered--six
thousand francs--was as good as if she had been a prince. The ladies at home might be indignant,
but what was their foolish fancy for a high-flown girl in comparison with these substantial
crowns in his pocket; and to be free from the responsibility of guarding her would be an advantage
too. And if her own party did not stir on her behalf, why should he? A most pertinent question.
Cauchon, on the other hand, could assure all objectors that no summary vengeance was to be
taken on the Maid. She was to be judged by the Church, and by the best men the University could
provide, and if she were found innocent, no doubt would go free.

They must have been sanguine indeed who hoped for a triumphant acquittal of Jeanne; but still
it may have been hoped that a trial by her countrymen would in every case be better for her
than to languish in prison or to be seized perhaps by the English on some after occasion, and
to perish by their hands. Let us therefore be fair to Cauchon, if possible, up to the beginning
of the Procès. He was no Frenchman, but a Burgundian; his allegiance was to his Duke, not to
the King of England; but his natural sovereign did so, and many, very many men of note and
importance were equally base, and did not esteem it base at all. Had the inhabitants of Rheims,
his native town, or of Rouen, in which his trial and downfall took place as well as Jeanne's,
pronounced for the King of Prussia in the last war, and proclaimed themselves his subjects,
the traitors would have been hung with infamy from their own high towers, or driven into their
river headlong. But things were very different in the fifteenth century. There has never been
a moment in our history when either England or Scotland has pronounced for a foreign sway.
Scotland fought with desperation for centuries against the mere name of suzerainty, though
of a kindred race. There have been terrible moments of forced subjugation at the point of the
sword; but never any such phenomena as appeared in France, so far on in the world's history
as was that brilliant and highly cultured age. Such a state of affairs is to our minds impossible
to understand or almost to believe: but in the interests of justice it must be fully acknowledged
and understood.

Cauchon arises accordingly, not at first with any infamy, out of the obscurity. He had been
expelled and dethroned from his See, but this only for political reasons. He was ecclesiastically
Bishop of Beauvais still; it was within his diocese that the Maid had taken prisoner, and there
also her last acts of magic, if magic there was, had taken place. He had therefore a legal
right to claim the jurisdiction, a right which no one had any interest in taking from him.
If Paris was disappointed at not having so interesting a trial carried on before its courts,
there was compensation in the fact that many doctors of the University were called to assist
Cauchon in his examination of the Maid, and to bring her, witch, sorceress, heretic, whatever
she might be, to question. These doctors were not undistinguished or unworthy men. A number
of them held high office in the Church; almost all were honourably connected with the University,
the source of learning in France. "With what art were they chosen!" exclaims M. Blaze de Bury.
"A number of theologians, the élite of the time, had been named to represent France at the
council of Bâle; of these Cauchon chose the flower." This does not seem on the face of it to
be a fact against, but rather in favour of, the tribunal, which the reader naturally supposes
must have been the better, the more just, for being chosen among the flower of learning in
France. They were not men who could be imagined to be the tools of any Bishop. Quicherat, in
his moderate and able remarks on this subject, selects for special mention three men who took
a very important part in it, Guillame Érard, Nicole Midi, and Tomas de Courcelles. They were
all men who held a high place in the respect of their generation. Érard was a friend of Machet,
the confessor of Charles VII., who had been a member of the tribunal at Poitiers which first
pronounced upon the pretensions of Jeanne; yet after the trial of the Maid Machet still describes
him as a man of the highest virtue and heavenly wisdom. Nicole Midi continued to hold an honourable
place in his University for many years, and was the man chosen to congratulate Charles when
Paris finally became again the residence of the King. Courcelles was considered the first theologian
of the age. "He was an austere and eloquent young man," says Quicherat, "of a lucid mind, though
nourished on abstractions. He was the first of theologians long before he had attained the
age at which he could assume the rank of doctor, and even before he had finished his studies
he was considered as the successor of Gerson. He was the light of the council of Bâle. Eneas
Piccolomini (Pope Pius II.) speaks with admiration of his capacity and his modesty. In him
we recognise the father of the freedom of the Gallican Church. His disinterestedness is shown
by the simple position with which he contented himself. He died with no higher rank than that
of Dean of the Chapter of Paris."

Did this in Cæsar seem ambitious? Was this the man to be used for their vile ends by a savage
English party thirsting for the blood of an innocent victim, and by the vile priest who was
its tool? It does not seem so to our eyes across the long level of the centuries which clear
away so many mists. And no more dreadful accusation can be brought against France than the
suggestion that men like these, her best and most carefully trained, were willing to act as
blood-hounds for the advantage and the pay of the invader. But there are many French historians
to whom the mere fact of a black gown or at least an ecclesiastical robe, confounds every testimony,
and to whom even the name of Frenchman does not make it appear possible that a priest should
retain a shred of honour or of honesty. We should have said by the light of nature and probability
that had every guarantee been required for the impartiality and justice of such a tribunal,
they could not have been better secured than by the selection of such men to conduct its proceedings.
They made a great and terrible mistake, as the wisest of men have made before now. They did
much worse, they behaved to an unfortunate girl who was in their power with indescribable ferocity
and cruelty; but we must hope that this was owing to the period at which they lived rather
than to themselves.

It is not perhaps indeed from the wise and learned, the Stoics and Pundits of a University,
that we should choose judges for the divine simplicity of those babes and sucklings out of
whose mouth praise is perfected. At the same time to choose the best men is not generally the
way adopted to procure a base judgement. Cauchon might have been subject to this blame had
he filled the benches of his court with creatures of his own, nameless priests and dialecticians,
knowing nothing but their own poor science of words. He did not do so. There were but two Englishmen
in the assembly, neither of them men of any importance or influence although there must have
been many English priests in the country and in the train of Winchester. There were not even
any special partisans of Burgundy, though some of the assessors were Burgundian by birth. We
should have said, had we known no more than this, that every precaution had been taken to give
the Maid the fairest trial. But at the same time a trial which is conducted under the name
of the Inquisition is always suspect. The mere fact of that terrible name seems to establish
a foregone conclusion; few are the prisoners at that bar who have ever escaped. This fact is
almost all that can be set against the high character of the individuals who composed the tribunal.
At all events it is no argument against the English that they permitted the best men in France
to be chosen as Jeanne's judges. It is the most bewildering and astonishing of historical facts
that they were so, and yet came to the conclusion they did, by the means they did, and that
without falling under the condemnation, or scorn, or horror of their fellow-men.

This then was the assembly which gathered in Rouen in the beginning of 1431. Quicherat will
not venture to affirm even that intimidation was directly employed to effect their decision.
He says that the evidence "tends to prove" that this was the case, but honestly allows that,
"it is well to remark that the witnesses contradict each other." "In all that I have said,"
he adds, "my intention has been to prove that the judges of the Maid had in no way the appearance
of partisans hotly pursuing a political vengeance; but that, on the contrary, their known weight,
the consideration which most of them enjoyed, and the nature of the tribunal for which they
were assembled, were all calculated to produce generally an expectation full of confidence
and respect."

Meanwhile there is not a word to be said for the treatment to which Jeanne herself was subjected,
she being, so far as is apparent, entirely in English custody. She had been treated with tolerable
gentleness it would seem in the first part of her captivity while in the hands of Jean de Luxembourg,
the Count de Ligny. The fact that the ladies of the house were for her friends must have assured
this, and there is no complaint made anywhere of cruelty or even unkindness. When she arrived
in Rouen she was confined in the middle chamber of the donjon, which was the best we may suppose,
neither a dungeon under the soil, nor a room under the leads, but one to which there was access
by a short flight of steps from the courtyard, and which was fully lighted and not out of reach
or sight of life. But in this chamber was an iron cage,(1) within which she was bound, feet,
and waist and neck, from the time of her arrival until the beginning of the trial, a period
of about six weeks. Five English soldiers of the lowest class watched her night and day, three
in the room itself, two at the door. It is enough to think for a moment of the probable manners
and morals of these troopers to imagine what torture must have been inflicted by their presence
upon a young woman who had always been sensitive above all things to the laws of personal modesty
and reserve. Their course jests would no doubt be unintelligible to her, which would be an
alleviation; but their coarse laughter, their revolting touch, their impure looks, would be
an endless incessant misery. We are told that she indignantly bestowed a hearty buffet on the
cheek of a tailor who approached her too closely when it was intended to furnish her with female
dress; but she was helpless to defend herself when in her irons, and had to endure as she best
could--the bars of her cage let us hope, if cage there was, affording her some little protection
from the horror of the continual presence of these rude attendants, with whom it was a shame
to English gentlemen and knights to surround a helpless woman.

When her trial began Jeanne was released from her cage, but was still chained by one foot to
a wooden beam during the day, and at night to the posts of her bed. Sometimes her guards would
wake her to tell her that she had been condemned and was immediately to be led forth to execution;
but that was a small matter. Attempts were also made to inflict the barest insult and outrage
upon her, and on one occasion she is said to have been saved only by the Earl of Warwick, who
heard her cries and went to her rescue. By night as by day she clung to her male garb, tightly
fastened by the innumerable "points" of which Shakespeare so often speaks. Such were the horrible
circumstances in which she awaited her public appearance before her judges. She was brought
before them every day for months together, to be badgered by the keenest wits in France, coming
back and back with artful questions upon every detail of every subject, to endeavour to shake
her firmness or force her into self-contradiction. Imagine a cross-examination going on for
months, like those--only more cruel than those--to which we sometimes see an unfortunate witness
exposed in our own courts of law. There is nothing more usual than to see people break down
entirely after a day or two of such a tremendous ordeal, in which their hearts and lives are
turned inside out, their minds so bewildered that they know not what they are saying, and everything
they have done in their lives exhibited in the worst, often in an entirely fictitious, light,
to the curiosity and amusement of the world.

But all our processes are mercy in comparison with those to which French prisoners at the bar
are still exposed. It is unnecessary to enter into an account of these which are so well known;
but they show that even such a trial as that of Jeanne was by no means so contrary to common
usage, as it would be, and always would have been in England. In England we warn the accused
to utter no rash word which may be used against him; in France the first principle is to draw
from him every rash word that he can be made to bring forth. This was the method employed with
Jeanne. Her judges were all Churchmen and dialecticians of the subtlest wit and most dexterous
faculties in France; they had all, or almost all, a strong prepossession against her. Though
we cannot believe that men of such quality were suborned, there was, no doubt, enough of jealous
and indignant feeling among them to make the desire of convicting Jeanne more powerful with
them than the desire for pure justice. She was a true Christian, but not perhaps the soundest
of Church-women. Her visions had not the sanction of any priest's approval, except indeed the
official but not warm affirmation of the Council at Poitiers. She had not hastened to take
the Church into her confidence nor to put herself under its protection. Though her claims had
been guaranteed by the company of divines at Poitiers, she herself had always appealed to her
private instructions, through her saints, rather than to the guiding of any priest. The chief
ecclesiastical dignitary of her own party had just held her up to the reprobation of the people
for this cause: she was too independent, so proud that she would take no advice but acted according
to her own will. The more accustomed a Churchman is to experience the unbounded devotion and
obedience of women, the more enraged he is against those who judge for themselves or have other
guides on whom they rely. Jeanne was, beside all other sins alleged against her, a presumptuous
woman: and very few of these men had any desire to acquit her. They were little accustomed
to researches which were solely intended to discover the truth: their principle rather was,
as it has been the principle of many, to obtain proofs that their own particular way of thinking
was the right one. It is not perhaps very good even for a system of doctrine when this is the
principle by which it is tested. It is more fatal still, on this principle, to judge an individual
for death or for life. It will be abundantly proved, however, by all that is to follow, that
in face of this tribunal, learned, able, powerful, and prejudiced, the peasant girl of nineteen
stood like a rock, unmoved by all their cleverness, undaunted by their severity, seldom or
never losing her head, or her temper, her modest steadfastness, or her high spirit. If they
hoped to have an easy bargain of her, never were men more mistaken. Not knowing a from b, as
she herself said, untrained, unaided, she was more than a match for them all.

Round about this centre of eager intelligence, curiosity, and prejudice, the cathedral and
council chamber teeming with Churchmen, was a dark and silent ring of laymen and soldiers.
A number of the English leaders were in Rouen, but they appear very little. Winchester, who
had very lately come from England with an army, which according to some of the historians would
not budge from Calais, where it had landed, "for fear of the Maid"--was the chief person in
the place, but did not make any appearance at the trial, curiously enough; the Duke of Bedford
we are informed was visible on one shameful occasion, but no more. But Warwick, who was the
Governor of the town, appears frequently and various other lords with him. We see them in the
mirror held up to us by the French historians, pressing round in an ever narrowing circle,
closing up upon the tribunal in the midst, pricking the priests with perpetual sword points
if they seem to loiter. They would have had everything pushed on, no delay, no possibility
of escape. It is very possible that this was the case, for it is evident that the Witch was
deeply obnoxious to the English, and that they were eager to have her and her endless process
out of the way; but the evidence for their terror and fierce desire to expedite matters is
of the feeblest. A canon of Rouen declared at the trial that he had heard it said by Maître
Pierre Morice, and Nicolas l'Oyseleur, judges assessors, and by other whose names he does not
recollect, "that the said English were so afraid of her that they did not dare to begin the
siege of Louviers until she was dead; and that it was necessary if one would please them, to
hasten the trial as much as possible and to find the means of condemning her." Very likely
this was quite true: but it cannot at all be taken for proved by such evidence. Another contemporary
witness allows that though some of the English pushed on her trial for hate, some were well
disposed to her; the manner of Jeanne's imprisonment is the only thing which inclines the reader
to believe every evil thing that is said against them.

Such were the circumstances in which Jeanne was brought to trail. The population, moved to
pity and to tears as any population would have been, before the end, would seem at the beginning
to have been indifferent and not to have taken much interest one way or another: the court,
a hundred men and more with all their hangers-on, the cleverest men in France, one more distinguished
and impeccable than the others: the stern ring of the Englishmen outside keeping an eye upon
the tedious suit and all its convolutions: these all appear before us, surrounding as with
bands of iron the young lonely victim in the donjon, who submitting to every indignity, and
deprived of every aid, feeling that all her friends had abandoned her, yet stood steadfast
and strong in her absolute simplicity and honesty. It was but two years in that same spring
weather since she had left Vaucouleurs to seek the fortune of France, to offer herself to the
struggle which now was coming to an end. Not a soul had Jeanne to comfort or stand by her.
She had her saints who--one wonders if such a thought ever entered into her young visionary
head--had lured her to her doom, and who still comforted her with enigmatical words, promises
which came true in so sadly different a sense from that in which they were understood.

     (1) We are glad to add that the learned Quicherat has doubts
     on the subject of the cage.

CHAPTER XII -- BEFORE THE TRIAL. LENT, 1431.

We have not, however, sufficiently described the horror of the prison, and the treatment to
which Jeanne was exposed, though the picture is already dark enough. It throws a horrible yet
also a grotesque light upon the savage manners of the time to find that the chamber in which
she was confined, had secret provision for an espionnage of the most base kind, openings made
in the walls through which everything that took place in the room, every proceeding of the
unfortunate prisoner, could be spied upon and every word heard. The idea of such a secret watch
has always been attractive to the vulgar mind, and no doubt it has been believed to exist many
times when there was little or no justification for such an infernal thought. From the "ear"
of Dionysius, down to the Trou Judas, which early tourists on the Continent were taught to
fear in every chamber door, the idea has descended to our own times. It would seem, however,
to be beyond doubt that this odious means of acquiring information was in full operation during
the trial of Jeanne, and various spies were permitted to peep at her, and to watch for any
unadvised word she might say in her most private moments. We are told that the Duke of Bedford
made use of the opportunity in a still more revolting way, and was present, a secret spectator,
at the fantastic scene when Jeanne was visited by a committee of matrons who examined her person
to prove or to disprove one of the hateful insinuations which were made about her. The imagination,
however, refuses to conceive that a man of serious age and of high functions should have degraded
himself to the level of a Peeping Tom in this way; all the French historians, nevertheless,
repeat the story though on the merest hearsay evidence. And they also relate, with more apparent
truth, how a double treachery was committed upon the unfortunate prisoner by stationing two
secretaries at these openings, to take down her conversation with a spy who had been sent to
her in the guise of a countryman of her own; and that not only Cauchon but Warwick also was
present on this occasion, listening, while their plot was carried out by the vile traitor inside.
The clerks, we are glad to say, are credited with a refusal to act: but Warwick did not shrink
from the ignominy. The Englishmen indeed shrank from no ignominy; nor did the great French
savants assembled under the presidency of the Bishop. It is necessary to grant to begin with
that they were neither ignorant nor base men, yet from the beginning of the trial almost every
step taken by them appears base, as well as marked, in the midst of all their subtlety and
diabolical cunning, by the profoundest ignorance of human nature. The spy of whom we have spoken,
L'Oyseleur (bird-snarer, a significant name), was sent, and consented to be sent, to Jeanne
in her prison, as a fellow prisoner, a pays, like herself from Lorraine, to invite her confidence:
but his long conversations with the Maid, which were heard behind their backs by the secretaries,
elicited nothing from her that she did not say in the public examination. She had no secret
devices to betray to a traitor. She would not seem, indeed, to have suspected the man at all,
not even when she saw him among her judges taking part against her. Jeanne herself suspected
no falsehood, but made her confession to him, when she found that he was a priest, and trusted
him fully. The bewildering and confusing fact, turning all the contrivances of her judges into
foolishness, was, that she had nothing to confess that she was not ready to tell in the eye of day.

The adoption of this abominable method of eliciting secrets from the candid soul which had
none, was justified, it appears, by the manner of her trial, which was after the rules of the
Inquisition--by which even more than by those which regulate an ordinary French trial the guilt
of the accused is a foregone conclusion for which proof is sought, not a fair investigation
of facts for abstract purposes of justice. The first thing to be determined by the tribunal
was the counts of the indictment against Jeanne; was she to be tried for magical arts, for
sorcery and witchcraft? It is very probable that the mission of L'Oyseleur was to obtain evidence
that would clear up this question by means of recalling to her the stories of her childhood,
of the enchanted tree, and the Fairies' Well; from which sources, her accusers anxiously hoped
to prove that she derived her inspiration. But it is very clear that no such evidence was forthcoming,
and that it seemed to them hopeless to attribute sorcery to her; therefore the accusation was
changed to that of heresy alone. That they together decorated with a series of frescoes which
acquired considerable celebrity the exterior of the Fondaco is all that is known for certain,
Titian being apparently employed as the subordinate of his friend and master. Of these frescoes only
one figure, doubtfully assigned to Titian, and facing the Grand Canal,
has been preserved, in a much-damaged condition--the few fragments
that remained of those facing the side canal having been destroyed
in 1884.[14] Vasari shows us a Giorgione angry because he has been
complimented by friends on the superior beauty of some work on the
"facciata di verso la Merceria," which in reality belongs to Titian,
and thereupon implacably cutting short their connection and friendship.

This version is confirmed by Dolce, but refuted by the less contemporary authority of Tizianello's
Anonimo. Of what great painters, standing in the relation of master and pupil, have not such
stories been told, and--the worst of it is--told with a certain foundation of truth? Apocryphal
is, no doubt, that which has evolved itself from the internal evidence supplied by the Baptism
of Christ of Verrocchio and Leonardo da Vinci; but a stronger substructure of fact supports the
unpleasing anecdotes as to Titian and Tintoretto, as to Watteau and Pater, as to our own Hudson
and Reynolds, and, alas! as to very many others.

How touching, on the other hand, is that simple entry in Francesco Francia's day-book, made when
his chief journeyman, Timoteo Viti, leaves him: "1495 a di 4 aprile è partito il mio caro Timoteo;
chi Dio li dia ogni bene et fortuna!" ("On the 4th day of April 1495 my dear Timoteo left me.
May God grant him all happiness and good fortune!")

There is one reason that makes it doubly difficult, relying on developments of style only, to make,
even tentatively, a chronological arrangement of Titian's early works. This is that in those
painted poesie of the earlier Venetian art of which the germs are to be found in Giovanni Bellini
and Cima, but the flower is identified with Giorgione, Titian surrendered himself to the overmastering
influence of the latter with less reservation of his own individuality than in his sacred works.
In the earlier imaginative subjects the vivifying glow of Giorgionesque
poetry moulds, colours, and expands the genius of Titian, but so naturally
as neither to obliterate nor to constrain it.

Indeed, even in the late time of our master--checking an unveiled sensuousness which sometimes
approaches dangerously near to a downright sensuality--the influence of the master and companion
who vanished half a century before victoriously reasserts itself. It is this renouveau of the
Giorgionesque in the genius of the aged Titian that gives so exquisite a charm to the Venere
del Pardo, so strange a pathos to that still later Nymph and Shepherd, which was a few years
ago brought out of its obscurity and added to the treasures of the Imperial Gallery at Vienna.

The sacred works of the early time are Giorgionesque, too, but with a difference. Here from the
very beginning there are to be noted a majestic placidity, a fulness
of life, a splendour of representation, very different from the tremulous
sweetness, the spirit of aloofness and reserve which informs such
creations as the Madonna of Castelfranco and the Madonna with St.
Francis and St. Roch of the Prado Museum.

Later on, we have, leaving farther and farther behind the Giorgionesque ideal, the overpowering
force and majesty of the Assunta, the true passion going hand-in-hand with beauty of the Louvre
Entombment, the rhetorical passion and scenic magnificence of the St. Peter Martyr.

The Baptism of Christ, with Zuanne Ram as donor, now in the Gallery
of the Capitol at Rome, had been by Crowe and Cavalcaselle taken away
from Titian and given to Paris Bordone, but the keen insight of Morelli
led him to restore it authoritatively, and once for all, to Titian.

Internal evidence is indeed conclusive in this case that the picture must be assigned to a date
when Bordone was but a child of tender years.[15] Here Titian is found treating this great scene in
the life of Christ more in the style of a Giorgionesque pastoral than in the solemn hieratic
fashion adopted by his great predecessors and contemporaries. The luxuriant landscape is in the
main Giorgionesque, save that here and there a naked branch among the leafage--and on one
of them the woodpecker--strongly recalls Giovanni Bellini. The same robust, round-limbed young
Venetian, with the inexpressive face, does duty here as St. John the Baptist, who in the Three
Ages, presently to be discussed, appears much more appropriately as the amorous shepherd.
The Christ, here shown in the flower of youthful manhood, with luxuriant
hair and softly curling beard, will mature later on into the divine
Cristo della Moneta.

The question at once arises here, Did Titian in the type of this figure derive inspiration from Giovanni
Bellini's splendid Baptism of Christ, finished in 1510 for the Church of S. Corona at Vicenza,
but which the younger artist might well have seen a year or two previously, while it was in the
course of execution in the workshop of the venerable master? Apart from its fresh naïveté,
and its rare pictorial charm, how trivial and merely anecdotic does the conception of Titian
appear by the side of that of Bellini, so lofty, so consoling in its serene beauty, in the solemnity
of its sunset colour![16] Alone in the profile portrait of the donor, Zuanne Ram, placed in
the picture with an awkwardness attractive in its naïvete, but superbly painted, is Titian already
a full-grown master standing alone.

The beautiful Virgin and Child with SS. Ulfo and Brigida, placed in the Sala de la Reina Isabel
of the Prado, is now at last officially restored to Titian, after having been for years innumerable
ascribed to Giorgione, whose style it not more than generally recalls. Here at any rate all
the rival wise men are agreed, and it only remains for the student of the old masters, working
to-day on the solid substructure provided for him by his predecessors, to wonder how any other
attribution could have been accepted. But then the critic of the present day is a little too
prone to be wise and scornful à ban marché, forgetting that he has been spared three parts of
the road, and that he starts for conquest at the high point, to reach which the pioneers of
scientific criticism in art have devoted a lifetime of noble toil. It is in this piece especially
that we meet with that element in the early art of the Cadorine which Crowe and Cavalcaselle
have defined as "Palmesque." The St. Bridget and the St. Ulphus are both types frequently to
be met with in the works of the Bergamasque painter, and it has been more than once remarked
that the same beautiful model with hair of wavy gold must have sat to Giorgione, Titian, and
Palma. This can only be true, however, in a modified sense, seeing that Giorgione did not, so much
as his contemporaries and followers, affect the type of the beautiful Venetian blond, "large, languishing,
and lazy." The hair of his women--both the sacred personages and the divinities nominally classic
or wholly Venetian--is, as a rule, of a rich chestnut, or at the most dusky fair, and in them
the Giorgionesque oval of the face tempers with its spirituality
the strength of physical passion that the general physique denotes.

The polished surface of this panel at Madrid, the execution, sound and finished without being
finicking, the high yellowish lights on the crimson draperies, are all very characteristic of
this, the first manner of Vecelli. The green hangings at the back of the picture are such as are
very generally associated with the colour-schemes of Palma. An old repetition, with a slight
variation in the Bambino, is in the royal collection at Hampton Court, where it long bore--indeed
it does so still on the frame--the name of Palma Vecchio.

It will be remembered that Vasari assigns to the Tobias and the Angel in the Church of S. Marciliano
at Venice the exact date 1507, describing it, moreover, with greater
accuracy than he does any other work by Titian.

He mentions even "the thicket, in which is a St. John the Baptist kneeling as he prays to
heaven, whence comes a splendour of light." The Aretine biographer is followed in this particular
by Morelli, usually so eagle-eyed, so little bound by tradition in tracing the beginnings of a great
painter. The gifted modern critic places the picture among the quite early works of our master.
Notwithstanding this weight of authority, the writer feels bound to dissent from the view just now
indicated, and in this instance to follow Crowe and Cavalcaselle, who assign to the Tobias and
the Angel a place much later on in Titian's long career. The picture, though it hangs high in the
little church for which it was painted, will speak for itself to those who interrogate it
without parti pris. Neither in the figures--the magnificently classic yet living archangel Raphael
and the more naïve and realistic Tobias--nor in the rich landscape with St. John the Baptist
praying is there anything left of the early Giorgionesque manner. In the sweeping breadth
of the execution, the summarising power of the brush, the glow from within of the colour,
we have so many evidences of a style in its fullest maturity. It will be safe, therefore, to
place the picture well on in Titian's middle period.[17]

The Three Ages in the Bridgewater Gallery and the so-called Sacred and Profane Love in the Borghese
Gallery represent the apogee of Titian's Giorgionesque style. Glowing through and through with
the spirit of the master-poet among Venetian painters, yet falling short a little, it may be,
of that subtle charm of his, compounded indefinably of sensuous delight and spiritual yearning,
these two masterpieces carry the Giorgionesque technically a pretty wide step farther than the
inventor of the style took it. Barbarelli never absolutely threw off the trammels of the Quattrocento,
except in his portraits, but retained to the last--not as a drawback, but rather as an added
charm--the naïveté, the hardly perceptible hesitation proper to art
not absolutely full-fledged.

The Three Ages, from its analogies of type and manner with the Baptism of the Capitol, would
appear to be the earlier of the two imaginative works here grouped together, but to date later
than that picture.[18] The tonality of the picture is of an exquisite silveriness--that of clear,
moderate daylight, though this relative paleness may have been somewhat increased by time. It
may a little disconcert at first sight those who have known the lovely pastoral only from
hot, brown copies, such as the one which, under the name of Giorgione, was formerly in the Dudley
House Collection, and now belongs to Sir William Farrer. It is still so difficult to battle with
the deeply-rooted notion that there can be no Giorgione, no painting of his school, without the
accompaniment of a rich brown sauce! The shepherdess has a robe of fairest crimson, and her
flower-crowned locks in tint more nearly approach to the blond cendré which distinguishes so
many of Palma's donne than to the ruddier gold that Titian himself generally affects. The more
passionate of the two, she gazes straight into the eyes of her strong-limbed rustic lover, who
half-reclining rests his hand upon her shoulder. On the twin reed-pipes, which she still holds
in her hands, she has just breathed forth a strain of music, and to it, as it still lingers in their
ears, they yield themselves entranced. Here the youth is naked, the maid clothed and adorned--a
reversal, this, of Giorgione's Fête Champêtre in the Salon Carré
of the Louvre, where the women are undraped, and the amorous young
cavaliers appear in complete and rich attire.

To the right are a group of thoroughly Titianesque amorini--the winged one, dominating the
others, being perhaps Amor himself; while in the distance an old man contemplates skulls ranged
round him on the ground--obvious reminders of the last stage of all, at which he has so nearly
arrived. There is here a wonderful unity between the even, unaccented harmony of the delicate
tonality and the mood of the personages--the one aiding the other to express the moment of pause
in nature and in love, which in itself is a delight more deep than all that the very whirlwind
of passion can give. Near at hand may be pitfalls, the smiling love-god may prove less innocent
than he looks, and in the distance Fate may be foreshadowed by the figure of weary Age awaiting
Death. Yet this one moment is all the lovers' own, and they profane it not by speech, but stir
their happy languor only with faint notes of music borne on the still, warm air.

The Sacred and Profane Love of the Borghese Gallery is one of the world's pictures, and beyond doubt
the masterpiece of the early or Giorgionesque period. To-day surely no one will be found to gainsay
Morelli when he places it at the end of that period, which it so incomparably sums up--not
at the beginning, when its perfection would be as incomprehensible as the less absolute achievement
displayed in other early pieces which such a classification as this would place after the
Borghese picture. The accompanying reproduction obviates all necessity for a detailed description.
Titian painted afterwards perhaps more wonderfully still--with a more sweeping vigour of brush,
with a higher authority, and a play of light as brilliant and diversified. He never attained
to a higher finish and perfection of its kind, or more admirably suited the technical means
to the thing to be achieved. He never so completely gave back, coloured with the splendour
of his own genius, the rays received from Giorgione. The delicious sunset landscape has all the
Giorgionesque elements, with more spaciousness, and lines of a still more suave harmony. The grand
Venetian donna who sits sumptuously robed, flower-crowned, and even gloved, at the sculptured
classic fount is the noblest in her pride of loveliness, as she is one of the first, of the long line
of voluptuous beauties who will occupy the greatest brushes of the Cinquecento. The little love-god
who, insidiously intervening, paddles in the water of the fountain and troubles its surface, is
Titian's very own, owing nothing to any forerunner. The divinely beautiful Profane Love--or, as
we shall presently see, Venus--is the most flawless presentment of female loveliness unveiled
that modern art has known up to this date, save only the Venus of Giorgione himself (in the Dresden
Gallery), to which it can be but little posterior. The radiant freshness of the face, with its
glory of half-unbound hair, does not, indeed, equal the sovereign loveliness of the Dresden
Venus or the disquieting charm of the Giovanelli Zingarella (properly Hypsipyle). Its beauty
is all on the surface, while theirs stimulates the imagination of the beholder. The body with
its strong, supple beauty, its unforced harmony of line and movement,
with its golden glow of flesh, set off in the true Giorgionesque fashion
by the warm white of the slender, diaphanous drapery, by the splendid
crimson mantle with the changing hues and high lights, is, however,
the most perfect poem of the human body that Titian ever achieved.

Only in the late Venere del Pardo, which so closely follows the chief
motive of Giorgione's Venus, does he approach it in frankness and
purity.

Far more genuinely classic is it in spirit, because more living and more solidly founded on natural
truth, than anything that the Florentine or Roman schools, so much more assiduous in their
study of classical antiquity, have brought forth.[19]

It is impossible to discuss here in detail all the conjectural explanations which have been hazarded
with regard to this most popular of all Venetian pictures--least of all that strange one brought
forward by Crowe and Cavalcaselle, the Artless and Sated Love, for which they have found so little
acceptance. But we may no longer wrap ourselves in an atmosphere of dreamy conjecture and show but
a languid desire to solve the fascinating problem.
 Perhaps,
therefore, the Bishop knew that the slim creature before him, half boy half girl, was not likely
to be overawed by his presence or questions; but it cannot have been but a wonder to the others,
all gazing at her, the first men in Normandy, the most learned in Paris, to hear her voice,
assez femme, young and clear, arising in the midst of them, "I know not what things I may be
asked," said Jeanne. "Perhaps you may ask me questions which I cannot answer." The assembly
was startled by this beginning.

"Will you swear to answer truly all that concerns the faith, and that you know?"

"I will swear," said Jeanne, "about my father and mother and what I have done since coming
to France; but concerning my revelations from God I will answer to no man, except only to Charles
my King; I should not reveal them were you to cut off my head, unless by the secret counsel
of my visions."

The Bishop continued not without gentleness, enjoining her to swear at least that in everything
that touched the faith she would speak truth; and Jeanne kneeling down crossed her hands upon
the book of the Gospel, or Missal as it is called in the report, and took the required oath,
always under the condition she stated, to answer truly on everything she knew concerning the
faith, except in respect to her revelations.

The examination then began with the usual formalities. She was asked her name (which she said
with touching simplicity was Jeannette at home but Jeanne in France), the names of her father
and mother, godfather and godmothers, the priest who baptised her, the place where she was
born, etc., her age, almost nineteen; her education, consisting of the Pater Noster, Ave Maria,
and Credo, which her mother had taught her.

Here she was asked, a curious interruption to the formal interrogatory, to say the Pater Noster--the
reason of which sudden demand was that witches and sorcerers were supposed to be unable to
repeat that prayer. As unexpected as the question was Jeanne's reply. She answered that if
the Bishop would hear her in confession she would say it willingly. She had been refused all
the exercises of piety, and she was speaking to a company of priests.

There is a great dignity of implied protest against this treatment in such an answer. The request
was made a second time with a promise of selecting two worthy Frenchmen to hear her: but her
reply was the same. She would say the prayer when she made her confession but not otherwise.
She was ready it would seem in proud humility to confess to any or to all of her enemies, as
one whose conscience was clear, and who had nothing to conceal.

She was then commanded not to attempt to escape from her prison, on pain of being condemned
for heresy, but to this again she demurred at once. She would not accept the prohibition, but
would escape if she could, so that no man could say that she had broken faith; although since
her capture she had been bound in chains and her feet fastened with irons. To this, her examiner
said that it was necessary so to secure her in order that she might not escape. "It is true
and certain," she replied, "whatever others may wish, that to every prisoner it is lawful to
escape if he can." It may be remarked, as she forcibly pointed out afterwards, that she had
never given her faith, never surrendered, but had always retained her freedom of action.

The tribunal thereupon called in the captain in charge of Jeanne's prison, a gentleman called
John Gris in the record, probably John Grey, along with two soldiers, Bernoit and Talbot, and
enjoined them to guard her securely and not to permit her to talk with any one without the
permission of the court. This was all the business done on the first day of audience.

On the 22d of February at eight o'clock in the morning, the sitting was resumed. In the meantime,
however, the chapel had been found too small and too near the outer world, the proceedings
being much interrupted by shouts and noises from without, and probably incommoded within by
the audience which had crowded it the first day. The judges accordingly assembled in the great
hall of the castle; they were forty-nine in number on the second day, the number being chiefly
swelled by canons of Rouen. After some preliminary business the accused was once more introduced,
and desired again to take the oath. Jeanne replied that she had done so on the previous day
and that this was enough; upon which there followed a short altercation, which, however, ended
by her consent to swear again that she would answer truly in all things that concerned the
faith. The questioner this day was Jean Beaupère (Pulchri patris, as he is called in the Latin),
a theologian, Master of Arts, Canon of Paris and of Besançon, "one of the greatest props of
the University of Paris," a man holding a number of important offices, and who afterwards appeared
at the Council of Bâle as the deputy of Normandy. He began by another exhortation to speak
the truth, to which Jeanne replied as before that what she did say she would say truly, but
that she would not answer upon all subjects. "I have done nothing but by revelation," she said.

These preliminaries on both sides having been gone through, the examination was resumed. Jeanne
informed the court in answer to Beaupère's question that she had been taught by her mother
to sew and did not fear to compete with any woman in Rouen in these crafts; that she had once
been absent from home when her family were driven out of their village by fear of the Burgundians,
and that she had then lived for about fifteen days in the house of a woman called La Rousse,
at Neufchâteau; that when she was at home she was occupied in the work of the house and did
not go to the fields with the sheep and other animals; that she went to confession regularly
to the Curé of her own village, or when he could not hear her, to some other priest, by permission
of the Curé; also that two or three times she had made her confession to the mendicant friars--this
being during her stay in Neufchâteau (where presumably she was not acquainted with the clergy);
and that she received the sacrament always at Easter. Asked whether she had communicated at
other feasts than Easter, she said briefly that this was enough. "Go on to the rest," passez
outre, she added, and the questioner seems to have been satisfied. Then came the really vital
part of the matter. She proceeded--no direct question on the point being recorded, though no
doubt it was made--to tell how when she was about thirteen she heard voices from God bidding
her to be good and obedient. The first time she was much afraid. The voice came about the hour
of noon, in summer, in her father's garden. She was fasting but had not fasted the preceding
day. The voice came from the right, towards the church; and came rarely without a great light.
This light came always from the side whence the voice proceeded, and was a very bright radiance.
When she came into France she still continued to hear the same voices.

She was then asked how she could see the light when it was at the side; to which foolish question
Jeanne gave no reply, but "turned to other matters," saying voluntarily with a soft implied
reproof of the noise around her--that if she were in a wood, that is in a quiet place, she
could hear the voices coming towards her. She added (going on, one could imagine, in a musing,
forgetting the congregation of sinners about her) that it seemed to her a noble voice, and
that she believed it came from God, and that when she had heard it three times she knew it
was the voice of an angel; the voice always came quite clearly to her, and she understood it well.

She was then asked what it said to her concerning the salvation of her soul.

She said that it taught her to rule her life well, to go often to church: and told her that
it was necessary that she, Jeanne, should go to France. The said Jeanne added that she would
not be questioned further concerning the voice, or the manner in which it was made known to
her, but that two or three times in a week it had said to her that she must go to France; but
that her father knew nothing of this. The voice said to her that she should go to France, until
she could endure it no longer; it said to her that she should raise the siege, which was set
against the city of Orleans. It said also that she must go to Robert of Baudricourt, in the
city of Vaucouleurs, who was captain of that place, and that he would give her people to go
with her; to which she had answered that she was a poor girl who knew not how to ride, nor
how to conduct war. She then said that she went to her uncle and told him that she wished to
go with him for a little while to his house, and that she lived there for eight days; she then
told her uncle that she must go to Vaucouleurs, and the said uncle took her there. Also she
went on to say that when she came to the said city of Vaucouleurs, she recognised Robert of
Baudricourt; though she had never seen him before she knew him by the voice that said to her
which was he. She then told this Robert that it was necessary that she should go to France,
but twice over he refused and repulsed her; the third time, however, he received her, and gave
her certain men to go with her; the voice had told her that this would be so.

She said also that the Duke of Lorraine sent for her to come to him, and that she went under
a safe conduct granted by him, and told him that she must go to France. He asked her whether
he should recover from his illness; but she told him that she knew nothing of that, and she
talked very little to him of her journey. She told the Duke that he ought to send his son and
his people with her to take her to France, and that she would pray God to restore his health;
and then she was taken back to Vaucouleurs. She said also that when she left Vaucouleurs she
wore the dress of a man, without any other arms than a sword which Robert de Baudricourt had
given her; and that she had with her a chevalier, a squire, and four servants, and that they
slept for the first night at St. Urbain, in the abbey there. She was then asked by whose advice
she wore the dress of a man, but refused to answer. Finally she said that she charged no man
with giving her this advice.

She went on to say that the said Robert de Baudricourt exacted an oath from those who went
with her, that they would conduct her to the end of her journey well and safely; and that he
said, as she left him, "Go, and let come what will." She also said that she knew well that
God loved the Duke of Orleans, concerning whom she had more revelations than about any other
living man, except him whom she called her King. She added that it was necessary for her to
wear male attire, and that whoever advised her to do so had given her wise counsel.

She then said that she sent a letter to the English before Orleans, in which she required them
to go away, a copy of which letter had been read to her in Rouen; but there were two or three
mistakes, especially in the words which called upon them to surrender to the Maid instead of
to surrender to the King. (There is no indication why these two latter statements should have
been introduced into the midst of her narrative of the journey; it may have been in reply to
some other question interjected by another of her examiners: Passez outre, as she herself says.
She immediately resumes the simple and straightforward tale.)

The said Jeanne went on to say that her further journey to him whom she called her King was
without any impediment; and that when she arrived at the town of St. Catherine de Fierbois
she sent news of her arrival to the town of Chasteau-Chinon where the said King was. She arrived
there herself about noon and went to an inn(1); and after dinner went to him whom she called
her King, who was in the castle. She then said that when she entered the chamber where he was,
she knew him among all others, by the revelation of her "voices." She told her King that she
wished to make war against the English.

She was then asked whether when she heard the "voices" in the presence of the King the light
was also seen in that place. She answered as before: Passez outre: Transeatis ultra. "Go on,"
as we might say, "to the other questions."

She was asked if she had seen an angel hovering over her King. She answered: "Spare me; passez
outre." She added afterwards, however, that before he put his hand to the work, the King had
many beautiful apparitions and revelations. She was asked what these were. She answered: "I
will not tell you; it is not I who should answer; send to the King and he will tell you."

She was then asked if her voices had promised her that when she came to the King he would receive
her. She answered that those of her own party knew that she had been sent from God and that
some had heard and recognised the voices. Further, she said that her King and various others
had heard and seen(2) the voices coming to her--Charles of Bourbon (Comte de Clermont) and
two or three others with him. She then said that there was no day in which she did not hear
that voice; but that she asked nothing from it except the salvation of her soul. Besides this,
Jeanne confessed that the voice said she should be led to the town of St. Denis in France,
where she wished to remain--that is after the attack on Paris--but that against her will the
lords forced her to leave it: if she had not been wounded she would not have gone: but she
was wounded in the moats of Paris: however she was healed in five days. She then said that
she had made an assault, called in French escarmouche (skirmish), upon the town of Paris. She
was asked if it was on a holy day, and said that she believed it was on a festival. She was
then asked if she thought it well done to fight on a holy day, and answered, "Passez outre."
Go on to the next question.

This is a verbatim account of one day of the trial. Most of the translations which exist give
questions as well as answers: but these are but occasionally given in the original document,
and Jeanne's narrative reads like a calm, continuous statement, only interrupted now and then
by a question, usually a cunning attempt to startle her with a new subject, and to hurry some
admission from her. The great dignity with which she makes her replies, the occasional flash
of high spirit, the calm determination with which she refuses to be led into discussion of
the subjects which she had from the first moment reserved, are very remarkable. We have seen
her hitherto only in conflict, in the din of battle and the fatigue, yet exuberant energy,
of rapid journeys. Her circumstances were now very different. She had been shut up in prison
for months, for six weeks at least she had been in irons, and the air of heaven had not blown
upon this daughter of the fields; her robust yet sensitive maidenhood had been exposed to a
hundred offences, and to the constant society, infecting the very air about, of the rudest
of men; yet so far is her spirit from being broken that she meets all those potent, grave,
and reverend doctors and ecclesiastics, with the simplicity and freedom of a princess, answering
frankly or holding her peace as seems good to her, afraid of nothing, keeping her self-possession,
all her wits about her as we say, without panic and without presumption. The trial of Jeanne
is indeed almost more miraculous than her fighting; a girl not yet nineteen, forsaken of all,
without a friend! It is less wonderful that she should have developed the qualities of a general,
of a gunner, every gift of war--than that in her humiliation and distress she should thus hold
head against all the most subtle intellects in France, and bear, with but one moment of faltering,
a continued cross-examination of three months, without losing her patience, her heart, or her
courage.

*****

The third day brought a still larger accession of judges, sixty-two of them taking their places
on the benches round the Bishop in the great hall; and the day began with another and longer
altercation between Cauchon and Jeanne on the subject of the oath again demanded of her. She
maintained her resolution to say nothing of her voices. "We" according to the record "required
of her that she should swear simply and absolutely without reservation." She would seem to
have replied with impatience, "Let me speak freely:" adding "By my faith you may ask me many
questions which I will not answer": then explaining, "Many things you may ask me, but I will
tell you nothing truly that concerns my revelations; for you might compel me to say things
which I have sworn not to say; and so I should perjure myself, which you ought not to wish."
This explains several statements which she made later in respect to her introduction to the
King. She repeated emphatically: "I warn you well, you who call yourselves my judges, that
you take a great responsibility upon you, and that you burden me too much." She said also that
it was enough to have already sworn twice. She was again asked to swear simply and absolutely,
and answered, "It is enough to have sworn twice," and that all the clerks in Rouen and Paris
could not condemn her unless lawfully; also that of her coming she would speak the truth but
not all the truth; and that the space of eight days would not be enough to tell all.

"We the said Bishop" (continues the report) "then said to her that she should ask advice from
those present whether she ought to swear or not. She replied again that of her coming she would
speak truly and not otherwise, nor would it be fit that she should talk at large. We then told
her that it would throw suspicion on what she said if she did not swear to speak the truth.
She answered as before. We repeated that she must swear precisely and absolutely. She answered
that she would say what she knew, but not all, and that she had come on the part of God, and
appealed to God from whom she came. Again requested and admonished to swear on pain of every
punishment that could be put on her, again answered 'Passez outre.' Finally she consented to
swear that she would speak the truth in everything that concerned the trial."

Her examination was then resumed by Beaupère as before, who elicited from her that she had
fasted (he seems to have wished to make out that the fasting had something to do with her visions)
since noon the day before (it was Lent); and also that she had heard her voices both on that
day and the day before, three times on the previous day, the first time in the morning when
she was asleep, and awakened by them. Did she kneel and thank them? She thanked them, sitting
up in her bed (to which she was chained, as her questioner knew) and clasping her hands. She
asked them what she was to do, and they told her to answer boldly.

It may be remarked here that more frequently as the examination goes on, part of Jeanne's words
are quoted in the first person, as if the reporters had been specially struck by them, while
the bulk of her evidence goes on more calmly in the third person, the narrative form. After
saying that she was bidden to answer boldly, she seems to have turned to the Bishop, and to
have addressed him individually: "You say you are my judge; I warn you to take care what you
are doing, for I am sent from God, and you are putting yourself in much peril" (magno periculo:
gallice, adds the reporter, en grant dangier).

She was then asked if her voices ever changed their meaning, and answered that she had never
heard two speak contrary to each other; what they had said that day was that she should speak
boldly. Asked, if the voice forbade her to reply to questions asked, she replied; "I will not
answer you. I have revelations touching the King which I will not tell you." Asked, if the
voices forbade her to reveal these revelations, she answered, "I have not consulted them; give
me fifteen days' delay and I will answer you"; but being again exhorted to reply, said: "If
the voice forbade me to speak, how many times should I tell you?" Again asked, if she were
forbidden to speak, answered, "I believe I am not forbidden by men"--repeating that she would
not reply, and knew not how far she should reply, for it had not been revealed to her; but
that she believed firmly, as firmly as the Christian faith, and that God had redeemed us from
the pains of hell, that this voice came from Him.

Questioned concerning the voice, what it appeared to be when it spoke, if that of an angel,
or from God Himself; or if it was the voice of a saint or of saints (feminine), answered: "The
voice comes from God; and I believe that I should not tell you all I know, for I should displease
these voices if I answered you; and as for this question I pray you to leave me free." Asked
if she thought that to speak the truth would displease God, she answered, "What the voices
say I am to tell to the King, not to you," adding that during that night they had said much
to her for the good of the King, and that if she could but let him know she would willingly
drink no wine up to Easter (the reader will remember that her frugal fare consisted of bread
dipped in the wine and water, which is justly called eau rougie in France). Asked, if she could
not induce the voices to speak to her King directly, she answered that she knew not whether
her voices would consent, unless it were the will of God, and God consented to it, adding,
"They might well reveal it to the King; and with that I should be content." Asked, if the voices
could not communicate with the King as they did in her presence, she answered, that she did
not know whether this was God's will; and added, that unless it were the will of God she would
not know how to act. Asked, if it was by the advice of her voices that she attempted to escape
from her prison, she answered, "I have nothing to say to you on that point." Asked, if she
always saw a light when the voices were heard, she answered: "Yes: that with the sound of the
voices light came." Asked if she saw anything else coming with the voices, answered: "I do
not tell you all. I am not allowed to do so, nor does my oath touch that; the voices are good
and noble, but neither of that will I answer." She was then asked to give in writing the points
on which she would not reply. Then she was asked if her voices had eyes and ears, and answered,
"You shall not have this either," adding, that it was a saying among children that men were
sometimes hanged for speaking the truth.

She was then asked if she knew herself to be in the grace of God. She replied: "If I am not
so, may God put me in His grace; if I am, may God keep me in it. I should be the most miserable
in the world if I were not in the grace of God." She said besides, that if she were in a state
of sin she did not believe her voices would come to her, and she wished that everyone could
understand them as she did, adding, that she was about thirteen when they came to her first.

She was then asked, whether in her childhood she had played with the other children in the
fields, and various other particulars about Domremy, whether there were any Burgundians there?
to which Jeanne answered boldly that there was one, and that she wished his head might be cut
off, adding piously, "that is, if it pleased God"(3); she was also asked whether she had fought
along with the other children against the children of the neighbouring Burgundian village of
Maxy (Maxey sur Meuse): why she hated the Burgundians, and many questions of this kind, with
a close examination about a certain tree near the village of Domremy, which some called the
Tree of the good Ladies, and others, the Fairies' Tree; and also about a well there, the Fairies'
Well, of which poor patients were said to drink and get well. Jeanne (no doubt relieved by
the simple character of these questions) made answer freely and without hesitation, in no way
denying that she had danced and sung with the other children, and made garlands for the image
of the Blessed Marie of Domremy; but she did not remember whether she had ever done so after
attaining years of discretion, and certainly she had never seen a fairy, nor worked any spell
by their means. At the end, after having thus been put off her guard, she was suddenly asked
about her dress (a capital point in the eyes of her judges): whether she wished to have a woman's
dress. Probably she was, as they hoped, tired, and expecting no such question, for she answered
quickly yet with instant recovery: "Bring me one to go home in and I will accept it; otherwise
no. I prefer this, since it pleases God that I should wear it." The recollection of Domremy
and of the pleasant fields, must have carried her back to the days when the little Jeanne was
like the rest in her short, full petticoats of crimson stuff, free of any danger: what could
be better to go home in? but she immediately remembered the obvious and excellent reasons she
had for wearing another costume now. So ended the third day.

In the meantime there had been, we are told, various interruptions during the examination;
perhaps it was then that Nicolas de Houppeville protested against Bishop Cauchon as a partisan
and a Burgundian, and therefore incapable by law of judging a member of the opposite party:
and had been rudely silenced, and afterwards punished, as we have already heard. Another kind
of opposition less bold had begun to be remarked, which was that one of the persons present,
by word and sign, whispering suggestions to her, or warning her with his eyes, was helping
the unfortunate prisoner in her defence. Probably this did little good, "for she was often
troubled and hurried in her answers," we are told; but it was a sign of good-will, at least.
When Frère Isambard, who was the person in question, speaks at a later period he tells us that
"the questions put to Jeanne were too difficult, subtle, and dangerous, so that the great clerks
and learned men who were present scarcely would have known how to answer them, and that many
in the assembly murmured at them." Perhaps the good Frère Isambard might have spared himself
the trouble; for Jeanne, however she may have suffered, was probably more able to hold her
own than many of those great clerks, and did so with unfailing courage and spirit. One of the
other judges, Jean Fabry, a bishop, declared afterwards that "her answers were so good, that
for three weeks he believed that they were inspired." Manchon, the reporter, he who had refused
to take down the private conversation of Jeanne in her prison with the vile traitor, L'Oyseleur,
makes his voice heard also to the effect that "Monseigneur of Beauvais would have had everything
written as pleased him, and when there was anything that displeased him he forbade the secretaries
to report it as being of no importance for the trial." On another day a humbler witness still,
Massieu, one of the officers of the court, who had the charge of taking Jeanne daily from her
prison to the hall, and back again, met in the courtyard an Englishman, who seems to have been
a singing man or lay clerk "of the King's chapel in England," probably attached to Winchester's
ecclesiastical retinue. This man asked him: "What do you think of her answers? Will she be
burned? What will happen?" "Up to this time," said Massieu, "I have heard nothing from her
that was not honourable and good. She seems to me a good woman, but how it will all end God
only knows!"

No doubt conversations of this kind were being carried on all over Rouen. Would she be burned?
What would happen? Could any one stand and answer like that hour after hour and day by day,
inspired only by the devil? There was no popular enthusiasm for her even now. How should there
have been in that partisan province, more English than French? But a chill doubt began to steal
into many minds whether she was so bad as had been thought, whether indeed she might not after
all be something quite different from what she had been thought? Nature had begun to work in
the agitated place, and even in that black-robed, eager assembly. If there was a vile L'Oyseleur
trying to get her confidence in private, and so betray her, there was also a kind Frère Isambard,
privately plucking at her sleeve, imploring her to be cautious, whispering an answer probably
not half so wise as her own natural reply, yet warming her heart with the suggestion of a friend
at hand.

On the fourth day, Jeanne was again required to swear, and replied as before, that so far as
concerned the trial she would answer truly, but not all she knew. "You ought to be satisfied:
I have sworn sufficiently," she said; and with this her judges seem to have been content. Beaupère
then resumed his questions, but first asked her, perhaps with a momentary gleam of compassion
and a sudden consciousness of the pallor and weariness of the young prisoner, how she did.
She answered, one can imagine with what tone of indignant disdain: "You see how I am: I am
as well as I can be." He then cross-examined her closely as to what voices she had heard since
her last appearance in court, but drew from her only the same answer, "The voice tells me to
answer boldly," and that she would tell them as much as she was permitted by God to tell them,
but concerning her revelations for the King of France she would say nothing except by permission
of her voices.

She was then asked what kind of voices they were which she heard, were they voices of angels,
or of saints (sancti aut sanctæ, male or female saints) or from God Himself? She answered that
the voices were those of St. Catherine and St. Margaret, whose heads were crowned with beautiful
crowns, very rich and precious. "So much as this God allows me to say. If you doubt send to
Poitiers, where I was questioned before." (It may perhaps be permissible to suppose that the
kind whisperer at her elbow might have suggested the repeated references to Poitiers that follow,
but which are not to be found before: though it was most natural she should refer to this place
where she was examined at the beginning of her mission.) Asked how she knew which of these
two saints, she answered that she could quite distinguish one from the other by the manner
of their salutation; that she had been led and guided by them for seven years, and that she
knew them because they had named themselves to her. She was then asked how they were dressed?
and answered: "I cannot tell you; I am not permitted to reveal this; if you do not believe
me send to Poitiers." She said also that at her coming into France she had revealed these things,
but could not now. She was asked what was the age of her saints, but replied that she was not
permitted to tell. Asked, if both saints spoke at once or one after the other, she replied:
"I have not permission to tell you: but I always consult them both together." Asked, which
had appeared to her first, and answered: "I do not know which it was; I did know, but have
forgotten. It is written in the register of Poitiers."

"She then said she had much comfort from St. Michael. Again, asked, which had come first, she
replied that it was St. Michael. Asked, if a long time had passed since she first heard the
voice of St. Michael, answered: "I do not name to you the voice of St. Michael; but his conversation
was of great comfort to me." Asked, again, what voice came first to her when she was thirteen,
answered, that it was St. Michael whom she saw before her eyes, and that he was not alone,
but accompanied by many angels of Heaven. She said also that she would not have come into France
but by the command of God. On the 24th of March 1514 the Council of Ten revokes its decree of the previous
May, and formally declares that Titian is not to receive his broker's patent on the first vacancy,
but must wait his turn. Seemingly nothing daunted, Titian petitions again, asking for the reversion
of the particular broker's patent which will become vacant on the death of Giovanni Bellini; and
this new offer, which stipulates for certain special payments and provisions, is accepted by
the Council. Titian, like most other holders of the much-coveted office, shows himself subsequently
much more eager to receive its not inconsiderable emoluments than to finish the pictures, the painting
of which is the one essential duty attached to the office. Some further bargaining takes place
with the Council on the 18th of January 1516, but, a few days after the death of Giovanni
Bellini at the end of November in the same year, fresh resolutions are passed postponing the grant
to Titian of Bellini's patent; notwithstanding which, there is conclusive evidence of a later
date to show that he is allowed the full enjoyment of his "Senseria
in Fontego di Tedeschi"

(sic), with all its privileges and immunities, before the close of this same year, 1516.

It is in this year that Titian paid his first visit to Ferrara, and entered into relations
with Alfonso I., which were to become more intimate as the position of the master became greater
and more universally recognised in Italy. It was here, as we may safely assume, that he completed,
or, it may be, repaired, Giovanni Bellini's last picture, the great Bacchanal or Feast of
the Gods on Earth, now at Alnwick Castle. It is there that he obtained the commission for
two famous works, the Worship of Venus and the Bacchanal, designed, in continuation of the
series commenced with Bellini's Feast of the Gods, to adorn a favourite apartment in Alfonso's
castle of Ferrara; the series being completed a little later on by that crown and climax of the
whole set, the Bacchus and Ariadne of the National Gallery.

Bellini appears in an unfamiliar phase in this final production of his magnificent old age,
on which the signature, together with the date, 1514, so carefully
noted by Vasari, is still most distinctly to be read.

Much less Giorgionesque--if the term be in this case permissible--and more Quattrocentist in style
than in the immediately preceding altar-piece of S. Giovanni Crisostomo, he is here hardly
less interesting. All admirers of his art are familiar with the four beautiful Allegories of
the Accademia delle Belle Arti at Venice, which constitute, besides the present picture, almost
his sole excursion into the regions of pagan mythology and symbolism. These belong, however, to
a considerably earlier period of his maturity, and show a fire which in the Bacchanal has
died out.[33] Vasari describes this Bacchanal as "one of the most beautiful works ever executed
by Gian Bellino," and goes on to remark that it has in the draperies "a certain angular (or
cutting) quality in accordance with the German style." He strangely attributes this to an
imitation of Dürer's Rosenkranzfest, painted some eight years previously for the Church of San
Bartolommeo, adjacent to the Fondaco de' Tedeschi. This particularity, noted by the author
of the Vite, and, in some passages, a certain hardness and opacity of colour, give rise to the
surmise that, even in the parts of the picture which belong to Bellini, the co-operation of
Basaiti may be traced. It was he who most probably painted the background and the figure of
St. Jerome in the master's altar-piece finished in the preceding year for S. Giovanni Crisostomo;
it was he, too, who to a great extent executed, though he cannot have wholly devised, the
Bellinesque Madonna in Glory with Eight Saints in the Church of San Pietro Martire at Murano,
which belongs to this exact period. Even in the Madonna of the Brera Gallery (1510), which
shows Gian Bellino's finest landscape of the late time, certain hardnesses
of colour in the main group suggest the possibility of a minor co-operation
by Basaiti.

Some passages of the Bacchanal, however--especially the figures of the two blond, fair-breasted
goddesses or nymphs who, in a break in the trees, stand relieved against the yellow bands of a sunset
sky--are as beautiful as anything that Venetian art in its Bellinesque phase has produced
up to the date of the picture's appearance. Very suggestive of Bellini is the way in which
the hair of some of the personages is dressed in heavy formal locks, such as can only be produced
by artificial means. These are to be found, no doubt, chiefly in his earliest or Paduan period,
when they are much more defined and rigid. Still this coiffure--for as such it must be designated--is
to be found more or less throughout the master's career. It is very noticeable in the Allegories
just mentioned.

Infinitely pathetic is the old master's vain attempt to infuse into the chosen subject the measure
of Dionysiac vehemence that it requires. An atmosphere of unruffled peace, a grand serenity,
unconsciously betraying life-weariness, replaces the amorous unrest that courses like fire
through the veins of his artistic offspring, Giorgione and Titian. The audacious gestures and
movements naturally belonging to this rustic festival, in which the gods unbend and, after the
homelier fashion of mortals, rejoice, are indicated; but they are here gone through, it would
seem, only pour la forme. A careful examination of the picture substantially confirms Vasari's
story that the Feast of the Gods was painted upon by Titian, or to put it otherwise, suggests
in many passages a Titianesque hand. It may well be, at the same time, that Crowe and Cavalcaselle
are right in their conjecture that what the younger master did was rather to repair injury to the
last work of the elder and supplement it by his own than to complete a picture left unfinished
by him. The whole conception, the charpente, the contours of even the landscape are attributable
to Bellini. His are the carefully-defined, naked tree-trunks to the right, with above in the branches
a pheasant, and on a twig, in the immediate foreground of the picture, a woodpecker; his is
the rocky formation of the foreground with its small pebbles.[34] Even the tall, beetling crag,
crowned with a castle sunset-lit--so confidently identified with
the rock of Cadore and its castle--is Bellinesque in conception, though
not in execution.

By Titian, and brushed in with a loose breadth that might be taken to betray a certain impatience
and lack of interest, are the rocks, the cloud-flecked blue sky, the uplands and forest-growth
to the left, the upper part of the foliage that caps the hard, round tree-trunks to the right.
If it is Titian that we have here, as certainly appears most probable, he cannot be deemed
to have exerted his full powers in completing or developing the Bellinesque landscape. The task
may well, indeed, have presented itself to him as an uninviting one. There is nothing to remind
the beholder, in conception or execution, of the exquisite Giorgionesque landscapes in the Three
Ages and the Sacred and Profane Love, while the broader handling suggests rather the technical
style, but in no way the beauty of the sublime prospect which opens out in the Bacchus and Ariadne.

CHAPTER
III

The "Worship of Venus" and "Bacchanal"

Place in Art of the "Assunta"--The "Bacchus and Ariadne"--So-called Portraits of Alfonso of Ferrara
and Laura Dianti--The "St. Sebastian" of Brescia--Altar-pieces at Ancona and in the Vatican--The
"Entombment" of the Louvre--The "Madonna di Casa Pesaro"--Place among Titian's works of "St. Peter
Martyr."

In the year in which Titian paid his first visit to Ferrara, Ariosto brought out there his first edition
of the Orlando Farioso.[35] A greater degree of intimacy between poet and painter has in some
quarters been presupposed than probably existed at this stage of Titian's career, when his relation
to Alfonso and the Ferrarese Court was far from being as close as it afterwards became. It has accordingly
been surmised that in the Worship of Venus and the Bacchanal, painted for Alfonso, we have proof
that he yielded to the influence of the romantic poet who infused new life-blood into the imaginative
literature of the Italian Renaissance. In their frank sensuousness, in their fulness of life,
in their unforced marriage of humanity to its environment, these very pictures are, however,
essentially Pagan and Greek, not by any process of cold and deliberate imitation, but by a similar
natural growth from a broad groundwork provided by Nature herself. It was the passionate and
unbridled Dosso Dossi who among painters stood in the closest relation
to Ariosto, both in his true vein of romanticism and his humorous
eccentricity.

In the Worship of Venus and the Bacchanal we have left behind already the fresh morning of
Titian's genius, represented by the Giorgionesque works already enumerated, and are rapidly approaching
its bright noon. Another forward step has been taken, but not without some evaporation of the
subtle Giorgionesque perfume exhaled by the more delicate flowers of genius of the first period.
The Worship of Venus might be more appropriately named Games of the
Loves in Honour of Venus.

The subject is taken from the Imagines[36] of Philostratus, a renowned Greek sophist, who, belonging
to a late period of the Roman Empire, yet preserved intact the self-conscious grace and charm
of the Hellenistic mode of conception. The theme is supplied by a series of paintings, supposed
to have been seen by him in a villa near Naples, but by one important group of modern scholars
held to be creations of the author's fertile brain. Before a statue of Venus more or less of
the Praxitelean type--a more earthly sister of those which have been named the "Townley Venus"
and the "Vénus d'Arles"--myriads of Loves sport, kissing, fondling, leaping, flying, playing
rhythmic games, some of them shooting arrows at the opposing faction, to which challenge merry answer
is made with the flinging of apples. Incomparable is the vigour, the life, the joyousness of
the whole, and incomparable must have been the splendour of the colour before the outrages
of time (and the cleaner) dimmed it. These delicious pagan amorini are the successors of the
angelic putti of an earlier time, whom the Tuscan sculptors of the
Quattrocento had already converted into more joyous and more earthly
beings than their predecessors had imagined.

Such painters of the North, in touch with the South, as Albrecht
Dürer, Mabuse, and Jacob Cornelissen van Oostsanen, delighted in scattering
through their sacred works these lusty, thick-limbed little urchins,
and made them merrier and more mischievous still, with their quaint
Northern physiognomy.

To say nothing on this occasion of Albani, Poussin, and the Flemish sculptors of the seventeenth
century, with Du Quesnoy and Van Opstal at their head, Rubens and Van Dyck derived their chief
inspiration in similar subjects from these Loves of Titian.[37]

The sumptuous Bacchanal, for which, we are told, Alfonso gave the commission and supplied the
subject in 1518, is a performance of a less delicate charm but a more realistic vigour than its companion.
From certain points of analogy with an Ariadne described by Philostratus, it has been very
generally assumed that we have here a representation of the daughter
of Minos consoled already for the departure of Theseus, whose sail
gleams white on the blue sea in the distance.

No Dionysus is, however, seen here among the revellers, who, in their orgies, do honour to the
god, Ariadne's new lover. The revel in a certain audacious abandon denotes rather the festival from
which the protagonists have retired, leaving the scene to the meaner performers. Even a certain
agreement in pose between the realistic but lovely figure of the Bacchante, overcome with the
fumes of wine, and the late classic statues then, and until lately, entitled The Sleeping
Ariadne, does not lead the writer to believe that we have here the new spouse of Dionysus so lately
won back from despair. The undraped figure,[38] both in its attitude and its position in the
picture, recalls the half-draped Bacchante, or goddess, in Bellini's Bacchanal at Alnwick.
Titian's lovely mortal here may rank as a piece of flesh with Correggio's dazzling Antiope in
the Louvre, but not with Giorgione's Venus or Titian's own Antiope, in which a certain feminine
dignity spiritualises and shields from scorn beauty unveiled and otherwise defenceless. The climax
of the splendid and distinctively Titianesque colour-harmony is the agitated crimson garment
of the brown-limbed dancer who, facing his white-robed partner, turns his back to the spectator.
This has the strongly marked yellowish lights that we find again in the streaming robe of
Bacchus in the National Gallery picture, and yet again in the garment of Nicodemus in the Entombment.

The
charming little Tambourine Player, which is No. 181 in the Vienna Gallery, may be placed somewhere
near the time of the great works just now described, but rather before than after them.

What that is new remains to be said about the Assunta, or Assumption of the Virgin, which was ordered
of Titian as early as 1516, but not shown to the public on the high altar of Santa Maria de'
Frari until the 20th of March 1518? To appreciate the greatest of extant Venetian altar-pieces
at its true worth it is necessary to recall what had and what had not appeared at the time when
it shone undimmed upon the world. Thus Raphael had produced the Stanze, the Cartoons, the Madonnas
of Foligno and San Sisto, but not yet the Transfiguration; Michelangelo had six years before
uncovered his magnum opus, the Ceiling of the Sixtine Chapel; Andrea del Sarto had some four years
earlier completed his beautiful series of frescoes at the Annunziata in Florence. Among painters
whom, origin notwithstanding, we must group as Venetians, Palma had in 1515 painted for the
altar of the Bombardieri at S. Maria Formosa his famous Santa Barbara;
Lorenzo Lotto in the following year had produced his characteristic
and, in its charm of fluttering movement, strangely unconventional
altar-piece for S. Bartolommeo at Bergamo, the Madonna with Ten Saints.

In none of these masterpieces of the full Renaissance, even if they had all been seen by Titian,
which was far from being the case, was there any help to be derived in the elaboration of a work
which cannot be said to have had any precursor in the art of Venice. There was in existence one
altar-piece dealing with the same subject from which Titian might possibly have obtained a hint.
This was the Assumption of the Virgin painted by Dürer in 1509 for
Jacob Heller, and now only known by Paul Juvenel's copy in the Municipal
Gallery at Frankfort.

The group of the Apostles gazing up at the Virgin, as she is crowned by the Father and the
Son, was at the time of its appearance, in its variety as in its fine balance of line, a magnificent
novelty in art.

Without exercising a too fanciful ingenuity, it would be possible to find points of contact between
this group and the corresponding one in the Assunta. But Titian could not at that time have
seen the original of the Heller altar-piece, which was in the Dominican Church at Frankfort,
where it remained for a century.[39] He no doubt did see the Assumption in the Marienleben
completed in 1510; but then this, though it stands in a definite relation to the Heller altar-piece,
is much stiffer and more formal--much less likely to have inspired the master of Cadore. The
Assunta was already in Vasari's time much dimmed, and thus difficult to see in its position
on the high altar. Joshua Reynolds, when he visited the Frari in 1752, says that "he saw it
near; it was most terribly dark but nobly painted." Now, in the Accademia delle Belle Arti,
it shines forth again, not indeed uninjured, but sufficiently restored to its pristine beauty to
vindicate its place as one of the greatest productions of Italian art at its highest. The sombre,
passionate splendours of the colouring in the lower half, so well adapted to express the supreme
agitation of the moment, so grandly contrast with the golden glory of the skies through which
the Virgin is triumphantly borne, surrounded by myriads of angels
and cherubim, and awaited by the Eternal.

This last is a figure the divine serenity of which is the strongest contrast to those terrible
representations of the Deity, so relentless in their superhuman majesty, which, in the ceiling
of the Sixtine, move through the Infinite and fill the beholder with awe. The over-substantial,
the merely mortal figure of the Virgin, in her voluminous red and blue draperies, has often
been criticised, and not without some reason. Yet how in this tremendous ensemble, of which
her form is, in the more exact sense, the centre of attraction and the climax, to substitute
for Titian's conception anything more diaphanous, more ethereal? It is only when we strive to replace
the colossal figure in the mind's eye, by a design of another and a more spiritual character, that
the difficulty in all its extent is realised.

Placed as the Assunta now is in the immediate neighbourhood of one of Tintoretto's best-preserved
masterpieces, the Miracolo del Schiavo, it undergoes an ordeal from which, in the opinion of
many a modern connoisseur and lover of Venetian art, it does not issue absolutely triumphant.
Titian's turbulent rival is more dazzling, more unusual, more overpowering in the lurid splendour
of his colour; and he has that unique power of bringing the spectator
to a state of mind, akin in its agitation to his own, in which he
gladly renounces his power and right to exercise a sane judgment.

When he is thoroughly penetrated with his subject, Tintoretto soars perhaps on a stronger pinion
and higher above the earth than the elder master. Yet in fulness and variety of life, in unexaggerated
dignity, in coherence, in richness and beauty, if not in poetic significance of colour, in grasp
of humanity and nature, Titian stands infinitely above his younger competitor. If, unhappily,
it were necessary to make a choice between the life-work of the one
and the life-work of the other--making the world the poorer by the
loss of Titian or Tintoretto--can it be doubted for a moment what
the choice would be, even of those who abdicate when they are brought
face to face with the mighty genius of the latter?

But to return for a moment to the Assunta. The enlargement of dimensions, the excessive vehemence
of movement in the magnificent group of the Apostles is an exaggeration, not a perversion, of truth.
It carries the subject into the domain of the heroic, the immeasurable, without depriving
it of the great pulsation of life. If in sublime beauty and intellectuality the figures, taken
one by one, cannot rank with the finest of those in Raphael's Cartoons, yet they preserve in
a higher degree, with dramatic unity and truth, this precious quality of vitality. The expressiveness,
the interpretative force of the gesture is the first thought, its rhythmic beauty only the second.
This is not always the case with the Cartoons, and the reverse process, everywhere adhered
to in the Transfiguration, is what gives to that overrated last work of Sanzio its painfully artificial
character. Titian himself in the St. Sebastian of Brescia, and above all in the much-vaunted masterpiece,
The Martyrdom of St. Peter the Dominican, sins in the same direction, but exceptionally only,
and, as it were, against his better self.

Little wonder that the Franciscan Fathers were at first uncertain,
and only half inclined to be enthusiastic, when they entered into
possession of a work hitherto without parallel in Italian or any other
art.[40] What is great, and at the same time new, must inevitably
suffer opposition at the outset.

 She added that she would have
been dead but for the revelations which comforted her daily. She was then asked what she had
done with her mandragora (mandrake)? she answered that she had no mandragora, nor had ever
had. She had heard say that near her village there was one, but had never seen it. She had
heard say that it was a dangerous thing, and that it was wicked to keep it; but knew nothing
of its use. Asked, in what place this mandrake was, and what she had heard of it? she said
that she had heard that it grew under the tree of which mention has been made, but did not
know the place; she said also that she had heard that above the mandragora was a hazel tree.
Asked, what she heard was done with the mandragora, answered, that she had heard that it brought
money, but did not believe it; and added that her voices had never told her anything about it.

Asked, what was the appearance of St. Michael when she saw him first, she answered, that she
saw no crown, and knew nothing of his dress. Asked, if he was naked, she answered, "Do you
think God has nothing to clothe him with?" Asked, if he had hair, she answered, "Why should
it have been cut?" She said further that she had not seen the blessed Michael since she left
the castle of Crotoy, nor did she see him often. At last she said that she knew not whether
he had hair or not. Asked, whether he carried scales, she answered, "I know nothing of it,"
but added that she had much joy in seeing him, and she knew when she saw him that she was not
in a state of sin. She also said that St. Catherine and St. Margaret often made her confess
to them, and said that if she had been in a state of sin it was without knowing it. She was
then asked whether, when she confessed, she believed herself to be in a state of mortal sin;
she answered, that she knew not whether she had been in that state, but did not believe she
had done the works of sin. "It would not have pleased God," she said, "that I should have been
so; nor would it have pleased Him that I should have done the works of sin by which my soul
should have been burdened."

She was then asked what sign she gave to the King that she came to him from God; she answered:
"I have told you always that nothing should draw this from me.(7) Ask me no more." Asked, if
she had not sworn to reveal what was asked of her touching the trial, answered, "I have told
you that I will tell you nothing that was for our King; and of this which belongs to him I
will not speak." Asked, if she knew the sign which she gave to the King, she answered: "You
shall know nothing from me." When it was said to her that this did concern the trial, she answered,
"Of that which I have promised to keep secret I shall tell you nothing"; and further she said,
"I promised in that place and I could not tell you without perjuring myself." Asked, to whom
she promised? answered, that she had promised to Saints Catherine and Margaret, and this was
shown to the King. She also said she had promised it to these two saints, because they had
required it of her. And the same Jeanne had done this at their request. "Too many people would
have asked me concerning it, if I had not promised to the aforesaid saints." She was then asked,
when she showed this sign to the King if there were others with him; she answered, that to
her there was no one near him, even though many people might have been present. (As a matter
of fact the sign was given to Charles when he talked with the Maid apart in a recess, the great
hall being full of the Court and followers; so that this was strictly true.) Asked further,
if she saw a crown over the head of her King when she showed him this sign, but replied: "I
cannot answer you without perjury." Asked further if her King had a crown when he was at Rheims,
answered, that in her opinion her King had a crown which he found at Rheims, but a very fine
one was afterwards brought for him. He did this to hasten matters, at the desire of the city
of Rheims; but if he had been more certain, he could have had a crown a thousand times richer.
(All this is very obscure.)

Asked, if she had seen this crown, she answered: "I could not tell you without perjury, but
I heard that it was a very rich one." It was then determined to conclude for this day.

On the sixth day there was again the same questions about the oath, ending in the usual way.
And the cross-examination was at once continued.

She was asked if she would say whether St. Michael had wings, and what bodies and members had
St. Catherine and St. Margaret; and she answered, "I have told you what I know, and will make
no other reply"; she said, moreover, that when she saw St. Michael and St. Catherine and St.
Margaret, she knew at once that they were saints of Paradise. Asked, if she saw anything more
than their faces, she answered: "I have told you all I know of them: and I would rather have
had my head taken off than tell you all I know." She then said that in whatever concerned the
trial she would speak freely. Asked, if she believed that St. Michael and St. Gabriel had natural
heads, she answered: "I saw them with my eyes and I believe that they are, as firmly as I believe
that God is." Asked, if she believed that God made them in the form in which she saw them,
she answered, "Yes." Asked, if she believed that God had created them in the same form from
the beginning, answered: "You shall have no more for the present, except what I have already said."

This subject was then dropped, and the examiner made another leap forward to a different part
of her life. "Did you know by revelation that you should break prison?" he said. To this Jeanne
answered indignantly: "This has nothing to do with your trial. Would you have me speak against
myself?"

Again questioned what her "voices" had said to her in respect to her attempts at escape, she
again answered: "This has nothing to do with the trial; I go back to the trial. If all your
questions were about that, I should tell you all." She said besides, on her faith, that she
knew neither the day nor the hour when she should escape. She was then asked what the voices
said to her generally, and answered: "In truth, they tell me I shall be freed, but neither
the day nor the hour; and that I ought to speak boldly, and with a glad countenance." She was
then asked whether, when first she saw her King, he asked her whether it was by revelation
that she had assumed the dress of a man? she replied: "I have answered this. I cannot recollect
whether he asked me. But it is written in the book at Poitiers." Asked, whether the doctors
who examined her there, some for a month, some for three weeks, had asked her about her change
of dress; she answered: "I don't remember; but I know they asked me when I assumed the dress
of a man, and I told them it was in the town of Vaucouleurs." Asked, whether these doctors
had inquired whether it was her voices which had made her take that dress, answered, "I don't
remember." Asked if her Queen wished her to change her dress when she first saw her, answered,
"I don't remember." Asked if her King, Queen, and all of her party did not ask her to lay aside
the dress of a man, she answered, "This has nothing to do with the trial." Asked, if the same
was not requested of her in the castle of Beaurevoir, she answered: "It is true. And I replied
that I could not lay it aside without the permission of God." She said further that the demoiselle
of Luxembourg (aunt of Jeanne's captor, and a very old woman) and the lady of Beaurevoir offered
her a woman's dress, or stuff to make one, and begged her to wear it; but she replied that
she had not yet the permission of our Lord, and that it was not yet time. Asked, if M. Jean
de Pressy and others at Arras had offered her a woman's dress, she answered, "He and others
have often asked it of me." Asked, if she thought she would have done wrong in putting on a
woman's dress, she answered, that it was better to obey her sovereign Lord, that is, God; she
said also that if she had done it, she would rather have done it at the request of these two
ladies than of any other in France, except her Queen. Asked, if, when God revealed to her that
she should change her dress, it was by the voice of St. Michael, St. Catherine, or St. Margaret,
she answered, "You shall hear no more about it." Asked, when the King first employed her, and
her standard was made, whether the men-at-arms and others who took part in the war did not
have flags imitated from hers? she answered, "It is well to know that the lords retained their
own arms"; she also added that her brothers-in-arms made such pennons as pleased them. Asked,
how these were made, if they were of linen or cloth, answered, that they were of white satin,
some of them with lilies; that she had but two or three lances in her own company--but that
in the rest of the army some carried pennons like hers, but only to distinguish them from others.
Asked, if the banners were often renewed, answered: "I know not; when the staff was broken
it was renewed." Asked, if she had not said that the pennons copied from hers were fortunate,
answered, that she had said, "Go in boldly among the English"; and that she had done the same
herself. Asked, if she said that they should have good luck if they bore the banners well,
answered, that she had told them what would happen, and what should still happen. Asked, if
she had caused holy water to be sprinkled on the pennons when they were new, she answered,
"That has nothing to do with the trial"; but added that if she did so sprinkle them she was
not instructed to answer that question now. Asked, if the others put Jhesus Maria upon their
pennons, she answered: "By my faith, I know nothing about it." Asked, if she had ever carried
or caused to be carried in a procession round a church or altar the linen of which the pennons
were made, answered no, that she had never seen anything of the kind done.

Asked, when she was before Jargeau, what it was that she wore behind her helmet, and if she
had not something round it, she answered: "By my faith, there was nothing." Asked, if she knew
a certain Brother Richard, she answered: "I never saw him till I was before Troyes." Asked,
what cheer Brother Richard made to her, answered, that she thought the people of Troyes had
sent him to her, doubting whether she had come on the part of God, and that as he approached
her he made the sign of the cross, and sprinkled holy water; she said to him: "Come on boldly;
I shall not fly away." Asked, if she had seen, or had caused to be made, any images or pictures
of herself, she answered, that at Arras she had seen a picture in the hands of a Scot, where
she was represented fully armed, kneeling on one knee, and presenting a letter to the King;
but that she had never caused any image or picture of herself to be made. Asked concerning
a table in the house of her host, upon which were painted three women, with Justice, Peace,
Union inscribed beneath, answered, that she knew nothing of it. Asked, if she knew that those
of her party caused masses and prayers to be made in her honour, she answered, that she knew
not; and if they did so, it was not by any command of hers; but that if they did so, her opinion
was that they did no wrong. Asked, if those of her party firmly believed that she was sent
from God, she answered: "I know not whether they believed it; but even if they did not believe
it, I am none the less sent on the part of God." Asked, whether she thought that to believe
that she was sent from god was a worthy faith, she answered, that if they believed that she
was sent from God they were not mistaken. Asked, if she knew what her party meant by kissing
her feet and hands and her garments, answered, that many people did it, but that her hands
were kissed as little as she could help it. The poor people, however, came to her of their
own free will, because she never oppressed them, but protected them as far as was in her power.
Asked, what reverence the people of Troyes made to her, she answered, "None at all," and added
that she believed Brother Richard came into Troyes with her army, but that she had not seen
him coming in. Asked, if he had not preached at the gates when she came, answered, that she
scarcely paused there at all, and knew nothing of any sermon. Asked, how long she was at Rheims,
and answered, four or five days. Asked, whether she baptised (stood godmother to) children
there, she answered: To one at Troyes, but did not remember any at Rheims or at Château-Thierry;
but there were two at St. Denis; and willingly she called the boys "Charles," in honour of
her King, and the girls "Jeanne," according to what their mothers wished. Asked, if the good
women of the town did not touch with their rings the rings she wore, she answered, that many
women touched her hands and her rings; but she did not know why they did it. Asked, what she
did with the gloves in which her King was consecrated, she answered that "Gloves were distributed
to the knights and nobles that came there"; and there was one who lost his; but she did not
say that she would find it for him. Also she said that her standard was in the church at Rheims,
and she believed near the altar, and she herself had carried it for a short time, but did not
know whether Brother Richard had held it.

She was then asked if she communicated and went to confession often while moving about the
country, and if she received the sacrament in her male costume; to which she answered "yes,
but without her arms"; she was then questioned about a horse belonging to the Bishop of Senlis,
which had not suited her, a matter completely without importance. The inference intended was
that it was taken from him without being paid for; but there was no evidence that the Maid
knew anything about it. We then come to the incident of Lagny.

She was asked how old the child was which she saw at Lagny, and answered, three days; it had
been brought to Lagny to the Church of Nôtre Dame, and she was told that all the maids in Lagny
were before our Lady praying for it, and she also wished to go and pray God and our Lady that
its life might come back; and she went, and prayed with the rest. And finally life appeared;
it yawned three times, and was baptised and buried in consecrated ground. It had given no sign
of life for three days and was black as her coat, but when it yawned its colour began to come
back. She was there with the other maids on her knees before our Lady to make her prayer. 

PART II

THE DIARY OF A STATESMAN

That which I am about to insert in this
place may seem to some to be trifling, and on a parity with the diverting
story of M. Boisrosé, which I have set down in an earlier part of
my memoirs. A child unbaptised could not be buried in consecrated ground,
and was subject to all the sorrows of the unredeemed; but who could doubt that the priest would
be easily persuaded by some wavering of the tapers on the altar upon the little dead face,
some flicker of his own compassionate eyelids, that sufficient life had come back to permit
the holy rite to be administered? The whole little scene is affecting in the extreme, the young
creatures all kneeling, fervently appealing to the Maiden-mother, the priest ready to take
instant advantage of any possible flicker, the Maid of France, no conspicuous figure, but weeping
and praying among the rest. There was no thought here of the raising of the dead--the prayer
was for breath enough only to allow of the holy observance, the blessed water, the last possibility
of human love and effort. 

A strong element of the Giorgionesque pathos informs still and gives charm to the Sciarra Violin-Player
of Sebastiano del Piombo; only that there it is already tempered by the haughty self-restraint
more proper to Florentine and Roman portraiture. There is little or nothing to add after this as to
the Jeune Homme au Gant, except that as a representation of aristocratic youth it has hardly a
parallel among the master's works except, perhaps, a later and equally admirable, though less
distinguished, portrait in the Pitti.

Not until Van Dyck, refining upon Rubens under the example of the Venetians, painted in the pensieroso
mood his portraits of high-bred English cavaliers in all the pride of adolescence or earliest
manhood, was this particular aspect of youth in its flower again depicted with the same felicity.[32]

To
Crowe and Cavalcaselle's pages the reader must be referred for a
detailed and interesting account of Titian's intrigues against the
venerable Giovanni Bellini in connection with the Senseria, or office
of broker, to the merchants of the Fondaco de' Tedeschi.

We see there how, on the death of the martial pontiff, Julius the Second, Pietro Bembo proposed
to Titian to take service with the new Medici Pope, Leo the Tenth (Giovanni de' Medici), and
how Navagero dissuaded him from such a step. Titian, making the most of his own magnanimity, proceeds
to petition the Doge and Signori for the first vacant broker's patent for life, on the same conditions
and with the same charges and exemptions as are conceded to Giovanni Bellini. The petition
is presented on the 31st of May 1513, and the Council of Ten on that day moves and carries a resolution
accepting Titian's offer with all the conditions attached.
 Her voices forbade her several times to attempt to escape; but
at last, in the doubt she had of the English she threw herself down, commending herself to
God and to our Lady, and was much hurt. But after she had done this the voice of St. Catherine
said to her not to be afraid, that she should be healed, and that Compiègne would be relieved.

Also she said that she prayed always for the relief of Compiègne with her council. Asked, what
she said after she had thrown herself down, she answered, that some said that she was dead;
and as soon as the Burgundians saw that she was not dead, they told her that she had thrown
herself down. Asked, if she had said that she would rather die than fall into the hands of
the English, she answered, that she would much rather have rendered her soul to God than have
fallen into the hands of the English. Asked, if she was not in a great rage, and if she did
not blaspheme the name of God, she answered, that she never said evil of any saint, and that
it was not her custom to swear. Asked respecting Soissons, when the captain had surrendered
the town, whether she had not cursed God, and said that if she had gotten hold of the captain,
she would have cut him into four pieces; she answered, that she never swore by any saint, and
that those who said so had not understood her.

*****

At this point the public trial of Jeanne came to a sudden end. Either the feeling produced
in the town, and even among the judges, by her undeviating, simple, and dignified testimony
had begun to be more than her persecutors had calculated upon; or else they hoped to make shorter
work with her when deprived of the free air of publicity, the sight no doubt of some sympathetic
faces, and the consciousness of being still able to vindicate her cause and to maintain her
faith before men. Two or three fierce Inquisitors within her cell, and the Bishop, that man
without heart or pity at their head, might still tear admissions from her weariness, which
a certain sympathetic atmosphere in a large auditory, swept by waves of natural feeling, would
strengthen her to keep back. The Bishop made a proclamation that in order not to vex and tire
his learned associates he would have the minutes of the previous sittings reduced into form,
and submitted to them for judgment, while he himself carried on apart what further interrogatory
was necessary. We are told that he was warned by a counsellor of the town that secret examinations
without witnesses or advocate on the prisoner's side, were illegal; but Monseigneur de Beauvais
was well aware that anything would be legal which effected his purpose, and that once Jeanne
was disposed of, the legality or illegality of the proceedings would be of small importance.
I have thought it right to give to the best of my power a literal translation of these examinations,
notwithstanding their great length; as, except in one book, now out of print and very difficult
to procure, no such detailed translation,(8) so far as I am aware, exists; and it seems to
me that, even at the risk of fatiguing the reader (always capable of skipping at his pleasure),
it is better to unfold the complete scene with all its tedium and badgering, which brings out
by every touch the extraordinary self-command, valour, and sense of this wonderful Maid, the
youngest, perhaps, and most ignorant of the assembly, yet meeting all with a modest and unabashed
countenance, true, pure, and natural,--a far greater miracle in her simplicity and noble steadfastness
than even in the wonders she had done.

     (1) She was in reality detained two days, which fact, no
     doubt, she judged to be an unimportant detail.

     (2) Probably meaning, had been present when the voices came
     to her and had perceived her state of listening and
     abstraction.

     (3) This was her special friend, Gerard of Epinal--her
     compère and gossip; was it jesting beguiled by some
     childish recollection, or mock threat of youthful days that
     she said this?

     (4) An answer evidently given in the vagueness of imperfect
     knowledge, meaning a very great number.

     (5) Quicherat gives a note on this subject to point out that
     there was really was but one Pope at this moment, the
     question having been settled by the abdication of Clement
     VIII., Benedict XIV. being a mere impostor. We cannot
     believe, however, that this historical cutting of the knot
     could be known to Jeanne. She probably felt only, with her
     fine instinct, that there could be but one Pope, and that to
     be deceived on such a matter ought to have been a thing
     impossible to all those priests and learned men; as a matter
     of fact the three claimants, on account of whom the Comte
     d'Armagnac had appealed to her, were no longer existing at
     the time he wrote.

     (6) She meant Paris, which was lost by the English,
     according to her prophecy within the time named.

     (7) It should here be noted that Jeanne's sign to the King
     being, as he afterwards declared, the answer to his most
     private devotions and the final setting at rest of a doubt
     which might have injured him much had it been known that he
     entertained it--it would have been dishonourable on her part
     and a great wrong to him had she revealed it.

     (8) The translation of M. Fabre is now, I believe,
     reprinted, but it is not satisfactory.

CHAPTER XIV --THE EXAMINATION IN PRISON. LENT, 1431. 

(Smith's "Latin and English Dictionary"). The district of the city of Bonaven alluded to was evidently
suburban, because the house in which Calphurnius and his family dwelt was a "little country
seat," which was, nevertheless, close to ("prope") the town.

The Saint must have had some special reason for writing the name of his native town in Gaelic,
while the rest of the "Confession" is written in Latin. There was a very important town in Armorican
Britain at the time, which was called Bononia by the Romans, and Bonauen by the Gaulish Celts (Hersart
de la Villemarque Celtic Legend, pp. 3, 4). In the days of Julius Caesar its harbour was called
Portus Ictius ("Dictionnaire Archeologique et Historique du Pas de Calais").

O'Donovan, who translated the "Annals of the Kingdom of Ireland by the Four Masters," assures
us in a note, under the year 405, that Niall of the Nine Hostages was assassinated by the banished
Prince Eochaidh at Muir N'Icht, which the translator identifies as
Bononia, or Boulogne- sur-Mer.

Keating, on the other hand, narrates that King Niall received his mortal wound on the banks of the
Loire. It is easy to reconcile the apparent difference between the two accounts, if we assume
that the wounded Monarch was carried in a dying state to join the fleet which lay at anchor
in the fine bay which then formed the outer harbour of Boulogne, and that he had at least the
consolation of dying on board his own ship.

Muir N'Icht, or Portus Ictius, then possessed the finest harbour in northern Gaul. From the
days of Julius Caesar, Portus Ictius, or the harbour of Boulogne, was the port from which the
Roman troops sailed to Britain, and the harbour to which they steered on their return. On top
of Caligula's tower there was a lighthouse for the guidance of vessels at sea. The very fact
that King Niall made use of this harbour when he raided Armorica in the twenty-seventh year of his
reign, makes it likely that he sailed into the same harbour when first invading that country
in the ninth year of his reign. The sons of the soldiers who took part in the second raid were
still alive; and the memories of both expeditions were still fresh in the minds of the brave
Irish Scots when St. Patrick wrote his "Confession."

The records of both expeditions were undoubtedly read at the annual Feast of Tara, when the Kings,
nobles and learned were accustomed to meet annually and examine the National records (Keating,
pp. 337--388).

The triumphant march of devastation made by the Irish Monarch in the ninth year of his reign,
when he led his troops "from the walls of Antoninus to the shores of Kent"; the successful
raid into Armorica which commenced with the capture of the Roman
encampment at Haute Ville, Boulogne, and ended in the plundering of
the surrounding country, must have been the burden of many a warlike
song whenever the Irish minstrels chanted the glorious triumphs of
King Niall's invincible troops.

It is, therefore, but natural to suppose every man, woman, and child in Ireland had often heard
the name of Bonaven, where the soldiers of King Niall stormed the encampment, and where the ever-conquering
Monarch expired.

St. Patrick, who, according to the "Scholiast," the Fifth and Tripartite Lives, and Heating's "History"
(p. 312), was captured in Armorica, and who, according to Hersart de la Villemarque and Dr.
Lanigan, was taken captive at Boulogne, was well aware that every Irishman would know the town
to which he was referring when he declared in his "Confession" that his father, Calphurnius,
and consequently he himself, hailed from the suburban district of Bonaven Taberniae, or Bononia,
where the Roman encampment stood.

HISTORY OF THE TOWN BONAVEN, OR BONONIA.

THE ancient records of Bononia, or Boulogne-sur-Mer, date back to about half a century before
Christ--to the time when Julius Caesar, anticipating Napoleon the
Great, stood on the north-eastern cliffs of that town gazing through
the Channel mist on the dim outline of that Britain which he had resolved
to subjugate.

At that period two headlands stretched out into the sea for a distance of three miles--one on
the northeastern side of the town, near to what is now known as Fort la Cresche; and the other from
Cape Alpreck, about three miles lower down on the south-western coast. These headlands, stretching
out into the sea, so encircled a bay as to form it into an outward haven.

The inner harbour of Boulogne was approached by a narrow channel dividing the north-eastern
from the south-western cliffs; and the waters of the bay, flowing through it and uniting with
the River Liane in covering the present site of the lower town, rushed onwards as far as the valley
of Tintelleries and the vale of St. Martin.

Facing the site of the present town there was an island called Elna, and on it was built the
ancient town of Gessoriac, which was connected with the mainland
by a bridge.

Realising the future importance of the place both for naval and military purposes, Caesar commissioned
Pedius, a native of Bononia, in Italy, to lay out a town on the declivity of the Grande Rue,
leading to Haute Ville, as the upper town and the hill leading to it are called at the present
day. (Bertrand's "History of Boulogne-sur-Mer," pp. 17, 18. "Walkernaer's Geography," vol. i.,
p. 454).

The walls of the present fortifications of Haute Ville, built in the thirteenth century, rest
on the ancient foundations of the old Roman encampment. This fact was proved at the time when
a tunnelling was made for the railway from Boulogne to Calais under Haute Ville ("Dictionnaire Historique
et Archeologique du Pas de Calais," vol. i, p. 22). The circuit of the present fortifications,
about 700 yards square, present to-day the appearance pf the old Roman encampment. "The camp
of a Roman legion," writes Gibbon, "presented all the appearance of a fortified city. The rampart
itself was usually twelve feet high, and defended by a ditch twelve
feet in depth, as well as in breadth.

This important labour was performed by the legionaries themselves, to whom the use of the spade
and the pick-axe was no less familiar than the sword and the pilum" ("Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire," vol. i., p. 27.) This gives a faithful description of the Roman encampment (Castra
Stativa) at Boulogne, which is described by St. Patrick as Bonaven Tabernise, or Bononia,
where the Roman encampment was pitched. Bononia, according to Bertrand's "History of Boulogne,"
was regarded by the Romans as their "principal dockyard" in Northern Gaul; and Suetonius, in his
"Lives of the Twelve Caesars," describes it "as the port from which the Roman legions successively
departed for Britain"

(p. 283, note).

Many err in supposing that Gessoriac and Bononia were one and the same town, originally called
Gessoriac, and later, that is to say during the reign of Constantine the Great, known as Bononia.
It is true, however, that during that Emperor's reign Gessoriac also came to be called Bononia.

It
is well to observe that the Morini, or inhabitants of the coast in the neighbourhood of Boulogne,
were converted to Christianity by St. Firmin about the close of the second century; and that
St. Fusian built a chapel on the banks of the River Liane, which flows through Boulogne, in the
year 275.

St. Patrick, in his "Confession," represents himself and the fellow- citizens of his youth as
Christians who had not observed the Commandments of God, and who had not been obedient to their priests.
At that time the Northern Britons were pagans; St. Ninian, who flourished about the year 400,
was the first missioner who preached the Gospel to the Dalraida and Southern Picts. They could
not, therefore, have been described in the year 388, when St. Patrick was made captive, as Christians
who had ceased to practise their religion. "I knew not the real God," writes St. Patrick, "and
I was brought captive to Ireland with many thousand men, as we deserved, for we had forgotten God
and had not kept His Commandments, and were disobedient to our priests, who admonished us for our
salvation. And the Lord brought down upon us the anger of His Spirit, and scattered us amongst
many nations, even to the ends of the earth, where now my humble
self may be witnessed among strangers"

("Confession").

ST. PATRICK MADE CAPTIVE BY NIALL OF THE NINE HOSTAGES.

GIBBON narrates that about the middle of the fourth century the "sea coast of Gaul and Britain were
exposed to the depredations of the Saxons" (vol. i., P- 739); and Bertrand, in his "History of
Boulogne," admits that the city was plundered by the Saxons in the year 371, but that the invaders
spared Caligula's tower and lighthouse on account of its usefulness for their safe navigation.
The silence of local history concerning two raids made by the Irish Scots into Armorica in the
years 388 and 402 is not surprising, seeing that French writers admit that there is practically no
history of Armorica or more than a century after the Saxon raid in the year 371. (vol. i., p. 744).
Keating supplements this information by describing the two raids made by the Irish Scots into Armorica;
the first of which took place in the year 388, and the second in 402, or about that time. This
Irish historian is considered by Professor Stokes to be a most trustworthy authority. "Keating,"
writes the Professor, "had access to the Munster Documents, which are now lost. He gives a long
account of the Irish invasions of England and France exactly corresponding to the statements
of the Roman historian, Amianus Marcellinus, and to the 'Annals of
the Four Masters'"

("Ireland and the Celtic Church," p. 38, note).

Of the raids of King Niall into Armorica the first is the more interesting, for it proves,
first, that St. Patrick was born in the year 373, and, next, that he was captured neither in North
Britain, nor Wales, but in Armorican Britain.

To escape from these conclusions, Doctor Lanigan, who held that St. Patrick was born in the
year 387, writes as follows: "I find in Keating but one expedition of Niall to the coast of Gaul,
during which he says, in another place, that St. Patrick with two hundred of the noblest youth
were brought away. . . . This event occurred in the latter end of Niall Naoigiallach's reign,
and not as early as the ninth year of it. . . . We have no authority," continues Lanigan,
"for his having visited Gaul at any time until the period already given, and which is clearly
marked in Irish history. Our Saint's captivity may be assigned to 403, and to a time not long prior
to King Niall's death. Thus the date of his birth and captivity, considering the circumstances
now mentioned, help to confirm each other, and, combined with his age at consecration, authorizes
his birth in 387" ("Eccl. Hist, of Ireland," vol. i., pp. 137, 138).

Contrary to what Dr. Lanigan has just stated, a close study of Keating's "History" will prove
that King Niall made two raids into Armorica, the first in the ninth and the second in the twenty-seventh
year of his reign, and the account of the two expeditions is clear and unmistakable. "There is an
old manuscript in vellum, exceedingly curious, entitled 'The Life of St. Patrick,' which treats
likewise of the lives of Muchuda Albain and other Saints, from which
I," writes Keating, "shall transcribe a citation that relates to St.
Patrick.

"Patrick was a Briton born and descended from religious parents," and in the same place is the
following remark: "The Irish Scots, under Niall the King, wasted and destroyed many provinces
in Britain in opposition to the power of the Romans. They attempted to possess themselves of
the northern part of Britain, and, at length, having driven out the old inhabitants, these Irish
seized upon the country and settled in it." The same author (of the manuscript) upon this occasion
remarks that from henceforth Great Britain was divided into three kingdoms, that were distinguished
by the names of Scotia, Anglia, and Britia.

This ancient writer likewise asserts that when Niall, the hero of the Nine Hostages, undertook
the expedition for settling the tribe of the Dailraida in Scotland, the Irish fleet sailed to
the place where St. Patrick resided; "At this time the fleet out of Ireland plundered the country
in which St. Patrick then lived, and, according to the custom of the Irish, many captives were
carried away from thence, among whom was St. Patrick, in the sixteenth year of his age, and his
two sisters, Lupida and Darerca; and St. Patrick was led captive into Ireland in the ninth
year of the reign of Niall, King of Ireland, who was the mighty monarch of the kingdom for seven-and-twenty
years, and brought away spoils out of England, Britain, and France."

"By this expression it is supposed," continues Keating, "that Niall
of the Nine Hostages waged war against Britain or Wales, and perhaps
made a conquest of the country; and it is more than probable that,
when the Irish Prince had finished his design upon the kingdom of
Wales, he carried his arms in a fleet to France and invaded the country
at the time called Armorica, but now Little Brittany, and from thence
he led St. Patrick and his two sisters into captivity.

"And this I am rather induced to believe, because the mother of St. Patrick was sister of St.
Martin, the Bishop of Tours in France; and I have read in an ancient Irish manuscript, whose
authority I cannot dispute, that St. Patrick and his two sisters were brought captive into
Ireland from Armorica, or Brittany, in the kingdom of France. It is evident likewise that when
Niall, the King of Ireland, had succeeded with the Britons, he despatched a formidable fleet
to plunder the coast of France, and succeeded; and that he carried away numbers of captives
with him into captivity, one of which, it is reasonable to suppose, was the young Patrick, who
was afterwards distinguished by the name of the Irish Saint.

"Niall, encouraged by the number of his captives and the success of his arms in France, resolved
upon another expedition, and accordingly raised a grand army of his Irish subjects for that
purpose, and sent a commission to the General of the Dalraida in Scotland to follow him with his choicest
troops and assist him in the invasion. Niall having prepared a sufficient
number of transports and a full supply of provisions, weighed anchor
with his victorious Irish, and steering his course directly to France,
had the advantage of a prosperous wind, and in a few days landed upon
the coast. He immediately set himself to spoil and ravage the country
near the river Loire. Here it was that the General of the Dalraida
found him, and both armies being joined, they committed dreadful hostilities,
which obliged the inhabitants to fly and leave the country to the
mercy of the invaders.

"The commanding officer of the Dalraida in
this expedition was Gabhran, the son of Dombanguirt, who brought over
with him Eochaidh, the son of Ena Cinsalach, King of Leinster. This
young Prince had been formerly banished into Scotland by Niall, but
resolving to be revenged when opportunity offered, he desired to be
admitted as a volunteer in the service, and was by that means transported
into France. The King of Ireland being informed of his arrival, would
on no account permit him to visit him, nor suffer him in his presence.
But Eochaidh soon found an opportunity to execute his design; for
one day, perceiving the King sitting on the banks of the Loire, he
hid himself secretly in an opposite grove on the other side, and shot
Niall through the body with an arrow; the wound was mortal, and he
died instantly" ("General History of Ireland," pp. 311--313). According
to O'Donovan's translation of "Muir N'Icht," Niall lived long enough
to reach his fleet at Boulogne, where he expired.

Notwithstanding,
then, Lanigan's positive assertion, it is quite evident from Keating's
history that King Niall twice invaded Armorica; first, after he had
devastated the Island of Britain in the ninth year of his reign, when
St. Patrick was captured, and again in the twenty- seventh year of
his reign, when he sailed directly from Ireland to Gaul and expired
at Boulogne.

The events may be briefly stated as follows: Niall succeeded
Criomthan in the year 376. In the ninth year of his reign, or A.D.
385, he prepared an expedition against the Picts, who were harassing
the Scots settlers in North Britain. Having completed his task, he
overran England, and finished his raid by crossing over to Armorica,
before returning triumphant to Ireland with St. Patrick amongst his
captives.

Two days after, on Monday, the 12th of March, the Inquisitors began by several additional questions
concerning the angel who brought the sign to the King; was it the same whom she first saw,
or another? She answered that it was the same, and no other was wanted. Asked, if this angel
had not deceived her since she had been taken prisoner; answered, that SHE BELIEVED SINCE IT
SO PLEASED OUR LORD THAT IT WAS BEST THAT SHE SHOULD BE TAKEN. Asked, if the angel had not
failed her; answered, "How could he have failed me, when he comforts me every day?" This comfort
is what she understands to come through St. Catherine and St. Margaret. Asked, whether she
called them, or they came without being called, she answered, that they often came without
being called, and if they did not come soon enough, she asked our Saviour to send them. Asked,
if St. Denis had ever appeared to her; answered, not that she knew. Asked, if when she promised
to our Lord to remain a virgin she spoke to Him; answered, that it ought to be enough to speak
to those who were sent by Him that is to say, St. Catherine and St. Margaret. Asked, what induced
her to summon a man to Toul, in respect to marriage; answered, "I did not summon him; it was
he who summoned me"; and that on that occasion she had sworn before the judge to speak the
truth, which was that she had not made him any promise. She also said that the first time she
had heard the voices she made a vow of virginity so long as it pleased God, being then about
the age of thirteen.

It was the object of the judges by these questions to prove that, according to a fable which
had obtained some credit, Jeanne during her visit to La Rousse, the village inn-keeper at Neufchâteau,
had acted as servant in the house and tarnished her good fame--so that her betrothed had refused
to marry her: and that he had been brought before the Bishop's court at Toul for his breach
of promise, as we should say. Exactly the reverse was the case, as the reader will remember.

Jeanne was further asked, if she had spoken of her visions to her curé or to any ecclesiastic:
and answered no, but only to Robert de Baudricourt and to her King; but added that she was
not bidden by her voices to conceal them, but feared to reveal them lest the Burgundians should
hear of them and prevent her going. And especially she had much doubt of her father, lest he
should hinder her from going. Asked, if she thought she did well to go away without the permission
of her father and mother, when it is certain we ought to honour our father and mother; answered,
that in every other thing she had fully obeyed him, except in respect to her departure; but
she had written to them, and they had pardoned her. Asked, if when she left her father and
mother she did not think it was a sin; answered, that her voices were quite willing that she
should tell them, if it were not for the pain it would have given them; but as for herself,
she would not have told them for any consideration; also that her voices left her to do as
she pleased, to tell or not.

*****

Having gone so far the reverend fathers went to dinner, and Jeanne we hope had her piece of
bread and her eau rougie. In the afternoon these indefatigable questioners returned, and the
first few questions throw a fuller light on the troubled cottage at Domremy, out of which this
wonderful maiden came like a being of another kind.

She was questioned as to the dreams of her father; and answered, that while she was still at
home her mother told her several times that her father said he had dreamt that Jeanne his daughter
had gone away with the troopers, that her father and mother took great care of her and held
her in great subjection: and she obeyed them in every point except that of her affair at Toul
in respect to marriage. She also said that her mother had told her what her father had said
to her brothers: "If I could think that the thing would happen of which I have dreamed, I wish
she might be drowned first; and if you would not do it, I would drown her with my own hands";
and that he nearly lost his senses when she went to Vaucouleurs.

How profound is this little village tragedy! The suspicious, stern, and unhopeful peasant,
never sure even that the most transparent and pure may not be capable of infamy, distracted
with that horror of personal degradation which is involved in family disgrace, cruel in the
intensity of his pride and fear of shame! He has been revealed to us in many lands, always
one of the most impressive of human pictures, with no trust of love in him but an overwhelming
faith in every vicious possibility. If there is no evidence to prove that, even at the moment
when Jeanne was supreme, when he was induced to go to Rheims to see the coronation, Jacques
d'Arc was still dark, unresponsive, never more sure than any of the Inquisitors that his daughter
was not a witch, or worse, a shameless creature linked to the captains and the splendid personages
about her by very different ties from those which appeared--there is at least not a word to
prove that he had changed his mind. She does not add anything to soften the description here
given. The sudden appearance of this dark remorseless figure, looking on from his village,
who probably in all Domremy--when Domremy got to hear the news--would be the only person who
would in his desperation almost applaud that stake and devouring flame, is too startling for words.

The end of this day's examination was remarkable also for a sudden light upon the method she
had intended to adopt in respect to the Duke of Orleans, then in prison in England, whom it
was one of her most cherished hopes to deliver.

Asked, how she meant to rescue the Duc d'Orléans: she answered, that by that time she hoped
to have taken English prisoners enough to exchange for him: and if she had not taken enough
she should have crossed the sea, in power, to search for him in England. Asked, if St. Catherine
and St. Margaret had told her absolutely and without condition that she should take enough
prisoners to exchange for the Duc d'Orléans, who was in England, or otherwise, that she should
cross the sea to fetch him and bring him back within three years; she answered yes: and that
she had told the King and had begged him to permit her to make prisoners. She said further
that if she had lasted three years without hindrance, she should have delivered him. Otherwise
she said she had not thought of so long a time as three years, although it should have been
more than one; but she did not at present recollect exactly.

There is a curious story existing, though we do not remember whence it comes and there is not
a scrap of evidence for it, which suggests a rumour that Jeanne was not the child of the d'Arc
family at all, but in fact an abandoned and illegitimate child of the Queen, Isabel of Bavaria,
and that her real father was the murdered Duc d'Orléans. This suggestion might explain the
ease with which she fell into the way of Courts, a sort of air à la Princesse which certainly
was about her, and her especial devotion to Orleans, both to the city and the duke. A shadow
of a supposed child of our own Queen Mary has also appeared in history, quite without warrant
or likelihood. It is a little conventional and well worn even in the way of romance, yet there
are certain fanciful suggestions in the thought.

After the above, Jeanne was again questioned and at great length upon the sign given to the
King, upon the angel who brought it, the manner of his coming and going, the persons who saw
him, those who saw the crown bestowed upon the King, and so on, in the most minute detail.
That the purpose of the sign was that "they should give up arguing and so let her proceed on
her mission," she repeated again and again; but here is a curious additional note.

She was asked how the King and the people with him were convinced that it was an angel; and
answered, that the King knew it by the instruction of the ecclesiastics who were there, and
also by the sign of the crown. Asked, how the ecclesiastics (gens d'église) knew it was an
angel she answered, "By their knowledge (science), and because they were priests."

Was this the keenest irony, or was it the wandering of a weary mind? We cannot tell; but if
the latter, it was the only occasion on which Jeanne's mind wandered; and there was method
and meaning in the strange tale.

She was further questioned whether it was by the advice of her voices that she attacked La
Charité, and afterwards Paris, her two points of failure; the purpose of her examiners clearly
being to convince her that those voices had deceived her. To both questions she answered no.
To Paris she went at the request of gentlemen who wished to make a skirmish, or assault of
arms (vaillance d'armes); but she intended to go farther, and to pass the moats; that is, to
force the fighting and make the skirmish into a serious assault; the same was the case before
La Charité. She was asked whether she had no revelation concerning Pont l'Evêque, and said
that since it was revealed to her at Melun that she should be taken, she had had more recourse
to the will of the captains than to her own; but she did not tell them that it was revealed
to her that she should be taken. Asked, if she thought it was well done to attack Paris on
the day of the Nativity of our Lady, which was a festival of the Church; she answered, that
it was always well to keep the festivals of our Lady: and in her conscience it seemed to her
that it was and always would be a good thing to keep the feasts of our Lady, from one end to
the other.

In the afternoon the examiners returned to the attempt at escape or suicide--they seemed to
have preferred the latter explanation--made at Beaurevoir; and as Jeanne expresses herself
with more freedom as to her personal motives in these prison examinations and opens her heart
more freely, there is much here which we give in full.

She was asked first what was the cause of her leap from the tower of Beaurevoir. She answered
that she had heard that all the people of Compiègne, down to the age of seven, were to be put
to the sword, and that she would rather die than live after such a destruction of good people;
this was one of the reasons; the other was that she knew that she was sold to the English and
that she would rather die than fall into the hands of the English, her enemies. Asked, if she
made that leap by the command of her voices; answered, that St. Catherine said to her almost
every day that she was not to leap, for that God would help her, and also the people of Compiègne:
and she, Jeanne, said to St. Catherine that since God intended to help the people of Compiègne
she would fain be there. And St. Catherine said: "You must take it in good part, but you will
not be delivered till you have seen the King of the English." And she, Jeanne, answered: "Truly
I do not wish to see him. I would rather die than fall into the hands of the English." Asked,
if she had said to St. Catherine and St. Margaret, "Will God leave the good people of Compiègne
to die so cruelly?" answered, that she did not say "so cruelly," but said it in this way: "Will
God leave these good people of Compiègne to die, who have been and are so loyal to their lord?"
She added that after she fell there were two or three days that she would not eat; and that
she was so hurt by the leap that she could not eat; but all the time she was comforted by St.
Catherine, who told her to confess and ask pardon of God for that act, and that without doubt
the people of Compiègne would have succour before Martinmas. And then she took pains to recover
and began to eat, and shortly was healed.

Asked, whether, when she threw herself down, she wished to kill herself, she answered no; but
that in throwing herself down she commended herself to God, and hoped by means of that leap
to escape and to avoid being delivered to the English. Asked, if, when she recovered the power
of speech, she had denied and blasphemed God and the saints, as had been reported; answered,
that she remembered nothing of the kind, and that, as far as she knew, she had never denied
and blasphemed God and His saints there nor anywhere else, and did not confess that she had
done so, having no recollection of it. Asked, if she would like to see the information taken
on the spot, answered: "I refer myself to God, and not another, and to a good confession."
Asked, if her voices ever desired delay for their replies; answered, that St. Catherine always
answered her at once, but sometimes she, Jeanne, could not hear because of the tumult round
her (turbacion des personnes) and the noise of her guards; but that when she asked anything
of St. Catherine, sometimes she, and sometimes St. Margaret asked of our Lord, and then by
the command of our Lord an answer was given to her. Asked, if, when they came, there was always
light accompanying them, and if she did not see that light when she heard the voice in the
castle without knowing whether it was in her chamber or not: answered, that there was never
a day that they did not come into the castle, and that they never came without light: and that
time she heard the voice, but did not remember whether she saw the light, or whether she saw
St. Catherine. Also she said she had asked from her voices three things: one, her release:
the other, that God would help the French, and keep the town faithful: and the other the salvation
of her soul. Afterwards she asked that she might have a copy of these questions and her answers
if she were to be taken to Paris, that she may give them to the people in Paris, and say to
them, "This is how I was questioned in Rouen, and here are my replies," that she might not
be exhausted by so many questions.

Asked, what she meant when she said that Monseigneur de Beauvais put himself in danger by bringing
her to trial, and why Monseigneur de Beauvais more than others, she answered, that this was
and is what she said to Monseigneur de Beauvais: "You say that you are my judge. I know not
whether you are so; but take care that you judge well, or you will put yourself in great danger.
I warn you, so that if our Lord should chastise you for it, I may have done my duty in warning
you." Asked, what was that danger? she answered, that St. Catherine had said that she should
have succour, but that she knew not whether this meant that she would be delivered from prison,
or that, when she was before the tribunal, there might come trouble by which she should be
delivered; she thought, however, it would be the one or the other. And all the more that her
voices told her that she would be delivered by a great victory; and afterwards they said to
her: "Take everything cheerfully, do not be disturbed by this martyrdom: thou shalt thence
come at last to the kingdom of Heaven." And this the voices said simply and absolutely--that
is to say, without fail; she explained that she called It martyrdom because of all the pain
and adversity that she had suffered in prison; and she knew not whether she might have still
more to suffer, but waited upon our Lord. She was then asked whether, since her voices had
said that she should go to Paradise, she felt assured that she should be saved and not damned
in hell; she answered, that she believed firmly what her voices said about her being saved,
as firmly as if she were so already. And when it was said to her that this answer was of great
weight, she answered that she herself held it as a great treasure.

We have said that Jeanne's answers to the Inquisitors in prison had a more familiar form than
in the public examination; which seem to prove that they were not unkind to her, further, at
least, than by the persistence and tediousness of their questions. The Bishop for one thing
was seldom present; the sittings were frequently presided over by the Deputy Inquisitor, who
had made great efforts to be free of the business altogether, and had but very recently been
forced into it; so that we may at least imagine, as he was so reluctant, that he did what he
could to soften the proceedings. Jean de la Fontaine, too, was a milder man than her former
questioners, and in so small an assembly she could not be disturbed and interrupted by Frère
Isambard's well-meant signs and whispers. She speaks at length and with a self-disclosure which
seems to have little that was painful in it, like one matured into a kind of age by long weariness
and trouble, who regards the panorama of her life passing before her with almost a pensive
pleasure. And it is clear that Jeanne's ear, still so young and keen, notwithstanding that
attitude of mind, was still intent upon sounds from without, and that Jeanne's heart still
expected a sudden assault, a great victory for France, which should open her prison doors--or
even a rising in the very judgment hall to deliver her. How could they keep still outside,
Dunois, Alençon, La Hire, the mighty men of valour, while they knew that she was being racked
and tortured within? She who could not bear to be out of the conflict to serve her friends
at Compiègne, even when succour from on high had been promised, how was it possible that these
gallant knights could live and let her die, their gentle comrade, their dauntless leader? In
those long hours, amid the noise of the guards within and the garrison around, how she must
have thought, over and over again, where were they? when were they coming? how often imagined
that a louder clang of arms than usual, a rush of hasty feet, meant that they were here!

But honour and love kept Jeanne's lips closed. Not a word did she say that could discredit
King, or party, or friends; not a reproach to those who had abandoned her. She still looked
for the great victory in which Monseigneur, if he did not take care, might run the risk of
being roughly handled, or of a sudden tumult in his own very court that would pitch him form
his guilty seat. It was but the fourteenth of March still, and there were six weary weeks to
come. She did not know the hour or the day, but yet she believed that this great deliverance
was on its way.

And there was a great deliverance to come: but not of this kind. The voices of God--how can
we deny it?--are often, though in a loftier sense, like those fantastic voices that keep the
word of promise to the ear but break it to the heart. They promised her a great victory: and
she had it, and also the fullest deliverance: but only by the stake and the fire, which were
not less dreadful to Jeanne than to any other girl of her age. They did not speak to deceive
her, but she was deceived; they kept their promise, but not as she understood it. "These all
died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded
of them, and embraced them." Jeanne too was persuaded of them, but was not to receive them--except
in the other way.

On the afternoon of the same day (it was still Lent, and Jeanne fasted, whatever our priests
may have done), she was again closely questioned on the subject, this time, of Franquet d'Arras,
who, as has been above narrated, was taken by her in the course of some indiscriminate fighting
in the north. She was asked if it was not mortal sin to take a man as prisoner of war and then
give him up to be executed. There was evidently no perception of similarities in the minds
of the judges, for this was precisely what had been done in the case of Jeanne herself; but
even she does not seem to have been struck by the fact. Their object, apparently, was by proving
that she was in a state of sin, to prove also that her voices were of no authority, as being
unable to discover so simple a principle as this.

When they spoke to her of "one named Franquet d'Arras, who was executed at Lagny," she answered
that she consented to his death, as he deserved it, for he had confessed to being a murderer,
a thief, and a traitor. She said that his trial lasted fifteen days, the Bailli de Senlis and
the law officers of Lagny being the judges; and she added that she had wished to have Franquet,
to exchange him for a man of Paris, Seigneur de Lours (corrected, innkeeper at the sign of
l'Ours); but when she heard that this man was dead, and when the Bailli told her that she would
go very much against justice if she set Franquet free, she said to the Bailli: "Since my man
is dead whom I wished to deliver, do with this one whatever justice demands." Asked, if she
took the money or allowed it to be taken by him who had taken Franquet, she answered, that
she was not a money changer or a treasurer of France, to deal with money.

She was then reminded that having assaulted Paris on a holy day, having taken the horse of
Monseigneur de Senlis, having thrown herself down from the tower of Beaurevoir, having consented
to the death of Franquet d'Arras, and being still dressed in the costume of a man, did she
not think that she must be in a state of mortal sin? She answered to the first question about
Paris: "I do not think I was guilty of mortal sin, and if I have sinned it is to God that I
would make it known, and in confession to God by the priest." To the second question, concerning
the horse of Senlis, she answered, that she believed firmly that there was not mortal sin in
this, seeing it was valued, and the Bishop had due notice of it, and at all events it was sent
back to the Seigneur de la Trémouille to give it back to Monseigneur de Senlis. The said horse
was of no use to her; and, on the other hand, she did not wish to keep it because she heard
that the Bishop was displeased that his horse should have been taken. And as for the tower
of Beaurevoir: "I did it not to destroy myself, but in the hope of saving myself and of going
to the aid of the good people who were in need." But after having done it, she had confessed
her sin, and asked pardon of our Lord, and had pardon of Him. And she allowed that it was not
right to have made that leap, but that she did wrong.

The next day an important question was introduced, the only one as yet which Jeanne does not
seem to have been able to answer with understanding. On points of fact or in respect to her
visions she was always quite clear, but questions concerning the Church were beyond her knowledge.
It is only indeed after some time has elapsed that we perceive why such a question was introduced.

After admonitions made to her she was required, if she had done anything contrary to the faith,
to submit herself to the decision of the Church. She replied, that her answers had all been
heard and seen by clerks, and that they could say whether there was anything in them against
the faith: and that if they would point out to her where any error was, afterwards she would
tell them what was said by her counsellors. At all events if there was anything against the
faith which our Lord had commanded, she would not sustain it, and would be very sorry to go
against that. Here it was shown to her that there was a Church militant and a Church triumphant,
and she was asked if she knew the difference between them. She was also required to put herself
under the jurisdiction of the Church, in respect to what she had done, whether it was good
or evil, but replied, "I will answer no more on this point for the present."

Having thrown in this tentative question which she did not understand, they returned to the
question of her dress, which holds such an important place in the entire interrogatory. If
she were allowed to hear mass as she wished, having been all this time deprived of religious
ordinances, did not she think it would be more honest and befitting that she should go in the
dress of a woman? To this she replied vaguely, that she would much rather go to mass in the
dress of a woman than to retain her male costume and not to hear mass; and that if she were
certified that she should hear mass, she would be there in a woman's dress. "I certify you
that you shall hear mass," the examiner replied, "but you must be dressed as a woman." "What
would you say," she answered as with a momentary doubt, "if I had sworn to my King never to
change?" but she added: "Anyhow I answer for it. Find me a dress, long, touching the ground,
without a train, and give it to me to go to mass; but I will return to my present dress when
I come back." She was then asked why she would not have all the parts of a female dress to
go to mass in; she said, "I will take counsel upon that, and answer you," and begged again
for the honour of God and our Lady that she might be allowed to hear mass in this good town.
Afterwards she was again recommended to assume the whole dress of a woman and gave a conditional
assent: "Get me a dress like that of a young bourgeoise, that is to say, a long houppelande;
I will wear that and a woman's hood to go to mass." After having promised, however, she made
an appeal to them to leave her free, and to think no more of her garb, but to allow her to
hear mass without changing it. This would seem to have been refused, and all at once without
warning the jurisdiction of the Church was suddenly introduced again.

She was asked, whether in all she did and said she would submit herself to the Church, and
replied: "All my deeds and works are in the hands of God, and I depend only on Him; and I certify
that I desire to do nothing and say nothing against the Christian faith; and if I have done
or said anything in the body that was against the Christian faith which our Lord has established,
I should not defend it but cast it forth from me." Asked again, if she would not submit to
the laws of the Church she replied: "I can answer no more to-day on this point; but on Saturday
send the clerk to me, if you do not come, and I will answer by the grace of God, and it can
be put in writing."

A great many questions followed as to her visions, but chiefly what had been asked before. He
was not killed at Preston-Pans.-D.

443 Letter 182 To Sir Horace Mann. Arlington Street, Oct. 4, 1745.

I am still writing to you as "R`esident de sa Majest`e Britannique;"
and without the apprehension of your suddenly receiving letters of
recall, or orders to notify to the council of Florence the new accession.

I dare say your fears made you think that the young Prince (for he is at least Prince of Scotland)
had vaulted from Cope's neck into St. James's House; but he is still at Edinburgh; and his cousin
Grafton, the lord chamberlain has not even given orders for fitting up this palace for his reception.
The good people of England have at last rubbed their eyes and looked
about them.

A wonderful spirit is arisen in all counties, and among all sorts of people. The nobility are
raising regiments, and every body else is-being raised. Dr. Herring,(1119) the Archbishop of
York, has set an example that would rouse the most indifferent; in
two days after the news arrived at York of Cope's defeat, and when
they every moment expected the victorious rebels at their gates, the
bishop made a speech to the assembled county, that had as much true
spirit, honesty, and bravery in it, as ever was penned by an historian
for an ancient hero.

The rebels returned to Edinburgh, where they have no hopes of taking the Castle, for old Preston,
the deputy-governor, and General Guest, have obliged them to supply
the Castle constantly with fresh provisions, on pain of having the
town fired with red-hot bullets.

They did fling a bomb on Holyrood House, and obliged the Boy to shift
his quarters.

Wade is marching against them, and will have a great army: all the rest of our troops are ordered
from Flanders, and are to meet him in Yorkshire, with some Hessians too. That county raises
four thousand men, besides a body of foxhunters, whom Oglethorpe has converted into hussars.
I am told that old Stair, who certainly does not want zeal, but may not want envy neither,
has practised a little Scotch art to prevent wade from having an army, and consequently the
glory of saving this country. This I don't doubt he will do, if the rebels get no foreign aid;
and I have great reason to hope they will not, for the French are privately making us overtures
of peace. My dear child, dry your wet-brown-paperness, and be in spirits again!

It is not a very civil joy to send to Florence, but I can't help telling you how glad I am of
news that came two days ago, of the King of Prussia having beat Prince Charles,(1120) who attacked him
just after we could have obtained for them a peace with that King. That odious house of Austria!
It will not be decent for you to insult Richcourt but I would, were I at Florence.


She was asked, if she would submit all her sayings and doings, good or evil, to the judgment
of our Holy Mother, the Church. She replied, that as for the Church, she loved it and would
sustain it with all her might for our Christian faith; and that it was not she whom they ought
to disturb and hinder from going to church or from hearing mass. As to the good things she
had done, and that had happened, she must refer all to the King of Heaven, who had sent her
to Charles, King of France; and it should be seen that the French would soon gain a great advantage
which God would send them, so great that all the kingdom of France would be shaken. And this,
she said, that when it came to pass, they might remember that she had said it. She was again
asked, if she would submit to the jurisdiction of the Church, and answered, "I refer everything
to our Lord who sent me, to our Lady, and to the blessed Saints of Paradise"; and added her
opinion was that our Lord and the Church meant the same thing, and that difficulties should
not be made concerning this, when there was no difficulty, and they were both one. She was
then told that there was the Church triumphant, in which are God, the saints, the angels, and
all saved souls. And this being the case she was asked if she would refer her cause to the
Church militant thus explained to her. She replied that she had come to the King of France
on the part of God, on the part of the Virgin Mary, the blessed Saints of Paradise, and the
Church victorious in Heaven, and at their commandment; and to that Church she submitted all
her good deeds, and all that she had done and might do. And if they asked her whether she would
submit to the Church militant, answered, that she would now answer no more than this.

Here again the argument strayed back to the futile subject of dress, always at hand to be taken
up again, one would say, when the judges were non-plussed. Her first reply on this subject
is remarkable and shows that dark and terrible forebodings were already beginning to mingle
with her hopes.

Asked, what she had to say about the woman's dress that had been offered to her, to hear mass
in: she answered, that she would not take it yet, not until the Lord pleased; but that if it
were necessary to lead her out to be executed, and if she should then have to be undressed,
she required of the Lords of the Church that they would give her the grace to have a long chemise,
and a kerchief for her head; that she would prefer to die rather than to alter what our Lord
had directed her to do, and that she firmly believed our Lord would not let her descend so
low, but that she should soon be helped by God and by a miracle. She was then asked, if what
she did in respect to the man's costume was by command of God, why she asked for a woman's
chemise in case of death? answered, It is enough that it should be long.

The effect of these words in which so much was implied, must have made a supreme sensation
among the handful of men gathered round the helpless girl in her prison, bringing the stake
in all its horror before the eyes of the judges as before her own. No other thing could have
been suggested by that piteous prayer. The stake, the scaffold, the fire--and the shrinking
figure all maidenly, helpless, exposed to every evil gaze, must have showed themselves at least
for a moment against that dark background of prison wall. It was enough that it should be long--to
hide her as much as was possible from those dreadful staring eyes.

The interrogatory goes on wildly after this about the age and the dress of the saints. But
a tone of fate had come into it, and Jeanne herself, it was evident, was very serious; her
mind turned to more weighty thoughts. Presently they asked if the saints hated the English,
to which she replied that they hated what God hated and loved what He loved. She was then asked
if God hated the English. She replied that of the love or hate that God had for the English,
or what God did for their souls, she knew nothing; but she knew well that they should be driven
out of France, except those who died there; and that God would send victory to the French against
the English. Asked, if God was for the English so long as they were prosperous in France: she
answered, that she knew not whether God hated the French, but believed He had allowed them
to be beaten because of their sins.

Jeanne was then brought to a test which, had she been a great statesman or a learned doctor,
would have been as dangerous, as the question concerning John the Baptist was to the priests
and scribes. "If we shall say: From heaven, he will say, Why then believed ye him not? but
if we shall say of men we fear the people." And she was only a peasant girl and the event of
which they spoke had been before her little time.

Asked, if she thought and believed firmly that her King did well to kill Monseigneur de Bourgogne,
she answered that IT WAS A GREAT MISFORTUNE FOR THE KINGDOM OF FRANCE: but that however it
might be among themselves, God had sent her to the succour of the King.

One or two other questions of some importance followed amid perpetual changes of the subject:
one of which called forth as follows her last deliverance on the subject of the Pope.

Asked, if she had said to Monseigneur de Beauvais that she would answer as exactly to him and
to his clerks as she would have done before our Holy Father the Pope, although at several points
in the trial she would have had to refuse to answer, if she did not answer more plainly than
before Monseigneur de Beauvais--she said that she had answered as much as she knew, and that
if anything came to her memory that she had forgotten to say, she would say it willingly. Asked,
if it seemed to her that she would be bound to answer the plain truth to the Pope, the vicar
of God, in all he asked her touching the faith and her conscience, she replied that she desired
to be taken before him, and then she would answer all that she ought to answer.

Here we seem to perceive dimly that there was beginning to be a second party among those examiners,
one of which was covertly but earnestly attempting to lead Jeanne into an appeal to the Pope,
which would have conveyed her out of the hands of the English at least, and gained time, probably
deliverance for her, could Jeanne have been made to understand it.

This, however, was by no means the wish of Cauchon, whose spy and whisperer, L'Oyseleur, was
working against it in the background. Jeanne evidently failed to take up what they meant. She
did not understand the distinction between the Church militant and the Church triumphant: that
God alone was her judge, and that no tribunal could decide upon the questions which were between
her Lord and herself, was too firmly fixed in her mind: and again and again the men whose desire
was to make her adopt this expedient, were driven back into the ever repeated questions about
St. Catherine and St. Margaret.

One other of her distinctive sayings fell from her in the little interval that remained, in
a series of useless questions about her standard. Was it true that this standard had been carried
into the Cathedral at Rheims when those of the other captains were left behind? "It had been
through the labour and the pain," she said, "there was good reason that it should have the honour."

This last movement of a proud spirit, absolutely disinterested and without thought of honour
or advancement in the usual sense of the word, gives a sort of trumpet note at the end of these
wonderful wranglings in prison, in which, however, there is a softening of tone visible throughout,
and evident effect of human nature bringing into immediate contact divers human creatures day
after day. Jeanne is often at her best, and never so frequently as during these less formal
sittings utters those flying words, simple and noble and of absolute truth to nature, which
are noted everywhere, even in the most rambling records.

*****

The private examination, concluding with that last answer about the banner, came to an end
on the 17th March, the day before Passion Sunday. Several subsequent days were occupied with
repeated consultations in the Bishop's palace, and the reading over of the minutes of the examinations,
to the judges first and afterwards to Jeanne, who acknowledged their correctness, with one
or two small amendments. It is only now that Cauchon reappears in his own person. On the morning
of the following Sunday, which was Palm Sunday, he and four other doctors with him had a conversation
with Jeanne in her prison, very early in the morning, touching her repeated application to
be allowed to hear mass and to communicate. The Bishop offered her his ultimatum: if she consented
to resume her woman's dress, she might hear mass, but not otherwise; to which Jeanne replied,
sorrowfully, that she would have done so before now if she could; but that it was not in her
power to do so. Thus after the long and bitter Lent her hopes of sharing in the sacred feast
were finally taken from her. It remains uncertain whether she considered that her change of
dress would be direct disobedience to God, which her words seem often to imply; or whether
it would mean renunciation of her mission, which she still hoped against hope to be able to
resume; or if the fear of personal insult weighed most with her. The latter reason had evidently
something to do with it, but, as evidently, not all.

The background to these curious sittings, afterwards revealed to us, casts a hazy side-light
upon them. Probably the Bishop, never present, must have been made aware by his spies of an
intention on the part of those most favourable to Jeanne to support an appeal to the Pope;
and L'Oyseleur, the traitor, who was all this time admitted to her cell by permission of Cauchon,
and really as his tool and agent, was actively employed in prejudicing her mind against them,
counselling her not to trust to those clerks, not to yield to the Church. How he managed to
explain his own appearance on the other side, his official connection with the trial, and constant
presence as one of her judges, it is hard to imagine. Probably he gave her to believe that
he had sought that position (having got himself liberated from the imprisonment which he had
represented himself as sharing) for her sake, to be able to help her.

On the other hand her friends, whose hearts were touched by her candour and her sufferings,
were not inactive. Jean de la Fontaine and the two monks--l'Advenu and Frère Isambard--also
succeeded in gaining admission to her, and pressed upon her the advantage of appealing to the
Church, to the Council of Bâle about to assemble, or to the Pope himself, which would have
again changed the venue, and transferred her into less prejudiced hands. It is very likely
that Jeanne in her ignorance and innocence might have held by her reference to the supreme
tribunal of God in any case; and it is highly unlikely that of the English authorities, intent
on removing the only thing in France of which their forces were afraid, should have given her
up into the hands of the Pope, or allowed her to be transferred to any place of defence beyond
their reach; but at least it is a relief to the mind to find that all these men were not base,
as appears on the face of things, but that pity and justice and human feeling sometimes existed
under the priest's gown and the monk's cowl, if also treachery and falsehood of the blackest
kind. The Bishop, who remained withdrawn, we know not why, from all these private sittings
in the prison (probably busy with his ecclesiastical duties as Holy Week was approaching),
heard with fury of this visit and advice, and threatened vengeance upon the meddlers, not without
effect, for Jean de la Fontaine, we are told--who had been deep in his councils, and indeed
his deputy, as chief examiner--disappeared from Rouen immediately after, and was heard of no more.

     (1) Compiègne was a strong point. Had she proclaimed a
     promise from St. Catherine, of victory? Chastelain says so,
     long after date and with errors in fact. Two Anglo-
     Compiègnais were at her trial. The Rehabilitation does not
     go into this question.--(From Mr. Lang.)

CHAPTER XV -- RE-EXAMINATION. MARCH-MAY, 1431.

Upon all these contentions followed the calm of Palm Sunday, a great and touching festival,
the first break upon the gloom of Lent, and a forerunner of the blessedness of Easter. We have
already told how--a semblance of charity with which the reader might easily be deceived--the
Bishop and four of his assessors had gone to the prison to offer to the Maid permission to
receive the sacrament if she would do so in a woman's dress: and how after pleading that she
might be allowed that privilege as she was, in her male costume, and with a pathetic statement
that she would have yielded if she could, but that it was impossible--she finally refused;
and was so left in her prison to pass that sacred day unsuccoured and alone. The historian
Michelet, in the wonderful sketch in which he rises superior to himself, and which amidst all
after writings remains the most beautiful and touching memorial of Jeanne d'Arc, has made this
day a central point in his tale, using with the skill of genius the service of the Church appropriate
to the day, in heart-rending contrast with those doors of the prison which did not open, and
the help of God which did not come to the young and solitary captive. Le beau jour fleuri passed
over her in darkness and desertion: her agony and passion lay before her like those of the
Divine Sufferer, to whom every day of the succeeding week is specially consecrated. The ever-popular
picture in the Salon Carré of the Louvre now known as Alfonso I. of Ferrara and Laura Dianti,
but in the collection of Charles I. called, with no nearer approach to the truth, Titian's
Mistress after the Life, comes in very well at this stage. The exuberant beauty, with the skin of dazzling
fairness and the unbound hair of rippling gold, is the last in order of the earthly divinities
inspired by Giorgione--the loveliest of all in some respects, the most consummately rendered,
but the least significant, the one nearest still to the realities of life. The chief harmony
is here one of dark blue, myrtle green, and white, setting off flesh delicately rosy, the whole
enframed in the luminous half-gloom of a background shot through here and there with gleams of
light. Vasari described how Titian painted, ottimamente con un braccio sopra un gran pezzo d'
artiglieria, the Duke Alfonso, and how he portrayed, too, the Signora Laura, who afterwards
became the wife of the duke, che è opera stupenda.

It is upon this foundation, and a certain real or fancied resemblance between the cavalier who
in the background holds the mirror to his splendid donna and the Alfonso of Ferrara of the
Museo del Prado, that the popular designation of this lovely picture is founded, which probably,
like so many of its class, represents a fair Venetian courtesan with a lover proud of her fresh,
yet full-blown beauty. Now, however, the accomplished biographer of Velazquez, Herr Carl Justi,[42]
comes forward with convincing arguments to show that the handsome insouciant personage, with
the crisply curling dark hair and beard, in Titian's picture at Madrid cannot possibly be,
as has hitherto been almost universally assumed, Alfonso I. of Ferrara, but may very probably
be his son, Ercole II. This alone invalidates the favourite designation of the Louvre picture,
and renders it highly unlikely that we have here the "stupendous" portrait of the Signora Laura
mentioned by Vasari.

A comparison of the Madrid portrait with the so-called Giorgio Cornaro of Castle Howard--a famous
portrait by Titian of a gentleman holding a hawk, and having a sporting dog as his companion,
which was seen at the recent Venetian exhibition of the New Gallery--results in something like
certainty that in both is the same personage portrayed. It is not only that the quality and
cast of the close curling hair and beard are the same in both portraits, and that the handsome
features agree exceedingly well; the sympathetic personage gives in either case the same impression
of splendid manhood fully and worthily enjoyed, yet not abused. This means that if the Madrid
portrait be taken to present the gracious Ercole II. of Ferrara, then must it be held that also
in the Castle Howard picture is Alfonso's son and successor portrayed. In the latter canvas, which
bears, according to Crowe and Cavalcaselle, the later signature "Titianus F.," the personage
is, it may be, a year or two older. Let it be borne in mind that only on the back of the canvas
is, or rather was, to be found the inscription: "Georgius Cornelius, frater Catterinae Cipri
et Hierusalem Reginae (sic)," upon the authority of which it bears its present designation.

The
altar-piece, The Virgin and Child with Angels, adored by St. Francis, St. Blaise, and a Donor, now
in San Domenico, but formerly in San Francesco at Ancona, bears the date 1520 and the signature
"Titianus Cadorinus pinsit," this being about the first instance in which the later spelling
"Titianus" appears. If as a pictorial achievement it cannot rank with the San Niccolò and
the Pesaro altar-pieces, it presents some special points of interest which make it easily
distinguishable from these. The conception is marked by a peculiar intensity but rarely to be
met with in our master at this stage, and hardly in any other altar-piece of this particular
type. It reveals a passionate unrest, an element of the uncurbed, the excessive, which one expects
to find rather in Lorenzo Lotto than in Titian, whose dramatic force is generally, even in its
most vigorous manifestations, well under control. The design suggests that in some shape or other
the painter was acquainted with Raphael's Madonna di Foligno; but it is dramatic and real where the Urbinate's
masterpiece was lofty and symbolical. Still Titian's St. Francis, rapt in contemplation, is sublime
in steadfastness and intensity of faith; the kneeling donor is as pathetic in the humility
of his adoration as any similar figure in a Quattrocento altar-piece,
yet his expressive head is touched with the hand of a master of the
full Renaissance.

An improved version of the upper portion of the Ancona picture, showing the Madonna and Child
with angels in the clouds, appears a little later on in the S. Niccolò altar-piece.

Coming to the important altar-piece completed in 1522 for the Papal
Legate, Averoldo, and originally placed on the high altar in the Church
of SS.

Nazzaro e Celso at Brescia, we find a marked change of style and sentiment. The St. Sebastian presently
to be referred to, constituting the right wing of the altar-piece, was completed before the rest,[43]
and excited so great an interest in Venice that Tebaldi, the agent of Duke Alfonso, made an attempt
to defeat the Legate and secure the much-talked-of piece for his master. Titian succumbed to
an offer of sixty ducats in ready money, thus revealing neither for the first nor the last
time the least attractive yet not the least significant side of his character. But at the last
moment Alfonso, fearing to make an enemy of the Legate, drew back and left to Titian the discredit
without the profit of the transaction.

The central compartment of the Brescia altar-piece presents The Resurrection, the upper panels
on the left and right show together the Annunciation, the lower left panel depicts the patron
saints, Nazarus and Celsus, with the kneeling donor, Averoldo; the lower right panel has the
famous St. Sebastian[44] in the foreground, and in the landscape the Angel ministering to St.
Roch. The St. Sebastian is neither more nor less than the magnificent academic study of a
nude athlete bound to a tree in such fashion as to bring into violent play at one and the same
moment every muscle in his splendidly developed body. There is neither in the figure nor in
the beautiful face framed in long falling hair any pretence at suggesting the agony or the
ecstasy of martyrdom. A wide gulf indeed separates the mood and the method of this superb bravura
piece from the reposeful charm of the Giorgionesque saint in the St. Mark of the Salute, or
the healthy realism of the unconcerned St. Sebastian in the S. Niccolò altar-piece. Here,
as later on with the St. Peter Martyr, those who admire in Venetian art in general, and in that
of Titian in particular, its freedom from mere rhetoric and the deep root that it has in Nature,
must protest that in this case moderation and truth are offended by a conception in its very
essence artificial. Yet, brought face to face with the work itself, they will put aside the
role of critic, and against their better judgment pay homage unreservedly to depth and richness
of colour, to irresistible beauty of modelling and painting.[45] Analogies have been drawn
between the Medicean Faun and the St. Sebastian, chiefly on account of the strained position
of the arms, and the peculiar one of the right leg, both in the statue and the painting; but
surely the most obvious and natural resemblance, notwithstanding certain marked variations,
is to the figure of Laocoon in the world-famous group of the Vatican. Of this a model had
been made by Sansovino for Cardinal Domenico Grimani, and of that model a cast was kept in Titian's
workshop, from which he is said to have studied.

In the Madonna di S. Niccolò, which was painted or rather finished in the succeeding year,
1523, for the little Church of S. Niccolò de' Frari, and is now in
the Pinacoteca of the Vatican, the keynote is suavity, unbroken richness
and harmony, virtuosity, but not extravagance of technique.

The composition must have had much greater unity before the barbarous shaving off, when the
picture went to Rome, of the circular top which it had in common with the Assunta, the Ancona,
and the Pesaro altar-pieces. Technically superior to the second of these great works, it is
marked by no such unity of dramatic action and sentiment, by no such passionate identification of
the artist with his subject. It is only in passing from one of its beauties to another that its
artistic worth can be fully appreciated. Then we admire the rapt expression, not less than
the wonderfully painted vestments of the St. Nicholas,[46] the mansuetude of the St. Francis,
the Venetian loveliness of the St. Catherine, the palpitating life of the St. Sebastian. The
latter is not much more than a handsome, over-plump young gondolier stripped and painted as
he was--contemplating, if anything, himself. The figure is just as Vasari describes it, ritratto
dal' vivo e senza artificio niuno. The royal saint of Alexandria is a sister in refined elegance
of beauty and costume, as in cunning elaboration of coiffure, to the St. Catherine of the Madonna
del Coniglio, and the not dissimilar figure in our own Holy Family with St. Catherine at the
National Gallery.

The fresco showing St. Christopher wading through the Lagunes with the infant Christ on his shoulder,
painted at the foot of a staircase in the Palazzo Ducale leading from the Doge's private apartments
to the Senate Hall, belongs either to this year, 1523, or to 1524. It is, so far as we know, Titian's
first performance as a frescante since the completion, twelve years previously, of the series
at the Scuola del Santo of Padua. As it at present appears, it is broad and solid in execution, rich
and brilliant in colour for a fresco, very fairly preserved--deserving, in fact, of a much better
reputation as regards technique than Crowe and Cavalcaselle have made for it. The movement is broad
and true, the rugged realism of the conception not without its pathos; yet the subject is not
lifted high above the commonplace by that penetrating spirit of personal
interpretation which can transfigure truth without unduly transforming
it.

In grandeur of design and decorative character, it is greatly exceeded
by the magnificent drawing in black chalk, heightened with white,
of the same subject, by Pordenone, in the British Museum.

Even the colossal, half-effaced St. Christopher with the Infant Christ, painted by the same master
on the wall of a house near the Town Hall at Udine, has a finer swing, a more resistless energy.

Where
exactly in the life-work of Titian are we to place the Entombment of the Louvre, to which among
his sacred works, other than altar-pieces of vast dimensions, the same supreme rank may be accorded
which belongs to the Bacchus and Ariadne among purely secular subjects? It was in 1523 that Titian
acquired a new and illustrious patron in the person of Federigo Gonzaga II., Marquess of Mantua,
son of that most indefatigable of collectors, the Marchioness Isabella d'Este Gonzaga, and nephew
of Alfonso of Ferrara. The Entombment being a "Mantua piece,"[47] Crowe and Cavalcaselle have
not unnaturally assumed that it was done expressly for the Mantuan ruler, in which case, as some
correspondence published by them goes to show, it must have been painted at, or subsequently
to, the latter end of 1523. Judging entirely by the style and technical execution of the canvas
itself, the writer feels strongly inclined to place it earlier by some two years or thereabouts--that
is to say, to put it back to a period pretty closely following upon that in which the Worship of
Venus and the Bacchanal were painted. Mature as Titian's art here is, it reveals, not for the last
time, the influence of Giorgione with which its beginnings were saturated. The beautiful head
of St. John shows the Giorgionesque type and the Giorgionesque feeling
at its highest.

The Joseph of Arimathea has the robustness and the passion of the Apostles in the Assunta, the
crimson coat of Nicodemus, with its high yellowish lights, is such as we meet with in the Bacchanal.
The Magdalen, with her features distorted by grief, resembles--allowing for the necessary differences
imposed by the situation--the women making offering to the love-goddess in the Worship of
Venus. The figure of the Virgin, on the other hand, enveloped from head to foot in her mantle of
cold blue, creates a type which would appear to have much influenced Paolo Veronese and his school. To
define the beauty, the supreme concentration of the Entombment, without by dissection killing
it, is a task of difficulty. What gives to it that singular power of enchanting the eye and enthralling
the spirit, the one in perfect agreement with the other, is perhaps above all its unity, not
only of design, but of tone, of informing sentiment. Perfectly satisfying balance and interconnection
of the two main groups just stops short of too obvious academic grace--the well-ordered movement,
the sweeping rhythm so well serving to accentuate the mournful harmony which envelops the sacred
personages, bound together by the bond of the same great sorrow,
and from them communicates itself, as it were, to the beholder.

In the colouring, while nothing jars or impairs the concert of the tints taken as a whole, each
one stands out, affirming, but not noisily asserting, its own splendour and its own special significance.
And yet the yellow of the Magdalen's dress, the deep green of the
coat making ruddier the embrowned flesh of sturdy Joseph of Arimathea,
the rich shot crimson of Nicodemus's garment, relieved with green
and brown, the chilling white of the cloth which supports the wan
limbs of Christ, the blue of the Virgin's robe, combine less to produce
the impression of great pictorial magnificence than to heighten that
of solemn pathos, of portentous tragedy.

Of the frescoes executed by Titian for Doge Andrea Gritti in the Doge's chapel in 1524 no trace
now remains. They consisted of a lunette about the altar,[48] with the Virgin and Child between St.
Nicholas and the kneeling Doge, figures of the four Evangelists on either side of the altar,
and in the lunette above the entrance St. Mark seated on a lion.

The Madonna di Casa Pesaro, which Titian finished in 1526, after having worked upon it for no less than
seven years, is perhaps the masterpiece of the painter of Cadore
among the extant altar-pieces of exceptional dimensions, if there
be excepted its former companion at the Frari, the Assunta.

For ceremonial dignity, for well-ordered pomp and splendour, for the dexterous combination,
in a composition of quite sufficient vraisemblance, of divine and sacred with real personages, it
has hardly a rival among the extant pictures of its class. And yet, apart from amazement at
the pictorial skill shown, at the difficulties overcome, at the magnificence tempered by due
solemnity of the whole, many of us are more languidly interested by this famous canvas than
we should care to confess.

It would hardly be possible to achieve a more splendid success with the prescribed subject and
the material at hand. It is the subject itself that must be deemed
to be of the lower and less interesting order.

It necessitates the pompous exhibition of the Virgin and Child, of St. Peter and other attendant
saints, united by an invisible bond of sympathy and protection, not
to a perpetually renewed crowd of unseen worshippers outside the picture,
as in Giorgione's Castelfranco Madonna, but merely to the Pesaro family,
so proud in their humility as they kneel in adoration, with Jacopo
Pesaro, Bishop of Paphos (Baffo), at their head.

The natural tie that should unite the sacred personages to the whole outer world, and with it their
power to impress, is thus greatly diminished, and we are dangerously
near to a condition in which they become merely grand conventional
figures in a decorative ensemble of the higher order.

To analyse the general scheme or the details of the glorious colour-harmony, which has survived
so many drastic renovations and cleanings, is not possible on this occasion, or indeed necessary.
 All was silent in the world around, not a breath of hope, not the whisper of
a friend. It was not till the 2d of May that the dreadful blank was again broken, and she was
called to the great hall of the castle for another interview with her tormentors. When she
was led into the hall it was full, as in the first sitting, sixty-three judges in all being
present. The interest had flagged or the pity had grown as the trial dragged its slow length
along; but now, when every day the verdict was expected from Paris, the interest had risen
again. On her way from her prison to the hall, it was necessary to pass the door of the castle
chapel: and here once or twice Massieu, the officer of the court, had permitted her to pause
and kneel down as she passed. This was all the celebration of the Paschal Feast that was permitted
to Jeanne. The compassionate official, however, was discovered in this small service of charity,
and sternly reprimanded and threatened. Henceforward she had to pass without even a longing
look through the door at the altar on which was the holy sacrament.

She came in on the renewed sitting of the 2d May to find the assembled priests settling themselves,
after the address which had been made to them, to hear another address which John de Chasteillon,
Archdeacon, had prepared for herself, in which he said much that was good both for body and
soul, to which she consented. He had a list of twelve articles in his hands, and explained
and expounded them to her, as they were the occasion of the sitting. He then "admonished her
in charity," explaining that those who were faithful to Christ hold firmly and closely to the
Christian creed, and adjuring her to consent and to amend her ways. To this Jeanne answered:
"Read your book," meaning the schedule held by Monseigneur the Archdeacon, "and then I will
answer you. I refer myself to God my master in all things; and I love Him with all my heart."

To read this book, however, was precisely what Monseigneur the Archdeacon had no intention
of doing. She was never allowed to hear the twelve articles upon which the verdict against
her was founded; but the speaker gave her a long discourse by way of explanation, following
more or less the schedule which he held. This "monition general," however, elicited no detailed
reply from Jeanne, who answered briefly with some impatience, "I refer myself to my judge,
who is the King of Heaven and earth." The "Lord Archdeacon" then proceeded to "monitions particulares."

It was then once more explained to her that this reference to God alone was a refusal to submit
to the Church militant, and she was instructed in the authority of the Church, which it was
the duty of every Christian to believe--unam sanctam Ecclesiam always guided by the Holy Spirit
and which could not err, to the judgment of which every question should be referred. She answered:
"I believe in the Church here below; but my doings and sayings, as I have already said, I refer
and submit to God. I believe that the Church militant cannot err or fail; but as for my deeds
and words I put them all before God, who has made me do that which I have done"; she also said
that she submitted herself to God, her Creator, who had made her do everything, and referred
everything to Him, and to Him alone.

She was then asked, if she would have no judge on earth and if our Holy Father the Pope were
not her judge; she answered: "I will tell you nothing more. I have a good master, that is our
Lord, on whom I depend for everything, and not an any other."

She was then told that if she would not believe the Church and the article Ecclesiam sanctam
Catholicam, that she might be reckoned as a heretic and punished by burning: to which she answered:
"I can say nothing else to you; and if I saw the fire before me, I should say only that which
I say, and could do nothing else." (Once more at this point the clerk writes on his margin,
"Proud reply"--Superba responsio--but whether in admiration or in blame it would be hard to say.)

Asked, if the Council General, or the Holy Father, Cardinals, etc., were there--whether she
would submit to them. "You shall have no other answer from me," she said.

Asked, if she would submit to our Holy Father the Pope: she answered, "Take me to him and I
will answer him," but would say no more.

Questioned in respect to her dress, she answered, that she would willingly accept a long dress
and a woman's hood to go to church to receive her Saviour, provided that, as she had already
said, she were allowed to wear it on that occasion only, and then to take back that which she
at present wore. Further, when it was set before her that she wore that dress without any need,
being in prison, she answered, "When I have done that for which I was sent by God, I will then
take back a woman's dress." Asked, if she thought she did well in being dressed like a man,
she answered, "I refer every thing to our Lord."

Again, after the exhortation made to her, namely, that in saying that she did well and did
not sin in wearing that dress, and in the circumstances which concerned her assuming and wearing
it, and in saying that God and the saints made her do so--she blasphemed, and as is contained
in this schedule, erred and did evil: she answered that she never blasphemed God or the saints.

She was then admonished to give up that dress, and no longer to think it was right, and to
return to the garb of a woman; but answered that she would make no change in this respect.

Concerning her revelations: she replied in regard to them, that she referred everything to
her judge, that is God, and that her revelations were from God, without any other medium.

Asked concerning the sign given to the King if she would refer to the Archbishop of Rheims,
the Sire de Boussac, Charles de Bourbon, La Tremouille, and La Hire, to them or to any one
of them, who, according to what she formerly said, had seen the crown, and were present when
the angel brought it, and gave it to the Archbishop; or if she would refer to any others of
her party who might write under their seals that it was so; she answered, "Send a messenger,
and I will write to them about the whole trial": but otherwise she was not disposed to refer
to them.

In respect to her presumption in divining the future, etc., she answered, "I refer everything
to my judge who is God, and to what I have already answered, which is written in the book."

Asked, if two or three or four knights of her party were to be brought here under a safe conduct,
whether she would refer to them her apparitions and other things contained in this trial; answered,
"Let them come and then I will answer:" but otherwise she was not willing to refer to anyone.

Asked whether, at the Church of Poitiers where she was examined, she had submitted to the Church,
she answered, "Do you hope to catch me in this way, and by that draw advantage to yourselves?"

In conclusion, "afresh and abundantly," she was admonished to submit herself to the Church,
on pain of being abandoned by the Church; for if the Church left her she would be in great
danger of body and of soul; and she might well put herself in peril of eternal fire for the
soul, as well as of temporal fire for the body, by the sentence of other judges. "You will
not do this which you say against me, without doing injury to your own bodies and souls," she said.

Asked, whether she could give a reason why she would not submit to the Church: but to this
she would make no additional reply.

Again a week passed in busy talk and consultation without, in silence and desertion within.
On the 9th of May the prisoner was again led, this time to the great tower, apparently the
torture chamber of the castle, where she found nine of her judges awaiting her, and was once
more adjured to speak the truth, with the threat of torture if she continued to refuse. Never
was her attitude more calm, more dignified and lofty in its simplicity, than at this grim moment.

"Truly," she replied, "if you tear the limbs from my body, and my soul out of it, I can say
nothing other than what I have said; or if I said anything different, I should afterwards say
that you had compelled me to do it by force." She added that on the day of the Holy Cross,
the 3d of May past, she had been comforted by St. Gabriel. She believed that it was St. Gabriel:
and she knew by her voices that it was St. Gabriel. She had asked counsel of her voices whether
she should submit to the Church, because the priests pressed her so strongly to submit: but
it had been said to her that if she desired our Lord to help her she must depend upon Him for
everything. She added that she knew well that our Lord had always been the master of all she
did, and that the Enemy had nothing to do with her deeds. Also she had asked her voices if
she should be burned, and the said voices had replied to her that she was to wait for the Lord
and He would help her.

Afterwards in respect to the crown which had been handed by the angel to the Archbishop of
Rheims, she was asked if she would refer to him. She answered: "Bring him here, that I may
hear what he says, and then I shall answer you; he will not dare to say the contrary of that
which I have said to you."

The Archbishop of Rheims had been her constant enemy; all the hindrances that had occurred
in her active life, and the constant attempts made to balk her even in her brief moment of
triumph, came from him and his associate La Trémouille. He was the last person in the world
to whom Jeanne naturally would have appealed. Perhaps that was the admirable reason why he
was suggested in this dreadful crisis of her fate.

A few days later, it was discussed among those dark inquisitors whether the torture should
be applied or not. Finally, among thirteen there were but two (let not the voice of sacred
vengeance be silent on their shame though after four centuries and more), Thomas de Courcelles,
first of theologians, cleverest of ecclesiastical lawyers, mildest of men, and Nicolas L'Oyseleur,
the spy and traitor, who voted for the torture. One man most reasonably asked why she should
be put to torture when they had ample material for judgment without it? One cannot but feel
that the proceedings on this occasion were either intended to beguile the impatience of the
English authorities, eager to be done with the whole business, or to add a quite gratuitous
pang to the sufferings of the heroic girl. As the men were not devils, though probably possessed
by this time, the more cruel among them, by the horrible curiosity, innate alas! in human nature,
of seeing how far a suffering soul could go, it is probable that the first motive was the true
one. The English, Warwick especially, whose every movement was restrained by this long-pending
affair, were exceedingly impatient, and tempted at times to take the matter into their own
hands, and spoil the perfectness of this well constructed work of art, conducted according
to all the rules, the beautiful trial which was dear to the Bishop's heart--and destined to
be, though perhaps in a sense somewhat different to that which he hoped, his chief title to fame.

Ten days after, the decision of the University of Paris arrived, and a great assembly of counsellors,
fifty-one in all, besides the permanent presidents, collected together in the chapel of the
Archbishop's house, to hear that document read, along with many other documents, the individual
opinions of a host of doctors and eminent authorities. After an explanation of the solemn care
given by the University to the consideration of every one of the twelve articles of the indictment,
that learned tribunal pronounced its verdict upon each. The length of the proceedings makes
it impossible to reproduce these. First as to the early revelations given to Jeanne, described
in the first and second articles, they are denounced as "murderous, seductive, and pernicious
fictions," the apparitions those of "malignant spirits and devils, Belial, Satan, and Behemoth."
The third article, which concerned her recognition of the saints, was described more mildly
as containing errors in faith; the fourth, as to her knowledge of future events, was characterised
as "superstitious and presumptuous divination." The fifth, concerning her dress, declared her
to be "blasphemous and contemptuous of God in His Sacraments." The sixth, by which she was
accused of loving bloodshed, because she made war against those who did not obey the summons
in her letters bearing the name Jhesus Maria, was declared to prove that she was cruel, "seeking
the shedding of blood, seditious, and a blasphemer of God." The tenor is the same to the end:
Blasphemy, superstition, pernicious doctrine, impiety, cruelty, presumption, lying; a schismatic,
a heretic, an apostate, an idolator, an invoker of demons. These are the conclusions drawn
by the most solemn and weighty tribunal on matters of faith in France. Well, I assure you that
I felt just then as if the one possible way left to demonstrate my sanity, my very existence,
was to lose my temper; and I did it very thoroughly. I raved up and down the room, knocked the
furniture about, chucked my boots through him, and called him a damned elemental. And although
it had no more effect upon him than if I had been in another world--as I suppose in a sense I
actually was--that outbreak did help to restore my sanity.

Perhaps you may have noticed that if a man is worsted in an argument
he invariably loses his temper?

It is the only means he has left to convince himself that he is right. Well, my temper did
that for me on this occasion. I could not prove my existence to that confounded spirit by any logic
or demonstration, but I could prove it to myself by getting angry. And I did.

The Researcher glared round the circle as if challenging anyone there to deny the validity
of his existence, then slapped his note-book together and sat upon it.

I do not expect you to believe my story (he concluded, with a touch of vehemence). Indeed, I
would much sooner that you did not believe it. I have been trying to doubt it myself for the past
eleven years, and I still hope to succeed in that endeavour, aided by my intensive study of
the comforting theories of the later Victorian scientists. But I must warn you that there was
just one touch of what one might call evidence, beyond my own impressions of that night--which may
have been, and probably were, a mixture of telepathy, hallucination,
expectancy, and auto-suggestion, that found expression in automatic
writing.

This rather flimsy piece of evidence rests upon a conclusion drawn from the end of my conversation
with the spirit. I was still banging about the room, then, and I said that I had finished with psychical
research, that never again would I make the least inquiry with regard to a possible future
life, or any kind of spiritualistic phenomenon. And, curiously enough, the poltergeist precisely echoed
my resolve. He said that that night's experience had clearly shown him that the research was useless,
that it could never prove anything, and that, even if it did, no one would believe it. For if,
as he pointed out, we who were in a manner of speaking face to face,
were unable to prove our own existence to each other, how could we
expect to prove the other's existence to anyone else?

It was getting light then, and he faded out almost immediately afterwards.

But
it is a fact that there were no more poltergeist phenomena in that
house, although the Slippertons went back to it a month or two later
and still have the same cook. No doubt the Bishop and his assessors had other things
to do, their ecclesiastical functions, their private business, which could not always be put
aside because one forsaken soul was held in suspense day after day. Finally on the 24th of
May, Jeanne again received in her prison a dignified company, some quite new and strange to
her (indeed the idea may cross the reader's mind that it was perhaps to show off the interesting
prisoner to two new and powerful bishops, the first, Louis of Luxembourg, a relative of her
first captor, that this last examination was held), nine men in all, crowding her chamber--exponuntur
Johannæ defectus sui, says the record--to expound to Jeanne her faults. It was Magister Peter
Morice to whom this office was confided. Once more the "schedule" was gone over, and an address
delivered laden with all the bad words of the University. "Jeanne, dearest friend," said the
orator at last, "it is now time, at the end of the trial, to think well what words these are."
She would seem to have spoken during this address, at least once--to say that she held to everything
she had said during the trial. When Morice had finished she was once more questioned personally.

She was asked if she still thought and believed that it was not her duty to submit her deeds
and words to the Church militant, or to any other except God, upon which she replied, "What
I have always said and held to during the trial, I maintain to this moment"; and added that
if she were in judgment and saw the fire lighted, the faggots burning, and the executioner
ready to rake the fire, and she herself within the fire, she could say nothing else, but would
sustain what she had said in her trial, to death.

Once more the scribe has written on his margin the words Responsio Johannæ superba--the proud
answer of Jeanne. Her raised head, her expanded breast, something of a splendour of indignation
about her, must have moved the man, thus for the third time to send down to us his distinctly
human impression of the worn out prisoner before her judges. "And immediately the promoter
and she refusing to say more, the cause was concluded," says the record, so formal, sustained
within such purely abstract limits, yet here and there with a sort of throb and reverberation
of the mortal encounter. From the lips of the Inquisitor too all words seemed to have been
taken. It is as when amid the excited crowd in the Temple the officers of the Pharisees approaching
to lay hands on a greater than Jeanne, fell back, not knowing why, and could not do their office.
This man was silenced also. Two bishops were present, and one a great man full of patronage;
but not for the richest living in Normandy could Peter Morice find any more to say.

These are in one sense the words of Jeanne; the last we have from her in her prison, the last
of her consistent and unbroken life. After, there was a deeper horror to go through, a moment
when all her forces failed. Here on the verge of eternity she stands heroic and unyielding,
brave, calm, and steadfast as at the outset of her career, the Maid of France. Were the fires
lighted and the faggots burning, and she herself within the fire, she had no other word to say.

     (1) It is correct in French to use the second person plural
     in addressing God, thou being a more intimate and less
     respectful form of speech. Such a difference is difficult to
     remember, and troubles the ear. The French, even those who
     ought to know better, sometimes speak of it as a supreme
     profanity on the part of the profane English, that they
     address God as thou.

     (2) The French report goes on, "et requiert ----," but no
     more. It is not in the Latin. The scribe was stopped by the
     Bishop's profane outcry, and forbidden to register the fact
     she was about to make a direct appeal to the Pope.

CHAPTER XVI -- THE ABJURATION. MAY 24, 1431.

On the 23d of May Jeanne was taken back to her prison attended by the officer of the court,
Massieu, her frame still thrilling, her heart still high, with that great note of constancy
yet defiance. She had been no doubt strongly excited, the commotion within her growing with
every repetition of these scenes, each one of which promised to be the last. And the fire and
the stake and the executioner had come very near to her; no doubt a whole murmuring world of
rumour, of strange information about herself, never long inaudible, never heard outside of
the Castle of Rouen, rose half-comprehended from the echoing courtyard outside and the babble
of her guards within. She would hear even as she was conveyed along the echoing stone passages
something here and there of the popular expectation:--a burning! the wonderful unheard of sight,
which by hook or by crook everyone must see; and no doubt among the English talk she might
now be able to make out something concerning this long business which had retarded all warlike
proceedings but which would soon be over now, and the witch burnt. There must have been some,
even among those rude companions, who would be sorry, who would feel that she was no witch,
yet be helpless to do anything for her, any more than Massieu could, or Frère Isambard: and
if it was all for the sake of certain words to be said, was the wench mad? would it not be
better to say anything, to give up anything rather than be burned at the stake? Jeanne, notwithstanding
the wonderful courage of her last speech, must have returned to her cell with small illusion
possible to her intelligent spirit. The stake had indeed come very near, the flames already
dazzled her eyes, she must have felt her slender form shrink together at the thought. All that
long night, through the early daylight of the May morning did she lie and ponder, as for far
less reasons so many of us have pondered as we lay wakeful through those morning watches. God's
promises are great, but where is the fulfilment? We ask for bread and he gives us, if not a
stone, yet something which we cannot realise to be bread till after many days. Jeanne's voices
had never paused in their pledge to her of succour. "Speak boldly, God will help you--fear
nothing"; there would be aid for her before three months, and great victory. They went on saying
so, though the stake was already being raised. What did they mean? what did they mean? Could
she still trust them? or was it possible----?

Her heart was like to break. At their word she would have faced the fire. She meant to do so
now, notwithstanding the terrible, the heartrending ache of hope that was still in her. But
they did not give her that heroic command. Still and always, they said God will help you, our
Lord will stand by you. What did that mean? It must mean deliverance, deliverance! What else
could it mean? If she held her head high as she returned to the horrible monotony of that prison
so often left with hope, so often re-entered in sadness, it must soon have dropped upon her
tired bosom. Slowly the clouds had settled round her. Over and over again had she affirmed
them to be true--these voices that had guided her steps and led her to victory. And they had
promised her the aid of God if she went forward boldly, and spoke and did not fear. But now
every way of salvation was closing; all around her were fierce soldiers thirsting for her blood,
smooth priests who admonished her in charity, threatening her with eternal fire for the soul,
temporal fire for the body. She felt that fire, already blowing towards her as if on the breath
of the evening wind, and her girlish flesh shrank. Was that what the voices had called deliverance?
was that the grand victory, the aid of the Lord?

It may well be imagined that Jeanne slept but little that night; she had reached the lowest
depths; her soul had begun to lose itself in bitterness, in the horror of a doubt. The atmosphere
of her prison became intolerable, and the noise of her guards keeping up their rough jests
half through the night, their stamping and clamour, and the clang of their arms when relieved.
Early next morning a party of her usual visitors came in upon her to give her fresh instruction
and advice. Something new was about to happen to-day. She was to be led forth, to breathe the
air of heaven, to confront the people, the raging sea of men's faces, all the unknown world
about her. The crowd had never been unfriendly to Jeanne. It had closed about her, almost wherever
she was visible, with sweet applause and outcries of joy. Perhaps a little hope stirred her
heart in the thought of being surrounded once more by the common folk, though probably it did
not occur to her to think of these Norman strangers as her own people. And a great day was
before her, a day in which something might still be done, in which deliverance might yet come.
L'Oyseleur, who was one of her visitors, adjured her now to change her conduct, to accept whatever
means of salvation might be offered to her. There was no longer any mention of Pope or Council,
but only of the Church to which she ought to yield. How it was that he preserved his influence
over her, having been proved to be a member of the tribunal that judged her, and not a fellow-prisoner,
nor a fellow-countryman, nor any of the things he had professed to be, no once can tell us;
but evidently he had managed to do so. Jeanne would seem to have received him without signs
of repulsion or displeasure. Indeed she seems to have been ready to hear anyone, to believe
in those who professed to wish her well, even when she did not follow their counsel.

It would require, however, no great persuasion on L'Oyseleur's part to convince her that this
was a more than usually important day, and that something decisive must be done, now or never.
Why should she be so determined to resist her only chance of safety? If she were but delivered
from the hands of the English, safe in the gentler keeping of the Church, there would be time
to think of everything, even to make her peace with her voices who would surely understand
if, for the saving of her life, and out of terror for the dreadful fire, she abandoned them
for a moment. She had disobeyed them at Beaurevoir and they had forgiven. One faltering word
now, a mark of her hand upon a paper, and she would be safe--even if still all they said was
true; and if indeed and in fact, after buoying her up from day to day, such a dreadful thing
might be as that they were not true----

The traitor was at her ear whispering; the cold chill of disappointment, of disillusion, of
sickening doubt was in her heart.

Then there came into the prison a better man than L'Oyseleur, Jean Beaupère, her questioner
in the public trial, the representative of all these notabilities. What he said was spoken
with authority and he came in all seriousness, may not we believe in some kindness too? to
warn her. He came with permission of the Bishop, no stealthy visitor. "Jean Beaupère entered
alone into the prison of the said Jeanne by permission, and advertised her that she would straightway
be taken to the scaffold to be addressed (pour y être preschée), and that if she was a good
Christian she would on that scaffold place all her acts and words under the jurisdiction of
our Holy Mother, the Church, and specially of the ecclesiastical judges." "Accept the woman's
dress and do all that you are told," her other adviser had said. When the car that was to convey
her came to the prison doors, L'Oyseleur accompanied her, no doubt with a show of supporting
her to the end. What a change from the confined and gloomy prison to the dazzling clearness
of the May daylight, the air, the murmuring streets, the throng that gazed and shouted and
followed! Life that had run so low in the prisoner's veins must have bounded up within her
in response to that sunshine and open sky, and movement and sound of existence--summer weather
too, and everything softened in the medium of that soft breathing air, sound and sensation
and hope. She had been three months in her prison. As the charrette rumbled along the roughly
paved streets drawing all those crowds after it, a strange object appeared to Jeanne's eyes
in the midst of the market-place, a lofty scaffold with a stake upon it, rising over the heads
of the crowd, the logs all arranged ready for the fire, a car waiting below with four horses,
to bring hither the victim. The place of sacrifice was ready, everything arranged--for whom?
for her? They drove her noisily past that she might see the preparations. It was all ready;
and where then was the great victory, the deliverance in which she had believed?

In front of the beautiful gates of St. Ouen there was a different scene. That stately church
was surrounded then by a churchyard, a great open space, which afforded room for a very large
assembly. In this were erected two platforms, one facing the other. On the first sat the court
of judges in number about forty, Cardinal Winchester having a place by the side of Monseigneur
de Beauvais, the president, with several other bishops and dignified ecclesiastics. Opposite,
on the other platform, were a pulpit and a place for the accused, to which Jeanne was conducted
by Massieu, who never left her, and L'Oyseleur, who kept as near as he could, the rest of the
platform being immediately covered by lawyers, doctors, all the camp followers, so to speak,
of the black army, who could find footing there. Jeanne was in her usual male dress, the doublet
and hose, with her short-clipped hair--no doubt looking like a slim boy among all this dark
crowd of men. The people swayed like a sea all about and around--the throng which had gathered
in her progress through the streets pushing out the crowd already assembled with a movement
like the waves of the sea. Every step of the trial all through had been attended by preaching,
by discourses and reasoning and admonishments, charitable and otherwise. Now she was to be
"preached" for the last time.

It was Doctor Guillaume Érard who ascended the pulpit, a great preacher, one whom the "copious
multitude" ran after and were eager to hear. He himself had not been disposed to accept this
office, but no doubt, set up there on that height before the eyes of all the people, he thought
of his own reputation, and of the great audience, and Winchester the more than king, the great
English Prince, the wealthiest and most influential of men. The preacher took his text from
a verse in St. John's Gospel: "A branch cannot bear fruit except it remain in the vine." The
centre circle containing the two platforms was surrounded by a close ring of English soldiers,
understanding none of it, and anxious only that the witch should be condemned.

It was in this strange and crowded scene that the sermon which was long and eloquent began.
When it was half over, in one of his fine periods admired by all the people, the preacher,
after heaping every reproach upon the head of Jeanne, suddenly turned to apostrophise the House
of France, and the head of that House, "Charles who calls himself King." "He has," cried the
preacher, stimulated no doubt by the eye of Winchester upon him, "adhered, like a schismatic
and heretical person as he is, to the words and acts of a useless woman, disgraced and full
of dishonour; and not he only, but the clergy who are under his sway, and the nobility. This
guilt is thine, Jeanne, and to thee I say that thy King is a schismatic and a heretic."

In the full flood of his oratory the preacher was arrested here by that clear voice that had
so often made itself heard through the tumult of battle. Jeanne could bear much, but not this.
She was used to abuse in her own person, but all her spirit came back at this assault on her
King. And interruption to a sermon has always a dramatic and startling effect, but when that
voice arose now, when the startled speaker stopped, and every dulled attention revived, it
is easy to imagine what a stir, what a wonderful, sudden sensation must have arisen in the
midst of the crowd. "By my faith, sire," cried Jeanne, "saving your respect, I swear upon my
life that my King is the most noble Christian of all Christians, that he is not what you say."

The sermon, however, was resumed after this interruption. And finally the preacher turned to
Jeanne, who had subsided from that start of animation, and was again the subdued and silent
prisoner, her heart overwhelmed with many heavy thoughts. "Here," said Èrard, "are my lords
the judges who have so often summoned and required of you to submit your acts and words to
our Holy Mother the Church; because in these acts and words there are many things which it
seemed to the clergy were not good either to say or to sustain."

To which she replied (we quote again from the formal records), "I will answer you." And as
to her submission to the Church she said: "I have told them on that point that all the works
which I have done and said may be sent to Rome, to our Holy Father the Pope, to whom, but to
God first, I refer in all. And as for my acts and words I have done all on the part of God."
She also said that no one was to blame for her acts and words, neither her King nor any other;
and if there were faults in them, the blame was hers and no other's.

Asked, if she would renounce all that she had done wrong; answered, "I refer everything to
God and to our Holy Father the Pope."

It was then told her that this was not enough, and that our Holy Father was too far off; also
that the Ordinaries were judges each in his diocese, and it was necessary that she should submit
to our Mother the Holy Church, and that she should confess that the clergy and officers of
the Church had a right to determine in her case. And of this she was admonished three times.

After this the Bishop began to read the definitive sentence. When a great part of it was read,
Jeanne began to speak and said that she would hold to all that the judges and the Church said,
and obey in everything their ordinance and will. And there in the presence of the above-named
and of the great multitude assembled she made her abjuration in the manner that follows:

And she said several times that since the Church said her apparitions and revelations should
not be sustained or believed, she would not sustain them; but in everything submit to the judges
and to our Mother the Holy Church.

*****

In this strange, brief, subdued manner is the formal record made. Manchon writes on his margin:
At the end of the sentence Jeanne, fearing the fire, said she would obey the Church. Even into
the bare legal document there comes a hush as of awe, the one voice responding in the silence
of the crowd, with a quiver in it; the very animation of the previous outcry enhancing the
effect of this low and faltering submission, timens igneum--in fear of the fire.

The more familiar record, and the recollections long after of those eye-witnesses, give us
another version of the scene. Èrard, from his pulpit, read the form of abjuration prepared.
But Jeanne answered that she did not know what abjuration meant, and the preacher called upon
Massieu to explain it to her. "And he" (we quote from his own deposition), "after excusing
himself, said that it meant this: that if she opposed the said articles she would be burnt;
but he advised her to refer it to the Church universal whether she should abjure or not. Which
thing she did, saying to Èrard, 'I refer to the Church universal whether I should abjure or
not.' To which Èrard answered, 'You shall abjure at once or you will be burnt.' Massieu gives
further particulars in another part of the Rehabilitation process. Èrard, he says, asked what
he was saying to the prisoner, and he answered that she would sign if the schedule was read
to her; but Jeanne said that she could not write, and then added that she wished it to be decided
by the Church, and ought not to sign unless that was done: and also required that she should
be placed in the custody of the Church, and freed from the hands of the English. The same Èrard
answered that there had been ample delay, and that if she did not sign at once she should be
burned, and forbade Massieu to say any more."

Meanwhile many cries and entreaties came, as far as they dared, from the crowd. Some one, in
the excitement of the moment, would seem to have promised that she should be transferred to
the custody of the Church. "Jeanne, why will you die? Jeanne, will you not save yourself?"
was called to her by many a bystander. The girl stood fast, but her heart failed her in this
terrible climax of her suffering. Once she called out over their heads, "All that I did was
done for good, and it was well to do it:"--her last cry. Then she would seem to have recovered
in some measure her composure. Probably her agitated brain was unable to understand the formula
of recantation which was read to her amid all the increasing noises of the crowd, but she had
a vague faith in the condition she had herself stated, that the paper should be submitted to
the Church, and that she should at once be transferred to an ecclesiastical prison. Other suggestions
are made, namely, that it was a very short document upon which she hastily in her despair made
a cross, and that it was a long one, consisting of several pages, which was shown afterwards
with Jehanne scribbled underneath. "In fact," says Massieu, "she abjured and made a cross with
the pen which the witness handed to her:" he, if any one must have known exactly what happened.

No doubt all this would be imperfectly heard on the other platform. But the agitation must
have been visible enough, the spectators closing round the young figure in the midst, the pleadings,
the appeals, seconded by many a cry from the crowd. Such a small matter to risk her young life
for! "Sign, sign; why should you die!" Cauchon had gone on reading the sentence, half through
the struggle. He had two sentences all ready, two courses of procedure, cut and dry: either
to absolve her--which meant condemning her to perpetual imprisonment on bread and water: or
to carry her off at once to the stake. The English were impatient for the last. It is a horrible
thing to acknowledge, but it is evidently true. They had never wished to play with her as a
cat with a mouse, as her learned countrymen had done those three months past; they had desired
at once to get her out of their way. But the idea of her perpetual imprisonment did not please
them at all; the risk of such a prisoner was more than they chose to encounter. Nevertheless
there are some things a churchman cannot do. When it was seen that Jeanne had yielded, that
she had put her mark to something on a paper flourished forth in somebody's hand in the sunshine,
the Bishop turned to the Cardinal on his right hand, and asked what he was to do? There was
but one answer possible to Winchester, had he been English and Jeanne's natural enemy ten times
over. To admit her to penitence was the only practicable way.

Here arises a great question, already referred to, as to what it was that Jeanne signed. She
could not write, she could only put her cross on the document hurriedly read to her, amid the
confusion and the murmurs of the crowd. The cédule to which she put her sign "contained eight
lines:" what she is reported to have signed is three pages long, and full of detail. Massieu
declares certainly that this (the abjuration published) was not the one of which mention is
made in the trial; "for the one read by the deponent and signed by the said Jeanne was quite
different." This would seem to prove the fact that a much enlarged version of an act of abjuration,
in its original form strictly confined to the necessary points and expressed in few words--was
afterwards published as that bearing the sign of the penitent. Her own admissions, as will
be seen, are of the scantiest, scarcely enough to tell as an abjuration at all.

When the shouts of the people proved that this great step had been taken, and Winchester had
signified his conviction that the penitence must be accepted, Cauchon replaced one sentence
by another and pronounced the prisoner's fate. "Seeing that thou hast returned to the bosom
of the Church by the grace of God, and hast revoked and denied all thy errors, we, the Bishop
aforesaid, commit thee to perpetual prison, with the bread of sorrow and water of anguish,
to purge thy soul by solitary penitence." Whether the words reached her over all those crowding
heads, or whether they were reported to her, or what Jeanne expected to follow standing there
upon her platform, more shamed and downcast than through all her trial, no one can tell. There
seems even to have been a moment of uncertainty among the officials. Some of them congratulated
Jeanne, L'Oyseleur for one pressing forward to say, "You have done a good day's work, you have
saved your soul." She herself, excited and anxious, desired eagerly to know where she was not
to go. She would seem for the moment to have accepted the fact of her perpetual imprisonment
with complete faith and content. It meant to her instant relief from her hideous prison-house,
and she could not contain her impatience and eagerness. "People of the Church--gens de' Église--lead
me to your prison; let me be no longer in the hands of the English," she cried with feverish
anxiety. To gain this point, to escape the irons and the dreadful durance which she had suffered
so long, was all her thought. The men about her could not answer this appeal. Some of them
no doubt knew very well what the answer must be, and some must have seen the angry looks and
stern exclamation which Warwick addressed to Cauchon, deceived like Jeanne by this unsatisfactory
conclusion, and the stir among the soldiers at sight of his displeasure. But perhaps flurried
by all that had happened, perhaps hoping to strengthen the victim in her moment of hope, some
of them hurried across to the Bishop to ask where they were to take her. One of these was Pierre
Miger, friar of Longueville. Where was she to be taken? In Winchester's hearing, perhaps in
Warwick's, what a question to put! An English bishop, says this witness turned to him angrily
and said to Cauchon that this was a "fauteur de ladite Jeanne," "this fellow was also one of
them." Miger excused himself in alarm as St. Peter did before him, and Cauchon turning upon
him commanded grimly that she should be taken back whence she came. Thus ended the last hope
of the Maid. Her abjuration, which by no just title could be called an abjuration, had been
in vain.

Jeanne was taken back, dismayed and miserable, to the prison which she had perilled her soul
to escape. It was very little she had done in reality, and at that moment she could scarcely
yet have realised what she had done, except that it had failed. At the end of so long and bitter
a struggle she had thrown down her arms--but for what? to escape those horrible gaolers and
that accursed room with its ear of Dionysius, its Judas hole in the wall. The bitterness of
the going back was beyond words. We hear of no word that she said when she realised the hideous
fact that nothing was changed for her; the bitter waters closed over her head. Again the chains
to be locked and double locked that bound her to her dreadful bed, again the presence of those
men who must have been all the more odious to her from the momentary hope that she had got
free from them for ever.

The same afternoon the Vicar-Inquisitor, who had never been hard upon her, accompanied by Nicole
Midi, by the young seraphic doctor, Courcelles, and L'Oyseleur, along with various other ecclesiastical
persons, visited her prison. The Inquisitor congratulated and almost blessed her, sermonising
as usual, but briefly and not ungently, though with a word of warning that should she change
her mind and return to her evil ways there would be no further place for repentance. As a return
for the mercy and clemency of the Church, he required her immediately to put on the female
dress which his attendants had brought. There is something almost ludicrous, could we forget
the tragedy to follow, in the bundle of humble clothing brought by such exalted personages,
with the solemnity which became a thing upon which hung the issues of life or death. Jeanne
replied with the humility of a broken spirit. "I take them willingly," she said, "and in everything
I will obey the Church." Then silence closed upon her, the horrible silence of the prison,
full of hidden listeners and of watching eyes.

Meantime there was great discontent and strife of tongues outside. It was said that many even
of the doctors who condemned her would fain have seen Jeanne removed to some less dangerous
prison: but Monseigneur de Beauvais had to hold head against the great English authorities
who were out of all patience, fearing that the witch might still slip through their fingers
and by her spells and incantations make the heart of the troops melt once more within them.
If the mind of the Church had been as charitable as it professed to be, I doubt if all the
power of Rome could have got the Maid now out of the English grip. They were exasperated, and
felt that they too, as well as the prisoner, had been played with. But the Bishop had good
hope in his mind, still to be able to content his patrons. Jeanne had abjured, it was true,
but the more he inquired into that act, the less secure he must have felt about it. And she
might relapse; and if she relapsed there would be no longer any place for repentance. And it
is evident that his confidence in the power of the clothes was boundless. In any case a few
days more would make all clear.

They did not have many days to wait. There are two, to all appearance, well-authenticated stories
of the cause of Jeanne's "relapse." One account is given by Frère Isambard, whom she told in
the presence of several others, that she had been assaulted in her cell by a Millourt Anglois,
and barbarously used, and in self-defence had resumed again the man's dress which had been
left in her cell. The story of Massieu is different: To him Jeanne explained that when she
asked to be released from her bed on the morning of Trinity Sunday, her guards took away her
female dress which she was wearing, and emptied the sack containing the other upon her bed.
She appealed to them, reminding them that these were forbidden to her; but got no answer except
a brutal order to get up. It is very probable that both stories are true. Frère Isambard found
her weeping and agitated, and nothing is more probable than this was the occasion on which
Warwick heard her cries, and interfered to save her. Massieu's version, of which he is certain,
was communicated to him a day or two after when they happened to be alone together. It was
on the Thursday before Trinity Sunday that she put on the female dress, but it would seem that
rumours on the subject of a relapse had begun to spread even before the Sunday on which that
event happened: and Beaupère and Midi were sent by the Bishop to investigate. But they were
very ill-received in the Castle, sworn at by the guards, and forced to go back without seeing
Jeanne, there being as yet, it appeared, nothing to see. On the morning of the Monday, however,
the rumours arose with greater force; and no doubt secret messages must have informed the Bishop
that the hoped-for relapse had taken place. He set out himself accordingly, accompanied by
the Vicar-Inquisitor and attended by eight of the familiar names so often quoted, triumphant,
important, no doubt with much show of pompous solemnity, to find out for himself. The Castle
was all in excitement, report and gossip already busy with the new event so trifling, so all-important.
There was no idea now of turning back the visitors. The prison doors were eagerly thrown open,
and there indeed once more, in her tunic and hose, was Jeanne, whom they had left four days
before painfully contemplating the garments they had given her, and humbly promising obedience.
The men burst in upon her with an outcry of astonishment. What she had changed her dress again?
"Yes," she replied, "she had resumed the costume of a man." There was no triumph in what she
said, but rather a subdued tone of sadness, as of one who in the most desperate strait has
taken her resolution and must abide by it, whether she likes it or not. She was asked why she
had resumed that dress, and who had made her do so. There was no question of anything else
at first. The tunic and gippon were at once enough to decide her fate.

She answered that she had done it by her own will, no one influencing her to do so; and that
she preferred the dress of a man to that of a woman.

She was reminded that she had promised and sworn not to resume the dress of a man. She answered
that she was not aware she had ever sworn or had made any such oath.

She was asked why she had done it. She answered that it was more lawful to wear a man's dress
among men, than the dress of a woman; and also that she had taken it back because the promise
made to her had not been kept, that she should hear the mass, and receive her Saviour, and
be delivered from her irons.

She was asked if she had not abjured that dress, and sworn not to resume it. She answered that
she would rather die than be left in irons; but if they would allow her to go to mass and take
her out of her irons and put her in a gracious prison, and a woman with her, she would be good,
and do whatever the Church pleased.

She was then asked suddenly, as if there had been no condemnation of her voices as lying fables,
whether since Thursday she had heard them again. To this she answered, recovering a little
courage, "Yes."

She was asked what they said to her; she answered that they said God had made known to her
by St. Catherine and St. Margaret the great pity there was of the treason to which she had
consented by making abjuration and revocation in order to save her life: and that she had earned
damnation for herself to save her life. Also that before Thursday her voices had told her that
she should do what she did that day, that on the scaffold they had told her to answer the preachers
boldly, and that this preacher whom she called a false preacher had accused her of many things
she never did. She also added that if she said God had not sent her she would damn herself,
for true it was that God had sent her. Also that her voices had told her since, that she had
done a great sin in confessing that she had sinned; but that for fear of the fire she had said
that which she had said.

She was asked (all over again) if she believed that these voices were those of St. Catherine
and St. Margaret. She answered, Yes, they were so; and from God. And as for what had been said
to her on the scaffold that she had spoken lies and boasted concerning St. Catherine and St.
Margaret, she had not intended any such thing. Also she said that she never intended to deny
her apparitions, or to say that they were not St. Catherine and St. Margaret. All that she
had done was in fear of the fire, and she had denied nothing but what was contrary to truth;
and she said that she would like better to make her penitence all at one time--that is to say,
in dying, than to endure a long penitence in prison. Also that she had never done anything
against God or the faith whatever they might have made her say; and that for what was in the
schedule of the abjuration she did not know what it was. Also she said that she never intended
to revoke anything so long as it pleased our Lord. At the end she said that if her judges would
have her do so, she might put on again her female dress; but for the rest she would do no more.

"What need we any further witness; for we ourselves have heard of his own mouth." Jeanne's
protracted, broken, yet continuous apology and defence, overawed her judges; they do not seem
to have interrupted it with questions. It was enough and more than enough. She had relapsed;
the end of all things had come, the will of her enemies could now be accomplished. No one could
say she had not had full justice done her; every formality had been fulfilled, every lingering
formula carried out. Now there was but one thing before her, whose sad young voice with many
pauses thus sighed forth its last utterance; and for her judges, one last spectacle to prepare,
and the work to complete which it had taken them three long months to do.

CHAPTER XVIII -- THE SACRIFICE. MAY 31, 1431.

It is not necessary to be a good man in order to divine what in certain circumstances a good
and pure spirit will do. The Bishop of Beauvais had entertained no doubt as to what would happen.
He knew exactly, with a perspicuity creditable to his perceptions at least, that, notwithstanding
the effect which his theatrical mise en scène had produced upon the imagination of Jeanne,
no power in heaven or earth would induce that young soul to content itself with a lie. He knew
it, though lies were his daily bread; the children of this world are wiser in their generation
than the children of light. He had bidden his English patrons to wait a little, and now his
predictions were triumphantly fulfilled. It is hard to believe of any man that on such a certainty
he could have calculated and laid his devilish plans; but there would seem to have existed
in the mediæval churchman a certain horrible thirst for the blood of a relapsed heretic which
was peculiar to their age and profession, and which no better principle in their own minds
could subdue. It was their appetite, their delight of sensation, in distinction from the other
appetites perhaps scarcely less cruel which other men indulged with no such horrified denunciation
from the rest of the world. About a mile distant, a group of buildings formed a fairly-sized
village, which at first was called by the Gauls Gessoriac, then Bonauen Armorik, and afterwards
named Bononia Oceasensis by the Roman Gauls, and finally Boulogne-sur-Mer by the French.

"A light-house, or Nemtor, as it was called in the Celtic language, kept watch during the night
over the camp, village, and sea, preserving the Gaulish frontier
from piratical incursions.

"At the foot of the light-house stood the residence of a Roman officer named Calphurnius, who had
the supervision of the fire in the tower, amongst the more costly and ornamented houses than
the others, where the free-and-easy life and customs of the Romans found a last refuge. He lived
there attended by domestic and military servants. He had fought under the Imperial flag and
attained the rank of a Decurion (p. 354). . . .

"Forgetfulness of God, disobedience to His laws, which are also the
best laws of human society, led to the ruin both of the colony of
Bononia and of St. Patrick's family.

One day a mutiny, from which the servants of Calphurnius could not have kept aloof, broke out
amongst the soldiers in the camp, just at the time when pirates, who had come from different
parts of the Irish coast and formed themselves into a fleet so as to plunder the towns on
the sea coast of Gaul with greater security, took advantage of the dissensions amongst the inhabitants
of Boulogne and besieged the town. Fine furniture, carpets, and valuable garments, vessels of
gold and silver, arms and instruments of every kind, everything that they could seize in the houses,
in the town, in the camp, in the rural dwellings close by, in the stables, in the ox stalls, in the
sheep pens: horses, cows, pigs, cattle and sheep were carried off and placed on board the ships.
Those who attempted any resistance were put to death, whilst others, undergoing the fate of domestic
animals, were sold into slavery.

Amongst the defenders of the colony who perished were Calphurnius, his wife, and many of his
household. St. Patrick was numbered amongst the captives. The corsairs, having set sail, landed
him in Ireland, where they sold him to a small chieftain in Ulster named Milcho" ("La Legende Celtique,"
par le Vicomte Hersart de la Villemarque, Membre de 1'Institut Paris, 1864, Librarie Academique.
Dedier et Cie., Librarie Editeurs, 35 Quai des Augustines).

There is a constant tradition that St. Patrick was a native of Boulogne, and that tradition is
expressed in the Celtic Legend just quoted. Even the present "Guide Book" of that town (Merridew's, 1905)
volunteers the following information, which, although erroneous as to dates, is interesting
as referring to St. Patrick's connection with the city: "About the year 249 St. Patrick arrived
in Morinia, and for some time resided at Boulogne" (p. 10). Feather Malbrancq, in his "History
of the Morini," quotes the "Chronicon Morinense," "The Life of St. Arnulphus," and "The Catalogue
of the Bishops of that See" to prove St. Patrick's connection with
the town.

Although it is certain that St. Patrick never presided over that See, the fact of his being
numbered amongst the Bishops admits of an easy explanation if he was a native of that town.

It
is evident from this that St. Patrick fled direct to Lethania after his escape from captivity
in Ireland, having received the angel's promise that he should return to his native land. O'Conor
testifies that the Irish called not only Armorica, Lethania, but all Western Gaul as far as
the Diocese of Auxerre. ("Lethaniam appellabant Hiberni non modo Armoricam sed et occidentalem
Galliam usque ad diocesim Antisiodorensem") ("Rerum Hibernicarum Scriptores Veteres Tom,"
L, p. 91, note).

THE SCHOLIAST PRACTICALLY ADMITS ST. PATRICK'S BIRTH IN ARMORICA.

THE Scholiast, who annotated St. Fiacc's "Metrical Life of St. Patrick," flourished in the
eleventh century, according to Professor Bury. The scholia of the Scholiast, however, should
be received with great caution, as Lanigan points out: "The scholia of the Scholiast," he remarks,
"are not the composition of one person. For instance, in scholion 5, the Letha mentioned in
the hymn is properly explained by Armorica, or the maritime tract on the North-West of Gaul;
while in scholion n it is interpreted of Latium, in Italy. In scholion 9 we read that on a certain
occasion St. Patrick said, 'Dar mo dhe broth,' which is explained, 'God is able to do this if
He choose'; and yet immediately after it is added that 'Dar mo dhe broth' was a sort of asseveration
familiar to St. Patrick, signifying 'By my God, Judge, or judgment.' On the whole, it is evident
that the scholia, as we have them at present, are a compilation of observations, some more, some less
ancient, extracted from various writers" ("Eccl. Hist, of Ireland," vol. L, c. iii., p. 81).

The
scholion (i) on St. Fiacc's opening words: "Natus est Patritius Nemturri"--"St. Patrick was born
at Nemthur"--is as follows: "Nemthur is a city in the Northern parts of Britain, viz. Alcluid
(nempe Alcluida)." By comparing this scholion with the scholion given later on (c. iii.), it will
be seen that the same pen has not written both scholia. The scholion referred to is this: "The
cause of St. Patrick's captivity was this: His father, Calphurnius, and his mother, Conchessa,
and his five sisters, Lupita, Tigris, Liemania, and Darerca, Cinnena was the name of the fifth,
and his brother deacon, Senanus, all together travelled from Britain Alcluid southwards over
the Sea of Ictium to Armorican Lethania, or Britannia Lethania, both on business and because
a certain relative of theirs dwelt there, and the mother of the above-named children, namely
Conchessa, was of the Franks, and a near relative of St. Martin. At that time, however, seven sons
of Fachmad, King of the Britons, broke loose from Britain and plundered
Armorican Britain in the territory of Letha, where St. Patrick happened
to be living with his family.

They slew Calphurnius there, and carried off St. Patrick and his sister Lupita captives to Ireland.
They sold Lupita 'in Connallia Murthemnensi' [a territory in Ulster], and Patrick in the northern
parts of the territory of the Dal-aradia."

The contradictory nature of the accounts given by the Scholiast as to St. Patrick's supposed
birth in Alcluid, or Dumbarton, and his capture in Armorica will be seen by comparing them with
the statement made by the Saint himself in his "Confession": "I, Patrick, a sinner and the most
uncultured and humblest of all the faithful, had a father named Calphurnius, a deacon, the son of
Potitus, a priest, who hailed from the suburban district of Bonaven Taberniae, for he possessed
a little country seat close by from whence I was led captive." This statement of the Saint disproves
the assertion of the Scholiast that Calphurnius and his family were on a friendly visit to Armorica
when all the calamities befell them, for the Saint distinctly states that his father hailed from
Bonaven Taberniae, and that he himself was actually residing at his father's little country
seat in the suburbs of that town at the time when he was forced into captivity.

It is evident, therefore, from the Scholiast that Bonaven Tabernise
was situated in Armorican Britain; and from St. Patrick's "Confession,"
that the town from which he was led captive was his own native town.

The Apostle of Ireland could not, therefore, as the Scholiast suggests, have been born at Alcluid,
or Dumbarton. It is curious to observe how unconsciously the Scholiast connects Calphurnius and
his family with Boulogne. Calphurnius and his family are made to sail from Dumbarton, over the
Sea of Itius or Ictius, to Armorica. Hersart de la Villemarque has already identified Bonaven
under its various names as Bononia or Boulogne.

It was called Itius or Ictius by Caesar, Bononia by the Romans, and Bonauen Armorik by the
Gaulish Celts. The Scholiast, therefore, when he directs the course of Calphurnius and his
family across the Sea of Ictius, seems to be steering their ship directly to Boulogne.

Nemthur cannot possibly be the name of the town near which St. Patrick was born, simply because
the Saint gives the name of Bonaven, or Bononia, as the city of his birth. St. Fiacc does
not name Nemthur as a town; he simply tells us that St. Patrick was born at Nemthur, which,
as has been proved, was both the name of the Caligula's tower and of the district in which that
tower stood in the suburbs of Bonaven. The Scholiast is the first to call Nemthur a town, and
evidently puts it down as the ancient name of Alcluid, or Dumbarton. This is the obvious meaning
of the scholion: "Nemthur est civitas in septentrional! Britanni nempe Alcluida." Nemthur is a
city in northern Britain, namely Alcluid. The "nempe Alcluida" looks very much like an interpolation,
and if an interpolation, the statement of the Scholiast that Nemthur is a city in northern Britain,
without the addition "nempe Alcluida," might easily refer to Northern Britain in Gaul where,
however, Nemthur was not the name of a city, but the name both of a tower and of the district
of the city where St. Patrick was born.

Neither the Scholiast, nor those who have adopted his views as to the Saint's birth at Dumbarton,
have ever answered Lanigan's challenge, who boldly states that the name Nemthur is not to be
found in Nennius's "List of British Towns," which Usher himself had illustrated, nor in any
of the old "Itineraries," or in Ricardus Corinensis, or in Camden, or Horsley &c. (vol. i, b.
3, p. 91).

The learned Cardinal Moran, in the March of the Dublin Review, 1880, endeavoured to take up the gauntlet
and answer Lanigan's challenge by quoting one of Taliessin's poems
from the "Black Book of Carmarthen," which represents a Welsh hero
sailing away with an army to Scotland and recovering his lost inheritance
in a battle fought and won at Nevthur in Clydesdale.

Besides the fact that no small stretch of imagination is required to believe that Nevthur and
Nemthur are one and the same, nearly all the poems attributed to Taliessin are regarded as
spurious by learned critics, as Chamber's "Encyclopaedia," under the heading Welsh Literature, evidently
points out.

"Mr. Nash, the author of 'Taliessin and the Bards and Druids of Wales,' enables us to form an
independent judgment on this point, for he translates some fifty of the poems, and we find that,
instead of their exhibiting an antique Welsh character, they abound in allusions to mediaeval
theology, and frequently employ mediaeval Latin terms. It is certainly unfortunate for the reputation
of the 'Chief of Bards' that the specimens of his poems, which are considered genuine, possess
exceedingly small merit. The life of this famous but over-rated genius is, of course, enveloped
in legend." Lanigan's challenge, therefore, still remains unanswered, and a town mamed Nemthur
is not to be found in any ancient history, geography, or map. The error, therefore, of the
Scholiast consisted in stating that Alcluid and Nemthur were identical, but his statement
that St. Patrick was captured in Armorica is historically true.

THE "TREPARTITE LIFE" FALLS INTO THE SAME ERROR.

THE following account is given in the "Trepartite Life" concerning St. Patrick's native town,
and the country from which he was taken captive:--

"Patrick, then, was of the Britons of Alcluid by origin. Calphurn was his father's name. He
was a noble priest. Potit was his grandfather's name, whose title was a deacon. Conceis was his
mother's name. She was of the Franks, and a sister to St. Martin. In Nemthur, moreover, was the
man Patrick born. . . .

"The cause of Patrick's coming to Erin was as follows: 'The seven sons of Fachmad, namely--the
seven sons of the King of Britain--were on a naval expedition, and they went to plunder Armoric
Letha; and a number of Britons of Strath-Cluaidh were on a visit with their kinsmen--the Britons
of Armoric Letha--and Calphurn, son of Potit, Patrick's father, and her mother Conceis, daughter
of Ocbas of the Gauls, that is of the Franks, were killed in the slaughter in Armorica. Patrick
and his two sisters, viz. Lupait and Tigris, were taken prisoners, moreover, in that slaughter. The
seven sons of Fachmad went afterwards to sea, having with them Patrick and his two sisters in
captivity. The way they went was around Erin, northwards, until they landed in the north, and
they sold Patrick to Miluic, son of Baun, that is, the King of Dal-Araidhe.

"They sold his two sisters in Conaille Muirthemne.

And they did not know this. Four persons, truly, that purchased him. One of them was Miluic.
It was from this that he received the name Cothriage, for the reasons that he served four masters.
He had, indeed, four names" (W. M. Hennessey's Translation of the "Trepartite Life").

The author of the "Trepartite Life" repeats the contradictory statements of the Scholiast, namely,
that St. Patrick was born at Dumbarton and captured in Armorica, and it stands refuted by St. Patrick
himsel in his "Confession," who declares that his father hailed from Bonaven, where the Roman
encampment stood, and that he himself was captured whilst residing at his father's villula,
or country seat, close by the town. Just as we are bound to credit St. Patrick's "Confession;"
the statements of the Scholiast, and of the author of the "Trepartite Life," that he was simply
on a visit to his relatives in Armorica when captured, must be discredited.

Ignoring the fact that the author of the "Tripartite Life" and Probus tell the same tale, the Archbishop
of Tuam, in his excellent "Life of St. Patrick," states "that the Scholiast on St. Fiacc whilst
expressly declaring that Nemthur, St. Patrick's birthplace, was in North Britain, namely, Ail
Cluade, adds that young Patrick, with his parents, brother and sisters, went from the Britons
of Ail Cluade over the Ictian Sea, southwards, to visit his relatives in Armorica, and that
it was from Latevian Armorica that Patrick was carried off captive to Ireland. The Scholiast
here confounds the Armoric Britons of the Clyde with the Armoric Britons of Gaul, or Letavia,
who had no existence then at so early a date. No doubt they were kindred Britons, but the name
Britannia and Britons were not at that time given to Armorica of Gaul" (Appendix i., p. 585).

Nothing
is here said by His Grace about Probus or the "Tripartite Life," who agree with the Scholiast
that the Saint was captured in Armorica. When treating of Britannia in Gaul, it will be proved
from the "Sacred Histories of Sulpicius Severus" that Armorica was called Britannia when the
Council of Ariminium was held in the year 359. It is evident, however, that the author of the "Tripartite
Life" was firmly convinced that St. Patrick was captured in Armorica, from the description
he gives of the flight of his captors: "The seven sons of Fachmad
went afterwards on the sea, having with them Patrick and his two sisters
in captivity.

The way they went was northward around Erin, until they landed in the north, and they sold
Patrick to Miluic."

From this narrative it is evident that the captives were carried by the fleet northwards around
Erin until they arrived in the neighbourhood of Lough Larne, Antrim, where St. Patrick was
sold as a slave. The captors afterwards sailed southwards and sold St. Patrick's sisters at
Louth. They must, therefore, as Father Bullen Morris surmises, have sailed around the western
coast of Erin after sailing away from Armorica. It is clear, as the same writer does not fail
to observe, that such a course cannot fit in with the Dumbarton theory: "A voyage northwards
from the mouth of the Clyde would take the Irish fleet to the North Pole" ("Ireland and St. Patrick,"
p. 26).

The Scholiast and the author of the "Tripartite Life" are of opinion that St. Patrick was made
captive by the seven sons of Fachmad, King of Britain, who are represented as making a raid
into Armorica. Jocelin declares that the capture was made by pirates. The Second, Third, and
Fourth "Lives" are unanimous in stating that the Saint was captured by the Irish Scots. St.
Patrick's own words in the Epistle to Coroticus, "Have I not tender mercy on that nation which
formerly took me captive?" leave no doubt as to his capture by the
Irish Scots.

Colgan endeavours to harmonise both accounts by suggesting that the sons of Fachmad were British
exiles in Ireland, who fought under the standard of King Niall when he invaded Armorica, and that
they may have been the actual captors of the Saint.

ALL THAT THE SECOND AND THIRD "LIVES" TESTIFY.

As the Second and Third "Lives of St. Patrick" are practically and almost verbally identical up
to the end of Section XL, the same translation up to that point will suffice for both.

"Patrick was born at Nemthur. He had a sister named Lupita, whose
relics are preserved at Armagh.

Patrick was born in the Field of Tents. It was called Campus Tabernaculorum because the Roman
army, at some time or other, pitched their tents there during the cold winter season.

"IV.--The boy, however, was reared at Nemthur. . . .

"XI.--This was the cause of his exile and arrival in Ireland: An army of Irish Scots embarked,
as usual, in their ships, and forming a large fleet sailed over to Britain, and brought back
from thence many captives and carried them to Ireland, the captives numbering altogether one
hundred of both sexes. Patrick was, as he himself testifies, in his sixteenth year at that
time."

The following addition is given in the Third "Life": "Patrick, who was also called Suchet, was sprung
from the British nation, and his country and the place where he was born was situated not far
from the sea. His father's name was 'Calburnius,' the son of a venerable man named Potitus;
but his mother, Conches by name, was the daughter of Dechusius. Both parents of this holy man
were devoted to religion."

Controversially speaking, neither of these two "Lives" are of any value. Nemthur is not identified
with Dumbarton, and it is not clearly stated whether the Irish fleet raided the island of Britain
or Armorican Britain, or whether St. Patrick was descended from the Island or Armorican Britons.
A recent writer lays much stress on the fact that the British word Tabern is used to denote
a tent field in the Second, Third, and Fourth "Lives," but the argument does not carry with
it much weight, for according to Camden the British and Gaulish Celts spoke the same language,
so that it is just as favourable to Armorica as to the island of Britain (" Britannia," vol. i.,
p. 11).

THE FOURTH "LIFE."

"SOME say that St. Patrick was of Jewish origin. After Our Lord had died on the Cross for the
sins of the human race, a Roman army, avenging His Passion, laid Judea waste, and the captive
Jews were dispersed amongst all the nations of the earth.

Some of their number settled down among the Armorican Britons, and
it is stated that it was from them that St. Patrick traced his origin."

This may be gathered from the book of Epistles composed by himself, "on account of our sins,
and because we had neither observed the precepts of the Lord nor obeyed His Commandments,
we are dispersed to the uttermost ends of the earth."

"But, however, it is more credible and more certain that he speaks of that dispersion into which
the Britons were driven by the Romans, in order that they might become possessed of the land
near the Tuscan Sea which is called Armorica. After that dispersion, therefore, his parents went
straight to Strath Clyde. There St. Patrick was conceived and born, his father being 'Kalburnius,'
and his mother Conchessa, as he testifies in the book of his Epistles: 'I am Patrick, the
son of Kalburnius, and Conchessa is my mother.' St. Patrick was, therefore, born in a town called
Nemthur, which signifies a heavenly tower. This town was situated in Campo Tabernise, which
is called the Field of Tents because, at one time, the Roman army pitched their tents there. In
the British tongue Campus Tabern is the same as Campus Tabernaculorum.

"XV.--But the first cause of his coming to Ireland, and the sequence of events which hurried
him there, are not to be passed over in silence. By the divine providence of God, it so happened
that in his tender years he should be led to that nation, so that in his youth he should learn
the language of the people, whose apostle he was afterwards destined to become. At that period
Irish fleets were accustomed to sail over to Britain for the sake of plunder, and to bring back
to Ireland whomsoever they made prisoners.

It chanced, therefore, that the venerated youth, with his sister, named Lupita, should be taken
captives amongst others. Some have written that the Saint at the time was but seven years of
age. It seems to me, however, more credible what he himself states:
'When I fell into captivity I was sixteen years of age.' He was taken
to Ireland and sold in the northern regions to four brothers, whom
he served with a simple and devout heart. On that account he was called
Cothraigh. But he had four names, for he received the name of Suchet
at baptism; he was called Magonius by Germanus, Bishop; lastly, when
he was elevated to the Episcopal dignity, he received his fourth name,
Patrick."

It is suggestive how the Armorican tradition seems to manifest
itself, either directly or indirectly, in nearly all the "Lives" of
the Saint which are considered the best; in St. Fiacc's, in the annotations
of the Scholiast, in the "Tripartite Life," in the Fourth "Life,"
and in the Fifth by Probus. In the Fourth "Life" it is stated that
both parents of the Saint were Armorican Britons, and that St. Patrick,
except for the accident of his place of birth, was an Armorican Briton.
The author of the Fourth "Life," moreover, calls Calphurnius and Conchessa
Armorican Britons, which serves to demonstrate that Armorica, even
in the early years of St. Patrick, fell under the name of Britannia,
and that its inhabitants were called Britons.

In this "Life" is to
be found the mistake of the Scholiast, and of the other "Lives" who
have adopted his suggestion, that Nemthur was the name of a town,
and not of a tower or district, as may be gathered from the history
of the tower itself.

The Second, Third, and Fourth "Lives" of the
Saint, however, "are filled with fables," according to Canon O'Hanlon.
"Their acts seem to have been either borrowed from one another, or
are copies of versions taken from the same source" ("Lives of the
Irish Saints," March 17th).

THE SIXTH "LIFE OF ST. PATRICK" BY JOCELIN.

"THERE
was a man named Calphurnius, the son of Potitus, a presbyter, by nation
a Briton, living in the village Taburnia (that is the Field of Tents),
near the town of Empthor, and his habitation was nigh unto the Irish
Sea. This man married a French damsel named Concuessa, niece of the
blessed Martin, Archbishop of Tours, and the damsel was elegant in
her form and in her manners, for, having been brought from France
with her elder sister into the northern parts of Britain, they were
sold at the command of her father. Calphurnius being pleased with
her manners, charmed with her attentions, and attracted by her beauty,
very much loved her, and from the state of serving maid in his household,
raised her to be his companion in wedlock. And her sister, having
been delivered unto another man, lived in the aforementioned town
of Empthor.

"And Calphurnius and his wife were just before God, walking
without offence in the justifications of the Lord, and they were eminent
in their birth, and in their faith, and in their hope, and in their
religion. And though in their outward habit and abiding they seemed
to serve under the yoke of Babylon, yet did they in their acts and
in their conversation show themselves citizens of Jerusalem. Therefore
out of the earth of their flesh, being freed from the tares of sin
and from the noxious weeds of vice by the ploughshare of evangelic
and apostolic learning, and being fruitful in the growth of all virtues,
did they, as the best and richest fruit, bring forth a son, whom,
when he had at the font put off the old man, they caused to be named
Patritius, as being the future father and patron of many nations;
of whom, even at his baptism, the God that is Three in One was pleased
by the sign of a threefold miracle to declare how pure a vessel of
election should he prove, and how devoted a worshipper of the Holy
Trinity.
"Being in the flame her voice never ceased repeating in a loud voice the holy name of Jesus,
and invoking without cease the saints of paradise, she gave up her spirit, bowing her head
and saying the name of Jesus in sign of the fervour of her faith." One of the Canons of Rouen,
standing sobbing in the crowd, said to another: "Would that my soul were in the same place
where the soul of that woman is at this moment"; which indeed is not very different from the
authorised saying of Pierre Morice in the prison. Guillaume Manchon, the reporter, he who wrote
superba responsio on his margin, and had written down every word of her long examination--his
occupation for three months,--says that he "never wept so much for anything that happened to
himself, and that for a whole month he could not recover his calm." This man adds a very characteristic
touch, to wit, that "with part of the pay which he had for the trial, he bought a missal, that
he might have a reason for praying for her." Jean Tressat, "secretary to the King of England"
(whatever that office may have been), went home from the execution crying out, "We are all
lost, for we have burned a saint." A priest, afterwards bishop, Jean Fabry, "did not believe
that there was any man who could restrain his tears."

The modern historians speak of the mockeries of the English, but none are visible in the record.
Indeed, the part of the English in it is extraordinarily diminished on investigation; they
are the supposed inspirers of the whole proceedings; they are believed to be continually pushing
on the inquisitors; still more, they are supposed to have bought all that large tribunal, the
sixty or seventy judges, among whom were the most learned and esteemed Doctors in France; but
of none of this is there any proof given. That they were anxious to procure Jeanne's condemnation
and death, is very certain. Not one among them believed in her sacred mission, almost all considered
her a sorceress, the most dangerous of evil influences, a witch who had brought shame and loss
to England by her incantations and evil spells. On that point there could be no doubt whatever.
She alone had stopped the progress of the invaders, and broken the charm of their invariable
success. But all that she had done had been in favour of Charles, who made no attempt to serve
or help her, and who had thwarted her plans, and hindered her work so long as it was possible
to do so, even when she was performing miracles for his sake. And Alençon, Dunois, La Hire,
where were they and all the knights? Two of them at least were at Louvins, within a day's march,
but never made a step to rescue her. We need not ask where were the statesmen and clergy on
the French side, for they were unfeignedly glad to have the burden of condemning her taken
from their hands. No one in her own country said a word or struck a blow for Jeanne. As for
the suborning of the University of Paris en masse, and all its best members in particular,
that is a general baseness in which it is impossible to believe. There is no appearance even
of any particular pressure put upon the judges. Jean de la Fontaine disappeared, we are told,
and no one ever knew what became of him: but it was from Cauchon he fled. And nothing seems
to have happened to the monks who attended the Maid to the scaffold, nor to the others who
sobbed about the pile. On the other side, the Doctors who condemned her were in no way persecuted
or troubled by the French authorities when the King came to his own. There was at the time
a universal tacit consent in France to all that was done at Rouen on the 31st of May, 1431.

One reason for this was not far to seek. We have perhaps already sufficiently dwelt upon it.
It was that France was not France at that dolorous moment. It was no unanimous nation repulsing
an invader. It was two at least, if not more countries, one of them frankly and sympathetically
attaching itself to the invader, almost as nearly allied to him in blood, and more nearly by
other bonds, than any tie existing between France and Burgundy. This does not account for the
hostile indifference of southern France and of the French monarch to Jeanne, who had delivered
them; but it accounts for the hostility of Paris and the adjacent provinces, and Normandy.
She was as much against them as against the English, and the national sentiment to which she,
a patriot before her age, appealed,--bidding not only the English go home, or fight and be
vanquished, which was their only alternative--but the Burgundians to be converted and to live
in peace with their brothers,--did not exist. Neither to Burgundians, Picards, or Normans was
the daughter of far Champagne a fellow countrywoman. [49] The victory over the Turks here commemorated
was won by Baffo in the service of the Borgia Pope, Alexander VI., some twenty-three years
before. This gives a special significance to the position in the picture of St. Peter, who, with
the keys at his feet, stands midway between the Bishop and the Virgin. We have seen Baffo in
one of Titian's earliest works (circa 1503) recommended to St. Peter
by Alexander VI. just before his departure for this same expedition.

[50] It has been impossible in the first section of these remarks upon the work of the master of
Cadore to go into the very important question of the drawings rightly and wrongly ascribed to him.
Some attempt will be made in the second section, to be entitled The Later Work of Titian,
to deal summarily with this branch of the subject, which has been placed on a more solid basis
since Giovanni Morelli disentangled the genuine landscape drawings of the master from those
of Domenico Campagnola, and furnished a firm basis for further study.

INDEX

"Alfonso d'Este and Laura Dianti" (Louvre) Altar-piece at Brescia "Annunciation, The" (Treviso)
"Annunciation, The" (Venice) "Aretino, Portrait of"

(Florence) "Ariosto, Portrait of" (Cobham Hall) "Assumption of the Virgin, The," "Bacchanal,
A," "Bacchus and Ariadne" (National Gallery), "Baptism of Christ, The" (Rome), "Battle of Cadore,
The" "Bella, La" (Florence) "Bishop of Paphos recommended by Alexander VI. to St. Peter, The" (Antwerp)

"Christ
at Emmaus" "Christ bearing the Cross" (Venice) "Christ between St. Andrew and St. Catherine"
(Venice) "Charles V. at Mühlberg" (Madrid) "Concert, A" (Florence) "Cornaro, Portrait of" (Castle
Howard) "Cristo della Moneta, Il" (Dresden)

"Death of St. Peter Martyr, The" "Diana and Actaeon" "Diana and Calisto"

"Entombment, The" (Louvre)

"Feast of the Gods, The" (Alnwick Castle) "Flora" (Florence) Fresco of St. Christopher in the Doge's
Palace Frescoes in the Scuola del Santo, Padua Frescoes on the Fondaco de' Tedeschi, Venice

"Herodias"
"Holy Family" (Bridgewater Gallery) "Holy Family with St. Catherine"
(National Gallery)

"Jupiter and Antiope" (Louvre)

"Madonna di Casa
Pesaro, The" (Venice) "Madonna di San Niccolò, The" (Rome) "Man, Portrait
of a" (Munich) "Man in Black, The" (Louvre) "Man of Sorrows, The"
(Venice) "Man with the Glove, The" (Louvre) "Medici, Portrait of Ippolito
de'"

"Noli me tangere" (National Gallery) "Nymph and Shepherd" (Vienna)

"Philip
II., Portrait of" "Pietà" (Milan)

"Rape of Europa, The"

"Sacred
and Profane Love" (Rome) "Sacred Conversation, A" (Chantilly) "Sacred
Conversation, A" (Florence) "St. Mark enthroned, with four other Saints"
(Venice) "St. Sebastian": see Altar-piece at Brescia

"Tambourine-Player,
The" The inference that any real recantation on Jeanne's part was then made, is untrue, and
not even asserted. She was deceived in respect to her deliverance, and felt it to the bottom
of her heart. It was to her the bitterness of death. But the flames of her burning showed her
the truth, and with her last breath she proclaimed her renewed conviction. The scene at the
stake would lose something of its greatness without that momentary cloud which weighed down
her troubled soul.

Twenty years after the martyrdom of Jeanne, long after he had, according to her prophecy, regained
Paris and all that had been lost, it became a danger to the King of France that it should be
possible to imagine that his kingdom had been recovered for him by means of sorcery; and accordingly
a great new trial was appointed to revise the decisions of the old. In the same palace of the
Archbishop at Rouen, which had witnessed so many scenes of the previous tragedy, the depositions
of witnesses collected with the minutest care, and which it had taken a long time to gather
from all quarters, were submitted for judgment, and a full and complete reversal of the condemnation
was given. The procès was a civil one, instituted (nominally) by the mother and brothers of
Jeanne, one of the latter being now a knight, Pierre de Lys, a gentleman of coat armour--against
the heirs and representatives of Cauchon, Bishop of Beauvais, and Lemaître, the Deputy Inquisitor--with
other persons chiefly concerned in the judgment. Some of these men were dead, some, wisely,
not to be found. The result was such a mass of testimony as put every incident of the life
of the Maid in the fullest light from her childhood to her death, and in consequence secured
a triumphant and full acquittal of herself and her name from every reproach. This remarkable
and indeed unique occurrence does not seem, however, to have roused any enthusiasm. Perhaps
France felt herself too guilty: perhaps the extraordinary calm of contemporary opinion which
was still too near the catastrophe to see it fully: perhaps that difficulty in the diffusion
of news which hindered the common knowledge of a trial--a thing too heavy to be blown upon
the winds,--while it promulgated the legend, a thing so much more light to carry: may be the
cause of this. You're warping." Such a painful experience might have been saved this distinguished
gentleman had his mother or caretaker not urged his standing too soon; and at the same time
had fed him on the proper food, so as to avoid "rickets." The ossification or hardening of
the bones of the legs continues all through childhood and is often
interfered with by improper feeding during the first two years of
life.

Urging the little people to stand too early is to be discouraged.
 The episode of the Pucelle in Michelet's
History of France touched the heart of the world, and remains one of the finest efforts of
history and the most popular picture of the saint. And perhaps, though so much less important
in point of art, the maiden work of another maiden of Orleans--the little statue of Jeanne,
so pure, so simple, so spiritual, made by the Princess Marie of that house, the daughter of
the race which the Maid held in visionary love, and which thus only has ever attempted any
return of that devotion--had its part in reawakening her name and memory. It fell again, however,
after the great work of Quicherat had finally given to the country the means of fully forming
its opinion on the subject which Fabre's translation, though unfortunately not literal and
adorned with modern decorations, was calculated to render popular. A great crop of statues
and some pictures not of any great artistic merit have since been dedicated to the memory of
the Maid: but yet the public enthusiasm has never risen above the tide mark of literary applause. 

P. 392.-E.

(1116) General Cope was tried afterwards for his behaviour in this action, and it appeared very
clearly, that the ministry, his inferior officers, and his troops, were greatly to blame; and that he
did all he could, so ill-directed, so ill-supplied, and so ill-obeyed.
(1117) Eldest son of the Earl of Wemyss.

(1118) James Drummond,
who would have been the fifth Earl of Perth, had it not been for the
attainder and outlawry under which his family laboured. Canonisation means to us, I presume, and even to a
great number of Catholics, simply the highest honour that can be paid to a holy and spotless
name. In that sense there is no distinction of nation, and the English as warmly as the French,
both being guilty towards her, and before God on her account--would welcome all honour that
could be paid to one who, more truly than any princess of the blood, is Jeanne of France, the
Maid, alone in her lofty humility and valour, and in everlasting fragrance of modesty and youth.

     (1) The writer must add that personally, as a Scot, she has
     no right to use this pronoun. Scotland is entirely guiltless
     of this crime. The Scots were fighting on the side of France
     through all these wars, a little perhaps for love of France,
     but much more out of natural hostility to the English. Nemthur
     was situated in the suburbs and close to the town of
     Bonaven. St. Fiacc gives the name of the district, but
     St. Patrick gives the name of the town near which he was
     born.
     

     Singularly enough Caligula's famous tower on the sea coast of
     Boulogne was called Turris Ordinis by the Romans, but
     Nemtor by the Gauls, as Hersart de la Villemarque clearly
     proves in his "Celtic Legend" (p. 213), and the tower itself
     has given its name to the locality where it once stood, which is
called even at the present time Tour d'Ordre--the French translation
of "Turris Ordinis."

The history of this tower, on account of its
close connection with the history of St. Patrick, cannot fail to be
interesting.

