THE BAD FAMILY

AND OTHER STORIES

MRS FENWICK

THE DUMPY BOOKS FOR CHILDREN

Selected by E. V. LUCAS, and each having End-papers specially designed by Mrs. FARMILOE

I. THE FLAMP, THE AMELIORATOR, and THE SCHOOLBOY'S APPRENTICE. Written by E. V. LUCAS

II. MRS. TURNER'S CAUTIONARY STORIES

III. THE BAD FAMILY. By Mrs. FENWICK

Other Volumes in the Series are in preparation

THE DUMPY BOOKS FOR CHILDREN.

NO. III. THE BAD FAMILY. BY MRS. FENWICK.

The Bad Family; & Other Stories

BY MRS. FENWICK

LONDON: GRANT RICHARDS 1898

CONTENTS

                                 PAGE

Introduction                     ix

The Bad Family                    1

The Good Family                  15

Foolish Fears                    29

The Broken Crutch                39

The Journal; Or, Birthday Gifts  45

The Basket of Plumbs             65

The Choice of Friends            75

Cousin James and Cousin Thomas   87

The Disasters of Impatience      97

The Deaf and Dumb Boy           109

Limby Lumpy                     119

The Oyster Patties              135

Introduction

Mrs. Fenwick, like Mrs. Turner (some of whose Cautionary Stories have already been published
in this series), lived and wrote at the beginning of this century. Mrs. Turner practised verse,
Mrs. Fenwick prose. I can tell nothing of Mrs. Fenwick's life, except that among her books
were Infantine Stories, the Life of Carlo, Mary and her Cat, Presents for Good Boys and Girls,
Rays from the Rainbow (an easy system of teaching grammar), and Lessons for Children; or, Rudiments
of Good Manners, Morals, and Humanity. It is from the last-named book that the first ten of
the following stories have been taken. It was a favourite work in its day, and not only was
it often reprinted in England, but was translated into French: for little French children,
it seems, need lessons too.

As for these Rudiments, although it was Mrs. Fenwick's purpose that they should lead to good
conduct, it would satisfy their present editor to know that they had amused. That is why they
are printed here, and also to show the kind of reading prepared for the childhood of our great-grandmothers
and great-grandfathers. In those days exaggeration was rather in favour with story-tellers;
and we therefore need not believe that there was ever a family quite so bad as the Bad Family
in this book, or a Good Family so good; or that Mrs. Loft (in 'The Basket of Plumbs') would
have bought fruit from a household down with fever; or that a boy of ten could write so well
as the hero of 'The Journal.' But after making allowances for exaggeration, we may take everything
else as truth. As I said, these stories are included in this series chiefly to provide entertainment;
but if they also have the use Mrs. Fenwick wished--if the misadventures of Frank Lawless keep
us from robbing orchards, and 'The Broken Crutch' leads to the befriending of weary and wooden-legged
sailors--why, so much the better.

The last two stories in this book, 'Limby Lumpy' and 'The Oyster Patties,' were not written
by Mrs. Fenwick; but they seem to fit in here rather well.

E. V. LUCAS.

October 1898.

The Bad Family

There is a certain street in a certain town (no matter for its name) in which there are two
handsome houses of equal size. The owners of these houses have each six children, and the neighbours
have named one the BAD FAMILY, and the other the GOOD FAMILY.

In the Bad Family there are three boys and three girls; and the servants, who are always much
teased and vexed when they live where there are naughty children, speak of them thus:--the
eldest they call FIGHTING HARRY, the second GREEDY GEORGE, and the youngest IDLE RICHARD; the
eldest girl is nicknamed CARELESS FANNY, the next LYING LUCY, and the youngest SELFISH SARAH.

MASTER HENRY indeed well deserves his title, for he thinks it a mighty fine thing to be a great
boxer, and takes great pride and pleasure in having a black eye or a bloody nose. This does
not proceed from courage; no, no: courage never seeks quarrels, and is only active to repel
insult, protect the injured, and conquer danger; but Harry would be one of the first to fly
from real danger, or to leave the helpless to shift for themselves. He knows that he is very
strong, and that few boys of his age can match him, so he picks quarrels on purpose to fight,
because his great strength and his constant practice make him almost sure to conquer. All his
schoolfellows hate him, for such a boy can neither have a good temper, a good heart, nor good
manners. It is a pity he should be sent to school, for learning is thrown away upon him; he
will be fit only to live with men that sweep the streets or drive carts and waggons, for with
such coarse and vulgar habits, gentlemen will not endure him in their company.

GEORGE, the second boy, is always thinking of eating and drinking. He follows the cook from
place to place to know what nice things she has got in her pantry. When there is any dainty
on the dinner-table, his greedy eyes are fixed on it from the moment he sits down till he is
helped, and then he grudges every morsel that any one else puts in his mouth. In his eagerness
to get more than his proper share, he crams great pieces into his mouth until he is almost
choked and the tears are forced from his eyes. He will get slily into the store-room and steal
honey, sugar, or raisins; and in the pantry he picks the edges of the tarts and pies, and does
a number of other mean tricks. When there is company at dinner, he watches the parlour-door
till they leave it, and before the servants have time to clear the table, he sips up all the
drops of wine that are left in the glasses, and will even eat the parings of apples and pears
that lie on the dessert plates. If he has an orange or a cake, he runs into some dirty hole
to eat it, for fear his brothers and sisters should ask for a piece. If he has any money given
him, he spends it all at once, and crams and eats till he can scarcely move.

This greedy boy is always watched and suspected. No one will trust him in a garden, for he
would eat till he made himself sick, or tear down the branches of the trees to get at the fruit.
Nor can he be allowed to pay any visits, for the manners of a glutton give great offence to
all well-bred people. He has a sallow, ugly look, and is always peeping and prying about, like
a beast watching for its prey.

IDLE RICHARD, the third son of the Bad Family, is a great dunce. Yet he is very capable of
learning well, if he chose to take the trouble, but he is fond of idleness and of nothing else.
In the morning when he is called, though he knows it is time to get up, he will lie still,
and after he has been called again and again, he is never ready in time for breakfast. At his
meals he lolls upon the table, or against the back of his chair, and is just as slow and drawling
in his manner of eating as in his learning. When he is sent to school, instead of looking at
his book, he is gazing all round the room, or cutting bits of stick with his knife; sometimes
he lays his head down on the desk and falls asleep, and then pretends to have the headache
to excuse his idleness. His master is obliged often to punish him, and then for an hour or
two he will learn very well, but next day he gets back to all his idle tricks, and does nothing;
so that he is far below many boys that are much younger than himself. When other children go
to play, he sits still or lies down upon the ground; he can take no pleasure, for he hates
the trouble of moving, and there he sits yawning and pining for want of something to do. When
he walks, he drags his feet along as if they were too heavy to lift up. His clothes are always
dirty, for he will not brush them; his eyes are dull and heavy; he looks like a clown and speaks
like a blockhead. Idle Richard is a burthen to himself, and scorned by everybody.

MISS FANNY has got the title of Careless, because she minds no one thing that she ought. If
she goes out to walk, she is sure to lose one of her gloves, or lets her bonnet blow off into
the mud, or steps into the middle of some filthy puddle, because she is staring about and not
minding which way she goes. At home, when she should go to work, her needle-book, or her thimble,
or her scissors cannot be found; though she has a work-basket to put these things in, they
are never in the right place.

At dinner she does not observe how her plate stands on the table, and perhaps her meat and
all the gravy tumble into her lap. If she has a glass of wine, she spills it on her frock;
if she hands a plate of bread and butter to any one, she is sure either to drop the plate,
or to let the bread and butter fall upon the carpet. She wears very coarse clothes, for she
cannot be trusted with good ones. At night when she undresses to go to bed, she throws her
frock on a chair or the ground, instead of folding it neatly up, so that it is tumbled and
not fit to put on the next morning. If she writes, she throws the ink about her clothes; if
she tears a hole in her frock, she does not take a needle and thread to mend it directly, but
pins it up; then perhaps the pin pricks her half a dozen times in an hour, and tears three
or four more holes in the frock. If she has a book lent to her, she will let it fall in the
dirt, or drop the grease of the candle upon the leaves. She is always a slattern and always
dirty; she is a disgrace to herself and a burthen to her friends.

What a shocking name the next is--LYING LUCY! It is dreadful to think that any one should deserve
to be so called, but this wicked little girl deserves it, for she has no sense of honour, and
seldom speaks the truth. Even when she does say what is true, on account of her having told
falsehoods so long, people know not how to believe her, for who can depend upon the word of
a LIAR? If she would forbear for a whole month to tell a lie, there would be hopes of her amendment,
and then her word might be taken. But till she leaves off this shameful practice, she must
expect to be shunned and pointed at with scorn wherever she goes.

SELFISH SARAH loves no one but herself, and no one loves her. She will not let her brothers
or sisters or any other child play with her toys, even if she is not using them. She hoards
up her playthings, and cannot amuse herself with them, for fear another should touch them.
If she has more sweet cake or fruit than she can eat, she puts it by, and lets it spoil and
get mouldy rather than give it away; or if she sees a poor child begging in the streets, without
shoes, stockings, or clothes to cover him, she will not part with a halfpenny to buy him a
bit of bread, though she is told that he is starving with hunger. She never assists any one,
nor is ever thankful or grateful for what is done for her. She covets everything she sees,
yet takes no real pleasure in anything.

The parents of these odious children never look happy, nor enjoy comfort. The brothers and
sisters never meet but to quarrel, so that the house is always in an uproar. All abuse each
other's vices, yet take no pains to cure their own faults. The servants hate them, the neighbours
despise them, and the house is shunned as though it had some dreadful distemper within. They
live without friends; for no prudent persons will suffer their children to visit where they
can learn nothing but wickedness and ill manners.

The Good Family

What a different picture the other house presents to our view! The parents of the Good Family
are always cheerful and happy; the children love each other and agree together; the servants
are content and eager to oblige, and visitors delight to come to the house, because they pass
their time there with both pleasure and profit.

MANLY EDWARD, the eldest son, is a fine youth, who makes himself the friend and protector of
his younger brothers and sisters. Edward has true courage, for he will meet danger to help
the helpless, to rescue the oppressed, or in defence of the injured; yet he tries to avoid
all quarrels, and is very often the peacemaker among those who are engaged in a dispute. His
manners are gentle and graceful. He shuns the company of the rude vulgar boys, yet insults
no one by seeming to hold them in contempt. It is not fine clothes or money that he pays respect
to, it is virtue and good manners; and if the poorest boy in the school has the most of these
good qualities, he gains the most of Manly Edward's love and esteem.

STUDIOUS ARTHUR, the second son of the Good Family, does not learn quickly, but what he wants
of that power he makes up by diligence. As he finds he cannot get his task by heart as fast
as some other boys, he therefore fixes his whole thoughts on his book; and no calls to go to
play, nor any sort of thing, can draw him from his lesson till he has learned it perfectly.
Arthur is seldom seen without a book in his hand; and if he goes out to walk, he puts one in
his pocket, to be ready if he should chance to have a few minutes to himself. He never wastes
any time, and by that means he gains a great deal of knowledge. He is so attentive that he
never forgets what he reads and learns. Arthur will, no doubt, become a very wise man, and
already he often finds the knowledge he has gained of great use to him. His parents commend
him, his friends admire him, and his schoolfellows respect him.

WELL-BRED CHARLES, the third son, is also a charming boy. He is greatly remarked for his perfect
good manners. He never forgets to behave with politeness wherever he is. In the company of
his parents and their friends he is attentive to supply the wants of every one. He listens
to the discourse, and when he is spoken to he answers at once in a lively, ready, and pleasant
manner, but is never forward and talkative. When he has a party of playfellows, his mirth is
not noisy and boisterous. He does not think, as some rude children do, that all play consists
in screaming, shouting, tearing clothes, and knocking things to pieces, but finds plenty of
sport for his little visitors without doing any of these things, and makes them as merry as
possible. When cakes or fruit are sent into the playroom, he helps his guests all round before
he touches any himself. He places them in the seats nearest the fire, or, in fine weather,
where they can see the most pleasant prospect. As good manners always arise from a good temper
and a kind heart which desires to make others happy, so they are sure to promote good-humour
and happiness. The play-parties of Charles, therefore, are never spoilt by disputes and quarrels.
His visitors come with delight, and leave him with regret.

WELL-BRED CHARLES is constantly attentive to the ease and comfort of those about him. He pays
great respect and deference to people who are old. He never uses coarse words nor bad language,
and always speaks civilly to servants. He does not enter the parlour with dirty hands and face,
nor ever greases his clothes, for he knows that dirty habits are offensive, disgusting things,
and therefore he carefully avoids them.

Some children put on their good manners with their best clothes, and think they need behave
well only before company; but the politeness of such children is stiff, awkward, and troublesome,
and they always forget themselves, and return to some of their vulgar habits, before they leave
the company. It is the constant practice of good manners, at all times and in all places, that
renders them easy, becoming, sweet and natural, like those of Well-bred Charles.

The daughters of this good and happy family are no less worthy of praise than the sons. The
eldest girl, whom we may call PATIENT EMMA, has the misfortune to suffer from illness. Sometimes
she has severe pain, yet she bears it with patience and fortitude. She even tries to hide what
she feels, that she may not afflict her kind parents; and the instant she has a little ease
she becomes as cheerful as any one. She submits without a murmur to take what medicines the
doctors prescribe for the cure of her illness. She is not so foolish as to expect to find a
pleasant taste in physic, but she expects that it will be of service to her; and she would
rather have a bitter taste in her mouth for a few moments, than endure days, weeks, and months
of pain and sickness. As peevish, fretful tempers often bring disease on the body, so a patient,
even temper not only lessens all suffering, but helps to cure the diseases of the body; Miss
Emma, therefore, will perhaps in a short time regain her health, and should such an event happen,
what joy it will give to all who know, pity, and admire this excellent little girl!

GENEROUS SUSAN thinks all day long how she can add to the happiness of others. It is her greatest
pleasure to relieve distress, to do good, and to promote the comforts of all around her. She
watches the looks of her parents, that she may fly to oblige them. If they are going out to
ride in the coach, and there is not room enough for all the children, she will give up her
place, that one of her brothers or sisters may go. She will at all times leave play, or decline
paying a visit, to attend on Emma, her sick sister. She sits whole hours by her bed-side to
watch her while she sleeps, and is careful to stir neither hand or foot, lest she should disturb
her slumbers. When awake, she reads to her, talks to her, or sings to her, if that seems most
to amuse her. She would gladly bear the pain herself, if it were possible so to relieve poor Emma.

When Susan has any money given to her, she does not treat herself with sweetmeats or toys,
but buys something that will be useful to her brothers or sisters. At other times she will
buy a pair of shoes for a poor child that goes bare-footed, or purchase a book for some little
boy or girl to learn to read in. Her mamma often gives her old frocks and gowns to bestow on
some distressed family, and then Susan works with all her might for several days, to mend and
make them up in the most useful manner: for she has been told that a poor woman who has two
or three children to take care of, and goes out to daily labour, has not time to work with
her needle, and perhaps does not know how to do it properly. When Susan has mended or made
three or four little frocks, and sees the children neatly dressed in them, she feels more delight
and pleasure than if she had twenty dolls of her own, clothed in silks and satins. Generous
Susan has the blessing of the poor and the love of all her family.

MERRY AGNES, the youngest child of the whole, is a fine, healthy, lively, sprightly, laughing
little girl, who feels no pain, and has no cause for sorrow. She is a kind of plaything for
her elder brothers and sisters, who all delight in her good-humour. They never tease, torment,
and try to put her out of temper, as some children do to those who are younger than themselves,
but they commend her goodness and strive to improve her. When they tell her not to do anything,
she obeys them at once: for she sees that they are all gay, smiling, happy children, because
they do what is right. If she wants to have what is not proper for her, she can bear to be
denied, and skips away just as merry as before. This little girl will become very clever, for
her brothers and sisters take pleasure in teaching her what they have been taught, and she
attends to their lessons, and improves by their advice. She knows that they are all good, and
she wishes to be like them.

It is a fine sight to see this Good Family all together: for among them there are no sour looks
or rude words, no murmurs, no complaints, or quarrels. No: all is kindness, peace, and happiness.

Foolish Fears

Mary Charlotte had a silly habit of screaming when she saw a spider, an earwig, a beetle, a
moth, or any kind of insect; and the sound of a mouse behind the wainscot of the room made
her suppose she should die with fright. The persons with whom she lived used to pity her for
being afraid, and that made her fond of the silly trick, so that she became worse daily, and
kept the house in a constant tumult and uproar: for she would make as much noise about the
approach of a poor insect not much larger than the head of a pin, as if she had seen half a
dozen hungry wolves coming with open jaws to devour her.

Mary Charlotte was once asked by Mrs. Wilson, a very good lady, to go with her into the country,
and Mary was much pleased at the thought of going to a house where there was a charming garden
and plenty of nice fruit. But the country is a sad place for people who encourage such foolish
fears, because one cannot walk in a garden or field without seeing numbers of harmless insects.

Mrs. Wilson, with her coach full of guests, arrived at her country-house just before dinner,
and as soon as that meal was over, Mary begged leave to go out into the shrubbery. It was a
charming place, and Mary was quite delighted with the clusters of roses and all the sweet-smelling
shrubs and flowers that seemed to perfume the air. But as she was tripping along, behold on
a sudden a frog hopped across the path. It was out of sight in a moment, yet Mary could go
no farther; she stood still and shrieked with terror. At the same instant she saw a slug creeping
upon her frock, and she now screamed in such a frantic manner that her cries reached the house.
The company rushed out of the dining parlour, and the servants out of the kitchen. Mrs. Wilson
was foremost, and in her haste to see what was the matter, she stumbled over a stone, and fell
with such violence against a tree, that it cut her head dreadfully; she was covered with a
stream of blood, and was taken up for dead.

It was soon known that the sight of a frog and a slug was all that ailed Miss Mary, and then
how angrily and scornfully did every one look at her, to think that her folly had been the
cause of such a terrible disaster. Mary Charlotte had not a bad heart, and when she heard Mrs.
Wilson's groans of pain while the doctors were dressing her wounds, she wept bitterly, and
sorely repented her silly unmeaning fears.

Mrs. Wilson was in great danger for many days, and Mary crept about the house in the most forlorn
manner, for no one took any notice of her, and she dared not go out in the garden, for fear
still of meeting some mighty monster of a snail, or something equally alarming. At length Mrs.
Wilson grew better, and then she sent for Mary to her room, and talked to her very kindly and
very wisely on the folly of fearing things which had not the power to hurt her, and which were
still more afraid of her than she could be of them--and with reason, since she was stronger,
and had far more power to hurt and give pain than a thousand frogs or mice had.

Mary promised that she would try to get the better of her fault, and she soon proved that her
promise was sincere.

One day she was with Mrs. Wilson in her chamber, and this good lady, being fatigued and sleepy,
gave Mary a book of pretty stories to divert her, and begged the little girl would make no
noise while she slept. Mrs. Wilson lay down on the bed, and Mary sat on a stool at some little
distance. All was as still as possible. After some time, as Mary chanced to lift her eyes from
her book, she saw not far from her a spider, who was spinning his web up and down from the
ceiling. She was just going to scream, when she thought of the mischief she had already done
to Mrs. Wilson, and she forbore. At the same moment, as she turned her head to the other side,
a little gray mouse sat on the table, nibbling some crumbs of sweet cake that had been left
there. Mary now trembled from head to foot, but she had so much power over herself that she
neither moved nor cried out. This effort, though it cost her some pain at first, did her good,
for in a minute or two she left off trembling. Her fear went away by degrees, and then she
could observe and wonder at the curious manner in which the spider spun long lines of thread
out of its own mouth, and made them fast to each other and the wall just as he pleased; and
could also admire the sleek coat and bright eyes of the little gray mouse on the table. Mary's
book slipped from her lap, and as she stooped to catch it, that it might not fall on the floor,
she was seen by the two visitors, who instantly fled away to their retreats in the greatest
fright possible. Neither spider nor gray mouse appeared again that day; and ever after Mary
Charlotte had courage and prudence, and took care not to do mischief to others, nor deprive
herself of pleasure, by the indulgence of foolish fears.

The Broken Crutch

One hot day in the month of June, a poor sunburnt lame sailor, with but one leg, was going
along the road, when his crutch broke in half, and he was forced to crawl on his hands and
knees to the side of the road, and sit down to wait till some coach or cart came by, whose
driver he would ask to take him up. The first that passed that way was a stage coach, but the
man who drove it was a surly fellow, and he would not help the sailor, as he thought he should
not be paid for it.

Soon after this the tired sailor fell fast asleep upon the ground, and though a thick shower
of rain came on, yet still he slept: for sailors when on board their ships have to bear all
sorts of weather.

When the wind blows, the waves of the sea often dash over the deck of the vessel and wet the
poor men to the skin while they are pulling the ropes and shifting the sails.

When the lame sailor awoke he found a boy's coat and waistcoat laid on his head and shoulders,
to keep him from being wet; and the boy sat by, in his shirt, trying to mend the broken crutch
with two pieces of wood and some strong twine. 'My good lad,' said the sailor, 'why did you
pull off your own clothes to keep me from being wet?' 'O,' said he, 'I do not mind the rain,
but I thought the large drops that fell on your face would awake you, and you must be sadly
tired to sleep so sound upon the bare ground. See, I have almost mended your crutch, which
I found broke; and if you can lean on me, and cross yonder field to my uncle's farmhouse, I
am sure he will get you a new crutch. Pray, do try to go there. I wish I was tall enough to
carry you on my back.'

The sailor looked at him with tears in his eyes, and said, 'When I went to sea five years ago,
I left a boy behind me, and if I should now find him such a good fellow as you seem to be,
I shall be as happy as the day is long, though I have lost my leg and must go on crutches all
the rest of my life.'

'What was your son's name?' the boy asked.

'Tom White,' said the sailor, 'and my name is John White.'

When the boy heard these names he jumped up, threw his arms round the sailor's neck, and said,
'My dear, dear father, I am Tom White, your own little boy.'

How great was the sailor's joy thus to meet his own child, and to find him so good to those
who wanted help! Tom had been taken care of by his uncle while his father was at sea, and the
sunburnt, lame sailor found a happy home in the farmhouse of his brother; and though he had
now a new crutch, he kept the broken one as long as he lived, and showed it to all strangers
who came to the farm, as a proof of the kind heart of his dear son Tom.

The Journal; or Birthday Gifts

It was the custom of Mr. Clayton to present gifts to his children on their birthdays, and his
gifts were of less or greater value, according to their industry, improvement, and good conduct
during the year. It was also the wish of Mr. Clayton that his eldest son and daughter should
each keep a journal of all their actions. He did not desire to see this journal himself, but
he advised them to read over at the end of each week what they had written, that the record
of what was good might incite them to other acts of virtue, and the history of their mistakes
and errors serve as a warning for the future.

This kind, indulgent father seldom had cause to punish his children; they were indeed very
good and docile children, always respecting the commands of their parents, and loving each
other with the true fondness of brothers and sisters.

One only of these children went to school, and that was the eldest boy, Laurence Clayton. The
others were instructed by a governess at home. Laurence was a fine boy, the hope and pride
of his family. For nine birthdays he had received gifts from the hand of his father as the
reward of his good conduct, and now his tenth birthday was approaching, and Mr. Clayton had
heard so pleasing an account of Laurence from his schoolmaster, that he said, beside the present
he meant to give him, he would on the birthday grant any favour Laurence should ask of him.

A week only was wanting to complete Laurence's tenth year. Company was invited, and the young
folks were all thinking and talking of the expected pleasures of that day--all but Laurence,
who became pensive and silent, shunned his brothers and sisters, and even the presence of his
father, to shut himself up in his own room; but, as he replied, when asked about his health,
that he was very well, it was supposed that he was busy at his studies, and they still prepared
for the birthday.

On the 24th of August Laurence was ten years old, and a finer morning than it proved was never
seen. The two families that were invited came to breakfast. All were assembled in the parlour,
and admiring a very handsome pair of globes, which, mounted on mahogany stands, were to be
presented to Laurence; when he entered the room, not dressed in the suit of clothes that had
been laid in his chamber, but in his oldest jacket, his cheeks quite pale, and his eyes red
and swelled with weeping. He turned his head away as he passed the globes, and, dropping on
his knees before his father, he said, 'O, sir, you promised to grant me a favour this day,
pray let it be your forgiveness! I know I do not deserve your pardon, but if you will forgive
me this once, I am sure I never, never can deceive you again.'

Mr. Clayton, shocked and surprised, desired to know what fault he had committed, when Laurence
took his journal-book from his pocket and gave it into his father's hand, saying, 'I am ashamed
to repeat what I have done, but it is written there, sir.' Mr. Clayton took the book, and told
Laurence to withdraw till he had read it. On opening the journal Mr. Clayton found that all
was regular down to the entry for the 2nd of August, which ran thus:--

Monday, August 2nd.--Being a school holiday, I went out with my father in a boat. He taught
me to steer the rudder, while he managed the oars. It was a happy day. We dined at Mr. Black's,
whose son showed me some fine drawings from busts of heathen gods, goddesses, and heroes; and
my aunt Eleanor, who was there, gave me five shillings to buy Baldwin's Pantheon, that I might
read the history of Jupiter, Juno, Mars, Minerva, Venus, Bacchus, Apollo, Hercules, and all
the rest of the Pagan deities. Coming home, my father praised me for behaving well. Indeed
it was a happy day.'

From the happy day Laurence had thus described, there was an entire blank in the journal; but
between the leaves was placed a written paper, from which Mr. Clayton read as follows:--

'August 23rd.--To-morrow is my birthday, and my father is preparing gifts for me, which he
thinks I deserve. My brothers and sisters are rejoicing, but I am wretched; when my father
smiles on me, I feel my cheeks burn, and my heart swells as if it would burst; and when he
calls me his dear good Laurence, something rises in my throat, and seems about to choke me.
If these are the feelings that belong to guilt, I wonder any one can bear the pain of being
wicked: for no headache or toothache ever gave me a quarter of the torment I have suffered
since I became a wicked boy. Oh, my dear, kind father, take pity on me, and this once forgive
me. I will tell you truly all I have done.

'On Tuesday, August 3rd, sir, I set out to go to school. It was the day after I had been so
happy with you in the boat and at Mr. Black's, and as I met William Thompson, I could not help
telling him what a pleasant day I had spent. "Oh, then," said he, "you are fond of the water;
I and two or three more are just going to take a little row, and you shall go with us." At
first I refused, but William told me I was too early for school, and as he was also going to
school, and promised to be back in time, I at last consented.

'Three dirty boys were waiting at the side of the river, and though I did not like their company,
I was then ashamed to go back, so we all jumped into a boat and rowed away. For some time we
went on very well; both wind and tide were in our favour, and it was quite easy to manage the boat.

'The fine day and the pleasant river soon made me forget school, till I heard some distant
clock strike twelve; then, distressed at what I had done, I insisted we should go back. But
it was very hard to row against wind and tide, and they began to quarrel and were going to
fight. I sprang up to snatch the oar from a boy who was going to strike another, and in suddenly
raising my arm I knocked his hat off into the river. It swam away, and as we were turning to
row after it, we dropped one of the oars, and trying to row with the other, we ran the boat
aground upon a bank of mud. There we were obliged to stay, for we could not force the boat
off, nor could we wade to the shore through that mud. I bore the blame of these misfortunes;
they all abused me sadly, and the boy whose hat was lost, cried and sobbed most bitterly: for,
he said, he belonged to a cruel master, and should be beaten almost to death; so at last, to
make him quiet, I promised to give him mine.

'Well, sir, there we stayed, and I heard the same clock strike one, two, three, and four. At
last, two men called to us from the opposite side of the river. They were the owners of the
boat we had taken away, and were in search of it. They got another boat, and came to us in
a great passion, swearing that if we did not pay them five shillings each for the day's work
we had hindered them of, and pay for the oar we had lost, they would take us before a justice
of the peace and have us sent to prison. William Thompson had no money in his pocket, but I
had the five shillings my Aunt Eleanor had given me the day before at Mr. Black's to buy the
Pantheon; that they took, but not being enough to satisfy their demand, they also took away
my satchel with all my school books, telling me where they lived, and that they would restore
it safe as soon as I brought them the rest of the money. The other boys were so poor and so
ragged, the men did not ask anything of them.

'It was near six o'clock when we got on shore, about the time I knew I should be expected home
from school. William Thompson went down on his knees to beg I would not tell what had happened,
promising at the same time to bring the money to release my books the next morning. Indeed
I was so much ashamed of having played truant thus, that I was glad enough to conceal it. The
boy whose hat I had knocked off into the river would not leave me till he had got mine, so
I was forced to slip in at the garden-gate and steal up the back stairs to my own room, that
I might not be seen to come home without my hat. I was now very hungry, yet afraid to show
myself; when I was called to tea, my legs trembled under me as I went downstairs. I met my
sister Molly in the hall, who gave me an apple, and then asked me what I had had for dinner
at school. I turned from her, for I knew not what to answer; but as soon as I got into the
parlour, you, sir, told me to bring you my Latin grammar. Then I was forced to answer, and
a lie seemed easier than the truth: so I said I had left my satchel and my books at school.
I could not play nor amuse myself any way all that evening, and when I took up my journal,
what had I to set down--that I had played truant, lost my hat and my money, and told my father
a lie? No, no, I could not bear to write all that.

'Next morning, sir, I had new troubles. I was forced to steal slyly out of the house, that
no one might see me put on my best hat, and when I got to William Thompson's, he had got no
money to give me. I dared not go to school without my books, so I went to seek the man that
had them. He was gone to his daily work, and we could not find him, and I waited and loitered
till he came home to his dinner. I begged and prayed for my books, and at last he gave them
up to me, making me promise I would bring him the money next day, or something that he could
sell for money, which if I did not do, he said he would come and declare the whole story to
you, sir. I got to school that day time enough for afternoon's lessons, and was forced to tell
another lie to my master, to excuse my not coming sooner.

'I had no dinner either that day; but the pain of hunger was nothing to the fear of being found
out. Well, sir, to tell all the worst at once, I have from time to time carried away, to pay
the man whose oar we had lost, my silver pen and pencil, my compasses, my pocket inkstand,
and that handsome bound set of Natural History you gave me on my last birthday. Then in going
to seek him, I have stayed away three more mornings from school. And my head has been so filled
with other thoughts that I have not minded my lessons as I used to do. I have lost my place
in my class twice, have been punished once, and my master threatens to make complaints to you,
sir, of the change in my conduct. To excuse wearing my best hat, I did also invent a wicked
lie of having lost my other at school.

'Alas! alas! how many sad things have I been guilty of since I first played truant! If I had
but confessed my fault that day, how many more I should have avoided! I have never known a
happy moment since, and if I could describe to my brothers and sisters the pain and grief I
have felt, I am sure they would never be as naughty as I have been.

'O, sir, I cannot bear to deceive you any longer, and if you will grant me your pardon, indeed,
indeed, I will try never to offend you more.'

It is not possible to express how great Mr. Clayton's surprise and sorrow was on perusing this
paper; yet, convinced by Laurence's candid confession of his faults that his penitence was
sincere, he consented to forgive him the past and restore him to his favour. Laurence knelt
at his father's feet, and while he kissed his parent's hand and bathed it in tears of gratitude,
he felt the first moment of pleasure he had known for three long weeks.

Though all were glad to see Laurence forgiven, no one could be merry; and it was the first
grave birthday that had ever been known in the family. The globes were covered up and sent
into Mr. Clayton's library: for though he could forgive, it would not have been right to have
rewarded Laurence, as if he had not done wrong. But that day twelvemonth came, and then Laurence
deserved the globes and the love and praise of every one for his diligence and goodness throughout
the year. Whenever he was tempted to do wrong, he remembered that one error often becomes the
source of many others, and carefully avoided committing the first fault. His journal was kept
faithfully, and all the days in it were happy days; and on his eleventh birthday Laurence could
play and dance with a light heart and a clear conscience.

The Basket of Plumbs[1]

A poor girl, whose face was pale and sickly, and who led a little ragged child by the hand,
came up one day to the door of a large house, and, seeing a boy standing there, said to him,
'Do, pray, sir, ask your mamma to buy these plumbs. There are four dozen in my basket.' George
Loft took the basket to his mother, who counted the plumbs, and finding them right in number
and that they were sound, good fruit, sent out to know the price. The girl asking more than
Mrs. Loft thought they were worth, she put the plumbs again into the basket, and told George
to carry them back, and say it did not suit her to buy them.

Now these plumbs were fresh picked from the tree; they had a fine bloom on them, and were very
tempting to the eye. George loved plumbs above all other fruit, and he walked very slowly from
the parlour with his eyes fixed on the basket. The longer he looked, the more he wished to
taste them. One plumb, he thought, would not be missed; and as he put his hand in to take that
one, two others lay close under his fingers. It was as easy to take three as one, and the three
plumbs were taken and put into his pocket. When he reached the hall door and gave the basket
back to the girl, his face was as red as a flame of fire, but she did not notice it, nor thought
of counting her plumbs; for how could she suppose any one in that house would be so mean as
to take from her little store!

It chanced that as the girl turned from the door, Mrs. Loft came to the parlour window, and,
seeing the girl look so ill, she felt sorry she had not bought the plumbs. Therefore, throwing
up the sash, she asked the cause of her sickly looks. The girl then told a sad story of distress:
she had been ill of a fever; her parents had caught the disease of her, and were now very bad
and not able to work for the support of their children. In the little garden of their cottage
a plumb-tree grew, and she had picked the ripe plumbs and had come out to sell them that she
might buy physic for her parents and food for herself and her hungry little sister. Mrs. Loft
paid the girl the full price for her plumbs, gave her wine to carry to her sick parents and
food for herself and the child, and bade her return the next day for more.

Soon after the grateful girl had left the house, Mrs. Loft, placing the fruit in her dessert-baskets,
found that, instead of forty-eight, there were only forty-five plumbs; and, far from thinking
her son had been guilty of the theft, she laid the blame on the girl, who she now thought had
tried to impose on her. It was not the loss of three plumbs that Mrs. Loft cared for, but the
want of an honest mind that gave her offence. She had meant to be a friend to the poor girl,
but now she began to doubt the truth of her story; for Mrs. Loft thought if she could impose
in one thing she might also in others. Deeming the girl therefore no longer worthy of her kindness,
she gave orders for her to be sent away when she came on the morrow.

George had heard the whole: first, the tale of distress, and then his mother's censure of the
blameless girl. He had not only taken from a poor, wretched creature a part of her little all,
but had been the means of bringing a foul reproach upon her, while her parents, who might have
been saved from greater distress by his mother's bounty, would now be left helpless, in sickness
and in sorrow. All this cruel mischief he had done for the sake of eating three plumbs--he,
too, who had never wanted food, clothes, nor anything a child need desire to possess. He felt
the bitter pangs of guilt, and the fruit, whose shape and bloom had looked so tempting, was
now as hateful as poison to the sight of George.

There was still a way left to make some amends: namely, to confess his fault to his mother.
It did require some courage to do this; and when a boy throws away his sense of honour, no
wonder his courage should forsake him. George could not resolve to disclose a crime to his
mother, which he thought she never would find out. The first day in each week he had sixpence
given him for pocket-money, and he laid a plan to save that money, and to bestow it for a month
to come on the girl. This, he thought, was doing even more than justice: for as her three plumbs
were only worth one penny, he should by this means give her two shillings for them, and save
his own credit with his mamma. He wished with all his heart he had never touched the plumbs;
but as he had done it, it seemed to him less painful to leave the poor girl to suffer the blame,
than to accuse himself.

With this plan of further deceit in his mind, George went to dinner; but before the cloth was
taken from the table he had reason enough to repent of his double error. Mrs. Loft, in paying
for the plumbs, had given a number of half-pence, among which, unseen by her, a shilling had
slipped. When the poor girl reached the cottage she found the shilling, and lost not a moment
in coming back to restore it to its right owner. Mrs. Loft well knew that she who could be
thus just in one instance must have an honest mind. Her doubts of the poor girl were at an
end, but no sooner did she cast her eyes on George, than she read, in the deep blush that spread
over his face, in his downcast look, and the trembling of his limbs, who was the guilty person.

Guilt not only fixes the stings of remorse within the bosom, but imprints its hateful mark
upon the outward form.

[1] The spelling is Mrs. Fenwick's.

The Choice of Friends

The moon was shining on a clear cold night, and it was near ten o'clock, and all the children
of the village of Newton, except one, were in bed and asleep. That one, whose name was Frank
Lawless, was above three miles from home, weeping with pain and fear, alone, forlorn, cold,
and wretched, with no shelter but a leafless hedge and no seat but a hard stone; while his
father and mother were running wildly about the fields and lanes, not knowing what had become
of their naughty boy.

Frank Lawless had been playing truant that day, and was met by his father with a number of
bad boys, to whom he ought not at any time to have spoken. They were the children of brickmakers,
and most likely they had never been taught what was right; so that if they said wicked words,
told lies, and took things which did not belong to them, one could scarcely wonder at it; but
that Frank Lawless, who had the means of knowing the value of good conduct and good manners,
should choose such boys for his friends and playfellows, was indeed most strange. Yet thus
it was; their shouting, laughing, and vulgar mirth pleased Frank. They had also a great share
of cunning, and found the way to manage him, so as to get from him what they wanted to have.
When they told Frank that he was very handsome and very clever, and that it was a shame so
fine a boy should be forced to go to school if he did not like it, he was silly enough to be
pleased, and gave them in return his playthings and his money; nay, he would even take sugar,
cakes, fruit, and sweetmeats from his mother's store-room to bestow on these ill-chosen friends;
and their false pretence of love for him made him quite careless of gaining the real love of
his father and mother.

On meeting his son in the midst of the brickmakers' children, Mr. Lawless[2] was very angry,
and, taking him home by force, he gave him a severe reproof, and then locked him up in his
chamber. Frank, who had lately grown very sullen and froward, was far from being sorry for
his fault, and said to himself that his father was both cross and cruel, and wished to prevent
his being happy. With these wicked thoughts in his head, he began to contrive how to make his
escape; and the window not being very high above the ground, and having a vine growing up to
it, whose branches would serve as a sort of ladder, he got out, reached the ground, and passing
unseen through the garden-gate, ran with all his speed till he came up to the boys, who were
still at the cruel sport of robbing birds'-nests in the lane where he had left them.

But he did not seem half as welcome to them now as in the morning, when he had brought a pocket
full of apples, and as he said he was come to live with them, and should never go home again,
their manner was quite changed. One took away his hat and another his shoes. They cut sticks
to make a bonfire, and, having got a great pile, they made Frank carry it. The weight was too
much for him, and when he let it fall, they gave him hard words and still harder blows. He
now began to find that the service of the wicked is by no means so easy as to obey the commands
of the good.

While Frank Lawless was toiling under his heavy load of sticks, the boys were laying a plan
to rob an orchard. It was the autumn season of the year, and all the fruit of the orchard was
gone, except the pears of one tree, which, as it stood very near the dwelling-house of the
owner of the orchard, these boys had been afraid to climb. Now having Frank Lawless in their
power, they thought of making him, in the dusk of the evening, commit the theft and run all
the hazard, while they stayed in safety by the hedge, ready to receive the stolen fruit. Frank,
dreading what might happen to him in the daring attempt, begged and prayed them not to force
him there; but he had made himself a slave to hard task-masters, and they cuffed and kicked
him, till, to escape from their hands, he climbed the tree.

Scarcely had Frank pulled half-a-dozen pears, when his false friends heard the farmer who owned
the orchard come singing up the lane: and, to save themselves from being thought to have any
concern with it, they began to pelt Frank with stones, and cry aloud--'See, see, there is a
boy robbing Farmer Wright's pear-tree.' Frank got down as quickly as he could, but not soon
enough to escape the angry farmer, who gave him a most severe horse-whipping, while those who
had brought him into this sad scrape stood laughing, hooting, and clapping their hands. It
was useless to try to excuse himself; he had been seen in the tree, the pears were found in
his pocket, and the farmer, after whipping him without mercy, pushed him out of the orchard
and bade him be gone.

Smarting now with pain, and almost blinded by his tears, he ran to get away from the false
and cruel boys who were making sport of what they had caused him to suffer, when one, still
more wicked than the rest, threw a great stone after him, which, hitting his ankle-bone, gave
him such extreme torture that he sank on the ground not able to proceed a step farther. The
boys made off in alarm at what they had done, and Frank, in terror and pain, sat sobbing on
a stone till he was found by his father, who had been searching for him in the greatest distress.

His father took him home, warmed and fed him and healed his bruises, though after such extreme
bad conduct, he could not esteem and caress him like a good child. It was happy for Frank Lawless
that he took the warning of that day. He had gained nothing but shame, pain, and sorrow by
his choice of wicked friends, and from that time he chose with more wisdom. Good conduct brought
him back to his father's favour, and now at ten o'clock at night, when the moon and stars were
shining in the sky, and the air was cold and frosty, Frank Lawless was always snug in bed,
like the rest of the good children of the little village of Newton.[3]

[2] One drawback to bringing Frank's father into the story is that he, in spite of his character,
has to be called Lawless too.

[3] There is one error in this story which perhaps it is worth while to point out. Birds'-nesting
and orchard-robbing are not in season together.

Cousin James and Cousin Thomas

James Brown was born at a farmhouse. He had not seen a town or a city when he was ten years old.

James Brown rose from his bed at six in the morning during summer. The men and maids of a farmhouse
rise much sooner than that hour, and go to their daily work. Some yoke the oxen to the plough,
some bring the horses in from the field, some mend the hedges, some manure the land, some sow
seed in the ground, and some plant young trees. Those who have the care of the sheep, and who
are called shepherds, take their flocks from the fold and lead them to their pasture on the
hills, or in the green meadows by the running brook. The maids meanwhile haste to milk the
cows, then churn the butter, put the cheese into the cheese-press, clean their dairy, and feed
the pigs, geese, turkeys, ducks, and chickens. James Brown did not work in the fields, so when
he rose from his bed, his first care was to wash his face and hands, to comb and brush his
hair; and when these things were done, and he had said his morning prayers, he went with his
father about the farm or weeded the garden. Garden work was very proper for a boy of his age
and size.

James Brown had a cousin, named Thomas, and Thomas Brown once came to pay James a visit. The
two boys were very glad to see each other, and Thomas told James of the famous city of London,
where he lived. He spoke of the spacious paved streets, crowded all day by throngs of people,
and lighted at night by rows, on each side of the way, of glass lamps. He told him of the fine
toy-shops, where all kinds of playthings for children are sold: such as bats, balls, kites,
marbles, tops, drums, trumpets, whips, wheelbarrows, shuttles, dolls, and baby-houses. And
of other great shops where linens, muslins, silks, laces, and ribbons fill the windows, and
make quite a gay picture to attract the passers-by. He described also the noble buildings and
the great river Thames, with its fine arched bridges, built of stone. He spoke or the immense
number of boats, barges, and vessels that sail and row upon the Thames, and of the great ships
that lie at anchor there, which bring stores of goods from all parts of the world. He told
him of the King's palace and the Queen's palace, of the park and the canal, with the stately
swans that are seen swimming on it.

Nor did he forget to describe Saint Paul's Church, with its fine choir, its lofty dome and
cupola, and its curious whispering gallery, where a whisper breathed to the wall on one side
is carried round by the echo, and the words are heard distinctly on the opposite side of the
gallery. He spoke also of Westminster Abbey, that fine old Gothic building which contains a
great number of monuments, erected there to keep alive the remembrance of the actions of great
and wise men.

He told James likewise of the Tower of London, which is always guarded by soldiers, and in
one part of which he had seen lions, tigers, a wolf, a spotted panther, a white Greenland bear,
and other wild beasts, with many sorts of monkeys.[4]

Thomas Brown talked very fast on these subjects, and as James, who had never seen anything
of the kind, was quite silent, and seemed as much surprised as pleased with all that he heard,
Thomas began to think his cousin was but a dull, stupid sort of boy. But the next morning,
when they went out into the fields, he found that James had as much knowledge as himself, though
not of the same kind. Thomas knew not wheat from barley, nor oats from rye; nor did he know
the oak tree from the elm, nor the ash from the willow. He had heard that bread was made from
corn, but he had never seen it threshed in a barn from the stalks, nor had he ever seen a mill
grinding it into flour. He knew nothing of the manner of making and baking bread, of brewing
malt and hops into beer, or of the churning of butter. Nor did he even know that the skins
of cows, calves, bulls, horses, sheep, and goats were made into leather.

James Brown perfectly knew these, and many other things of the same nature, and he willingly
taught his cousin to understand some of the arts that belong to the practice of husbandry.

These friendly and observing boys, after this time, met always once a year, and they were eager
in their separate stations to acquire knowledge, that they might impart it to each other at
the end of the twelvemonth. So that Thomas, while living in a crowded city, gained a knowledge
of farming and all that relates to a country life; and James, though dwelling a hundred miles
from London, knew all the curious things that it contained.

[4] These, it is sad to say, have now gone. Beyond a venerable raven, the Tower has no live
stock. To-day Thomas would describe the Zoo instead.

The Disasters of Impatience

On the day that Mr. Daleham removed from his town residence to his new house in the country
there was much bustle and business in the family. The servants were all employed in unpacking
and arranging chairs, tables, sofas, and sideboards in their proper places. Some men were putting
up beds, while others were hanging window-curtains and nailing down carpets. The only idle
persons in the house were Arnold and Isabel, and they could find nothing to do but to skip
from room to room, ask questions, admire their new dwelling-house, and talk of the pleasure
they should receive in a visit their father was engaged to make that day to Mr. Morton, his
intimate friend, who lived about one mile and a half distant.

So desirous were Arnold and Isabel of seeing Morton Park, or rather perhaps of eating some
of the fine grapes and melons which they had heard grew in Mr. Morton's hot-house, that the
morning seemed to be the length of the whole day. When people are without employment, time
hangs heavily on their hands, and minutes will appear to be as long as hours. Half a dozen
times in the course of the morning these children ran to the door of the library, to ask their
father when he would be ready to go, and though he was engaged sorting papers and arranging
his books, they did not forbear their troublesome inquiries till he was quite angry with them.

At length, however, the joyful tidings came to Arnold and Isabel that they were to dress directly,
as their father would be ready to set out in half an hour. As the day was very fine, and the
coachman's assistance was useful to the other servants busied in disposing the furniture in
the various apartments, Mr. Daleham chose to walk to Morton Park; but after he had dressed,
and the half-hour had elapsed, he still had orders to give that detained him.

Arnold and Isabel meanwhile were standing at the hall door, almost wild with their impatience
to be gone; and at last Arnold proposed to his sister that they should go on first, as their
papa could soon overtake them; and Isabel eagerly ran to ask the housekeeper whether they must
take the right or the left-hand road. The housekeeper was busy with a basket of china, some
of which had been broken in the carriage; and as her thoughts were fixed on the fragments of
the china, she scarcely attended to the nature of Isabel's question, and said hastily that
the right-hand road led to Morton Park; and so it did, but that was the coach road, and Mr.
Daleham meant to go a much nearer and cleaner way, upon a raised path across some pleasant meadows.

No sooner had Isabel received the housekeeper's reply than away they went, and in their eagerness
to reach Morton Park, they did not at first observe that the lane was very dirty; but at last
some large splashes of mud on Isabel's clean frock attracted Arnold's notice, and he then perceived
that his own white stockings and nankeen trousers were in the same dirty state. What was now
to be done? They both felt that it was highly improper to go to a gentleman's house in such
a condition; but then Arnold said that his father must know that the road was dirty after so
much rain as they had had lately, and as he meant to walk, he supposed their getting a few
splashes was of no consequence. Isabel agreed with this mode of reasoning, and on they went,
expecting every moment to hear their father's steps behind them.

The lane now became wider and more open to the beams of the sun, which had dried the pathway;
but though they were somewhat out of the mud, the heat of the sun was so intense they knew
not how to bear it, and they walked as fast as they could in order to get to some shady place.
While they were panting with heat, they suddenly came to a stream that ran directly across
the road, and it had no bridge over it, because foot passengers rarely came that way.

They were now in the greatest distress. To stand still in the full burning sun was dreadful,
and to go back was equally fatiguing. There was no place to sit down in that part of the road,
but on the opposite side of the stream three large oak trees were growing, and formed a pleasant
shade over a green bank. Isabel, greatly tired, and almost fainting with heat, wished she could
get to the shady bank; so did Arnold, and he said he could take off his shoes and stockings,
and carry his sister through the water on his back. This plan was settled; and they agreed
that, when they were over the stream, they would wait on the bank for their papa, and endeavour
to rub off upon the grass the clots of mud that stuck to their shoes. But either Arnold was
not so strong as he had supposed he was, or Isabel, having her brother's shoes and stockings
to carry in her hand, did not hold fast round his neck, for just as they were in the middle
of the stream, his foot slipped, he staggered, fell, and down went brother and sister at once
into the pool.

Both scrambled up in a moment, and neither had suffered more injury than being completely bathed
in the water. With streaming hair and dripping garments they reached the bank; but when Isabel
saw that the ribbons of her new straw bonnet were spoiled, she began to cry and accuse her
brother of having thrown her down on purpose, which so provoked the young gentleman, that he
said it was all owing to her clumsiness, and at the same time he shook the sleeves of his jacket,
from which he was wringing the wet, in her face. Isabel's anger increasing at this, she rudely
gave her brother a severe box on the ear. A scuffle now ensued, which caused a second tumble,
and this fall being on the rough gravel, Isabel's face was scratched by the sharp pebbles,
and Arnold's elbow sadly cut by a large flint stone.

The smart of these wounds cooled their passions; they thought no more of fighting, and were
wiping away the blood, and looking with grief and dismay at their wet, dirty clothes, when
a servant came up who had been sent in pursuit of them.

Mr. Daleham was not far behind. He had been told that Arnold and Isabel were gone before him,
and was much alarmed at not finding them in the field-path. He had therefore returned the same
way to search for them; he ordered the servant to conduct them home, and told them that their
silly impatience had spoiled their pleasure, as it was not possible for them now to appear
at Morton Park.

Mr. Daleham then hastened on, for fear Mr. Morton's dinner should wait for him; and Arnold
and Isabel, forlorn, wet, draggled, and dirty, were led back to their own house. They passed
a dismal afternoon, lamenting their folly and imprudence; and next morning they heard that
there were not only plenty of grapes, melons, peaches, and filberts on Mr. Morton's table,
but that also a very merry party of children were assembled there, who danced on the lawn till
the dusk of evening approached, and then played at blindman's buff in the great hall.

The Deaf and Dumb Boy

'Now, my dear boy and girl,' said their aunt to Charles and Helen Laurie, 'you are come to
stay a whole fortnight with me, and we must take care not to mis-spend our time, for not all
the art of man can restore one day that is lost. You, Charles, shall practise your drawing
while Helen works, and then while I hear Helen spell and read, you may write. Each day of our
lives should be made some good use of; and while we are young, and have health and strength,
we ought to learn all those things which we may wish to know when we are grown old.'

Charles and Helen Laurie now ran in search of their books, which were soon found, as they were
laid in the right place; and then they sat down to their tasks, glad to please their aunt,
and quite certain that to learn to be wise and good was the best thing in the world.

At the hour of noon, when the clock had struck twelve, their aunt told them to leave their
books, put on their hats, and go out to walk with her. They went through some fields, and down
a pretty lane, and in the hedges on each side were tall oak, elm, and poplar trees, that made
the lane look like a grove, and kept them from the rays of the sun. At length they came to
a small, neat, white house that stood on a green lawn, and had bushes of lilac blossoms before
the windows, with a large fish-pond at the end of it. The house had rails before it, and Charles
and Helen went with their aunt through a gate that was made of the tools that men work with
in the fields, such as a rake, a spade, a hoe, and a scythe.

In the house they saw a fine-looking boy of ten years of age, with light-brown hair, hazel
eyes, and cheeks as red as a rose. He came up to Charles and Helen, and shook hands with them,
and seemed joyous at seeing them, but did not say a word. They thought it strange that he did
not speak to them; and at last Charles said to him, 'Your lawn would be a good place to play
at trap-ball on, if it were not for the fish-pond that is so near it. Do you play at trap-ball,
sir?'

The boy, whose name was Jackson, put his hand to his mouth, shook his head, got up from his
chair, went for a slate, wrote on it, and gave it to Charles, who read these words: 'I cannot
speak to you. I do not hear what you say to me. I am a poor deaf and dumb boy, but I shall
be glad to please you, now you have been so kind as to come to see me. Pray write down on this
slate what you wish me to do.'

Charles took the slate, and when Helen read the words that were written on it, her eyes were
full of tears, to think that such a sweet boy should be deaf and dumb. But Charles hung his
head, for Jackson wrote so fine a hand, that he did not like to show that he could not perform
as well. Helen knew what Charles was thinking of, for she had heard him found fault with, and
had seen him write when he did not take pains to learn to write a fine hand; so she went to
the hall door and made a sign to Jackson, as much as to say they would like to go out.

Jackson led them round the lawn to the fish-pond, and that they might see the fish, he threw
in some pieces of bread to make the fish jump up to catch the bread in their mouths. He next
took them to the back of the house to show them the farm-yard; there they saw cocks and hens
on the rubbish heap, ducks and geese dipping or swimming in the pond, pigs grunting, cows,
calves, and a pet lamb, who, as soon as he saw them, came out of a barn and ran up to Jackson,
that he might stroke and play with him; but he was full of tricks, and when Charles or Helen
went near him he strove to butt them with his young horns. He would not eat out of their hands,
but he took all that Jackson gave him. In the same barn that the lamb came out of, were a goat
and two young kids. The goat, the kids, the lamb, the calves, all were fond of Jackson, for
he had a kind heart and would not hurt the smallest insect.

Charles and Helen stayed that day to dine with Jackson, of whom they grew more and more fond
each moment that they were with him. He was a boy of a sweet, gentle temper, and won the kindness
of all who came to his house. He drew as well as he wrote, and knew all the things that a deaf
and dumb boy could learn. He had a box of tools, and had made a bird-cage and a neat desk to
write on. It is a sad thing to be deaf and dumb, for much of what boys learn at school, and
which it is right to know, cannot be taught to a deaf and dumb child.

Charles told his aunt Laurie, as they went home at night, that when he had grown to be a man
he would love Jackson, and try to be of use to him, since blind or deaf and dumb men must want
some one to guide and take care of them.

It is a sad thing not to see, or not to speak and hear; so that all boys and girls who have
their sight and speech should be glad to make the best use of them. They should, while they
are young, do what they are told by their friends is right to be done, and then when they grow
up they can be of great use in the world. A fool, a dunce, or a bad man does harm and not good
in the world.

Limby Lumpy;

Or, the Boy who was Spoiled by his Mamma[5]

I

Limby Lumpy was the only son of his mamma. His father was called the 'Pavior's Assistant';
for he was so large and heavy, that when he used to walk through the streets the men who were
ramming the stones down with a large wooden rammer would say, 'Please to walk over these stones,
sir.' And then the men would get a rest.

Limby was born on the 1st of April; I do not know how long ago; but, before he came into the
world, such preparations were made. There was a beautiful cradle; and a bunch of coral, with
bells on it; and lots of little caps; and a fine satin hat; and tops and bottoms for pap; and
two nurses to take care of him. He was, too, to have a little chaise, when he grew big enough;
after that, he was to have a donkey, and then a pony. In short, he was to have the moon for
a plaything, if it could be got; and, as to the stars, he would have had them, if they had
not been too high to reach.

Limby made a rare to-do when he was a little baby. But he never was a little baby--he was always
a big baby; nay, he was a big baby till the day of his death.

'Baby Big,' his mamma used to call him; he was 'a noble baby,' said his aunt; he was 'a sweet
baby,' said old Mrs. Tomkins, the nurse; he was 'a dear baby,' said his papa,--and so he was,
for he cost a good deal. He was 'a darling baby,' said his aunt, by the mother's side; 'there
never was such a fine child,' said everybody, before the parents; when they were at another
place they called him 'a great, ugly, fat child.'

Limby was almost as broad as he was long. He had what some people called an open countenance;
that is, one as broad as a full moon. He had what his mamma called beautiful auburn locks,
but what other people said were carroty; not before the mother, of course.

Limby had a flattish nose and a widish mouth, and his eyes were a little out of the right line.
Poor little dear, he could not help that, and therefore it was not right to laugh at him.

Everybody, however, laughed to see him eat his pap, for he would not be fed with the patent
silver pap-spoon which his father bought him; but used to lay himself flat on his back, and
seize the pap-boat with both hands, and never leave go of it till its contents were fairly
in his dear little stomach.

So Limby grew bigger and bigger every day, till at last he could scarcely draw his breath,
and was very ill; so his mother sent for three apothecaries and two physicians, who looked
at him, and told his mamma there were no hopes: the poor child was dying of over-feeding. The
physicians, however, prescribed for him--a dose of castor oil.

His mamma attempted to give him the castor oil; but Limby, although he liked tops and bottoms,
and cordial, and pap, and sweetbread, and oysters, and other things nicely dished up, had no
fancy for castor oil, and struggled, and kicked, and fought every time his nurse or mamma attempted
to give it him.

'Limby, my darling boy,' said his mamma, 'my sweet cherub, my only dearest, do take its oily
poily--there's a ducky, deary--and it shall ride in a coachy poachy.'

'O! the dear baby,' said the nurse, 'take it for nursey. It will take it for nursey--that it will.'

The nurse had got the oil in a silver medicine spoon, so contrived that if you could get it
into the child's mouth the medicine must go down. Limby, however, took care that no spoon should
go into his mouth; and when the nurse tried the experiment for the nineteenth time, gave a
plunge and a kick, and sent the spoon up to the ceiling, knocked off nurse's spectacles, upset
the table on which all the bottles and glasses were, and came down whack on the floor.

His mother picked him up, clasped him to her breast, and almost smothered him with kisses.
'O! my dear boy,' said she, 'it shan't take the nasty oil--it won't take it, the darling; naughty
nurse to hurt baby: it shall not take nasty physic'; and then she kissed him again.

Poor Limby, although only two years old, knew what he was at--he was trying to get the master
of his mamma; he felt he had gained his point, and gave another kick and a squall, at the same
time planted a blow on his mother's eye.

'Dear little creature,' said she, 'he is in a state of high convulsions and fever--he will
never recover.'

But Limby did recover, and in a few days was running about the house, and the master of it;
there was nobody to be considered, nobody to be consulted, nobody to be attended to, but Limby
Lumpy.

II

Limby grew up big and strong; he had everything his own way. One day, when he was at dinner
with his father and mother, perched upon a double chair, with his silver knife and fork, and
silver mug to drink from, he amused himself by playing drums on his plate with the mug.

'Don't make that noise, Limby, my dear,' said his father. 'Dear little lamb,' said his mother,
'let him amuse himself. Limby, have some pudding?'

'No; Limby no pudding'--drum! drum! drum!

A piece of pudding was, however, put on Limby's plate, but he kept on drumming as before. At
last he drummed the bottom of the mug into the soft pudding, to which it stuck, and by which
means it was scattered all over the carpet.

'Limby, my darling,' said his mother; and the servant was called to wipe Limby's mug and pick
the pudding up from the floor. Limby would not have his mug wiped, and floundered about, and
upset the cruet-stand and the mustard on the table-cloth.

'O! Limby Lumpy; naughty boy,' said his father.

'Don't speak so cross to the child; he is but a child,' said his mother; 'I don't like to hear
you speak so cross to the child.'

'I tell you what it is,' said his father, 'I think the boy does as he likes; but I don't want
to interfere.'

Limby now sat still, resolving what to do next. He was not hungry, having been stuffed with
a large piece of pound cake about an hour before dinner; but he wanted something to do, and
could not sit still.

Presently a saddle of mutton was brought on the table. When Limby saw this he set up a crow
of delight. 'Limby ride,' said he, 'Limby ride'; and rose up in his chair, as if to reach the dish.

'Yes, my ducky, it shall have some mutton,' said his mamma; and immediately gave him a slice,
cut up into small morsels. That was not it. Limby pushed that on the floor, and cried out,
'Limby on meat! Limby on meat!'

His mamma could not think what he meant. At last, however, his father recollected that he had
been in the habit of giving him a ride occasionally, first on his foot, sometimes on the scroll
end of the sofa, at other times on the top of the easy chair. Once he put him on a dog, and
more than once on the saddle; in short, he had been in the habit of perching him on various
things; and now Limby, hearing this was a saddle of mutton, wanted to take a ride on it.

'Limby on--Limby ride on bone,' said the child, in a whimper.

'Did you ever hear?' said the father.

'What an extraordinary child!' said the mother; 'how clever to know it was like a saddle--the
little dear. No, no, Limby--grease frock, Limby.'

But Limby cared nothing about a greasy frock, not he--he was used enough to that; and therefore
roared out more lustily for a ride on the mutton.

'Did you ever know such a child? What a dear, determined spirit!'

'He is a child of an uncommon mind,' said his mother. 'Limby, dear--Limby, dear--silence! silence!'

The truth was, Limby made such a roaring, that neither father nor mother could get their dinners,
and scarcely knew whether they were eating beef or mutton.

'It is impossible to let him ride on the mutton,' said his father: 'quite impossible!'

'Well, but you might just put him astride the dish, just to satisfy him; you can take care
his legs or clothes do not go into the gravy.'

'Anything for a quiet life,' said the father. 'What does Limby want?--Limby ride?'

'Limby on bone!--Limby on meat!'

'Shall I put him across?' said Mr. Lumpy.

'Just for one moment,' said his mamma: 'it won't hurt the mutton.'

The father rose, and took Limby from his chair, and, with the greatest caution, held his son's
legs astride, so that they might hang on each side of the dish without touching it; 'just to
satisfy him,' as he said, 'that they might dine in quiet,' and was about to withdraw him from
it immediately.

But Limby was not to be cheated in that way, he wished to feel the saddle under him, and accordingly
forced himself down upon it; but feeling it rather warmer than was agreeable, started, and
lost his balance, and fell down among the dishes, soused in melted butter, cauliflower, and
gravy--floundering, and kicking, and screaming, to the detriment of glasses, jugs, dishes,
and everything else on the table.

'My child! my child!' said his mamma; 'O! save my child!'

She snatched him up, and pressed his begreased garments close to the bosom of her best silk gown.

Neither father nor mother wanted any more dinner after this. As to Limby, he was as frisky
afterwards as if nothing had happened; and, about half an hour from the time of this disaster,
cried for his dinner.

[5] This story and the one which follows it are not by Mrs. Fenwick. 'Limby Lumpy' is from
The Holiday Book.

The Oyster Patties

There was once a little boy, who perhaps might have been a good little fellow if his friends
had taken pains to make him so, but I do not know how it was, instead of teaching him to be
good, they gave him everything he cried for; so, whenever he wished to have anything, he had
only to cry; and if he did not get it directly, he cried louder and louder till at last he
got it. By this means Alfred was not only very naughty but very unhappy; he was crying from
morning till night; he had no pleasure in anything; he was in everybody's way, and nobody liked
to be with him. Well, one day his mamma thought she would give him a day of pleasure, and make
him very happy indeed, so she told him he should have a feast, and dine under the great cedar
tree that stood upon the lawn, and that his cousins should be invited to dine with him, and
that he should have whatever he chose for his dinner. So she rang the bell, and she told the
servants to take out tables and chairs and to lay the cloth upon the table under the tree;
and she ordered her two footmen to be ready to wait upon him. She desired the butler to tell
the cook to prepare the dinner, and to get all sorts of nice dishes for the feast; but she
said to Alfred, 'What shall you like best of all, my dear boy?' So Alfred tried to think of
something that he had never had before, and he recollected that one day he had heard a lady
say, who was dining with his papa and mamma, that the oyster patties were the best she had
ever eaten. Now Alfred had never tasted oyster patties, so he said he would have oyster patties
for dinner. 'Oyster patties, my dear boy? You cannot have oyster patties at this time of the
year, there are no oysters to be had,' his mamma said to him; 'try, love, to think of something
else.'

But naughty Alfred said, 'No, I can think of nothing else,' so the cook was sent for, and desired
to think of something that he might like as well. The cook proposed first a currant pie, then
a barberry pie, or a codlin pie with custard. 'No, no, no,' said Alfred, shaking his head.
'Or a strawberry tart, my sweet boy; or apricot jam?' said his mamma, in a soothing tone of voice.

But Alfred said, 'No, mamma, no, I don't like strawberries; I don't like apricot jam; I want
oysters.'

'But you cannot have oysters, my little master,' said the cook. 'But I will have oysters,'
said the little boy, 'and you shan't say that I can't have them, shall she, mamma?' and he
began to scream and to cry. 'Do not cry, my sweet soul,' said his mamma, 'and we will see what
we can do; dry up your tears, my little man, and come with me, and the cook, I daresay, will
be able to get some oysters before dinner; it is a long time to dinner, you know, and I have
some pretty toys for you upstairs if you will come with me till dinner is ready.' So she took
the little crying boy by the hand and led him up to her room, and she whispered to the cook
as she passed not to say anything more about it now, and that she hoped he would forget the
oyster patties by the time dinner was ready. In the meantime she took all the pains she could
to amuse and please him, and as fast as he grew tired of one toy she brought out another. At
last, after some hours, she gave him a beautiful toy for which she had paid fifteen shillings.
It was a sand toy of a woman sitting at a spinning wheel, and when it was turned up the little
figure began spinning away, and the wheel turned round and round as fast as if the woman who
turned it had been alive. Alfred wanted to see how it was done, but, instead of going to his
mother to ask her if she would be so good as to explain it to him, he began pulling it to pieces
to look behind it. For some time he was very busy, and he had just succeeded in opening the
large box at the back of the figure when all the sand that was in it came pouring out upon
the floor, and when he tried to make the little woman spin again, he found she would not do
it any more; she could not, for it was the sand dropping down that had made her move before.

Now do you know that Alfred was so very silly that he began to be angry even with the toy,
and he said, 'Spin, I say; spin directly,' and then he shook it very hard, but in vain; the
little hands did not move, and the wheel stood still. So then he was very angry indeed, and,
setting up a loud cry, he threw the toy to the other end of the room. Just at this very moment
the servant opened the door and said that dinner was ready and that Alfred's cousins were arrived.

'Come, my dear child, you are tired of your toys, I see,' said mamma, 'so come to dinner, darling;
it is all ready, under the tree.' So away they went, leaving the room all strewed with toys,
with broken pieces, and the sand all spilt in a heap upon the floor. When they went under the
dark spreading branches of the fine old cedar tree, there they saw the table covered with dishes
and garnished with flowers; there were chickens, and ham, and tongue, and lobsters, besides
tarts, and custards, and jellies, and cakes, and cream, and I do not know how many nice things
besides; there was Alfred's high chair at the head of the table, and he was soon seated in
it, as master of the feast, with his mother sitting by him, his cousins opposite to him, his
nurse standing on the other side, and the two footmen waiting besides. As soon as his cousins
were helped to what they liked best, his mamma said, 'What will you eat first, Alfred, my love?
A wing of a chicken?' 'No,' said Alfred, pushing it away. 'A slice of ham, darling?' said nurse.
'No,' said Alfred, in a louder tone. 'A little bit of lobster, my dear?' 'No, no,' replied
the naughty boy. 'Well, what will you have then?' said his mother, who was almost tired of
him. 'I will have oyster patties,' said he. 'That is the only thing you cannot have, my love,
you know, so do not think of it any more, but taste a bit of this pie; I am sure you will like it.'

'You said I should have oyster patties by dinner time,' said Alfred, 'and so I will have nothing
else.' 'I am sorry you are such a sad naughty child,' said his mother; 'I thought you would
have been so pleased with all these nice things to eat.' 'They are not nice,' said the child,
who was not at all grateful for all that his mother had done, but was now in such a passion,
that he took the piece of currant tart, which his nurse again offered to him, and squeezing
up as much as his two little hands could hold, he threw it at his nurse, and stained her nice
white handkerchief and apron with the red juice. Just at this moment his papa came into the
garden, and walked up to the table. 'What is all this?' said he. 'Alfred, you seem to be a
very naughty boy, indeed; and I must tell you, sir, I shall allow this no longer; get down
from your chair, sir, and beg your nurse's pardon.' Alfred had hardly ever heard his father
speak so before, and he felt so frightened, that he left off crying, and did as he was bid.
Then his father took him by the hand, and led him away. His mother said she was sure he would
now be good, and eat the currant tart. But his papa said, 'No, no, it is now too late, he must
come with me'; so he led him away, without saying another word. He took him into the village,
and he stopped at the door of a poor cottage.

'May we come in?' said his father. 'Oh yes, and welcome,' said a poor woman, who was standing
at a table with a saucepan in her hand. 'What are you doing, my good woman?' 'Only putting
out the children's supper, your honour.' 'And what have you got for their supper?' 'Only some
potatoes, please you, sir, but they be nicely boiled, and here come the hungry boys! They are
coming in from their work, and they will soon make an end of them, I warrant.'

As she said these words, in came John, and William, and Thomas, all with rosy cheeks and smiling
faces. They sat down, one on a wooden stool, one on a broken chair, and one on the corner of
the table, and they all began to eat the potatoes very heartily. But Alfred's papa said, 'Stop,
my good boys, do not eat any more, but come with me.' The boys stared, but their mother told
them to do as they were bid, so they left off eating, and followed the gentleman. Alfred and
his papa walked on till they arrived once more under the cedar tree in the garden, and there
was the fine feast, all standing just as they had left it, for Alfred's cousins were gone away,
and his mamma would not have the dinner taken away, because she hoped that Alfred would come
back to it. 'Now, boys,' said the gentleman, 'you may all sit down to this table, and eat whatever
you like.'

John, William, and Thomas sat down as quickly as they could, and began to devour the chickens
and tarts, and all the good things at a great rate; and Alfred, who now began to be very hungry,
would gladly have been one of the party; but when he was going to sit down, his papa said,
'No, sir, this feast is not for you; there is nothing here that you like to eat, you know;
so you will wait upon these boys, if you please, who seem as if they would find plenty that
they will like.' Alfred at this began to cry again, and said he wanted to go to his mamma;
but his father did not mind his crying, and said he should not go to his mamma again till he
was quite a good boy. 'So now, sir, hand this bread to John, and now take a clean plate to
Thomas, and now stand ready to carry this custard to William. There now, wait till they have
all done.' It was of no use now to cry or scream; he was obliged to do it all. When the boys
had quite finished their supper, they went home, and Alfred was led by his father into the
house. Before he went to bed, a cup of milk and water and a piece of brown bread were put before
him, and his father said, 'That is your supper, Alfred.' Alfred began to cry again, and said
he did not want such a supper as that. 'Very well,' said his father, 'then go to bed without,
and it shall be saved for your breakfast.' Alfred cried and screamed louder than ever; so his
father ordered the maid to put him to bed. When he was in bed, he thought his mamma would come
and see him, and bring him something nice, and he lay awake a long while; but she did not come,
and he cried and cried till at last he fell asleep.

In the morning when he awoke he was so hungry he could hardly wait to be dressed, but asked
for his breakfast every minute. When he saw the maid bring in the brown bread again without
any butter, and some milk and water, he was very near crying again; but he thought if he did
he should perhaps lose his breakfast as he had lost his supper; so he checked his tears, and
ate a hearty meal.

'Well,' said his father, who came into the room just as he was eating the last bit of bread.
'I am glad to see the little boy who could not yesterday find anything good enough for him
at a feast eating such simple fare as this so heartily. Come, Alfred, now you may come to your
dear mamma.'

THE END

Printed by R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, Edinburgh

One obvious misspelling is corrected. All other archaic variants and inconsistencies of spelling,
capitalization, and punctuation are retained from the original.

Redundant story title pages have been removed. Page numbers in the table of contents match
the original.

The page scans came from the Children's Book Collection of the Library of the University of
California, Los Angeles.

