Both French and British soon realized that the fall of Louisbourg was only a question of time.
But time was everything to both. The British were anxious to take Louisbourg and then sail
up to Quebec and take it by a sudden attack while Montcalm was engaged in fighting Abercromby's
army on Lake Champlain. The French, of course, were anxious to hold out long enough to prevent
this; and Drucour, their commandant at Louisbourg, was just the man for their purpose. His
wife, too, was as brave as he. The man bowed to the floor, and slowly moved away backwards.
With every gradual step Felix saw his natural shape return. The rays
of the autumn sun ceased to light up that mysterious apparition, and
only his attorney's humble clerk stood before Felix.
On June 18, just before Wolfe's lighthouse batteries were ready to open fire, Madame Drucour
set sail in the venturesome Echo, a little French man-of-war that was making a dash for it,
in the hope of carrying the news to Quebec. But after a gallant fight the Echo had to haul
down her colours to the Juno and the Sutherland. We shall hear more of the Sutherland at the
supreme moment of Wolfe's career.

Nothing French, not even a single man, could now get into or out of Louisbourg. But Drucour
still kept the flag up, and sent out parties at night to harass his assailants. One of these
surprised a British post, killed Lord Dundonald who commanded it, and retired safely after
being almost cut off by British reinforcements. "The daisy's for simplicity and unaffected air."

Tennyson
has made the daisy a subject of one of his most unsatisfactory poems. In "Maud," he writes:

"Her
feet have touched the meadows And left the daisies rosy."

To Wordsworth, the poet of nature, the daisy seems perfectly intelligible. Scattered throughout
the lowly places, with meekness it seems to shed beauty over its surroundings, and compensate
for gaudy vesture by cheerful contentment.

* * * * *

COLERIDGE AS A PLAGIARIST.

SOMETHING CHILDISH BUT VERY NATURAL.

WRITTEN IN GERMANY 1798-99.

But in my sleep to you I fly: I'm always with you in my sleep! The world is all one's own. But
then one wakes, and where am I? All, all alone.

Thus much for Coleridge.

"This," says Mr. Bayard Taylor, in the Notes
to his translation of Faust, "this is an old song of the people of
Germany. Herder published it in his Volkslieder, in 1779, but it was
no doubt familiar to Goethe in his childhood. The original melody,
to which it is still sung, is as simple and sweet as the words."

AMONG
THE PERUVIANS.

The extremes of civilization and barbarism are nearer
together in those countries which the Spaniards have wrested from
their native inhabitants, than in any other portion of the globe.
Before other European races, aboriginal tribes, even the fiercest,
gradually disappear. They hold their own before the descendants of
the conquistadores, who conquered the New World only to be conquered
by it. Out of Spain the Spaniard deteriorates, and nowhere so much
as in South America.

After Rochefort Wolfe had become a marked man. After Louisbourg he became an Imperial hero.
The only other the Army had yet produced in this war was Lord Howe, who had been killed in
a skirmish just before Ticonderoga. Wolfe knew Howe well, admired him exceedingly, and called
him 'the noblest Englishman that has appeared in my time, and the best soldier in the army.'
He would have served under him gladly. But Howe--young, ardent, gallant, yet profound--was
dead; and the hopes of discerning judges were centred on Wolfe. The war had not been going
well, and this victory at Louisbourg was the first that the British people could really rejoice
over with all their heart.

The British colonies went wild with delight. Halifax had a state ball, at which Wolfe danced
to his heart's content; while his unofficial partners thought themselves the luckiest girls
in all America to be asked by the hero of Louisbourg. Boston and Philadelphia had large bonfires
and many fireworks. The chief people of New York attended a gala dinner. Every church had special
thanksgivings.

In England the excitement was just as great, and Wolfe's name and fame flew from lip to lip
all over the country. Parliament passed special votes of thanks. Medals were struck to celebrate
the event. The king stood on his palace steps to receive the captured colours, which were carried
through London in triumph by the Guards and the Household Brigade. And Pitt, the greatest--and,
in a certain sense, the only--British statesman who has ever managed people, parliament, government,
navy, and army, all together, in a world-wide Imperial war--Pitt, the eagle-eyed and lion-hearted,
at once marked Wolfe down again for higher promotion and, this time, for the command of an
army of his own. And ever since the Empire Year of 1759 the world has known that Pitt was right.

CHAPTER VI

QUEBEC 1759

In October 1758 Wolfe sailed from Halifax for England with Boscawen and very nearly saw a naval
battle off Land's End with the French fleet returning to France from Quebec. The enemy, however,
slipped away in the dark. On November 1 he landed at Portsmouth. He had been made full colonel
of a new regiment, the 67th Foot (Hampshires), and before going home to London he set off to
see it at Salisbury. [Footnote: Ten years later a Russian general saw this regiment at Minorca
and was loud in his praise of its all-round excellence, when Wolfe's successor in the colonelcy,
Sir James Campbell, at once said: 'The only merit due to me is the strictness with which I
have followed the system introduced by the hero of Quebec.'] Wolfe's old regiment, the 20th
(Lancashire Fusiliers), was now in Germany, fighting under the command of Prince Ferdinand
of Brunswick, and was soon to win more laurels at Minden, the first of the three great British
victories of 1759--Minden, Quebec, and Quiberon.

