After the speaking, and just before the close, Mr. Whitman reverted to Colonel Ingersoll's
tribute to his poems, pronouncing it the capsheaf of all commendation that he had ever receiv'd.
Then, his mind still dwelling upon the Colonel's religious doubts, he went on to say that what
he himself had in his mind when he wrote "Leaves of Grass" was not only to depict American
life, as it existed, and to show the triumphs of science, and the poetry in common things,
and the full of an individual democratic humanity, for the aggregate, but also to show that
there was behind all something which rounded and completed it. "For what," he ask'd, "would
this life be without immortality? It would be as a locomotive, the greatest triumph of modern
science, with no train to draw after it. If the spiritual is not behind the material, to what
purpose is the material? What is this world without a further Divine purpose in it all?"

Colonel Ingersoll repeated his former argument in reply. 

The little man stood up in the feeling of his dignity, stretched out long to the tip to reach his
hand the ear of his opponent, for he seemed to feel like, by a to avenge shock when he saw that
his effort was fruitless, he began to curse (And indeed! The others were not guilty), that the
tent shook their dispute. As did all at once the door of the tent, and there entered a tall, stately
man, young and beautiful as a Persian prince, and his clothes and his weapons were out of a handsomely
Dagger and a gleaming sword, small and simple, but his serious eyes, his whole Decency commanded respect,
without fear instilling.

"Who's who dares to start in my tent dispute that?" he shouted to startled. For a time there
was silence, and finally told one of those who brought Mustapha had, as it had gone. Since it appeared
that face, "the Strong", as they called him, to redden with anger. "When I had you ever put
in my place, Hassan?" he shouted with terrible voice to the little ones. This drew down on themselves
for fear that He looked even smaller than before, and crept to the Zelttuere. A reasonable
Passage of the powerful force that he flew in a big strange leap to Zelttuere.

When the boy was gone, the three men Mustapha were before the Lord of the tent, who had meanwhile
put on the pads. "We bring what you catch us commanded you. "

That looked to the prisoners for a long time and then said: "Pasha of Sulieika your own Some
will tell you why you're standing in front Orbasan. "

When my brother heard this, he prostrated himself before that, and answered: "O Lord, you seem!
mistaken to be. I am a poor unfortunate, but not the Bassa, you are looking for! "

Everyone was amazed at this speech in the tent. The Lord of the tent said, "It can give you little
help you adjust to;. because I want to show the people who know you
well "

He gave orders to drive up Zuleima. They brought an old woman in the tent that the question though
it were my brother did not recognize the Pasha of Sulieika replied: "Yes!" And they swear it
by the grave of the Prophet, it was the Bassa and no other.

"You see, pathetic how your library has become water!" anger began the Strong. "You are too
miserable to me than that I should sully my good dagger with thy blood, but to the tail of
my horse I will bind up, tomorrow when the sun rises, and the woods
hunting with you until it departs behind the hills of Sulieika!

"

Since sank my poor brother of courage.

"This is the bane of my father's hard, for me ignominious death drives, "he cried, weeping," and
you are lost, sweet sister, you too, Zoraida! "

"Your adjustment will help anything," said one of the robbers by giving him the hands on Standing
back the band, "do, that you come out of the tent: for the strong bite in the Lips and looks
after his dagger. If you still want to live a night, come on!

"

As the robbers just wanted to take my brother out of the tent, they met three other the drifting
a prisoner himself. They entered with him. "We bring the Bassa, as you have commanded us, "said the
prisoner, and carried the cushion of the strong.

When the prisoner was led there, my brother had the opportunity to look at him, and he himself
fell to the resemblance that this man had with him, but he was darker in the face and had a
beard blacker.

The strong one seemed very surprised by the appearance of the second captive. "Who of you is
because the rights? "he said, as he soon my brother, soon saw the other man.

"If you mean the Pasha of Sulieika" said in a proud tone of the prisoners, "who am I saw "The
strong one it long with his serious, terrible look;! then waved it in silence, carry away the
Bassa.

When this was done, he went up to my brother, cut his ties with the dagger and beckoned to him
to put up beside him on the pad. "I'm sorry, stranger," he said, "I gave up for that monster,
but write it a strange coincidence of the sky to the straight up in the hour that the demise
of that wicked was consecrated in the Hands of my brothers led. "My brother asked him for the
only favor him again equal to have to travel further, because any
delay can be fatal to him.

The Strong asked After his hasty, and when he had Mustapha told all about talking him that this
night to stay in his tent, he and his horse are needed rest; The following day he would show him
a way of him after a half days Balsora bring - My brother agreed to this, was served admirably
and slept sweetly until morning the tent of the predator.

When he awoke, he found himself all alone in the tent, heard before the curtain of the tent, but
He spoke several voices together, the Lord of the tent and the small black-brown anzugehoeren
man appeared. He listened a bit and listened to his horror that the Small strongly urged the other
to kill the stranger, because, when he released would they all could tell.

Mustapha noticed immediately that it was the little grudge because he was the cause that he
yesterday treatment was that bad, the Strong seemed to reflect a few moments. "No," said it,
"he is my host, and the hospitality is sacred to me, and he does not look like me as if to
tell us. "

As he spoke, he beat back the curtain and entered. "Peace be with you, Mustapha!" he said, "let
us taste the morning draft, and then brace yourself to go!" He handed my brother a cup of sherbet,
and when they had been drinking, it puts the cart before the horse, and truly, with a lighter heart
than he had come, Mustapha swung into the saddle. They soon had the tents in the back and then
hit a wide path in the woods led. The strong man told my brother that those Bassa, which they caught
in the hunt The accused had promised them, they safely tolerate in its territory, a few Weeks
but he had caught one of their bravest men and most terrible to the Torture hanged. He had let him
lie in wait for a long time now, and still he has to . Die Mustapha did not venture any objection,
for he was glad, even with to have escaped unscathed.

At the end of the forest was given by Strong in his horse, described by my brother the way, offered
his hand in farewell and said, "Mustapha, you're in a strange way,
the host Orbasan become the robber, and I will not ask you not to
reveal what you see and have heard of.

You have unjustly endured agony, and I am you, compensations guilty. Take this dagger as a souvenir,
and so you need help, just send it to me, and I will hasten to assist you. This bag but maybe
you can travel to your need.

" My brother thanked him for his generosity, he took the dagger, but he hit the bag. But Orbasan
pressed his hand once more, let the bag fall to the ground and blew up with Sturmeseile in
the forest.

As Mustapha saw that he still will not catch everything , Can he dismounted to pick up the bag
and was shocked at the size of his host's Generosity, for the bag
contained a quantity of gold.

He thanked Allah for his safety, recommended him the noble robbers in his cheerful courage,
grace, and then moved further on his way to Balsora.

Lezah silent and looked Achmed, the old merchant, questioningly. "No, if it is so," said this,
"I like to improve my opinion of Orbasan, because truly, your brother has to He acted nice. "

"He has done such a good Moslem," Muley said, "but I hope you did your story therefore not closed,
for, as seems to me, we are all eager to hear more, what happened to your brother, whether
he has freed Fatima, your sister, and the beautiful Zoraida. "

"When I say not so bored, I tell you further," said Lezah, "because the Story of my brother, however,
adventurous and wonderful. "

At noon on the seventh day after his departure, Mustapha pulled into the gates of Balsora.
Once he was staying in a caravanserai, he asked when the slave market, the annual would be held
here, at first. But he got the fright response that he had two days to late. It regretted
his delay and told him that he had lost much; because even on the last day of the market two female
slaves had arrived from as high beauty, that the eyes of all the buyers had pulled up. We had
to tidy it torn and beaten, and they were indeed sold at such high prices, that it only her
present Lord did not cause chafing. He asked for closer these two, and he had no doubt that they
were the unfortunates who he was looking for. He also learned that the man who bought two, forty
hours of live Balsora Thiuli and hot-Kos, a noble, rich, but even elderly man who used to Kapudan Bassa
Mr. Gross was the, now have but to accept his collect riches to rest.

Mustapha has always wanted to sit down again on horseback to the Thiuli-Kos, hardly one day could
have the lead, nachzueilen. But when he remembered how he as an individual The mighty men wear nothing
but travelers still less could he get hold of its prey, he mused on a different plan and had
found him soon. The confusion with the Bassa of Sulieika that he would be almost as dangerous
now, gave him the idea to go under that name in the house of Thiuli-Kos,
and so an attempt to rescue the two unfortunate girls to venture.

He therefore hired some of the servants and horses, with Orbasan him money in good stead admirably
managed, and his servants, pretty dresses , and went on his way to the castle Thiuli. After
five days he was in the vicinity this castle come. It was a beautiful plane and was surrounded
by high walls all around, which very little has been dominated by the buildings. When Mustapha
had arrived, stained his black hair and beard, his face but he rubbed
the juice from a plant that he a brownish color was quite as she had
had that Bassa.

He then sent a his servant in the palace and left the name of the Pasha of Sulieika ask for
the night. The servant soon returned, and with him four beautiful dressed slaves Mustaphas horse
took the reins and leads into the courtyard. There she helped himself from his horse, and
four others led him up a wide marble staircase to Thiuli.

He was an old, funny fellow, received my brother and respectfully let him all the best, what could
be a cook to prepare, align.

After dinner brought the conversation to Mustapha and according to the new slaves, and Thiuli
praised her beauty and complained only that they are always so sad, but he thought this would
be soon. My brother was very pleased with this reception, and lay down with the most beautiful
hopes down to rest.

He might have slept for about an hour because he was awakened by the light of a lamp, the dazzling
fell on his eye. When he arose he believed to dream more, because before him that little, black-brown
guy was from Orbasan tent, a lamp in his hand, his wide mouth to an anti-smile warped. Mustapha
pinched himself in the arm, pulled located on the nose in order to convince himself, whether
he was awake, but the appearance was as before.

"What do you want on my bed?" Mustapha said, as he recovers from his surprise had.

"You endeavored not so, sir!" said the little man. "I guess well, so your come here. I, too,
was your face value still well remembered, but truly, if I'm not the Pasha would have to be hanged
with his own hand, you would give me a deceived. But now I'm here to make a question. "

"Above all, say how you come here," he said Mustapha full of anger that he was betrayed.

"I will tell you," he answered, "I could not with the strong longitudinal tolerated, so I fled,
but you, Mustapha, were actually the cause of our dispute, and in return you must give me your
sister to wife, and I want you to help escape be, do not you give them, I go to my new master and
tell him some of the New Bassa. "

Mustapha was beside himself with fear and anger, now that he is in the safe goal of his wishes
believed that this wretch should come and defeat, it was only a means
to his plan was able to save: He had to kill the little monster.

With one spring he went so out of the Bette on the little ones, but the latter, who might
have suspected something Such left, the lamp noticed that she goes
out, and arose in the dark by murderous screaming for help.

Now good advice was expensive and the girl he had to retire for the moment and only own life to
think, so he went to the window to see if he does not arise could.
It was quite a depth to the ground, and stood on the other hand, a
high Wall that was about to rise. Musing he stood at the window, he
heard many voices to approach his room, they were already at the door,
he took his despair Dagger and his clothes and jumped out the window.
The case was hard, but he felt, that he had broken a limb, that's
why he jumped up and ran to the wall that enclosed the yard, rose,
to the astonishment of his pursuers, up and found himself in the open.
He fled to he came to a small forest, where he threw down exhausted.
Here he considered what to be done.

His horses and his servant, he
was forced to leave in the lurch, but his money that he the belt was
wearing, he had saved.

His inventive mind showed him another way
soon to the rescue. He went into the forest on until he reached a
village where he bought at low price a horse in it soon contributed
in a city. There he did research for a doctor, and they told him an
old, experienced Man It was an immense show-piece,
too; lots of grand set scenes and fine armor-suits and all kinds of appointments imported from
London (where it had been first render'd.) The large brass bands--the three or four hundred
"supes"--the interviews between the French and English armies--the talk with Hubert (and the
hot irons) the delicious acting of Prince Arthur (Mrs. Richardson, I think)--and all the fine
blare and court pomp--I remember to this hour. The death-scene of the King in the orchard of
Swinstead Abbey, was very effective. Kean rush'd in, gray-pale and yellow, and threw himself
on a lounge in the open. His pangs were horribly realistic. (He must have taken lessons in
some hospital.)

Fanny Kemble play'd to wonderful effect in such pieces as "Fazio, or the Italian wife." The
turning-point was jealousy. It was a rapid-running, yet heavy-timber'd, tremendous wrenching,
passionate play. Such old pieces always seem'd to me built like an ancient ship of the line,
solid and lock'd from keel up--oak and metal and knots. One of the finest characters was a
great court lady, Aldabella, enacted by Mrs. Sharpe. O how it all entranced us, and knock'd
us about, as the scenes swept on like a cyclone!

Saw Hackett at the old Park many times, and remember him well. His renderings were first-rate
in everything. He inaugurated the true "Rip Van Winkle," and look'd and acted and dialogued
it to perfection (he was of Dutch breed, and brought up among old Holland descendants in Kings
and Queens counties, Long Island.) The play and the acting of it have been adjusted to please
popular audiences since; but there was in that original performance certainly something of
a far higher order, more art, more reality, more resemblance, a bit of fine pathos, a lofty
brogue, beyond anything afterward.

One of my big treats was the rendering at the old Park of Shakspere's "Tempest" in musical
version. There was a very fine instrumental band, not numerous, but with a capital leader.
Mrs. Austin was the Ariel, and Peter Richings the Caliban; both excellent. The drunken song
of the latter has probably been never equal'd. The perfect actor Clarke (old Clarke) was Prospero.

Yes; there were in New York and Brooklyn some fine non-technical singing performances, concerts,
such as the Hutchinson band, three brothers, and the sister, the red-cheek'd New England carnation,
sweet Abby; sometimes plaintive and balladic--sometimes anti-slavery, anti-calomel, and comic.
There were concerts by Templeton, Russell, Dempster, the old Alleghanian band, and many others.
Then we had lots of "negro minstrels," with capital character songs and voices. I often saw
Rice the original "Jim Crow" at the old Park Theatre filling up the gap in some short bill--and
the wild chants and dances were admirable--probably ahead of anything since. Every theatre
had some superior voice, and it was common to give a favorite song between the acts. "The Sea"
at the bijou Olympic, (Broadway near Grand,) was always welcome from a little Englishman named
Edwin, a good balladist. At the Bowery the loves of "Sweet William,"

    "When on the Downs the fleet was moor'd,"

always bro't an encore, and sometimes a treble.

I remember Jenny Lind and heard her (1850 I think) several times. She had the most brilliant,
captivating, popular musical style and expression of any one known; (the canary, and several
other sweet birds are wondrous fine--but there is something in song that goes deeper--isn't there?)

The great "Egyptian Collection" was well up in Broadway, and I got quite acquainted with Dr.
Abbott, the proprietor--paid many visits there, and had long talks with him, in connection
with my readings of many books and reports on Egypt--its antiquities, history, and how things
and the scenes really look, and what the old relics stand for, as near as we can now get. (Dr.
A. was an Englishman of say 54--had been settled in Cairo as physician for 25 years, and all
that time was collecting these relics, and sparing no time or money seeking and getting them.
By advice and for a change of base for himself, he brought the collection to America. But the
whole enterprise was a fearful disappointment, in the pay and commercial part.) As said, I
went to the Egyptian Museum many many times; sometimes had it all to myself--delved at the
formidable catalogue--and on several occasions had the invaluable personal talk, correction,
illustration and guidance of Dr. A. himself. He was very kind and helpful to me in those studies
and examinations; once, by appointment, he appear'd in full and exact Turkish (Cairo) costume,
which long usage there had made habitual to him.

One of the choice places of New York to me then was the "Phrenological Cabinet" of Fowler &
Wells, Nassau street near Beekman. Here were all the busts, examples, curios and books of that
study obtainable. I went there often, and once for myself had a very elaborate and leisurely
examination and "chart of bumps" written out (I have it yet,) by Nelson Fowler (or was it Sizer?)
there.

And who remembers the renown'd New York "Tabernacle" of those days "before the war"? It was
on the east side of Broadway, near Pearl street--was a great turtle-shaped hall, and you had
to walk back from the street entrance thro' a long wide corridor to get to it--was very strong--had
an immense gallery--altogether held three or four thousand people. Here the huge annual conventions
of the windy and cyclonic "reformatory societies" of those times were held--especially the
tumultuous Anti-Slavery ones. I remember hearing Wendell Phillips, Emerson, Cassius Clay, John
P. Hale, Beecher, Fred Douglas, the Burleighs, Garrison, and others. Sometimes the Hutchinsons
would sing--very fine. Sometimes there were angry rows. A chap named Isaiah Rhynders, a fierce
politician of those days, with a band of robust supporters, would attempt to contradict the
speakers and break up the meetings. But the Anti-Slavery, and Quaker, and Temperance, and Missionary
and other conventicles and speakers were tough, tough, and always maintained their ground,
and carried out their programs fully. I went frequently to these meetings, May after May--learn'd
much from them--was sure to be on hand when J. P. Hale or Cash Clay made speeches.

There were also the smaller and handsome halls of the Historical and Athensum Societies up
on Broadway. I very well remember W.C. Bryant lecturing on Homoeopathy in one of them, and
attending two or three addresses by R.W. Emerson in the other.

There was a series of plays and dramatic genre characters by a gentleman bill'd as Ranger--very
fine, better than merely technical, full of exquisite shades, like the light touches of the
violin in the hands of a master. There was the actor Anderson, who brought us Gerald Griffin's
"Gysippus," and play'd it to admiration. Among the actors of those times I recall: Cooper,
Wallack, Tom Hamblin, Adams (several), Old Gates, Scott, Wm. Sefton, John Sefton, Geo. Jones,
Mitchell, Seguin, Old Clarke, Richings, Fisher, H. Placide, T. Placide, Thorne, Ingersoll,
Gale (Mazeppa) Edwin, Horncastle. Some of the women hastily remember'd were: Mrs. Vernon, Mrs.
Pritchard, Mrs. McClure, Mary Taylor, Clara Fisher, Mrs. Richardson, Mrs. Flynn. Then the singers,
English, Italian and other: Mrs. Wood, Mrs. Seguin, Mrs. Austin, Grisi, La Grange, Steffanone,
Bosio, Truffi, Parodi, Vestvali, Bertucca, Jenny Lind, Gazzaniga, Laborde. And the opera men:
Bettini, Badiali, Marini, Mario, Brignoli, Amodio, Beneventano, and many, many others whose
names I do not at this moment recall.

In another paper I have described the elder Booth, and the Bowery Theatre of those times. Afterward
there was the Chatham. The elder Thorne, Mrs. Thorne, William and John Sefton, Kirby, Brougham,
and sometimes Edwin Forrest himself play'd there. I remember them all, and many more, and especially
the fine theatre on Broadway near Pearl, in 1855 and '6.

There were very good circus performances, or horsemanship, in New York and Brooklyn. Every
winter in the first-named city, a regular place in the Bowery, nearly opposite the old theatre;
fine animals and fine riding, which I often witness'd. (Remember seeing near here, a young,
fierce, splendid lion, presented by an African Barbary Sultan to President Andrew Jackson.
The gift comprised also a lot of jewels, a fine steel sword, and an Arab stallion; and the
lion was made over to a show-man.)

If it is worth while I might add that there was a small but well-appointed amateur-theatre
up Broadway, with the usual stage, orchestra, pit, boxes, &c., and that I was myself a member
for some time, and acted parts in it several times--"second parts" as they were call'd. Perhaps
it too was a lesson, or help'd that way; at any rate it was full of fun and enjoyment.

And so let us turn off the gas. Out in the brilliancy of the foot-lights--filling the attention
of perhaps a crowded audience, and making many a breath and pulse swell and rise--O so much
passion and imparted life!--over and over again, the season through--walking, gesticulating,
singing, reciting his or her part--But then sooner or later inevitably wending to the flies
or exit door--vanishing to sight and ear--and never materializing on this earth's stage again!

SOME PERSONAL AND OLD-AGE JOTTINGS

Anything like unmitigated acceptance of my "Leaves of Grass" book, and heart-felt response
to it, in a popular however faint degree, bubbled forth as a fresh spring from the ground in
England in 1876. The time was a critical and turning point in my personal and literary life.
Let me revert to my memorandum book, Camden, New Jersey, that year, fill'd with addresses,
receipts, purchases, &c., of the two volumes pub'd then by myself--the "Leaves," and the "Two
Rivulets"--some home customers, for them, but mostly from the British Islands. I was seriously
paralyzed from the Secession war, poor, in debt, was expecting death, (the doctors put four
chances out of five against me,)--and I had the books printed during the lingering interim
to occupy the tediousness of glum days and nights. Curiously, the sale abroad proved prompt,
and what one might call copious: the names came in lists and the money with them, by foreign
mail. The price was $10 a set. Both the cash and the emotional cheer were deep medicines; many
paid double or treble price, (Tennyson and Ruskin did,) and many sent kind and eulogistic letters;
ladies, clergymen, social leaders, persons of rank, and high officials. Those blessed gales
from the British Islands probably (certainly) saved me. Here are some of the names, for I w'd
like to preserve them: Wm. M. and D.G. Rossetti, Lord Houghton, Edwd. Dowden, Mrs. Anne Gilchrist,
Keningale Cook, Edwd. Carpenter, Therese Simpson, Rob't Buchanan, Alfred Tennyson, John Ruskin,
C.G. Gates, E.T. Wilkinson, T.L. Warren, C.W. Reynell, W.B. Scott, A.G. Dew Smith, E.W. Gosse,
T.W. Rolleston, Geo. Wallis, Rafe Leicester, Thos. Dixon, N. MacColl, Mrs. Matthews, R. Hannah,
Geo. Saintsbury, R.S. Watson, Godfrey and Vernon Lushington, G.H. Lewes, G.H. Boughton, Geo.
Fraser, W.T. Arnold, A. Ireland, Mrs. M. Taylor, M.D. Conway, Benj. Eyre, E. Dannreather, Rev.
T.E. Brown, C.W. Sheppard, E.J.A. Balfour, P.B. Marston, A.C. De Burgh, J.H. McCarthy, J.H.
Ingram, Rev. R.P. Graves, Lady Mount-temple, F.S. Ellis, W. Brockie, Rev. A.B. Grosart, Lady
Hardy, Hubert Herkomer, Francis Hueffer, H.G. Dakyns, R.L. Nettleship, W.J. Stillman, Miss
Blind, Madox Brown, H.R. Ricardo, Messrs. O'Grady and Tyrrel; and many, many more.

Severely scann'd, it was perhaps no very great or vehement success; but the tide had palpably
shifted at any rate, and the sluices were turn'd into my own veins and pockets. That emotional,
audacious, open-handed, friendly-mouth'd just-opportune English action, I say, pluck'd me like
a brand from the burning, and gave me life again, to finish my book, since ab't completed.
I do not forget it, and shall not; and if I ever have a biographer I charge him to put it in
the narrative. I have had the noblest friends and backers in America; Wm. O'Connor, Dr. R.M.
Bucke, John Burroughs, Geo.W. Childs, good ones in Boston, and Carnegie and R.G. Ingersoll
in New York; and yet perhaps the tenderest and gratefulest breath of my heart has gone, and
ever goes, over the sea-gales across the big pond.

About myself at present. I will soon enter upon my 73d year, if I live--have pass'd an active
life, as country school-teacher, gardener, printer, carpenter, author and journalist, domicil'd
in nearly all the United States and principal cities, North and South--went to the front (moving
about and occupied as army nurse and missionary) during the secession war, 1861 to '65, and
in the Virginia hospitals and after the battles of that time, tending the Northern and Southern
wounded alike--work'd down South and in Washington city arduously three years--contracted the
paralysis which I have suffer'd ever since--and now live in a little cottage of my own, near
the Delaware in New Jersey. My chief book, unrhym'd and unmetrical (it has taken thirty years,
peace and war, "a borning") has its aim, as once said, "to utter the same old human critter--but
now in Democratic American modern and scientific conditions." Then I have publish'd two prose
works, "Specimen Days," and a late one, "November Boughs." (A little volume, "Good-Bye my Fancy,"
is soon to be out, wh' will finish the matter.) I do not propose here to enter the much-fought
field of the literary criticism of any of those works.

But for a few portraiture or descriptive bits. To-day in the upper story of a little wooden
house of two stories near the Delaware river, east shore, sixty miles up from the sea, is a
rather large 20-by-20 low ceiling'd room something like a big old ship's cabin. The floor,
three quarters of it with an ingrain carpet, is half cover'd by a deep litter of books, papers,
magazines, thrown-down letters and circulars, rejected manuscripts, memoranda, bits of light
or strong twine, a bundle to be "express'd," and two or three venerable scrap books. In the
room stand two large tables (one of ancient St. Domingo mahogany with immense leaves) cover'd
by a jumble of more papers, a varied and copious array of writing materials, several glass
and china vessels or jars, some with cologne-water, others with real honey, granulated sugar,
a large bunch of beautiful fresh yellow chrysanthemums, some letters and envelopt papers ready
for the post office, many photographs, and a hundred indescribable things besides. There are
all around many books, some quite handsome editions, some half cover'd by dust, some within
reach, evidently used, (good-sized print, no type less than long primer,) some maps, the Bible,
(the strong cheap edition of the English crown,) Homer, Shakspere, Walter Scott, Emerson, Ticknor's
"Spanish Literature," John Carlyle's Dante, Felton's "Greece," George Sand's "Consuelo," avery
choice little Epictetus, some novels, the latest foreign and American monthlies, quarterlies,
and so on. There being quite a strew of printer's proofs and slips, and the daily papers, the
place with its quaint old fashion'd calmness has also a smack of something alert and of current
work. There are several trunks and depositaries back' d up at the walls; (one well-bound and
big box came by express lately from Washington city, after storage there for nearly twenty
years.) Indeed the whole room is a sort of result and storage collection of my own past life.
I have here various editions of my own writings, and sell them upon request; one is a big volume
of complete poems and prose, 1000 pages, autograph, essays, speeches, portraits from life,
&c. Another is a little "Leaves of Grass," latest date, six portraits, morocco bound, in pocket-book
form.

Fortunately the apartment is quite roomy. There are three windows in front. At one side is
the stove, with a cheerful fire of oak wood, near by a good supply of fresh sticks, whose faint
aroma is plain. On another side is the bed with white coverlid and woollen blankets. Toward
the windows is a huge arm-chair, (a Christmas present from Thomas Donaldson's young daughter
and son, Philadelphia) timber'd as by some stout ship's spars, yellow polish'd, ample, with
rattan-woven seat and back, and over the latter a great wide wolf-skin of hairy black and silver,
spread to guard against cold and draught. A time-worn look and scent of old oak attach both
to the chair and the person occupying it.

But probably (even at the charge of parrot talk) I can give no more authentic brief sketch
than "from an old remembrance copy," where I have lately put myself on record as follows: Was
born May 31, 1819, in my father's farm-house, at West Hills, L.I., New York State. My parents'
folks mostly farmers and sailors--on my father's side, of English--on my mother's (Van Velsor's),
from Hollandic immigration. There was, first and last, a large family of children; (I was the
second.) We moved to Brooklyn while I was still a little one in frocks--and there in B. I grew
up out of frocks--then as child and boy went to the public schools--then to work in a printing
office. My brother George reported badly wounded in the Fredericksburg fight. (For 1863 and
'64, see "Specimen Days.") 1865 to '71--Had a place as clerk (till well on in '73) in the Attorney.

General's Office, Washington. (New York and Brooklyn seem more like home, as I was born near,
and brought up in them, and lived, man and boy, for 30 years. But I lived some years in Washington,
and have visited, and partially lived, in most of the Western and Eastern cities.)

1873.--This year lost, by death, my dear dear mother--and, just before, my sister Martha--the
two best and sweetest women I have ever seen or known, or ever expect to see. Same year, February,
a sudden climax and prostration from paralysis. Had been simmering inside for several years;
broke out during those times temporarily, and then went over. But now a serious attack, beyond
cure. Dr. Drinkard, my Washington physician, (and a first-rate one,) said it was the result
of too extreme bodily and emotional strain continued at Washington and "down in front," in
1863, '4 and '5. I doubt if a heartier, stronger, healthier physique, more balanced upon itself,
or more unconscious, more sound, ever lived, from 1835 to '72. My greatest call (Quaker) to
go around and do what I could there in those war-scenes where I had fallen, among the sick
and wounded, was, that I seem'd to be so strong and well. (I consider'd myself invulnerable.)
But this last attack shatter'd me completely. Quit work at Washington, and moved to Camden,
New Jersey--where I have lived since, receiving many buffets and some precious caresses--and
now write these lines. Since then, (1874-'91) a long stretch of illness, or half-illness, with
occasional lulls. During these latter, have revised and printed over all my books--bro't out
"November Boughs"--and at intervals leisurely and exploringly travel'd to the Prairie States,
the Rocky Mountains, Canada, to New York, to my birthplace in Long Island, and to Boston. But
physical disability and the war-paralysis above alluded to to have settled upon me more and
more the last year or so. Am now (1891) domicil'd, and have been for some years, in this little
old cottage and lot in Mickle street, Camden, with a house-keeper and man nurse. Bodily I am
completely disabled, but still write for publication. I keep generally buoyant spirits, write
often as there comes any lull in physical sufferings, get in the sun and down to the river
whenever I can, retain fair appetite, assimilation and digestion, sensibilities acute as ever,
the strength and volition of my right arm good, eyesight dimming, but brain normal, and retain
my heart's and soul's unmitigated faith not only in their own original literary plans, but
in the essential bulk of American humanity east and west, north and south, city and country,
through thick and thin, to the last. Nor must I forget, in conclusion, a special, prayerful,
thankful God's blessing to my dear firm friends and personal helpers, men and women, home and
foreign, old and young.

OUT IN THE OPEN AGAIN

From the Camden Post, April 16, '91.

Walt Whitman got out in the mid-April sun and warmth of yesterday, propelled in his wheel chair,
the first time after four months of imprisonment in his sick room. He has had the worst winter
yet, mainly from grippe and gastric troubles, and threaten'd blindness; but keeps good spirits,
and has a new little forthcoming book in the printer's hands.

AMERICA'S BULK AVERAGE

If I were ask'd persona to specify the one point of America's people on which I mainly rely,
I should say the final average or bulk quality of the whole.

Happy indeed w'd I consider myself to give a fair reflection and representation of even a portion
of shows, questions, humanity, events, unfoldings, thoughts, &c. &c., my age in these States.

The great social, political, historic function of my time has been of course the attempted
secession war.

And was there not something grand, and an inside proof of perennial grandeur, in that war!
We talk of our age's and the States' materialism--and it is too true. But how amid the whole
sordidness--the entire devotion of America, at any price, to pecuniary success, merchandise--disregarding
all but business and profit--this war for a bare idea and abstraction--a mere, at bottom, heroic
dream and reminiscence--burst forth in its great devouring flame and conflagration quickly
and fiercely spreading and raging, and enveloping all, defining in two conflicting ideas--first
the Union cause--second the other, a strange deadly interrogation point, hard to define--Can
we not now safely confess it?--with magnificent rays, streaks of noblest heroism, fortitude,
perseverance, and even conscientiousness, through its pervadingly malignant darkness. What
an area and rounded field, upon the whole--the spirit, arrogance, grim tenacity of the South--the
long stretches of murky gloom--the general National Will below and behind and comprehending
all--not once really wavering, not a day, not an hour--What could be, or even can be, grander?

As in that war, its four years--as through the whole history and development of the New World--these
States through all trials, processes, eruptions, deepest dilemmas, (often straining, tugging
at society's heart-strings, as if some divine curiosity would find out how much this democracy
could stand,) have so far finally and for more than a century best justified themselves by
the average impalpable quality and personality of the bulk, the People en masse.... I am not
sure but my main and chief however indefinite claim for any page of mine w'd be its derivation,
or seeking to derive itself, f'm that average quality of the American bulk, the people, and
getting back to it again.

LAST SAVED ITEMS

I'm a vast batch left to oblivion. 

Like a nightmare now its unsolicited presence weighed on the two. Convicts go on behind the guard,
with secretly clenched fists. The child was doing nothing, and to them but every minute more unbearable
with his watchful eyes that were wet with bitter Tears, his irritated sullen, wegknurrte all the advances.
"Go ahead" the mother said, suddenly angry, troubled by his constant listening. Dance me not
always on their feet, that makes me nervous, "Edgar did so, but always after a few Steps he
turned and stood waiting, if they were left them with his eyes as the black poodle Mephistophelian
orbiting in this fiery and einspinnend Web of hatred in which they felt inescapably caught.
 Just as
disease proves health, and is the other side of it.... The philosophy of Greece taught normality
and the beauty of life. Christianity teaches how to endure illness and death. I have wonder'd
whether a third philosophy fusing both, and doing full justice to both, might not be outlined.

It will not be enough to say that no Nation ever achiev'd materialistic, political and money-making
successes, with general physical comfort, as fully as the United States of America are to-day
achieving them. I know very well that those are the indispensable foundations--the sine qua
non of moral and heroic (poetic) fruitions to come. For if those pre-successes were all--if
they ended at that--if nothing more were yielded than so far appears--a gross materialistic
prosperity only--America, tried by subtlest tests, were a failure--has not advanced the standard
of humanity a bit further than other nations. Were a rock, if not a Böcklin ancestor,
is the creator of the bright rococo structures from the fifties of the 18. Century. The producing pictures
display a mother of Böcklin physiognomy of odd large slash and she was a fine, educated, gifted, well exactly
amazing woman, the well renowned their children. Böcklin youth has been no bad, he subsequent recalled
joyous some droll article from his boyhood. (It even seems to me, said H. Heine,
more invigorating to accomplish something bad than something empty.)

The Highest said: Don't let us begin so low--isn't our range too coarse--too gross?... The
Soul answer'd: No, not when we consider what it is all for--the end involved in Time and Space,

Essentially my own printed records, all my volumes, are doubtless but off-hand utterances f'm
Personality spontaneous, following implicitly the inscrutable command, dominated by that Personality,
vaguely even if decidedly, and with little or nothing of plan, art, erudition, &c. If I have
chosen to hold the reins, the mastery, it has mainly been to give the way, the power, the road,
to the invisible steeds. (I wanted to see how a Person of America, the last half of the 19th
century, w'd appear, but quite freely and fairly in honest type.)

Haven't I given specimen clues, if no more? At any rate I have written enough to weary myself--and
I will dispatch it to the printers, and cease. But how much--how many topics, of the greatest
pointand cogency, I am leaving untouch'd!

WALT WHITMAN'S LAST [49]

Good-Bye my Fancy.--concluding Annex to Leaves of Grass.

H. Heine's first principle of criticising a book was, What motive is the author trying to carry
out, or express or accomplish? and the second, Has he achiev'd it? Slowly, with feigned matter of course came on the child and let his
scornful eyes off them. "Ah, there you are, Edi, we have up already looking inside, "finally
said the mother. How bold she is lying, "thought the child. But the lips were hard. They kept
the secret of the hatred behind the teeth.

Undecided, they were all three. One lay in wait for the others. "So we said, resignedly the angry
woman and tore one of the beautiful roses. Again, this slight tremors to the nostrils, which
betrayed in her anger. Edgar stopped him as I do that for nothing, looked into the blue, waited
until they left, he prepared himself to follow them. The Baron made
one more attempt. And just laughed satisfied
when he saw actually occurred after about half an hour, his mother from the side door, a bush
magnificent roses in hand, followed by the Baron, the traitor.

They both seemed very cocky.

This new last cluster, Good-By my Fancy follows suit, and yet with a difference. The clef is
here changed to its lowest, and the little book is a lot of tremolos about old age, death,
and faith. The physical just lingers, but almost vanishes. The book is garrulous, irascible
(like old Lear) and has various breaks and even tricks to avoid monotony. It will have to be
ciphered and ciphered out long--and is probably in some respects the most curious part of its
author's baffling works. Edgar waited. But his suspicions were brisk. A restless instinct was now operating between
every word of both a secret hostile intent out. The suspicion was it now sometimes a strange
clairvoyance of the decisions.
This book is his last message, and of course a great deal will be said about it by critics
all over the world, both in praise and dispraise; but probably nothing that the critics will
say will be as interesting as this characteristic utterance upon the book by the poet himself.
It is the subjective view as opposed to the objective views of the critics. Briefly, Whitman
gives, as he puts it, 'a hint of the spinal marrow of the business,' not only of Good-Bye my
Fancy, but also of the Leaves of Grass

"It was only after considerable persuasion on the editor's part that Mr. Whitman consented
to write the above. The mother belonged to an old Basel family, which for centuries may have been refined
by urban culture. Were her mother was a rock and members this family have distinguished themselves
in various ways.