There were blisters on them like great lumps. Tears started in the widow's eyes. She dared
not trust herself with a reply, though her heart was bursting with the thought that she could
not better his condition. There was no earthly means of support on which she had dependence
enough to encourage her child in the wish she knew he was forming--the wish not utter'd for
the first time--to be freed from his bondage. "Mother," at length said the boy, "I can stand
it no longer. I cannot and will not stay at Mr. Ellis's. Ever since the day I first went into
his house I've been a slave; and if I have to work so much longer I know I shall run off and
go to sea or somewhere else. I'd as leave be in my grave as there." And the child burst into
a passionate fit of weeping.

His mother was silent, for she was in deep grief herself. After some minutes had flown, however,
she gather'd sufficient self-possession to speak to her son in a soothing tone, endeavoring
to win him from his sorrows and cheer up his heart. She told him that time was swift--that
in the course of a few years he would be his own master.--that all people have their troubles--with
many other ready arguments which, though they had little effect in calming her own distress,
she hoped would act as a solace to the disturb'd temper of the boy. And as the half hour to
which he was limited had now elaps'd, she took him by the hand and led him to the gate, to
set forth on his return. The youth seemed pacified, though occasionally one of those convulsive
sighs that remain after a fit of weeping, would break from his throat. At the gate he threw
his arms about his mother's neck; each press'd a long kiss on the lips of the other, and the
youngster bent his steps towards his master's house.

As her child pass'd out of sight the widow return'd, shut the gate and enter'd her lonely room.
There was no light in the old cottage that night--the heart of its occupant was dark and cheerless.
Love, agony, and grief, and tears and convulsive wrestlings were there. The thought of a beloved
son condemned to labor--labor that would break down a man--struggling from day to day under
the hard rule of a soulless gold-worshipper; the knowledge that years must pass thus; the sickening
idea of her own poverty, and of living mainly on the grudged charity of neighbors--thoughts,
too, of former happy days--these rack'd the widow's heart, and made her bed a sleepless one
without repose.

The boy bent his steps to his employer's, as has been said. In his way down the village street
he had to pass a public house, the only one the place contain'd; and when he came off against
it he heard the sound of a fiddle--drown'd, however, at intervals, by much laughter and talking.
The windows were up, and, the house standing close to the road, Charles thought it no harm
to take a look and see what was going on within. Half a dozen footsteps brought him to the
low casement, on which he lean'd his elbow, and where he had a full view of the room and its
occupants. In one corner was an old man, known in the village as Black Dave--he it was whose
musical performances had a moment before drawn Charles's attention to the tavern; and he it
was who now exerted himself in a violent manner to give, with divers flourishes and extra twangs,
a tune very popular among that thick-lipp'd race whose fondness for melody is so well known.
In the middle of the room were five or six sailors, some of them quite drunk, and others in
the earlier stages of that process, while on benches around were more sailors, and here and
there a person dress'd in landsman's attire. The men in the middle of the room were dancing;
that is, they were going through certain contortions and shufflings, varied occasionally by
exceeding hearty stamps upon the sanded floor. In short the whole party were engaged in a drunken
frolic, which was in no respect different from a thousand other drunken frolics, except, perhaps,
that there was less than the ordinary amount of anger and quarreling. Indeed everyone seem'
d in remarkably good humor.

But what excited the boy's attention more than any other object was an individual, seated on
one of the benches opposite, who, though evidently enjoying the spree as much as if he were
an old hand at such business, seem' d in every other particular to be far out of his element.
His appearance was youthful. He might have been twenty-one or two years old. His countenance
was intelligent, and had the air of city life and society. He was dress'd not gaudily, but
in every respect fashionably; his coat being of the finest broadcloth, his linen delicate and
spotless as snow, and his whole aspect that of one whose counterpart may now and then be seen
upon the pave in Broadway of a fine afternoon. He laugh'd and talk'd with the rest, and it
must be confess'd his jokes--like the most of those that pass'd current there--were by no means
distinguish'd for their refinement or purity. Near the door was a small table, cover'd with
decanters and glasses, some of which had been used, but were used again indiscriminately, and
a box of very thick and very long cigars.

One of the sailors--and it was he who made the largest share of the hubbub--had but one eye.
His chin and cheeks were cover'd with huge, bushy whiskers, and altogether he had quite a brutal
appearance. "Come, boys," said this gentleman, "come, let us take a drink. I know you're all
a getting dry;" and he clench'd his invitation with an appalling oath. This politeness was
responded to by a general moving of the company toward the table holding the before-mention'd
decanters and glasses. Clustering there around, each one help'd himself to a very handsome
portion of that particular liquor which suited his fancy; and steadiness and accuracy being
at that moment by no means distinguishing traits of the arms and legs of the party, a goodly
amount of the fluid was spill'd upon the floor. This piece of extravagance excited the ire
of the personage who gave the "treat;" and that ire was still further increas'd when he discover'd
two or three loiterers who seem'd disposed to slight his request to drink. Charles, as we have
before mention'd, was looking in at the window.

"Walk up, boys! walk up! If there be any skulker among us, blast my eyes if he shan't go down
on his marrow bones and taste the liquor we have spilt! Hallo!" he exclaim'd as he spied Charles;
"hallo, you chap in the window, come here and take a sup."

As he spoke he stepp'd to the open casement, put his brawny hands under the boy's arms, and
lifted him into the room bodily.

"There, my lads," said he, turning to his companions, "there's a new recruit for you. Not so
coarse a one, either," he added as he took a fair view of the boy, who, though not what is
called pretty, was fresh and manly looking, and large for his age.

"Come, youngster, take a glass," he continued. And he pour'd one nearly full of strong brandy.

Now Charles was not exactly frighten'd, for he was a lively fellow, and had often been at the
country merry-makings, and at the parties of the place; but he was certainly rather abash'd
at his abrupt introduction to the midst of strangers. So, putting the glass aside, he look'd
up with a pleasant smile in his new acquaintance's face.

"I've no need for anything now," he said, "but I'm just as much obliged to you as if I was."

"Poh! man, drink it down," rejoin'd the sailor, "drink it down--it won't hurt you."

And, by way of showing its excellence, the one-eyed worthy drain'd it himself to the last drop.
Then filling it again, he renew'd his efforts to make the lad go through the same operation.

"I've no occasion. Besides, my mother has often pray'd me not to drink, and I promised to obey
her."

A little irritated by his continued refusal, the sailor, with a loud oath, declared that Charles
should swallow the brandy, whether he would or no. Placing one of his tremendous paws on the
back of the boy's head, with the other he thrust the edge of the glass to his lips, swearing
at the same time, that if he shook it so as to spill its contents the consequences would be
of a nature by no means agreeable to his back and shoulders. Disliking the liquor, and angry
at the attempt to overbear him, the undaunted child lifted his hand and struck the arm of the
sailor with a blow so sudden that the glass fell and was smash'd to pieces on the floor; while
the brandy was about equally divided between the face of Charles, the clothes of the sailor,
and the sand. By this time the whole of the company had their attention drawn to the scene.
Some of them laugh'd when they saw Charles's undisguised antipathy to the drink; but they laugh'd
still more heartily when he discomfited the sailor. All of them, however, were content to let
the matter go as chance would have it--all but the young man of the black coat, who has been
spoken of.

What was there in the words which Charles had spoken that carried the mind of the young man
back to former times--to a period when he was more pure and innocent than now? "My mother has
often pray'd me not to drink!" Ah, how the mist of months roll'd aside, and presented to his
soul's eye the picture of his mother, and a prayer of exactly similar purport! Why was it,
too, that the young man's heart moved with a feeling of kindness toward the harshly treated child?

Charles stood, his cheek flush'd and his heart throbbing, wiping the trickling drops from his
face with a handkerchief. At first the sailor, between his drunkenness and his surprise, was
much in the condition of one suddenly awaken'd out of a deep sleep, who cannot call his consciousness
about him. When he saw the state of things, however, and heard the jeering laugh of his companions,
his dull eye lighting up with anger, fell upon the boy who had withstood him. He seized Charles
with a grip of iron, and with the side of his heavy boot gave him a sharp and solid kick. He
was about repeating the performance--for the child hung like a rag in his grasp--but all of
a sudden his ears rang, as if pistols were snapp'd close to them; lights of various hues flicker'd
in his eye, (he had but one, it will be remember'd,) and a strong propelling power caused him
to move from his position, and keep moving until he was brought up by the wall. A blow, a cuff
given in such a scientific manner that the hand from which it proceeded was evidently no stranger
to the pugilistic art, had been suddenly planted in the ear of the sailor. It was planted by
the young man of the black coat. He had watch'd with interest the proceeding of the sailor
and the boy--two or three times he was on the point of interfering; but when the kick was given,
his rage was uncontrollable. He sprang from his seat in the attitude of a boxer--struck the
sailor in a manner to cause those unpleasant sensations which have been described--and would
probably have follow'd up the attack, had not Charles, now thoroughly terrified, clung around
his legs and prevented his advancing.

The scene was a strange one, and for the time quite a silent one. The company had started from
their seats, and for a moment held breathless but strain'd positions. In the middle of the
room stood the young man, in his not at all ungraceful attitude--every nerve out, and his eyes
flashing brilliantly.

He seem'd rooted like a rock; and clasping him, with an appearance of confidence in his protection,
clung the boy.

"You scoundrel!" cried the young man, his voice thick with passion, "dare to touch the boy
again, and I'll thrash you till no sense is left in your body."

The sailor, now partially recover'd, made some gestures of a belligerent nature.

"Come on, drunken brute!" continued the angry youth; "I wish you would! You've not had half
what you deserve!"

Upon sobriety and sense more fully taking their power in the brains of the one-eyed mariner,
however, that worthy determined in his own mind that it would be most prudent to let the matter
drop. Expressing therefore his conviction to that effect, adding certain remarks to the purport
that he "meant no harm to the lad," that he was surprised at such a gentleman being angry at
"a little piece of fun," and so forth--he proposed that the company should go on with their
jollity just as if nothing had happen'd. In truth, he of the single eye was not a bad fellow
at heart, after all; the fiery enemy whose advances he had so often courted that night, had
stolen away his good feelings, and set busy devils at work within him, that might have made
his hands do some dreadful deed, had not the stranger interposed.

In a few minutes the frolic of the party was upon its former footing. The young man sat down
upon one of the benches, with the boy by his side, and while the rest were loudly laughing
and talking, they two convers'd together. The stranger learn'd from Charles all the particulars
of his simple story--how his father had died years since--how his mother work' d hard for a
bare living--and how he himself, for many dreary months, had been the servant of a hard-hearted,
avaricious master. More and more interested, drawing the child close to his side, the young
man listen'd to his plainly told history--and thus an hour pass'd away.

It was now past midnight. The young man told Charles that on the morrow he would take steps
to relieve him from his servitude--that for the present night the landlord would probably give
him a lodging at the inn--and little persuading did the host need for that.

As he retired to sleep, very pleasant thoughts filled the mind of the young man--thoughts of
a worthy action perform'd--thoughts, too, newly awakened ones, of walking in a steadier and
wiser path than formerly.

That roof, then, sheltered two beings that night--one of them innocent and sinless of all wrong--the
other--oh, to that other what evil had not been present, either in action or to his desires!

Who was the stranger? To those that, from ties of relationship or otherwise, felt an interest
in him, the answer to that question was not pleasant to dwell upon. His name was Langton--parentless--a
dissipated young man--a brawler--one whose too frequent companions were rowdies, blacklegs,
and swindlers. The New York police offices were not strangers to his countenance. He had been
bred to the profession of medicine; besides, he had a very respectable income, and his house
was in a pleasant street on the west side of the city. Little of his time, however, did Mr.
John Langton spend at his domestic hearth; and the elderly lady who officiated as his housekeeper
was by no means surprised to have him gone for a week or a month at a time, and she knowing
nothing of his whereabouts.

Living as he did, the young man was an unhappy being. It was not so much that his associates
were below his own capacity--for Langton, though sensible and well bred, was not highly talented
or refined--but that he lived without any steady purpose, that he had no one to attract him
to his home, that he too easily allow'd himself to be tempted--which caused his life to be,
of late, one continued scene of dissatisfaction. This dissatisfaction he sought to drive away
by the brandy bottle, and mixing in all kinds of parties where the object was pleasure. On
the present occasion he had left the city a few days before, and passing his time at a place
near the village where Charles and his mother lived. He fell in, during the day, with those
who were his companions of the tavern spree; and thus it happen'd that they were all together.
Langton hesitated not to make himself at home with any associate that suited his fancy.

The next morning the poor widow rose from her sleepless cot; and from that lucky trait in our
nature which makes one extreme follow another, she set about her toil with a lighten'd heart.
Ellis, the farmer, rose, too, short as the nights were, an hour before day; for his god was
gain, and a prime article of his creed was to get as much work as possible from every one around
him. In the course of the day Ellis was called upon by young Langton, and never perhaps in
his life was the farmer puzzled more than at the young man's proposal--his desire to provide
for the widow's family, a family that could do him no pecuniary good, and his willingness to
disburse money for that purpose. The widow, too, was called upon, not only on that day, but
the next and the next.

It needs not that I should particularize the subsequent events of Langton's and the boy's history--how
the reformation of the profligate might be dated to begin from that time--how he gradually
sever'd the guilty ties that had so long gall'd him--how he enjoy'd his own home again--how
the friendship of Charles and himself grew not slack with time--and how, when in the course
of seasons he became head of a family of his own, he would shudder at the remembrance of his
early dangers and his escapes.

LINGAVE'S TEMPTATION

"Another day," utter'd the poet Lingave, as he awoke in the morning, and turn'd him drowsily
on his hard pallet, "another day comes out, burthen'd with its weight of woes. Of what use
is existence to me? Crush'd down beneath the merciless heel of poverty, and no promise of hope
to cheer me on, what have I in prospect but a life neglected and a death of misery?"

The youth paused; but receiving no answer to his questions, thought proper to continue the
peevish soliloquy. "I am a genius, they say," and the speaker smiled bitterly, "but genius
is not apparel and food. Why should I exist in the world, unknown, unloved, press'd with cares,
while so many around me have all their souls can desire? I behold the splendid equipages roll
by--I see the respectful bow at the presence of pride--and I curse the contrast between my
own lot, and the fortune of the rich. The lofty air--the show of dress--the aristocratic demeanor--the
glitter of jewels--dazzle my eyes; and sharp-tooth' d envy works within me. I hate these haughty
and favor'd ones. Why should my path be so much rougher than theirs? Pitiable, unfortunate
man that I am! to be placed beneath those whom in my heart I despise--and to be constantly
tantalized with the presence of that wealth I cannot enjoy!" And the poet cover'd his eyes
with his hands, and wept from very passion and fretfulness.

O, Lingave! be more of a man! Have you not the treasures of health and untainted propensities,
which many of those you envy never enjoy? Are you not their superior in mental power, in liberal
views of mankind, and in comprehensive intellect? And even allowing you the choice, how would
you shudder at changing, in total, conditions with them! Besides, were you willing to devote
all your time and energies, you could gain property too: squeeze, and toil, and worry, and
twist everything into a matter of profit, and you can become a great man, as far as money goes
to make greatness.

Retreat, then, man of the polish'd soul, from those irritable complaints against your lot-those
longings for wealth and puerile distinction, not worthy your class. Do justice, philosopher,
to your own powers. While the world runs after its shadows and its bubbles, (thus commune in
your own mind,) we will fold ourselves in our circle of understanding, and look with an eye
of apathy on those things it considers so mighty and so enviable. Let the proud man pass with
his pompous glance--let the gay flutter in finery--let the foolish enjoy his folly, and the
beautiful move on in his perishing glory; we will gaze without desire on all their possessions,
and all their pleasures. Our destiny is different from theirs. Not for such as we, the lowly
flights of their crippled wings. We acknowledge no fellow-ship with them in ambition. We composedly
look down on the paths where they walk, and pursue our own, without uttering a wish to descend,
and be as they. What is it to us that the mass pay us not that deference which wealth commands?
We desire no applause, save the applause of the good and discriminating--the choice spirits
among men. Our intellect would be sullied, were the vulgar to approximate to it, by professing
to readily enter in, and praising it. Our pride is a towering, and thrice refined pride.

When Lingave had given way to his temper some half hour, or thereabout, he grew more calm,
and bethought himself that he was acting a very silly part. He listen'd a moment to the clatter
of the carts, and the tramp of early passengers on the pave below, as they wended along to
commence their daily toil. It was just sunrise, and the season was summer. A little canary
bird, the only pet poor Lingave could afford to keep, chirp'd merrily in its cage on the wall.
How slight a circumstance will sometimes change the whole current of our thoughts! The music
of that bird abstracting the mind of the poet but a moment from his sorrows, gave a chance
for his natural buoyancy to act again.

Lingave sprang lightly from his bed, and perform'd his ablutions and his simple toilet--then
hanging the cage on a nail outside the window, and speaking an endearment to the songster,
which brought a perfect flood of melody in return--he slowly passed through his door, descended
the long narrow turnings of the stairs, and stood in the open street. Undetermin'd as to any
particular destination, he folded his hands behind him, cast his glance upon the ground, and
moved listlessly onward.

Hour after hour the poet walk'd along--up this street and down that--he reck'd not how or where.
And as crowded thoroughfares are hardly the most fit places for a man to let his fancy soar
in the clouds--many a push and shove and curse did the dreamer get bestow'd upon him.

The booming of the city clock sounded forth the hour twelve--high noon.

"Ho! Lingave!" cried a voice from an open basement window as the poet pass'd.

He stopp'd, and then unwittingly would have walked on still, not fully awaken'd from his reverie.

"Lingave, I say!" cried the voice again, and the person to whom the voice belong'd stretch'd
his head quite out into the area in front, "Stop man. Have you forgotten your appointment?"

"Oh! ah!" said the poet, and he smiled unmeaningly, and descending the steps, went into the
office of Ridman, whose call it was that had startled him in his walk.

Who was Ridman? While the poet is waiting the convenience of that personage, it may be as well
to describe him.

Ridman was a money-maker. He had much penetration, considerable knowledge of the world, and
a disposition to be constantly in the midst of enterprise, excitement, and stir. His schemes
for gaining wealth were various; he had dipp'd into almost every branch and channel of business.
A slight acquaintance of several years' standing subsisted between him and the poet. The day
previous a boy had call'd with a note from Ridman to Lingave, desiring the presence of the
latter at the money-maker's room. The poet return'd for answer that he would be there. This
was the engagement which he came near breaking.

Ridman had a smooth tongue. All his ingenuity was needed in the explanation to his companion
of why and wherefore the latter had been sent for.

It is not requisite to state specifically the offer made by the man of wealth to the poet.
Ridman, in one of his enterprises, found it necessary to procure the aid of such a person as
Lingave--a writer of power, a master of elegant diction, of fine taste, in style passionate
yet pure, and of the delicate imagery that belongs to the children of song. The youth was absolutely
startled at the magnificent and permanent remuneration which was held out to him for a moderate
exercise of his talents.

But the nature of the service required! All the sophistry and art of Ridman could not veil
its repulsiveness. The poet was to labor for the advancement of what he felt to be unholy--he
was to inculcate what would lower the perfection of man. He promised to give an answer to the
proposal the succeeding day, and left the place.

Now during the many hours there was a war going on in the heart of the poor poet. He was indeed
poor; often he had no certainty whether he should be able to procure the next day's meals.
And the poet knew the beauty of truth, and adored, not in the abstract merely, but in practice,
the excellence of upright principles.

Night came. Lingave, wearied, lay upon his pallet again and slept. The misty veil thrown over
him, the spirit of poesy came to his visions, and stood beside him, and look'd down pleasantly
with her large eyes, which were bright and liquid like the reflection of stars in a lake.

Virtue, (such imagining, then, seem'd conscious to the soul of the dreamer,) is ever the sinew
of true genius. Together, the two in one, they are endow'd with immortal strength, and approach
loftily to Him from whom both spring. Yet there are those that having great powers, bend them
to the slavery of wrong. God forgive them! for they surely do it ignorantly or heedlessly.
Oh, could he who lightly tosses around him the seeds of evil in his writings, or his enduring
thoughts, or his chance words--could he see how, haply, they are to spring up in distant time
and poison the air, and putrefy, and cause to sicken--would he not shrink back in horror? A
bad principle, jestingly spoken--a falsehood, but of a word--may taint a whole nation! Let
the man to whom the great Master has given the might of mind, beware how he uses that might.
If for the furtherance of bad ends, what can be expected but that, as the hour of the closing
scene draws nigh, thoughts of harm done, and capacities distorted from their proper aim, and
strength so laid out that men must be worse instead of better, through the exertion of that
strength--will come and swarm like spectres around him?

"Be and continue poor, young man," so taught one whose counsels should be graven on the heart
of every youth, "while others around you grow rich by fraud and disloyalty. Be without place
and power, while others beg their way upward.

When Lingave awoke the next morning, he despatch'd his answer to his wealthy friend, and then
plodded on as in the days before.

LITTLE JANE

"Lift up!" was ejaculated as a signal! and click! went the glasses in the hands of a party
of tipsy men, drinking one night at the bar of one of the middling order of taverns. And many
a wild gibe was utter'd, and many a terrible blasphemy, and many an impure phrase sounded out
the pollution of the hearts of these half-crazed creatures, as they toss'd down their liquor,
and made the walls echo with their uproar. The first and foremost in recklessness was a girlish-faced,
fair-hair'd fellow of twenty-two or three years. They called him Mike. He seem'd to be look'd
upon by the others as a sort of prompter, from whom they were to take cue. And if the brazen
wickedness evinced by him in a hundred freaks and remarks to his companions, during their stay
in that place, were any test of his capacity--there might hardly be one more fit to go forward
as a guide on the road of destruction. From the conversation of the party, it appear'd that
they had been spending the early part of the evening in a gambling house.

A second, third and fourth time were the glasses fill'd; and the effect thereof began to be
perceiv'd in a still higher degree of noise and loquacity among the revellers. One of the serving-men
came in at this moment, and whisper'd the barkeeper, who went out, and in a moment return'd
again. "A person," he said, "wish'd to speak with Mr. Michael. He waited on the walk in front."

The individual whose name was mention'd, made his excuses to the others, telling them he would
be back in a moment, and left the room. As he shut the door behind him, and stepp'd into the
open air, he saw one of his brothers--his elder by eight or ten years--pacing to and fro with
rapid and uneven steps. As the man turn'd in his walk, and the glare of the street lamp fell
upon his face, the youth, half-benumb'd as his senses were, was somewhat startled at its paleness
and evident perturbation. "Come with me!" said the elder brother, hurriedly, "the illness of
our little Jane is worse, and I have been sent for you."

"Poh!" answered the young drunkard, very composedly, "is that all? I shall be home by-and-by,"
and he turn'd back again.

"But, brother, she is worse than ever before. Perhaps when you arrive she may be dead."

The tipsy one paus'd in his retreat, perhaps alarm'd at the utterance of that dread word, which
seldom fails to shoot a chill to the hearts of mortals. But he soon calm'd himself, and waving
his hand to the other: "Why, see," said he, "a score of times at least, have I been call'd
away to the last sickness of our good little sister; and each time it proves to be nothing
worse than some whim of the nurse or physician. Three years has the girl been able to live
very heartily under her disease; and I'll be bound she'll stay on earth three years longer."

And as he concluded this wicked and most brutal reply, the speaker open'd the door and went
into the bar-room. But in his intoxication, during the hour that follow'd, Mike was far from
being at ease. At the end of that hour, the words, "perhaps when you arrive she may be dead?"
were not effaced from his hearing yet, and he started for home. The elder brother had wended
his way back in sorrow.

Let me go before the younger one, awhile, to a room in that home. A little girl lay there dying.
She had been ill a long time; so it was no sudden thing for her parents, and her brethren and
sisters, to be called for the witness of the death agony. The girl was not what might be called
beautiful. And yet, there is a solemn kind of loveliness that always surrounds a sick child.
The sympathy for the weak and helpless sufferer, perhaps, increases it in our own ideas. The
ashiness and the moisture on the brow, and the film over the eyeballs--what man can look upon
the sight, and not feel his heart awed within him? Children, I have sometimes fancied too,
increase in beauty as their illness deepens.

Besides the nearest relatives of little Jane, standing round her bedside, was the family doctor.
He had just laid her wrist down upon the coverlet, and the look he gave the mother, was a look
in which there was no hope. "My child!" she cried, in uncontrollable agony, "O! my child!"
And the father, and the sons and daughters, were bowed down in grief, and thick tears rippled
between the fingers held before their eyes.

Then there was silence awhile. During the hour just by-gone, Jane had, in her childish way,
bestow'd a little gift upon each of her kindred, as a remembrancer when she should be dead
and buried in the grave. And there was one of these simple tokens which had not reach'd its
destination. She held it in her hand now. It was a very small much-thumbed book--a religious
story for infants, given her by her mother when she had first learn'd to read.

While they were all keeping this solemn stillness-broken only by the suppress'd sobs of those
who stood and watch'd for the passing away of the girl's soul--a confusion of some one entering
rudely, and speaking in a turbulent voice, was heard in an adjoining apartment. Again the voice
roughly sounded out; it was the voice of the drunkard Mike, and the father bade one of his
sons go and quiet the intruder "If nought else will do," said he sternly, "put him forth by
strength. We want no tipsy brawlers here, to disturb such a scene as this." For what moved
the sick girl uneasily on her pillow, and raised her neck, and motion'd to her mother? She
would that Mike should be brought to her side. And it was enjoin'd on him whom the father had
bade to eject the noisy one, that he should tell Mike his sister's request, and beg him to
come to her.

He came. The inebriate--his mind sober'd by the deep solemnity of the scene--stood there, and
leaned over to catch the last accounts of one who soon was to be with the spirits of heaven.
All was the silence of the deepest night. The dying child held the young man's hand in one
of hers; with the other she slowly lifted the trifling memorial she had assigned especially
for him, aloft in the air. Her arm shook--her eyes, now becoming glassy with the death-damps,
were cast toward her brother's face. She smiled pleasantly, and as an indistinct gurgle came
from her throat, the uplifted hand fell suddenly into the open palm of her brother's, depositing
the tiny volume there. Little Jane was dead.

From that night, the young man stepped no more in his wild courses, but was reform'd.

DUMB KATE

Not many years since--and yet long enough to have been before the abundance of railroads, and
similar speedy modes of conveyance--the travelers from Amboy village to the metropolis of our
republic were permitted to refresh themselves, and the horses of the stage had a breathing
spell, at a certain old-fashion'd tavern, about half way between the two places. It was a quaint,
comfortable, ancient house, that tavern. Huge buttonwood trees embower'd it round about, and
there was a long porch in front, the trellis'd work whereof, though old and moulder'd, had
been, and promised still to be for years, held together by the tangled folds of a grape vine
wreath'd about it like a tremendous serpent. 

At p. 319., enumerating the contents of chap. vi., we have "The Questions of the Accidence,
called the Poasing of the English Parts;" and chap. ix. is "Of Parsing and the kinds thereof, &c."

At
the end of a kind of introduction there is an "Advertisement by the
Printer," intimating that the author's book, "The Poasing of the Accidence,"
is likely to come forth.

From all this, it seems as if the two words were used indifferently.

F.R.A.

The Meaning of "Version" (Vol. ii., p. 466.).--T. appears to apply a peculiar meaning of his
own to the word "version," which it would have been quite as well if he had explained in a glossarial
note.

He thinks A.E.B. was mistaken in using that phrase in reference to
Lord Bacon's translation into Latin of his own English original work,
and he proceeds to compare (to what end does not very clearly appear)
a sentence from Lord Bacon's English text, with the same sentence
as re-translated back again from Lord Bacon's Latin by Wats.

Finally, T. concludes with this very singular remark: "Wats' version is the more exact of the
two!"

Does T. mean to call Lord Bacon's English text a version of his Latin, by anticipation of eighteen
years?

The only other authority for such meaning of the word would seem to be the facetious Dr. Prout,
who accused Tom Moore of a similar version of his celebrated papers.

A.E.B.

First Paper-mill in England (Vol. ii., p. 473).--The birthplace of the "High Germaine Spilman"
(Spielmann), celebrated by Churchyard, your English readers may not
easily discover by his description as quoted by DR. RIMBAULT.

"Lyndoam Bodenze" is Lindau am Boden-see, on the Lake of Constance (in German, Bodensee), once
a free imperial city, called, from its site on three islets in the lake, "the Swabian Venice," now
a pretty little town belonging to the kingdom of Bavaria.

V.

"Torn by Horses" (Vol. ii., p. 480.).--This cruel death was suffered by Ravaillac, who accomplished
what Jean Châtel failed in doing.

The execution took place on the 27th of May, 1610, with the most atrocious severities of torture,
of which the drawing by horses was but the last out of a scene that continued for many hours.
The day before he had been racked to the very extremity of human
suffering. The horses dragged at the wretch's body for an hour in
vain; at length a nobleman present sent one of his own, which was
stronger; but this even would not suffice. The executioner had to
sever the mangled body with his knife, before the limbs would give
way. I could add more of these details, but the subject is intolerable.

The
execution of Ravaillac was followed with the utmost exactness, but
with more cruelty, if possible, in the case of Damiens (sentenced
for the attempt on Louis le Bien-Aimé), who suffered on the Place
de Grève, March 28. 1757. The frightful business lasted from morning
till dusk! Here again the knife was used before the body gave way,
the horses having dragged at it for more than an hour first; the poor
wretch living, it is said, all the while!

I believe this was the
last instance of the punishment in France, if not in Europe.

A concise
summary of the trials of these men, and all the hideous details of
their tortures and execution, will be found, by those who have a taste
for such things, in the third volume of the new series of the Neuer
Pitaval, edited by Hitzig and Haring (Leipzig, Brockhaus),--a collection
of causes célèbres which has been in course of publication at intervals
since 1842. The last look was bestow'd on the dead girl's face
by those who loved her so well in life, and then she was softly laid away to her sleep beneath
that green grass covering.

Yet in the churchyard on the hill is Kate's grave. There stands a little white stone at the
head, and verdure grows richly there; and gossips, some-times of a Sabbath afternoon, rambling
over that gathering-place of the gone from earth, stop a while, and con over the dumb girl's
hapless story.

TALK TO AN ART-UNION

A Brooklyn fragment

It is a beautiful truth that all men contain something of the artist in them. And perhaps it
is the case that the greatest artists live and die, the world and themselves alike ignorant
what they possess. Who would not mourn that an ample palace, of surpassingly graceful architecture,
fill'd with luxuries, and embellish'd with fine pictures and sculpture, should stand cold and
still and vacant, and never be known or enjoy'd by its owner? Would such a fact as this cause
your sadness? Then be sad. For there is a palace, to which the courts of the most sumptuous
kings are but a frivolous patch, and, though it is always waiting for them, not one of its
owners ever enters there with any genuine sense of its grandeur and glory.

I think of few heroic actions, which cannot be traced to the artistical impulse. He who does
great deeds, does them from his innate sensitiveness to moral beauty. Such men are not merely
artists, they are also artistic material. Washington in some great crisis, Lawrence on the
bloody deck of the Chesapeake, Mary Stuart at the block, Kossuth in captivity, and Mazzini
in exile--all great rebels and innovators, exhibit the highest phases of the artist spirit.
The painter, the sculptor, the poet, express heroic beauty better in description; but the others
are heroic beauty, the best belov'd of art.

Talk not so much, then, young artist, of the great old masters, who but painted and chisell'd.
Study not only their productions. There is a still higher school for him who would kindle his
fire with coal from the altar of the loftiest and purest art. It is the school of all grand
actions and grand virtues, of heroism, of the death of patriots and martyrs--of all the mighty
deeds written in the pages of history--deeds of daring, and enthusiasm, devotion, and fortitude.

BLOOD-MONEY

"Guilty of the body and the blood of Christ."

I.

    Of olden time, when it came to pass
    That the beautiful god, Jesus, should finish his work on earth,
    Then went Judas, and sold the divine youth,
    And took pay for his body.

    Curs'd was the deed, even before the sweat of the clutching hand
      grew dry;
    And darkness frown'd upon the seller of the like of God,
    Where, as though earth lifted her breast to throw him from her,
      and heaven refused him,
    He hung in the air, self-slaughter'd.

    The cycles, with their long shadows, have stalk'd silently forward,
    Since those ancient days--many a pouch enwrapping meanwhile
    Its fee, like that paid for the son of Mary.

    And still goes one, saying,
    "What will ye give me, and I will deliver this man unto you?"
    And they make the covenant, and pay the pieces of silver.

II

    Look forth, deliverer,
    Look forth, first-born of the dead,
    Over the tree-tops of Paradise;
    See thyself in yet continued bonds,
    Toilsome and poor, thou bear'st man's form again,
    Thou art reviled, scourged, put into prison,
    Hunted from the arrogant equality of the rest;
    With staves and swords throng the willing servants of authority,
    Again they surround thee, mad with devilish spite;
    Toward thee stretch the hands of a multitude, like vultures' talons,
    The meanest spit in thy face, they smite thee with their palms;
    Bruised, bloody, and pinion'd is thy body,
    More sorrowful than death is thy soul.

    Witness of anguish, brother of slaves,
    Not with thy price closed the price of thine image:
    And still Iscariot plies his trade.

    April, 1843.

    PAUMANOK.

WOUNDED IN THE HOUSE OF FRIENDS

"And one shall say unto him. What are these wounds in thy hands? Then he shall answer Those
with which I was wounded in the house of my friends."--Zechariah, xiii. 6.

      If thou art balk'd, O Freedom,
    The victory is not to thy manlier foes;
    From the house of friends comes the death stab.

      Virginia, mother of greatness,
    Blush not for being also mother of slaves;
    You might have borne deeper slaves--
    Doughfaces, crawlers, lice of humanity--
    Terrific screamers of freedom,
    Who roar and bawl, and get hot i' the face,
    But were they not incapable of august crime,
    Would quench the hopes of ages for a drink--
    Muck-worms, creeping flat to the ground,
    A dollar dearer to them than Christ's blessing;
    All loves, all hopes, less than the thought of gain,
    In life walking in that as in a shroud;
    Men whom the throes of heroes,
    Great deeds at which the gods might stand appal'd,
    The shriek of the drown'd, the appeal of women,
    The exulting laugh of untied empires,
    Would touch them never in the heart,
    But only in the pocket.

      Hot-headed Carolina,
    Well may you curl your lip;
    With all your bondsmen, bless the destiny
    Which brings you no such breed as this.

      Arise, young North!
    Our elder blood flows in the veins of cowards:
    The gray-hair'd sneak, the blanch'd poltroon,
    The feign'd or real shiverer at tongues,
    That nursing babes need hardly cry the less for--
    Are they to be our tokens always?

SAILING THE MISSISSIPPI AT MIDNIGHT

    Vast and starless, the pall of heaven
      Laps on the trailing pall below;
    And forward, forward, in solemn darkness,
      As if to the sea of the lost we go.

    Now drawn nigh the edge of the river,
      Weird-like creatures suddenly rise;
    Shapes that fade, dissolving outlines
      Baffle the gazer's straining eyes.

    Towering upward and bending forward,
      Wild and wide their arms are thrown,
    Ready to pierce with forked fingers
      Him who touches their realm upon.

    Tide of youth, thus thickly planted,
      While in the eddies onward you swim,
    Thus on the shore stands a phantom army,
      Lining forever the channel's rim.

    Steady, helmsman! you guide the immortal;
      Many a wreck is beneath you piled,
    Many a brave yet unwary sailor
      Over these waters has been beguiled.

    Nor is it the storm or the scowling midnight,
      Cold, or sickness, or fire's dismay--
    Nor is it the reef, or treacherous quicksand,
      Will peril you most on your twisted way.

    But when there comes a voluptuous languor,
      Soft the sunshine, silent the air,
    Bewitching your craft with safety and sweetness,
      Then, young pilot of life, beware.

NOVEMBER BOUGHS

OUR EMINENT VISITORS

Past, Present and Future

Welcome to them each and all! They do good--the deepest, widest, most needed good--though quite
certainly not in the ways attempted--which have, at times, something irresistibly comic. What
can be more farcical, for instance, than the sight of a worthy gentleman coming three or four
thousand miles through wet and wind to speak complacently and at great length on matters of
which he both entirely mistakes or knows nothing--before crowds of auditors equally complacent,
and equally at fault?

Yet welcome and thanks, we say, to those visitors we have, and have had, from abroad among
us--and may the procession continue! We have had Dickens and Thackeray, Froude, Herbert Spencer,
Oscar Wilde, Lord Coleridge--soldiers, savants, poets--and now Matthew Arnold and Irving the
actor. Some have come to make money--some for a "good time"--some to help us along and give
us advice--and some undoubtedly to investigate, bona fide, this great problem, democratic America,
looming upon the world with such cumulative power through a hundred years, now with the evident
intention (since the secession war) to stay, and take a leading hand, for many a century to
come, in civilization's and humanity's eternal game. But alas! that very investigation--the
method of that investigation--is where the deficit most surely and helplessly comes in. Let
not Lord Coleridge and Mr. Arnold (to say nothing of the illustrious actor) imagine that when
they have met and survey'd the etiquettical gatherings of our wealthy, distinguish'd and sure-to-be-put-forward-on-such-occasions
citizens (New York, Boston, Philadelphia, &c., have certain stereotyped strings of them, continually
lined and paraded like the lists of dishes at hotel tables--you are sure to get the same over
and over again--it is very amusing)--and the bowing and introducing, the receptions at the
swell clubs, the eating and drinking and praising and praising back--and the next "day riding
about Central Park, or doing the" Public Institutions "--and so passing through, one after
another, the full-dress coteries of the Atlantic cities, all grammatical and cultured and correct,
with the toned-down manners of the gentlemen, and the kid-gloves, and luncheons and finger-glasses--Let
not our eminent visitors, we say, suppose that, by means of these experiences, they have "seen
America," or captur'd any distinctive clew or purport thereof. Not a bit of it. Of the pulse-beats
that lie within and vitalize this Commonweal to-day--of the hard-pan purports and idiosyncrasies
pursued faithfully and triumphantly by its bulk of men North and South, generation after generation,
superficially unconscious of their own aims, yet none the less pressing onward with deathless
intuition--those coteries do not furnish the faintest scintilla. In the Old World the best
flavor and significance of a race may possibly need to be look'd for in its "upper classes,"
its gentries, its court, its etat major. In the United States the rule is revers'd. Besides
(and a point, this, perhaps deepest of all,) the special marks of our grouping and design are
not going to be understood in a hurry. The lesson and scanning right on the ground are difficult;
I was going to say they are impossible to foreigners--but I have occasionally found the clearest
appreciation of all, coming from far-off quarters. Surely nothing could be more apt, not only
for our eminent visitors present and to come, but for home study, than the following editorial
criticism of the London Times on Mr. Froude's visits and lectures here a few years ago, and
the culminating dinner given at Delmonico's, with its brilliant array of guests:

"We read the list," says the Times, "of those who assembled to do honor to Mr. Froude: there
were Mr. Emerson, Mr. Beecher, Mr. Curtis, Mr. Bryant; we add the names of those who sent letters
of regret that they could not attend in person--Mr. Longfellow, Mr. Whittier. They are names
which are well known--almost as well known and as much honor'd in England as in America; and
yet what must we say in the end? The American people outside this assemblage of writers is
something vaster and greater than they, singly or together, can comprehend. It cannot be said
of any or all of them that they can speak for their nation. We who look on at this distance
are able perhaps on that account to see the more clearly that there are qualities of the American
people which find no representation, no voice, among these their spokesmen. And what is true
of them is true of the English class of whom Mr. Froude may be said to be the ambassador. Mr.
Froude is master of a charming style. He has the gift of grace and the gift of sympathy. Taking
any single character as the subject of his study, he may succeed after a very short time in
so comprehending its workings as to be able to present a living figure to the intelligence
and memory of his readers. But the movements of a nation, the, voiceless purpose of a people
which cannot put its own thoughts into words, yet acts upon them in each successive generation--these
things do not lie within his grasp.... The functions of literature such as he represents are
limited in their action; the influence he can wield is artificial and restricted, and, while
he and his hearers please and are pleas'd with pleasant periods, his great mass of national
life will flow around them unmov'd in its tides by action as powerless as that of the dwellers
by the shore to direct the currents of the ocean."

A thought, here, that needs to be echoed, expanded, permanently treasur'd by our literary classes
and educators. (The gestation, the youth, the knitting preparations, are now over, and it is
full time for definite purpose, result.) How few think of it, though it is the impetus and
background of our whole Nationality and popular life. In the present brief memorandum I very
likely for the first time awake "the intelligent reader" to the idea and inquiry whether there
isn't such a thing as the distinctive genius of our democratic New World, universal, immanent,
bringing to a head the best experience of the past--not specially literary or intellectual--not
merely "good," (in the Sunday School and Temperance Society sense,)-some invisible spine and
great sympathetic to these States, resident only in the average people, in their practical
life, in their physiology, in their emotions, in their nebulous yet fiery patriotism, in the
armies (both sides) through the whole secession war--an identity and character which indeed
so far "finds no voice among their spokesmen."

To my mind America, vast and fruitful as it appears to-day, is even yet, for its most important
results, entirely in the tentative state; its very formation-stir and whirling trials and essays
more splendid and picturesque, to my thinking, than the accomplish'd growths and shows of other
lands, through European history, or Greece, or all the past. Surely a New World literature,
worthy the name, is not to be, if it ever comes, some fiction, or fancy, or bit of sentimentalism
or polish'd work merely by itself, or in abstraction. So long as such literature is no born
branch and offshoot of the Nationality, rooted and grown from its roots, and fibred with its
fibre, it can never answer any deep call or perennial need. Perhaps the untaught Republic is
wiser than its teachers. Beyond the old masterpieces, the Iliad, the interminable Hindu epics,
the Greek tragedies, even the Bible itself, range the immense facts of what must have preceded
them, their sine qua non--the veritable poems and masterpieces, of which, grand as they are,
the word-statements are but shreds and cartoons.

For to-day and the States, I think the vividest, rapidest, most stupendous processes ever known,
ever perform'd by man or nation, on the largest scales and in countless varieties, are now
and here presented. Not as our poets and preachers are always conventionally putting it--but
quite different. Some colossal foundry, the flaming of the fire, the melted metal, the pounding
trip-hammers, the surging crowds of workmen shifting from point to point, the murky shadows,
the rolling haze, the discord, the crudeness, the deafening din, the disorder, the dross and
clouds of dust, the waste and extravagance of material, the shafts of darted sunshine through
the vast open roof-scuttles aloft-the mighty castings, many of them not yet fitted, perhaps
delay'd long, yet each in its due time, with definite place and use and meaning--Such, more
like, is a symbol of America.

After all of which, returning to our starting-point, we reiterate, and in the whole Land's
name, a welcome to our eminent guests. Visits like theirs, and hospitalities, and hand-shaking,
and face meeting face, and the distant brought near--what divine solvents they are! Travel,
reciprocity, "interviewing," intercommunion of lands--what are they but Democracy's and the
highest Law's best aids? O that our own country--that every land in the world--could annually,
continually, receive the poets, thinkers, scientists, even the official magnates, of other
lands, as honor'd guests. O that the United States, especially the West, could have had a good
long visit and explorative jaunt, from the noble and melancholy Tourgueneff, before he died--or
from Victor Hugo--or Thomas Carlyle. Castelar, Tennyson, any of the two or three great Parisian
essayists--were they and we to come face to face, how is it possible but that the right understanding
would ensue?

THE BIBLE AS POETRY

I suppose one cannot at this day say anything new, from a literary point of view, about those
autochthonic bequests of Asia--the Hebrew Bible, the mighty Hindu epics, and a hundred lesser
but typical works; (not now definitely including the Iliad--though that work was certainly
of Asiatic genesis, as Homer himself was--considerations which seem curiously ignored.) But
will there ever be a time or place--ever a student, however modern, of the grand art, to whom
those compositions will not afford profounder lessons than all else of their kind in the garnerage
of the past? Could there be any more opportune suggestion, to the current popular writer and
reader of verse, what the office of poet was in primeval times--and is yet capable of being,
anew, adjusted entirely to the modern?

All the poems of Orientalism, with the Old and New Testaments at the centre, tend to deep and
wide, (I don't know but the deepest and widest,) psychological development--with little, or
nothing at all, of the mere esthetic, the principal verse-requirement of our day. Very late,
but unerringly, comes to every capable student the perception that it is not in beauty, it
is not in art, it is not even in science, that the profoundest laws of the case have their
eternal sway and outcropping.

In his discourse on "Hebrew Poets" De Sola Mendes said: "The fundamental feature of Judaism,
of the Hebrew nationality, was religion; its poetry was naturally religious. Its subjects,
God and Providence, the covenants with Israel, God in Nature, and as reveal'd, God the Creator
and Governor, Nature in her majesty and beauty, inspired hymns and odes to Nature's God. And
then the checker'd history of the nation furnish'd allusions, illustrations, and subjects for
epic display--the glory of the sanctuary, the offerings, the splendid ritual, the Holy City,
and lov'd Palestine with its pleasant valleys and wild tracts." Dr. Mendes said "that rhyming
was not a characteristic of Hebrew poetry at all. Metre was not a necessary mark of poetry.
Great poets discarded it; the early Jewish poets knew it not." Compared with the famed epics
of Greece, and lesser ones since, the spinal supports of the Bible are simple and meagre. All
its history, biography, narratives, &c., are as beads, strung on and indicating the eternal
thread of the Deific purpose and power. Yet with only deepest faith for impetus, and such Deific
purpose for palpable or impalpable theme, it often transcends the masterpieces of Hellas, and
all masterpieces.

The metaphors daring beyond account, the lawless soul, extravagant by our standards, the glow
of love and friendship, the fervent kiss--nothing in argument or logic, but unsurpass'd in
proverbs, in religious ecstasy, in suggestions of common mortality and death, man's great equalizers--the
spirit everything, the ceremonies and forms of the churches nothing, faith limitless, its immense
sensuousness immensely spiritual--an incredible, all-inclusive non-worldliness and dew-scented
illiteracy (the antipodes of our Nineteenth Century business absorption and morbid refinement)--no
hair-splitting doubts, no sickly sulking and sniffling, no "Hamlet," no "Adonais," no "Thanatopsis,"
no "In Memoriam."

The culminated proof of the poetry of a country is the quality of its personnel, which, in
any race, can never be really superior without superior poems. The finest blending of individuality
with universality (in my opinion nothing out of the galaxies of the "Iliad," or Shakspere's
heroes, or from the Tennysonian "Idylls," so lofty, devoted and starlike,) typified in the
songs of those old Asiatic lands. Men and women as great columnar trees. Nowhere else the abnegation
of self towering in such quaint sublimity; nowhere else the simplest human emotions conquering
the gods of heaven, and fate itself. (The episode, for instance, toward the close of the "Mahabharata"--the
journey of the wife Savitri with the god of death, Yama,

    "One terrible to see--blood-red his garb,
    His body huge and dark, bloodshot his eyes,
    Which flamed like suns beneath his turban cloth,
    Arm'd was he with a noose,"

who carries off the soul of the dead husband, the wife tenaciously following, and--by the resistless
charm of perfect poetic recitation!-- eventually redeeming her captive mate.)

I remember how enthusiastically William H. Seward, in his last days, once expatiated on these
themes, from his travels in Turkey, Egypt, and Asia Minor, finding the oldest Biblical narratives
exactly illustrated there to-day with apparently no break or change along three thousand years--the
veil'd women, the costumes, the gravity and simplicity, all the manners just the same. The
veteran Trelawney said he found the only real nobleman of the world in a good average specimen
of the mid-aged or elderly Oriental. In the East the grand figure, always leading, is the old
man, majestic, with flowing beard, paternal, &c. In Europe and America, it is, as we know,
the young fellow--in novels, a handsome and interesting hero, more or less juvenile--in operas,
a tenor with blooming cheeks, black mustache, superficial animation, and perhaps good lungs,
but no more depth than skim-milk. But reading folks probably get their information of those
Bible areas and current peoples, as depicted in print by English and French cads, the most
shallow, impudent, supercilious brood on earth.

I have said nothing yet of the cumulus of associations (perfectly legitimate parts of its influence,
and finally in many respects the dominant parts,) of the Bible as a poetic entity, and of every
portion of it. Not the old edifice only--the congeries also of events and struggles and surroundings,
of which it has been the scene and motive--even the horrors, dreads, deaths. How many ages
and generations have brooded and wept and agonized over this book! What untellable joys and
ecstasies--what support to martyrs at the stake--from it. (No really great song can ever attain
full purport till long after the death of its singer--till it has accrued and incorporated
the many passions, many joys and sorrows, it has itself arous'd.) To what myriads has it been
the shore and rock of safety--the refuge from driving tempest and wreck! Translated in all
languages, how it has united this diverse world! Of civilized lands to-day, whose of our retrospects
has it not interwoven and link'd and permeated? Not only does it bring us what is clasp'd within
its covers; nay, that is the least of what it brings. Of its thousands, there is not a verse,
not a word, but is thick-studded with human emotions, successions of fathers and sons, mothers
and daughters, of our own antecedents, inseparable from that background of us, on which, phantasmal
as it is, all that we are to-day inevitably depends--our ancestry, our past.

Strange, but true, that the principal factor in cohering the nations, eras and paradoxes of
the globe, by giving them a common platform of two or three great ideas, a commonalty of origin,
and projecting kosmic brotherhood, the dream of all hope, all time--that the long trains gestations,
attempts and failures, resulting in the New World, and in modern solidarity and politics--are
to be identified and resolv'd back into a collection of old poetic lore, which, more than any
one thing else, has been the axis of civilization and history through thousands of years--and
except for which this America of ours, with its polity and essentials, could not now be existing.

No true bard will ever contravene the Bible. If the time ever comes when iconoclasm does its
extremest in one direction against the Books of the Bible in its present form, the collection
must still survive in another, and dominate just as much as hitherto, or more than hitherto,
through its divine and primal poetic structure. To me, that is the living and definite element-principle
of the work, evolving everything else. Then the continuity; the oldest and newest Asiatic utterance
and character, and all between, holding together, like the apparition of the sky, and coming
to us the same. Even to our Nineteenth Century here are the fountain heads of song.

FATHER TAYLOR (AND ORATORY)

I have never heard but one essentially perfect orator--one who satisfied those depths of the
emotional nature that in most cases go through life quite untouch'd, unfed--who held every
hearer by spells which no conventionalist, high or low--nor any pride or composure, nor resistance
of intellect--could stand against for ten minutes.

And by the way, is it not strange, of this first-class genius in the rarest and most profound
of humanity's arts, that it will be necessary, (so nearly forgotten and rubb'd out is his name
by the rushing whirl of the last twenty-five years,) to first inform current readers that he
was an orthodox minister, of no particular celebrity, who during a long life preach'd especially
to Yankee sailors in an old fourth-class church down by the wharves in Boston--had practically
been a seafaring man through his earlier years--and died April 6, 1871, "just as the tide turn'd,
going out with the ebb as an old salt should"? His name is now comparatively unknown, outside
of Boston--and even there, (though Dickens, Mr. Jameson, Dr. Bartol and Bishop Haven have commemorated
him,) is mostly but a reminiscence.

During my visits to "the Hub," in 1859 and '60 I several times saw and heard Father Taylor.
In the spring or autumn, quiet Sunday forenoons, I liked to go down early to the quaint ship-cabin-looking
church where the old man minister'd--to enter and leisurely scan the building, the low ceiling,
everything strongly timber'd (polish'd and rubb'd apparently,) the dark rich colors, the gallery,
all in half-light--and smell the aroma of old wood--to watch the auditors, sailors, mates,
"matlows," officers, singly or in groups, as they came in--their physiognomies, forms, dress,
gait, as they walk'd along the aisles--their postures, seating themselves in the rude, roomy,
undoor'd, uncushion'd pews--and the evident effect upon them of the place, occasion, and atmosphere.

The pulpit, rising ten or twelve feet high, against the rear wall, was back' d by a significant
mural painting, in oil--showing out its bold lines and strong hues through the subdued light
of the building--of a stormy sea, the waves high-rolling, and amid them an old-style ship,
all bent over, driving through the gale, and in great peril--a vivid and effectual piece of
limning, not meant for the criticism of artists (though I think it had merit even from that
standpoint,) but for its effect upon the congregation, and what it would convey to them.

Father Taylor was a moderate-sized man, indeed almost small, (reminded me of old Booth, the
great actor, and my favorite of those and preceding days,) well advanced in years, but alert,
with mild blue or gray eyes, and good presence and voice. Soon as he open'd his mouth I ceas'd
to pay any attention to church or audience, or pictures or lights and shades; a far more potent
charm entirely sway'd me. In the course of the sermon, (there was no sign of any MS., or reading
from notes,) some of the parts would be in the highest degree majestic and picturesque. Colloquial
in a severe sense, it often lean'd to Biblical and Oriental forms. Especially were all allusions
to ships and the ocean and sailors' lives, of unrival'd power and life-likeness.

Sometimes there were passages of fine language and composition, even from the purist's point
of view. A few arguments, and of the best, but always brief and simple. One realized what grip
there might have been in such words-of-mouth talk as that of Socrates and Epictetus. In the
main, I should say, of any of these discourses, that the old Demosthenean rule and requirement
of "action, action, action," first in its inward and then (very moderate and restrain'd) its
outward sense, was the quality that had leading fulfilment.

I remember I felt the deepest impression from the old man's prayers, which invariably affected
me to tears. Never, on similar or any other occasions, have I heard such impassion'd pleading--such
human-harassing reproach (like Hamlet to his mother, in the closet)--such probing to the very
depths of that latent conscience and remorse which probably lie somewhere in the background
of every life, every soul. For when Father Taylor preach'd or pray'd, the rhetoric and art,
the mere words, (which usually play such a big part) seem'd altogether to disappear, and the
live feeling advanced upon you and seiz'd you with a power before unknown. Everybody felt this
marvellous and awful influence. One young sailor, a Rhode Islander, (who came every Sunday,
and I got acquainted with, and talk'd to once or twice as we went away,) told me, "that must
be the Holy Ghost we read of in the Testament."

I should be at a loss to make any comparison with other preachers or public speakers. When
a child I had heard Elias Hicks--and Father Taylor (though so different in personal appearance,
for Elias was of tall and most shapely form, with black eyes that blazed at times like meteors,)
always reminded me of him. Both had the same inner, apparently inexhaustible, fund of latent
volcanic passion--the same tenderness, blended with a curious remorseless firmness, as of some
surgeon operating on a belov'd patient. Hearing such men sends to the winds all the books,
and formulas, and polish'd speaking, and rules of oratory.

Talking of oratory, why is it that the unsophisticated practices often strike deeper than the
train'd ones? Why do our experiences perhaps of some local country exhorter--or often in the
West or South at political meetings--bring the most definite results? In my time I have heard
Webster, Clay, Edward Everett, Phillips, and such celebres yet I recall the minor but life-eloquence
of men like John P. Hale, Cassius Clay, and one or two of the old abolition "fanatics" ahead
of all those stereotyped fames. Is not--I sometimes question--the first, last, and most important
quality of all, in training for a "finish'd speaker," generally unsought, unreck'd of, both
by teacher and pupil? Though may-be it cannot be taught, anyhow. At any rate, we need to clearly
understand the distinction between oratory and elocution. Under the latter art, including some
of high order, there is indeed no scarcity in the United States, preachers, lawyers, actors,
lecturers, &c. With all, there seem to be few real orators--almost none.

I repeat, and would dwell upon it (more as suggestion than mere fact)--among all the brilliant
lights of bar or stage I have heard in my time (for years in New York and other cities I haunted
the courts to witness notable trials, and have heard all the famous actors and actresses that
have been in America the past fifty years) though I recall marvellous effects from one or other
of them, I never had anything in the way of vocal utterance to shake me through and through,
and become fix'd, with its accompaniments, in my memory, like those prayers and sermons--like
Father Taylor's personal electricity and the whole scene there--the prone ship in the gale,
and dashing wave and foam for background--in the little old sea-church in Boston, those summer
Sundays just before the secession war broke out.

THE SPANISH ELEMENT IN OUR NATIONALITY

[Our friends at Santa Fe, New Mexico, have just finish'd their long-drawn-out anniversary of
the 333d year of the settlement of their city by the Spanish. The good, gray Walt Whitman was
asked to write them a poem in commemoration. Instead he wrote them a letter as follows:--Philadelphia
Press, August 5, 1883.]

CAMDEN, NEW JERSEY, July 20, 1883.

To Messrs. Griffin, Martinez, Prince, and other Gentlemen at Santa Fe:

DEAR SIRS:--Your kind invitation to visit you and deliver a poem for the 333d Anniversary of
founding Santa Fe has reach'd me so late that I have to decline, with sincere regret. But I
will say a few words offhand.

We Americans have yet to really learn our own antecedents, and sort them, to unify them. They
will be found ampler than has been supposed, and in widely different sources. Thus far, impress'd
by New England writers and schoolmasters, we tacitly abandon ourselves to the notion that our
United States have been fashion'd from the British Islands only, and essentially form a second
England only--which is a very great mistake. Many leading traits for our future national personality,
and some of the best ones, will certainly prove to have originated from other than British
stock. As it is, the British and German, valuable as they are in the concrete, already threaten
excess. Or rather, I should say, they have certainly reach'd that excess. To-day, something
outside of them, and to counterbalance them, is seriously needed.

The seething materialistic and business vortices of the United States, in their present devouring
relations, controlling and belittling everything else, are, in my opinion, but a vast and indispensable
stage in the new world's development, and are certainly to be follow'd by something entirely
different--at least by immense modifications. Character, literature, a society worthy the name,
are yet to be establish'd, through a nationality of noblest spiritual, heroic and democratic
attributes--not one of which at present definitely exists--entirely different from the past,
though unerringly founded on it, and to justify it.

To that composite American identity of the future, Spanish character will supply some of the
most needed parts. No stock shows a grander historic retrospect--grander in religiousness and
loyalty, or for patriotism, courage, decorum, gravity and honor. (It is time to dismiss utterly
the illusion-compound, half raw-head-and-bloody-bones and half Mysteries-of-Udolpho, inherited
from the English writers of the past 200 years. It is time to realize--for it is certainly
true--that there will not be found any more cruelty, tyranny, superstition, &c., in the resume
of past Spanish history than in the corresponding resume of Anglo-Norman history. Nay, I think
there will not be found so much.)

Then another point, relating to American ethnology, past and to come, I will here touch upon
at a venture. As to our aboriginal or Indian population--the Aztec in the South, and many a
tribe in the North and West--I know it seems to be agreed that they must gradually dwindle
as time rolls on, and in a few generations more leave only a reminiscence, a blank. But I am
not at all clear about that. As America, from its many far-back sources and current supplies,
develops, adapts, entwines, faithfully identifies its own--are we to see it cheerfully accepting
and using all the contributions of foreign lands from the whole outside globe--and then rejecting
the only ones distinctively its own--the autochthonic ones?

As to the Spanish stock of our Southwest, it is certain to me that we do not begin to appreciate
the splendor and sterling value of its race element. Who knows but that element, like the course
of some subterranean river, dipping invisibly for a hundred or two years, is now to emerge
in broadest flow and permanent action?

If I might assume to do so, I would like to send you the most cordial, heartfelt congratulations
of your American fellow-countrymen here. You have more friends in the Northern and Atlantic
regions than you suppose, and they are deeply interested in the development of the great Southwestern
interior, and in what your festival would arouse to public attention.

Very respectfully, &c.,

WALT WHITMAN.

WHAT LURKS BEHIND SHAKSPERE'S HISTORICAL PLAYS

We all know how much mythus there is in the Shakspere question as it stands to-day. Beneath
a few foundations of proved facts are certainly engulf d far more dim and elusive ones, of
deepest importance-- tantalizing and half suspected--suggesting explanations that one dare
not put in plain statement. But coming at once to the point, the English historical plays are
to me not only the most eminent as dramatic performances (my maturest judgment confirming the
impressions of my early years, that the distinctiveness and glory of the Poet reside not in
his vaunted dramas of the passions, but those founded on the contests of English dynasties,
and the French wars,) but form, as we get it all, the chief in a complexity of puzzles. Conceiv'd
out of the fullest heat and pulse of European feudalism--personifying in unparallel'd ways
the mediaeval aristocracy, its towering spirit of ruthless and gigantic caste, with its own
peculiar air and arrogance (no mere imitation)--only one of the "wolfish earls" so plenteous
in the plays themselves, or some born descendant and knower, might seem to be the true author
of those amazing works--works in some respects greater than anything else in recorded literature.

The start and germ-stock of the pieces on which the present speculation is founded are undoubtedly
(with, at the outset, no small amount of bungling work) in "Henry VI." It is plain to me that
as profound and forecasting a brain and pen as ever appear'd in literature, after floundering
somewhat in the first part of that trilogy--or perhaps draughting it more or less experimentally
or by accident--afterward developed and defined his plan in the Second and Third Parts, and
from time to time, thenceforward, systematically enlarged it to majestic and mature proportions
in "Richard II," "Richard III," "King John," "Henry IV," "Henry V," and even in "Macbeth,"
"Coriolanus" and "Lear." For it is impossible to grasp the whole cluster of those plays, however
wide the intervals and different circumstances of their composition, without thinking of them
as, in a free sense, the result of an essentially controling plan. 'What was that plan? Or,
rather, what was veil'd behind it?--for to me there was certainly something so veil'd. Even
the episodes of Cade, Joan of Arc, and the like (which sometimes seem to me like interpolations
allow'd,) may be meant to foil the possible sleuth, and throw any too 'cute pursuer off the
scent. In the whole matter I should specially dwell on, and make much of, that inexplicable
element of every highest poetic nature which causes it to cover up and involve its real purpose
and meanings in folded removes and far recesses. Of this trait--hiding the nest where common
seekers may never find it--the Shaksperean works afford the most numerous and mark'd illustrations
known to me. I would even call that trait the leading one through the whole of those works.

All the foregoing to premise a brief statement of how and where I get my new light on Shakspere.
Speaking of the special English plays, my friend William O'Connor says:

  They seem simply and rudely historical in their motive, as aiming
  to give in the rough a tableau of warring dynasties,--and carry to
  me a lurking sense of being in aid of some ulterior design, probably
  well enough understood in that age, which perhaps time and criticism
  will reveal.... Their atmosphere is one of barbarous and tumultuous
  gloom,--they do not make us love the times they limn,... and it is
  impossible to believe that the greatest of the Elizabethan men could
  have sought to indoctrinate the age with the love of feudalism which
  his own drama in its entirety, if the view taken of it herein be true,
  certainly and subtly saps and mines.

Reading the just-specified play in the light of Mr. O'Connor's suggestion, I defy any one to
escape such new and deep utterance- meanings, like magic ink, warm' d by the fire, and previously
invisible. Will it not indeed be strange if the author of "Othello" and "Hamlet" is destin'd
to live in America, in a generation or two, less as the cunning draughtsman of the passions,
and more as putting on record the first full expose--and by far the most vivid one, immeasurably
ahead of doctrinaires and economists--of the political theory and results, or the reason-why
and necessity for them which America has come on earth to abnegate and replace?

The summary of my suggestion would be, therefore, that while the more the rich and tangled
jungle of the Shaksperean area is travers'd and studied, and the more baffled and mix'd, as
so far appears, becomes the exploring student (who at last surmises everything, and remains
certain of nothing,) it is possible a future age of criticism, diving deeper, mapping the land
and lines freer, completer than hitherto, may discover in the plays named the scientific (Baconian?)
inauguration of modern democracy--furnishing realistic and first-class artistic portraitures
of the mediaeval world, the feudal personalities, institutes, in their morbid accumulations,
deposits, upon politics and sociology,--may penetrate to that hard-pan, far down and back of
the ostent of to-day, on which (and on which only) the progressism of the last two centuries
has built this Democracy which now hold's secure lodgment over the whole civilized world.

Whether such was the unconscious, or (as I think likely) the more or less conscious, purpose
of him who fashion'd those marvellous architectonics, is a secondary question.

A THOUGHT ON SHAKSPERE

The most distinctive poems--the most permanently rooted and with heartiest reason for being--the
copious cycle of Arthurian legends, or the almost equally copious Charlemagne cycle, or the
poems of the Cid, or Scandinavian Eddas, or Nibelungen, or Chaucer, or Spenser, or bona fide
Ossian, or Inferno--probably had their rise in the great historic perturbations, which they
came in to sum up and confirm, indirectly embodying results to date. Then however precious
to "culture," the grandest of those poems, it may be said, preserve and typify results offensive
to the modern spirit, and long past away. To state it briefly, and taking the strongest examples,
in Homer lives the ruthless military prowess of Greece, and of its special god-descended dynastic
houses; in Shakspere the dragon-rancors and stormy feudal Splendor of mediaeval caste.

Poetry, largely consider'd, is an evolution, sending out improved and-ever-expanded types--in
one sense, the past, even the best of it, necessarily giving place, and dying out. For our
existing world, the bases on which all the grand old poems were built have become vacuums--and
even those of many comparatively modern ones are broken and half-gone. For us to-day, not their
own intrinsic value, vast as that is, backs and maintains those poems--but a mountain-high
growth of associations, the layers of successive ages. Everywhere--their own lands included--(is
there not something terrible in the tenacity with which the one book out of millions holds
its grip?)--the Homeric and Virgilian works, the interminable ballad-romances of the middle
ages, the utterances of Dante, Spenser, and others, are upheld by their cumulus-entrenchment
in scholarship, and as precious, always welcome, unspeakably valuable reminiscences.

Even the one who at present reigns unquestion'd--of Shakspere--for all he stands for so much
in modern literature, he stands entirely for the mighty esthetic sceptres of the past, not
for the spiritual and democratic, the sceptres of the future. The inward and outward characteristics
of Shakspere are his vast and rich variety of persons and themes, with his wondrous delineation
of each and all,--not only limitless funds of verbal and pictorial resource, but great excess,
superfoetation--mannerism, like a fine, aristocratic perfume, holding a touch of musk (Euphues,
his mark)--with boundless sumptuousness and adornment, real velvet and gems, not shoddy nor
paste--but a good deal of bombast and fustian--(certainly some terrific mouthing in Shakspere!)

Superb and inimitable as all is, it is mostly an objective and physiological kind of power
and beauty the soul finds in Shakspere--a style supremely grand of the sort, but in my opinion
stopping short of the grandest sort, at any rate for fulfilling and satisfying modern and scientific
and democratic American purposes. Think, not of growths as forests primeval, or Yellowstone
geysers, or Colorado ravines, but of costly marble palaces, and palace rooms, and the noblest
fixings and furniture, and noble owners and occupants to correspond--think of carefully built
gardens from the beautiful but sophisticated gardening art at its best, with walks and bowers
and artificial lakes, and appropriate statue-groups and the finest cultivated roses and lilies
and japonicas in plenty--and you have the tally of Shakspere. The low characters, mechanics,
even the loyal henchmen--all in themselves nothing--serve as capital foils to the aristocracy.
The comedies (exquisite as they certainly are) bringing in admirably portray'd common characters,
have the unmistakable hue of plays, portraits, made for the divertisement only of the elite
of the castle, and from its point of view. The comedies are altogether non-acceptable to America
and Democracy.

But to the deepest soul, it seems a shame to pick and choose from the riches Shakspere has
left us--to criticise his infinitely royal, multiform quality--to gauge, with optic glasses,
the dazzle of his sun-like beams.

The best poetic utterance, after all, can merely hint, or remind, often very indirectly, or
at distant removes. Aught of real perfection, or the solution of any deep problem, or any completed
statement of the moral, the true, the beautiful, eludes the greatest, deftest poet--flies away
like an always uncaught bird.

ROBERT BURNS AS POET AND PERSON

What the future will decide about Robert Burns and his works--what place will be assign'd them
on that great roster of geniuses and genius which can only be finish'd by the slow but sure
balancing of the centuries with their ample average--I of course cannot tell. But as we know
him, from his recorded utterances, and after nearly one century, and its diligence of collections,
songs, letters, anecdotes, presenting the figure of the canny Scotchman in a fullness and detail
wonderfully complete, and the lines mainly by his own hand, he forms to-day, in some respects,
the most interesting personality among singers. Then there are many things in Burns's poems
and character that specially endear him to America. He was essentially a Republican--would
have been at home in the Western United States, and probably become eminent there. He was an
average sample of the good-natured, warm-blooded, proud-spirited, amative, alimentive, convivial,
young and early-middle-aged man of the decent-born middle classes everywhere and any how. Without
the race of which he is a distinct specimen, (and perhaps his poems) America and her powerful
Democracy could not exist to-day--could not project with unparallel'd historic sway into the
future.

Perhaps the peculiar coloring of the era of Burns needs always first to be consider'd. It included
the times of the '76-'83 Revolution in America, of the French Revolution, and an unparallel'd
chaos development in Europe and elsewhere. In every department, shining and strange names,
like stars, some rising, some in meridian, some declining--Voltaire, Franklin, Washington,
Kant, Goethe, Fulton, Napoleon, mark the era. And while so much, and of grandest moment, fit
for the trumpet of the world's fame, was being transacted--that little tragi-comedy of R. B,'s
life and death was going on in a country by-place in Scotland!

Burns's correspondence, generally collected and publish'd since his death, gives wonderful
glints into both the amiable and weak (and worse than weak) parts of his portraiture, habits,
good and bad luck, ambition and associations. His letters to Mrs. Dunlop, Mrs. McLehose, (Clarinda,)
Mr. Thompson, Dr. Moore, Robert Muir, Mr. Cunningham, Miss Margaret Chalmers, Peter Hill, Richard
Brown, Mrs. Riddel, Robert Ainslie, and Robert Graham, afford valuable lights and shades to
the outline, and with numerous others, help to a touch here, and fill-in there, of poet and
poems. There are suspicions, it is true, of "the Genteel Letter-Writer," with scraps and words
from "the Manual of French Quotations," and, in the love-letters, some hollow mouthings. Yet
we wouldn't on any account lack the letters. A full and true portrait is always what is wanted;
veracity at every hazard. Besides, do we not all see by this time that the story of Burns,
even for its own sake, requires the record of the whole and several, with nothing left out?
Completely and every point minutely told out its fullest, explains and justifies itself--(as
perhaps almost any life does.) He is very close to the earth. He pick'd up his best words and
tunes directly from the Scotch home-singers, but tells Thompson they would not please his,
T.'s, "learn'd lugs," adding, "I call them simple--you would pronounce them silly." Yes, indeed;
the idiom was undoubtedly his happiest hit. Yet Dr. Moore, in 1789, writes to Burns, "If I
were to offer an opinion, it would be that in your future productions you should abandon the
Scotch stanza and dialect, and adopt the measure and language of modern English poetry"!

As the 128th birth-anniversary of the poet draws on, (January, 1887,) with its increasing club-suppers,
vehement celebrations, letters, speeches, and so on--(mostly, as William O'Connor says, from
people who would not have noticed R. B. at all during his actual life, nor kept his company,
or read his verses, on any account)--it may be opportune to print some leisurely-jotted notes
I find in my budget. I take my observation of the Scottish bard by considering him as an individual
amid the crowded clusters, galaxies, of the old world--and fairly inquiring and suggesting
what out of these myriads he too may be to the Western Republic. In the first place no poet
on record so fully bequeaths his own personal magnetism,[39] nor illustrates more pointedly
how one's verses, by time and reading, can so curiously fuse with the versifier's own life
and death, and give final light and shade to all.

I would say a large part of the fascination of Burns's homely, simple dialect-melodies is due,
for all current and future readers, to the poet's personal "errors," the general bleakness
of his lot, his ingrain'd pensiveness, his brief dash into dazzling, tantalizing, evanescent
sunshine--finally culminating in those last years of his life, his being taboo'd and in debt,
sick and sore, yaw'd as by contending gales, deeply dissatisfied with everything, most of all
with himself--high-spirited too--(no man ever really higher-spirited than Robert Burns.) I
think it a perfectly legitimate part too. At any rate it has come to be an impalpable aroma
through which only both the songs and their singer must henceforth be read and absorb'd. Through
that view-medium of misfortune--of a noble spirit in low environments, and of a squalid and
premature death--we view the undoubted facts, (giving, as we read them now, a sad kind of pungency,)
that Burns's were, before all else, the lyrics of illicit loves and carousing intoxication.
Perhaps even it is this strange, impalpable post-mortem comment and influence referr'd to,
that gives them their contrast, attraction, making the zest of their author's after fame. If
he had lived steady, fat, moral, comfortable, well-to-do years, on his own grade, (let alone,
what of course was out of the question, the ease and velvet and rosewood and copious royalties
of Tennyson or Victor Hugo or Longfellow,) and died well-ripen'd and respectable, where could
have come in that burst of passionate sobbing and remorse which well'd forth instantly and
generally in Scotland, and soon follow'd everywhere among English-speaking races, on the announcement
of his death? and which, with no sign of stopping, only regulated and vein'd with fitting appreciation,
flows deeply, widely yet?

Dear Rob! manly, witty, fond, friendly, full of weak spots as well as strong ones-essential
type of so many thousands--perhaps the average, as just said, of the decent-born young men
and the early mid-aged, not only of the British Isles, but America, too, North and South, just
the same. I think, indeed, one best part of Burns is the unquestionable proof he presents of
the perennial existence among the laboring classes, especially farmers, of the finest latent
poetic elements in their blood. (How clear it is to me that the common soil has always been,
and is now, thickly strewn with just such gems.) He is well-called the Ploughman. "Holding
the plough," said his brother Gilbert, "was the favorite situation with Robert for poetic compositions;
and some of his best verses were produced while he was at that exercise." 1787, to the Earl
of Buchan. He has no high ideal of the poet or the poet's office; indeed quite a low and contracted
notion of both:

    "Fortune! if thou'll but gie me still
    Hale breeks, a scone, and whiskey gill,
    An' rowth o' rhyme to rave at will,
    Tak' a' the rest."

See also his rhym'd letters to Robert Graham invoking patronage; "one stronghold," Lord Glencairn,
being dead, now these appeals to "Fintra, my other stay," (with in one letter a copious shower
of vituperation generally.) In his collected poems there is no particular unity, nothing that
can be called a leading theory, no unmistakable spine or skeleton. Perhaps, indeed, their very
desultoriness is the charm of his songs: "I take up one or another," he says in a letter to
Thompson, "just as the bee of the moment buzzes in my bonnet-lug."

Consonantly with the customs of the time--yet markedly inconsistent in spirit with Burns's
own case, (and not a little painful as it remains on record, as depicting some features of
the bard himself,) the relation called patronage existed between the nobility and gentry on
one side, and literary people on the other, and gives one of the strongest side-lights to the
general coloring of poems and poets. It crops out a good deal in Burns's Letters, and even
necessitated a certain flunkeyism on occasions, through life. It probably, with its requirements,
(while it help'd in money and countenance) did as much as any one cause in making that life
a chafed and unhappy one, ended by a premature and miserable death.

Yes, there is something about Burns peculiarly acceptable to the concrete, human points of
view. He poetizes work-a-day agricultural labor and life, (whose spirit and sympathies, as
well as practicalities, are much the same everywhere,) and treats fresh, often coarse, natural
occurrences, loves, persons, not like many new and some old poets in a genteel style of gilt
and china, or at second or third removes, but in their own born atmosphere, laughter, sweat,
unction. Perhaps no one ever sang "lads and lasses"--that universal race, mainly the same,
too, all ages, all lands--down on their own plane, as he has. He exhibits no philosophy worth
mentioning; his morality is hardly more than parrot-talk--not bad or deficient, but cheap,
shopworn, the platitudes of old aunts and uncles to the youngsters (be good boys and keep your
noses clean.) Only when he gets at Poosie Nansie's, celebrating the "barley bree," or among
tramps, or democratic bouts and drinking generally,

    ("Freedom and whiskey gang the gither.")

we have, in his own unmistakable color and warmth, those interiors of rake-helly life and tavern
fun--the cantabile of jolly beggars in highest jinks--lights and groupings of rank glee and
brawny amorousness, outvying the best painted pictures of the Dutch school, or any school.

By America and her democracy such a poet, I cannot too often repeat, must be kept in loving
remembrance; but it is best that discriminations be made. His admirers (as at those anniversary
suppers, over the "hot Scotch") will not accept for their favorite anything less than the highest
rank, alongside of Homer, Shakspere, etc. Such, in candor, are not the true friends of the
Ayrshire bard, who really needs a different place quite by himself. The Iliad and the Odyssey
express courage, craft, full-grown heroism in situations of danger, the sense of command and
leadership, emulation, the last and fullest evolution of self-poise as in kings, and god-like
even while animal appetites. The Shaksperean compositions, on vertebers and frame-work of the
primary passions, portray (essentially the same as Homer's,) the spirit and letter of the feudal
world, the Norman lord, ambitious and arrogant, taller and nobler than common men--with much
underplay and gusts of heat and cold, volcanoes and stormy seas. Burns (and some will say to
his credit) attempts none of these themes. He poetizes the humor, riotous blood, sulks, amorous
torments, fondness for the tavern and for cheap objective nature, with disgust at the grim
and narrow ecclesiasticism of his time and land, of a young farmer on a bleak and hired farm
in Scotland, through the years and under the circumstances of the British politics of that
time, and of his short personal career as author, from 1783 to 1796. He is intuitive and affectionate,
and just emerged or emerging from the shackles of the kirk, from poverty, ignorance, and from
his own rank appetites--(out of which latter, however, he never extricated himself.) It is
to be said that amid not a little smoke and gas in his poems, there is in almost every piece
a spark of fire, and now and then the real afflatus. He has been applauded as democratic, and
with some warrant; while Shakspere, and with the greatest warrant, has been called monarchical
or aristocratic (which he certainly is.) But the splendid personalizations of Shakspere, formulated
on the largest, freest, most heroic, most artistic mould, are to me far dearer as lessons,
and more precious even as models for Democracy, than the humdrum samples Burns presents. The
motives of some of his effusions are certainly discreditable personally--one or two of them
markedly so. He has, moreover, little or no spirituality. This last is his mortal flaw and
defect, tried by highest standards. The ideal he never reach'd (and yet I think he leads the
way to it.) He gives melodies, and now and then the simplest and sweetest ones; but harmonies,
complications, oratorios in words, never. (I do not speak this in any deprecatory sense. Blessed
be the memory of the warm-hearted Scotchman for what he has left us, just as it is!) He likewise
did not know himself, in more ways than one. Though so really fret and independent, he prided
himself in his songs on being a reactionist and a Jacobite--on persistent sentimental adherency
to the cause of the Stuarts--the weakest, thinnest, most faithless, brainless dynasty that
ever held a throne.

Thus, while Burns is not at all great for New World study, in the sense that Isaiah and Eschylus
and the book of Job are unquestionably great--is not to be mention'd with Shakspere--hardly
even with current Tennyson or our Emerson--he has a nestling niche of his own, all fragrant,
fond, and quaint and homely--a lodge built near but outside the mighty temple of the gods of
song and art--those universal strivers, through their works of harmony and melody and power,
to ever show or intimate man's crowning, last, victorious fusion in himself of Real and Ideal.
Precious, too--fit and precious beyond all singers, high or low--will Burns ever be to the
native Scotch, especially to the working-classes of North Britain; so intensely one of them,
and so racy of the soil, sights, and local customs. He often apostrophizes Scotland, and is,
or would be, enthusiastically patriotic. His country has lately commemorated him in a statue.[40]
His aim is declaredly to be 'a Rustic Bard.' His poems were all written in youth or young manhood,
(he was little more than a young man when he died.) His collected works in giving everything,
are nearly one half first drafts. His brightest hit is his use of the Scotch patois, so full
of terms flavor'd like wild fruits or berries. Then I should make an allowance to Burns which
cannot be made for any other poet. Curiously even the frequent crudeness, haste, deficiencies,
(flatness and puerilities by no means absent) prove upon the whole not out of keeping in any
comprehensive collection of his works, heroically printed, "following copy," every piece, every
line according to originals. Other poets might tremble for such boldness, such rawness. In
"this odd-kind chiel" such points hardly mar the rest. Not only are they in consonance with
the underlying spirit of the pieces, but complete the full abandon and veracity of the farm-fields
and the home-brew'd flavor of the Scotch vernacular. (Is there not often something in the very
neglect, unfinish, careless nudity, slovenly hiatus, coming from intrinsic genius, and not
"put on," that secretly pleases the soul more than the wrought and re-wrought polish of the
most perfect verse?) Mark the native spice and untranslatable twang in the very names of his
songs-"O for ane and twenty, Tam," "John Barleycorn," "Last May a braw Wooer," "Rattlin roarin
Willie," "O wert thou in the cauld, cauld blast," "Gude e'en to you, Kimmer," "Merry hae I
been teething a Heckle," "O lay thy loof in mine, lass," and others.

The longer and more elaborated poems of Burns are just such as would please a natural but homely
taste, and cute but average intellect, and are inimitable in their way. The "Twa Dogs," (one
of the best) with the conversation between Cesar and Luath, the "Brigs of Ayr," "the Cotter's
Saturday Night," "Tam O'Shanter"--all will be long read and re-read and admired, and ever deserve
to be. With nothing profound in any of them, what there is of moral and plot has an inimitably
fresh and racy flavor. If it came to question, Literature could well afford to send adrift
many a pretensive poem, and even book of poems, before it could spare these compositions.

Never indeed was there truer utterance in a certain range of idiosyncrasy than by this poet.
Hardly a piece of his, large or small, but has "snap" and raciness. He puts in cantering rhyme
(often doggerel) much cutting irony and idiomatic ear-cuffing of the kirk-deacons--drilygood-natured
addresses to his cronies, (he certainly would not stop us if he were here this moment, from
classing that "to the De'il" among them)--"to Mailie and her Lambs," "to auld Mare Maggie,"
"to a Mouse,"

    "Wee, sleekit, cowrin, tim'rous beastie:"

"to a Mountain Daisy," "to a Haggis," "to a Louse," "to the Toothache," &c.--and occasionally
to his brother bards and lady or gentleman patrons, often with strokes of tenderest sensibility,
idiopathic humor, and genuine poetic imagination--still oftener with shrewd, original, sheeny,
steel-flashes of wit, home-spun sense, or lance-blade puncturing. Then, strangely, the basis
of Burns's character, with all its fun and manliness, was hypochondria, the blues, palpable
enough in "Despondency," "Man was made to Mourn," "Address to Ruin," a "Bard's Epitaph," &c.
From such deep-down elements sprout up, in very contrast and paradox, those riant utterances
of which a superficial reading will not detect the hidden foundation. Yet nothing is clearer
to me than the black and desperate background behind those pieces--as I shall now specify them.
I find his most characteristic, Nature's masterly touch and luxuriant life-blood, color and
heat, not in "Tam O'Shanter," "the Cotter's Saturday Night," "Scots wha hae," "Highland Mary,"
"the Twa Dogs," and the like, but in "the Jolly Beggars," "Rigs of Barley," "Scotch Drink,"
"the Epistle to John Rankine," "Holy Willie's Prayer," and in "Halloween," (to say nothing
of a certain cluster, known still to a small inner circle in Scotland, but, for good reasons,
not published anywhere.) In these compositions, especially the first, there is much indelicacy
(some editions flatly leave it out,) but the composer reigns alone, with handling free and
broad and true, and is an artist. You may see and feel the man indirectly in his other verses,
all of them, with more or less life-likeness--but these I have named last call out pronouncedly
in his own voice,

    "I, Rob, am here."

Finally, in any summing-up of Burns, though so much is to be said in the way of fault-finding,
drawing black marks, and doubtless severe literary criticism--(in the present outpouring I
have "kept myself in," rather than allow'd any free flow)--after full retrospect of his works
and life, the aforesaid "odd-kind chiel" remains to my heart and brain as almost the tenderest,
manliest, and (even if contradictory) dearest flesh-and-blood figure in all the streams and
clusters of by-gone poets.

Notes:

[39] Probably no man that ever lived--a friend has made the statement--was so fondly loved,
both by men and women, as Robert Burns. He held the plough or the pen with the same firm, manly
grasp. And he was loved. The simple roll of the women who gave him their affection and their
sympathy would make a long manuscript; and most of these were of such noble worth that, as
Robert Chambers says, 'their character may stand as a testimony in favor of that of Burns.'"
[As I understand, the foregoing is from an extremely rare book publish'd by M'Kie, in Kilmarnock.
I find the whole beautiful paragraph in a capital paper on Burns, by Amelia Barr.]

[40] The Dumfries statue of Robert Burns was successfully unveil'd April 1881 by Lord Rosebery,
the occasion having been made national in its character. Before the ceremony, a large procession
paraded the streets of the town, all the trades and societies of that part of Scotland being
represented, at the head of which went dairymen and ploughmen, the former driving their carts
and being accompanied by their maids. The statue is of Sicilian marble. It rests on a pedestal
of gray stone five feet high. The poet is represented as sitting easily on an old tree root,
holding in his left hand a cluster of daisies. His face is turn'd toward the right shoulder,
and the eyes gaze into the distance. Near by lie a collie dog, a broad bonnet half covering
a well-thumb'd song-book, and a rustic flageolet. The costume is taken from the Nasmyth portrait,
which has been follow'd for the features of the face.

A WORD ABOUT TENNYSON

Beautiful as the song was, the original "Locksley Hall" of half a century ago was essentially
morbid, heart-broken, finding fault with everything, especially the fact of money's being made
(as it ever must be, and perhaps should be) the paramount matter in worldly affairs;

    Every door is barr'd with gold, and opens but to golden keys.

First, a father, having fallen in battle, his child (the singer)

    Was left a trampled orphan, and a selfish uncle's ward.

Of course love ensues. The woman in the chant or monologue proves a false one; and as far as
appears the ideal of woman, in the poet's reflections, is a false one--at any rate for America.
Woman is not "the lesser man." (The heart is not the brain.) The best of the piece of fifty
years since is its concluding line:

    For the mighty wind arises roaring seaward and I go.

Then for this current 1886-7, a just-out sequel, which (as an apparently authentic summary
says) "reviews the life of mankind during the past sixty years, and comes to the conclusion
that its boasted progress is of doubtful credit to the world in general and to England in particular.
A cynical vein of denunciation of democratic opinions and aspirations runs throughout the poem
in mark'd contrast with the spirit of the poet's youth." Among the most striking lines of this
sequel are the following:

    Envy wears the mask of love, and, laughing sober fact to scorn,
    Cries to weakest as to strongest, 'Ye are equals, equal born,'
    Equal-born! Oh yes, if yonder hill be level with the flat.
    Charm us, orator, till the lion look no larger than the cat:
    Till the cat, through that mirage of overheated language, loom
    Larger than the lion Demo--end in working its own doom.
    Tumble Nature heel o'er head, and, yelling with the yelling street,
    Set the feet above the brain, and swear the brain is in the feet,
    Bring the old dark ages back, without the faith, without the hope.
    Beneath the State, the Church, the Throne, and roll their ruins down
      the slope.

I should say that all this is a legitimate consequence of the tone and convictions of the earlier
standards and points of view. Then some reflections, down to the hard-pan of this sort of thing.

The course of progressive politics (democracy) is so certain and resistless, not only in America
but in Europe, that we can well afford the warning calls, threats, checks, neutralizings, in
imaginative literature, or any department, of such deep-sounding, and high-soaring voices as
Carlyle's and Tennyson's. Nay, the blindness, excesses, of the prevalent tendency--the dangers
of the urgent trends of our times--in my opinion, need such voices almost more than any. Umbrellas
(Vol. i., p. 414. etc.).--To the extensive exhibition of umbrellas formed through the exertions
of the right worthy editor of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" and his very numerous friends, I am
happy to have it in my power to make an addition of considerable curiosity, it being of much
earlier date than any specimen at present in the collection:--

"Of
doues I haue a dainty paire Which, when you please to take the aier,
About your head shall gently houer, Your cleere browe from the sunne
to couer, And with their nimble wings shall fan you That neither cold
nor heate shall tan you, And, like vmbrellas, with their feathers
Sheeld you in all sorts of weathers."

Michael Drayton, 1630.

Had not the exhibition been limited to umbrellas used in England, I could have produced oriental
specimens, very like those now in fashion here, of the latter part of the sixteenth century.

BOLTON CORNEY.

Croziers and Pastoral Staves (Vol. ii., p. 412.).--The staff with the cross appears on the monument
of Abp. Warham, in Canterbury Cathedral; on the brass of Abp. Waldeby (1397), in Westminster Abbey
and on that of Abp. Cranley (1417), in New College Chapel, Oxford.

The crook is bent outwards in the brasses to the following bishops:--Bp. Trellick (1360), Hereford Cathedral;
Bp. Stanley (1515), Manchester Cathedral; Bp. Goodrich (1554), Ely Cathedral; and Bp. Pursglove (1579),
Tideswell Church, Derbyshire.

J.I.D.

* * * * *

Miscellaneous.

    

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

We never longed so much for greater space for our Notes upon Books as we do at this season of
gifts and good will, when the Christmas Books demand our notice.

Never did writer pen a sweeter tale than that which the author of
Mary Barton has just produced under the title of The Moorland Cottage.

    It is a purely English story,
    true to nature as a daguerreotype, without
    one touch of exaggeration, without
    the smallest striving after effect, yet so skilfully is it told,
so effectually does it tell, so strongly do Maggie's trials and single-mindedness
excite our sympathies, that it were hard to decide whether our tears
are disposed to flow the more readily at those trials, or at her quiet
heroic perseverance in doing right by which they are eventually surmounted.

The Moorland Cottage with its skilful and characteristic woodcut illustrations by Birket Foster,
will be a favourite for many and many a Christmas yet to come.
Rich in all the bibliopolic "pearl and gold" of a quaint and fanciful
binding, glancing with holly berries and mistletoe, Mr. Bogue presents
us with a volume as interesting as it is characteristic and elegant,
Christmas with the Poets. A more elegantly printed book was never
produced; and it is illustrated with fifty engravings designed and
drawn on wood by Birket Foster; engraved by Henry Vizetelly, and printed
in tints in a way to render most effective the artist's tasteful,
characteristic, and very able drawings. His very faults, doubts, swervings, doublings upon
himself, have been typical of our age. We are like the voyagers of a ship, casting off for
new seas, distant shores. We would still dwell in the old suffocating and dead haunts, remembering
and magnifying their pleasant experiences only, and more than once impell'd to jump ashore
before it is too late, and stay where our fathers stay'd, and live as they lived.

May-be I am non-literary and non-decorous (let me at least be human, and pay part of my debt)
in this word about Tennyson. I want him to realize that here is a great and ardent Nation that
absorbs his songs, and has a respect and affection for him personally, as almost for no other
foreigner. I want this word to go to the old man at Farringford as conveying no more than the
simple truth; and that truth (a little Christmas gift) no slight one either. I have written
impromptu, and shall let it all go at that. The readers of more than fifty millions of people
in the New World not only owe to him some of their most agreeable and harmless and healthy
hours, but he has enter'd into the formative influences of character here, not only in the
Atlantic cities, but inland and far West, out in Missouri, in Kansas, and away in Oregon, in
farmer's house and miner's cabin.

Best thanks, anyhow, to Alfred Tennyson--thanks and appreciation in America's name.

SLANG IN AMERICA

View'd freely, the English language is the accretion and growth of every dialect, race, and
range of time, and is both the free and compacted composition of all. From this point of view,
it stands for Language in the largest sense, and is really the greatest of studies. It involves
so much; is indeed a sort of universal absorber, combiner, and conqueror. The scope of its
etymologies is the scope not only of man and civilization, but the history of Nature in all
departments, and of the organic Universe, brought up to date; for all are comprehended in words,
and their backgrounds. This is when words become vitaliz'd, and stand for things, as they unerringly
and soon come to do, in the mind that enters on their study with fitting spirit, grasp, and
appreciation.

Slang, profoundly consider'd, is the lawless germinal element, below all words and sentences,
and behind all poetry, and proves a certain perennial rankness and protestantism in speech.
As the United States inherit by far their most precious possession--the language they talk
and write--from the Old World, under and out of its feudal institutes, I will allow myself
to borrow a simile even of those forms farthest removed from American Democracy. Considering
Language then as some mighty potentate, into the majestic audience-hall of the monarch ever
enters a personage like one of Shakspere's clowns, and takes position there, and plays a part
even in the stateliest ceremonies. Such is Slang, or indirection, an attempt of common humanity
to escape from bald literalism, and express itself illimitably, which in highest walks produces
poets and poems, and doubtless in pre-historic times gave the start to, and perfected, the
whole immense tangle of the old mythologies. For, curious as it may appear, it is strictly
the same impulse-source, the same thing. Slang, too, is the wholesome fermentation or eructation
of those processes eternally active in language, by which froth and specks are thrown up, mostly
to pass away; though occasionally to settle and permanently crystallize.

To make it plainer, it is certain that many of the oldest and solidest words we use, were originally
generated from the daring and license of slang. In the processes of word-formation, myriads
die, but here and there the attempt attracts superior meanings, becomes valuable and indispensable,
and lives forever. Thus the term right means literally only straight. Wrong primarily meant
twisted, distorted. Integrity meant oneness. Spirit meant breath, or flame. A supercilious
person was one who rais'd his eyebrows. To insult was to leap against. If you influenced a
man, you but flow'd into him. The Hebrew word which is translated prophesy meant to bubble
up and pour forth as a fountain. The enthusiast bubbles up with the Spirit of God within him,
and it pours forth from him like a fountain. The word prophecy is misunderstood. Many suppose
that it is limited to mere prediction; that is but the lesser portion of prophecy. The greater
work is to reveal God. Every true religious enthusiast is a prophet.

Language, be it remember'd, is not an abstract construction of the learn'd, or of dictionary-makers,
but is something arising out of the work, needs, ties, joys, affections, tastes, of long generations
of humanity, and has its bases broad and low, close to the ground. Its final decisions are
made by the masses, people nearest the concrete, having most to do with actual land and sea.
It impermeates all, the Past as well as the Present, and is the grandest triumph of the human
intellect. "Those mighty works of art," says Addington Symonds, "which we call languages, in
the construction of which whole peoples unconsciously co-operated, the forms of which were
determin'd not by individual genius, but by the instincts of successive generations, acting
to one end, inherent in the nature of the race--Those poems of pure thought and fancy, cadenced
not in words, but in living imagery, fountain-heads of inspiration, mirrors of the mind of
nascent nations, which we call Mythologies--these surely are more marvellous in their infantine
spontaneity than any more mature production of the races which evolv'd them. Yet we are utterly
ignorant of their embryology; the true science of Origins is yet in its cradle."

Daring as it is to say so, in the growth of Language it is certain that the retrospect of slang
from the start would be the recalling from their nebulous conditions of all that is poetical
in the stores of human utterance. Moreover, the honest delving, as of late years, by the German
and British workers in comparative philology, has pierc'd and dispers'd many of the falsest
bubbles of centuries; and will disperse many more. It was long recorded that in Scandinavian
mythology the heroes in the Norse Paradise drank out of the skulls of their slain enemies.
Later investigation proves the word taken for skulls to mean horns of beasts slain in the hunt.
And what reader had not been exercis'd over the traces of that feudal custom, by which seigneurs
warm'd their feet in the bowels of serfs, the abdomen being open'd for the purpose? It now
is made to appear that the serf was only required to submit his unharm'd abdomen as a foot
cushion while his lord supp' d, and was required to chafe the legs of the seigneur with his hands.

It is curiously in embryons and childhood, and among the illiterate, we always find the groundwork
and start, of this great science, and its noblest products. What a relief most people have
in speaking of a man not by his true and formal name, with a "Mister" to it, but by some odd
or homely appellative. The propensity to approach a meaning not directly and squarely, but
by circuitous styles of expression, seems indeed a born quality of the common people everywhere,
evidenced by nick-names, and the inveterate determination of the masses to bestow sub-titles,
sometimes ridiculous, sometimes very apt. Always among the soldiers during the secession war,
one heard of "Little Mac" (Gen. McClellan), or of "Uncle Billy" (Gen. Sherman.) "The old man"
was, of course, very common. Among the rank and file, both armies, it was very general to speak
of the different States they came from by their slang names. Those from Maine were call'd Foxes;
New Hampshire, Granite Boys; Massachusetts, Bay Staters; Vermont, Green Mountain Boys; Rhode
Island, Gun Flints; Connecticut, Wooden Nutmegs; New York, Knickerbockers; New Jersey, Clam
Catchers; Pennsylvania, Logher Heads; Delaware, Muskrats; Maryland, Claw Thumpers; Virginia,
Beagles; North Carolina, Tar Boilers; South Carolina, Weasels; Georgia, Buzzards; Louisiana,
Creoles; Alabama, Lizards; Kentucky, Corn Crackers; Ohio, Buckeyes; Michigan, Wolverines; Indiana,
Hoosiers; Illinois, Suckers; Missouri, Pukes; Mississippi, Tadpoles; Florida, Fly up the Creeks;
Wisconsin, Badgers; Iowa, Hawkeyes; Oregon, Hard Cases. Indeed I am not sure but slang names
have more than once made Presidents. "Old Hickory," (Gen. Jackson) is one case in point. "Tippecanoe,
and Tyler too," another.

I find the same rule in the people's conversations everywhere. I heard this among the men of
the city horse-cars, where the conductor is often call'd a "snatcher" (i. e. because his characteristic
duty is to constantly pull or snatch the bell-strap, to stop or go on.) Two young fellows are
having a friendly talk, amid which, says 1st conductor, "What did you do before you was a snatcher?"
Answer of 2d conductor, "Nail'd." (Translation of answer: "I work'd as carpenter.") What is
a "boom"? says one editor to another. "Esteem'd contemporary," says the other, "a boom is a
bulge." "Barefoot whiskey" is the Tennessee name for the undiluted stimulant. In the slang
of the New York common restaurant waiters a plate of ham and beans is known as "stars and stripes,"
codfish balls as "sleeve-buttons," and hash as "mystery."

The Western States of the Union are, however, as may be supposed, the special areas of slang,
not only in conversation, but in names of localities, towns, rivers, etc. A late Oregon traveller
says:

"On your way to Olympia by rail, you cross a river called the Shookum-Chuck; your train stops
at places named Newaukum, Tumwater, and Toutle; and if you seek further you will hear of whole
counties labell' d Wahkiakum, or Snohomish, or Kitsar, or Klikatat; and Cowlitz, Hookium, and
Nenolelops greet and offend you. They complain in Olympia that Washington Territory gets but
little immigration; but what wonder? What man, having the whole American continent to choose
from, would willingly date his letters from the county of Snohomish or bring up his children
in the city of Nenolelops? The village of Tumwater is, as I am ready to bear witness, very
pretty indeed; but surely an emigrant would think twice before he establish' d himself either
there or at Toutle. Seattle is sufficiently barbarous; Stelicoom is no better; and I suspect
that the Northern Pacific Railroad terminus has been fixed at Tacoma because it is one of the
few places on Puget Sound whose name does not inspire horror."

Then a Nevada paper chronicles the departure of a mining party from Reno: "The toughest set
of roosters that ever shook the dust off any town left Reno yesterday for the new mining district
of Cornucopia. They came here from Virginia. Among the crowd were four New York cock-fighters,
two Chicago murderers, three Baltimore bruisers, one Philadelphia prize-fighter, four San Francisco
hoodlums, three Virginia beats, two Union Pacific roughs, and two check guerrillas." Among
the far-west newspapers, have been, or are, The Fairplay (Colorado) Flume, The Solid Muldoon,
of Ouray, The Tombstone Epitaph, of Nevada, The Jimplecute, of Texas, and The Bazoo, of Missouri.
Shirttail Bend, Whiskey Flat, Puppytown, Wild Yankee Ranch, Squaw Flat, Rawhide Ranch, Loafer's
Ravine, Squitch Gulch, Toenail Lake, are a few of the names of places in Butte county, Cal.

Perhaps indeed no place or term gives more luxuriant illustrations of the fermentation processes
I have mention'd, and their froth and specks, than those Mississippi and Pacific coast regions,
at the present day. Hasty and grotesque as are some of the names, others are of an appropriateness
and originality unsurpassable. This applies to the Indian words, which are often perfect. Oklahoma
is proposed in Congress for the name of one of our new Territories. Hog-eye, Lick-skillet,
Rake-pocket and Steal-easy are the names of some Texan towns. Miss Bremer found among the aborigines
the following names: Men's, Horn-point; Round-Wind; Stand-and-look-out; The-Cloud-that-goes-aside;
Iron-toe; Seek-the-sun; Iron-flash; Red-bottle; White-spindle; Black-dog; Two-feathers-of-honor;
Gray-grass; Bushy-tail; Thunder-face; Go-on-the-burning-sod; Spirits-of-the-dead. Women's,
Keep-the-fire; Spiritual-woman; Second-daughter-of-the-house; Blue-bird.

Certainly philologists have not given enough attention to this element and its results, which,
I repeat, can probably be found working every where to-day, amid modern conditions, with as
much life and activity as in far-back Greece or India, under prehistoric ones. Then the wit--the
rich flashes of humor and genius and poetry--darting out often from a gang of laborers, railroad-men,
miners, drivers or boatmen! How often have I hover'd at the edge of a crowd of them, to hear
their repartees and impromptus! You get more real fun from half an hour with them than from
the books of all "the American humorists."

The science of language has large and close analogies in geological science, with its ceaseless
evolution, its fossils, and its numberless submerged layers and hidden strata, the infinite
go-before of the present. Or, perhaps Language is more like some vast living body, or perennial
body of bodies. And slang not only brings the first feeders of it, but is afterward the start
of fancy, imagination and humor, breathing into its nostrils the breath of life.

AN INDIAN BUREAU REMINISCENCE

After the close of the secession war in 1865, I work'd several months (until Mr. Harlan turn'd
me out for having written "Leaves of Grass") in the Interior Department at Washington, in the
Indian Bureau. Along this time there came to see their Great Father an unusual number of aboriginal
visitors, delegations for treaties, settlement of lands, &c.--some young or middle-aged, but
mainly old men, from the West, North, and occasionally from the South--parties of from five
to twenty each--the most wonderful proofs of what Nature can produce, (the survival of the
fittest, no doubt--all the frailer samples dropt, sorted out by death)--as if to show how the
earth and woods, the attrition of storms and elements, and the exigencies of life at first
hand, can train and fashion men, indeed chiefs, in heroic massiveness, imperturbability, muscle,
and that last and highest beauty consisting of strength--the full exploitation and fruitage
of a human identity, not from the culmination-points of "culture" and artificial civilization,
but tallying our race, as it were, with giant, vital, gnarl'd, enduring trees, or monoliths
of separate hardiest rocks, and humanity holding its own with the best of the said trees or
rocks, and outdoing them.

There were Omahas, Poncas, Winnebagoes, Cheyennes, Navahos, Apaches, and many others. Let me
give a running account of what I see and hear through one of these conference collections at
the Indian Bureau, going back to the present tense. Every head and face is impressive, even
artistic; Nature redeems herself out of her crudest recesses. Most have red paint on their
cheeks, however, or some other paint. ("Little Hill" makes the opening speech, which the interpreter
translates by scraps.) Many wear head tires of gaudy-color'd braid, wound around thickly--some
with circlets of eagles' feathers. Necklaces of bears' claws are plenty around their necks.
Most of the chiefs are wrapt in large blankets of the brightest scarlet.

Two or three have blue, and I see one black. (A wise man call'd "the Flesh" now makes a short
speech, apparently asking something. Indian Commissioner Dole answers him, and the interpreter
translates in scraps again.) All the principal chiefs have tomahawks or hatchets, some of them
very richly ornamented and costly. Plaid shirts are to be observ'd--none too clean. Now a tall
fellow, "Hole-in-the-Day," is speaking. He has a copious head-dress composed of feathers and
narrow ribbon, under which appears a countenance painted all over a bilious yellow. Let us
note this young chief. For all his paint, "Hole-in-the-Day" is a handsome Indian, mild and
calm, dress'd in drab buckskin leggings, dark gray surtout, and a soft black hat. His costume
will bear full observation, and even fashion would accept him. His apparel is worn loose and
scant enough to show his superb physique, especially in neck, chest, and legs. ("The Apollo
Belvidere!" was the involuntary exclamation of a famous European artist when he first saw a
full-grown young Choctaw.)

One of the red visitors--a wild, lean-looking Indian, the one in the black woolen wrapper--has
an empty buffalo head, with the horns on, for his personal surmounting. I see a markedly Bourbonish
countenance among the chiefs--(it is not very uncommon among them, I am told.) Most of them
avoided resting on chairs during the hour of their "talk" in the Commissioner's office; they
would sit around on the floor, leaning against something, or stand up by the walls, partially
wrapt in their blankets. Though some of the young fellows were, as I have said, magnificent
and beautiful animals, I think the palm of unique picturesqueness, in body, limb, physiognomy,
&c., was borne by the old or elderly chiefs, and the wise men.

My here-alluded-to experience in the Indian Bureau produced one very definite conviction, as
follows: There is something about these aboriginal Americans, in their highest characteristic
representations, essential traits, and the ensemble of their physique and physiognomy--something
very remote, very lofty, arousing comparisons with our own civilized ideals--something that
our literature, portrait painting, &c., have never caught, and that will almost certainly never
be transmitted to the future, even as a reminiscence. No biographer, no historian, no artist,
has grasp'd it--perhaps could not grasp it. It is so different, so far outside our standards
of eminent humanity. Their feathers, paint--even the empty buffalo skull--did not, to say the
least, seem any more ludicrous to me than many of the fashions I have seen in civilized society.
I should not apply the word savage (at any rate, in the usual sense) as a leading word in the
description of those great aboriginal specimens, of whom I certainly saw many of the best.
There were moments, as I look'd at them or studied them, when our own exemplification of personality,
dignity, heroic presentation anyhow (as in the conventions of society, or even in the accepted
poems and plays,) seem'd sickly, puny, inferior.

The interpreters, agents of the Indian Department, or other whites accompanying the bands,
in positions of responsibility, were always interesting to me; I had many talks with them.
Occasionally I would go to the hotels where the bands were quarter'd, and spend an hour or
two informally. Of course we could not have much conversation--though (through the interpreters)
more of this than might be supposed --sometimes quite animated and significant. I had the good
luck to be invariably receiv'd and treated by all of them in their most cordial manner.

[Letter to W. W. from an artist, B. H., who has been much among the American Indians:]

"I have just receiv'd your little paper on the Indian delegations. In the fourth paragraph
you say that there is something about the essential traits of our aborigines which 'will almost
certainly never be transmitted to the future.' If I am so fortunate as to regain my health
I hope to weaken the force of that statement, at least in so far as my talent and training
will permit. I intend to spend some years among them, and shall endeavor to perpetuate on canvas
some of the finer types, both men and women, and some of the characteristic features of their
life. It will certainly be well worth the while. My artistic enthusiasm was never so thoroughly
stirr'd up as by the Indians. They certainly have more of beauty, dignity and nobility mingled
with their own wild individuality, than any of the other indigenous types of man. Neither black
nor Afghan, Arab nor Malay (and I know them all pretty well) can hold a candle to the Indian.
All of the other aboriginal types seem to be more or less distorted from the model of perfect
human form--as we know it--the blacks, thin-hipped, with bulbous limbs, not well mark'd; the
Arabs large-jointed, &c. But I have seen many a young Indian as perfect in form and feature
as a Greek statue--very different from a Greek statue, of course, but as satisfying to the
artistic perceptions and demand.

"And the worst, or perhaps the best of it all is that it will require an artist--and a good
one--to record the real facts and impressions. Ten thousand photographs would not have the
value of one really finely felt painting. Color is all-important. No one but an artist knows
how much. An Indian is only half an Indian without the blue-black hair and the brilliant eyes
shining out of the wonderful dusky ochre and rose complexion."

SOME DIARY NOTES AT RANDOM

NEGRO SLAVES IN NEW YORK

I can myself almost remember negro slaves in New York State, as my grandfather and great-grandfather
(at West Hills, Suffolk county, New York) own'd a number. The hard labor of the farm was mostly
done by them, and on the floor of the big kitchen, toward sundown, would be squatting a circle
of twelve or fourteen "pickaninnies," eating their supper of pudding (Indian corn mush) and
milk. A friend of my grandfather, named Wortman, of Oyster Bay, died in 1810, leaving ten slaves.
Jeanette Treadwell, the last of them, died suddenly in Flushing last summer (1884,) at the
age of ninety-four years. I remember "old Mose," one of the liberated West Hills slaves, well.
He was very genial, correct, manly, and cute, and a great friend of my childhood.

CANADA NIGHTS--Late in August--

Three wondrous nights. Effects of moon, clouds, stars, and night-sheen, never surpass'd. I
am out every night, enjoying all. The sunset begins it. (I have said already how long evening
lingers here.) The moon, an hour high just after eight, is past her half, and looks somehow
more like a human face up there than ever before. As it grows later, we have such gorgeous
and broad cloud-effects, with Luna's tawny halos, silver edgings--great fleeces, depths of
blue-black in patches, and occasionally long, low bars hanging silently a while, and then gray
bulging masses rolling along stately, sometimes in long procession. The moon travels in Scorpion
to-night, and dims all the stars of that constellation except fiery Antares, who keeps on shining
just to the big one's side.

COUNTRY DAYS AND NIGHTS--

Sept. 30, '82, 4.30 A.M.--I am down in Camden county, New Jersey, at the farmhouse of the Staffords--have
been looking a long while at the comet--have in my time seen longer-tail'd ones, but never
one so pronounc'd in cometary character, and so spectral-fierce--so like some great, pale,
living monster of the air or sea. The atmosphere and sky, an hour or so before sunrise, so
cool, still, translucent, give the whole apparition to great advantage. It is low in the east.
The head shows about as big as an ordinary good-sized saucer--is a perfectly round and defined
disk--the tail some sixty or seventy feet--not a stripe, but quite broad, and gradually expanding.
Impress'd with the silent, inexplicably emotional sight, I linger and look till all begins
to weaken in the break of day.

October 2.--The third day of mellow, delicious, sunshiny weather. I am writing this in the
recesses of the old woods, my seat on a big pine log, my back against a tree. Am down here
a few days for a change, to bask in the Autumn sun, to idle lusciously and simply, and to eat
hearty meals, especially my breakfast. Warm mid-days--the other hours of the twenty-four delightfully
fresh and mild--cool evenings, and early mornings perfect. The scent of the woods, and the
peculiar aroma of a great yet unreap'd maize-field near by--the white butterflies in every
direction by day--the golden-rod, the wild asters, and sunflowers--the song of the katydid
all night.

Every day in Cooper's Woods, enjoying simple existence and the passing hours--taking short
walks--exercising arms and chest with the saplings, or my voice with army songs or recitations.
A perfect week for weather; seven continuous days bright and dry and cool and sunny. The nights
splendid, with full moon--about 10 the grandest of star-shows up in the east and south, Jupiter,
Saturn, Capella, Aldebaran, and great Orion. Am feeling pretty well--am outdoors most of the
time, absorbing the days and nights all I can.

CENTRAL PARK NOTES

American Society from a Park Policeman's Point of View

Am in New York city, upper part--visit Central Park almost every day (and have for the last
three weeks) off and on, taking observations or short rambles, and sometimes riding around.
I talk quite a good deal with one of the Park policemen, C.C., up toward the Ninetieth street
entrance. One day in particular I got him a-going, and it proved deeply interesting to me.
Our talk floated into sociology and politics. I was curious to find how these things appear'd
on their surfaces to my friend, for he plainly possess'd sharp wits and good nature, and had
been seeing, for years, broad streaks of humanity somewhat out of my latitude. I found that
as he took such appearances the inward caste-spirit of European "aristocracy" pervaded rich
America, with cynicism and artificiality at the fore. Of the bulk of official persons, Executives,
Congressmen, Legislators, Aldermen, Department heads, &c., &c., or the candidates for those
positions, nineteen in twenty, in the policeman's judgment, were just players in a game. Liberty,
Equality, Union, and all the grand words of the Republic, were, in their mouths, but lures,
decoys, chisel'd likenesses of dead wood, to catch the masses. Of fine afternoons, along the
broad tracks of the Park, for many years, had swept by my friend, as he stood on guard, the
carriages, &c., of American Gentility, not by dozens and scores, but by hundreds and thousands.
Lucky brokers, capitalists, contractors, grocery-men, successful political strikers, rich butchers,
dry goods' folk, &c. And on a large proportion of these vehicles, on panels or horse-trappings,
were conspicuously borne heraldic family crests. (Can this really be true?) In wish and willingness
(and if that were so, what matter about the reality?) titles of nobility, with a court and
spheres fit for the capitalists, the highly educated, and the carriage-riding classes--to fence
them off from "the common people"--were the heart's desire of the "good society" of our great
cities--aye, of North and South.

So much for my police friend's speculations--which rather took me aback--and which I have thought
I would just print as he gave them (as a doctor records symptoms.)

PLATE GLASS NOTES

St. Louis, Missouri, November, '79.--What do you think I find manufactur'd out here--and of
a kind the clearest and largest, best, and the most finish'd and luxurious in the world--and
with ample demand for it too? Plate glass! One would suppose that was the last dainty outcome
of an old, almost effete-growing civilization; and yet here it is, a few miles from St. Louis,
on a charming little river, in the wilds of the West, near the Mississippi. I went down that
way to-day by the Iron Mountain Railroad--was switch'd off on a side-track four miles through
woods and ravines, to Swash Creek, so-call'd, and there found Crystal city, and immense Glass
Works, built (and evidently built to stay) right in the pleasant rolling forest. Spent most
of the day, and examin'd the inexhaustible and peculiar sand the glass is made of--the original
whity-gray stuff in the banks--saw the melting in the pots (a wondrous process, a real poem)--saw
the delicate preparation the clay material undergoes for these great pots (it has to be kneaded
finally by human feet, no machinery answering, and I watch'd the picturesque bare-legged Africans
treading it)--saw the molten stuff (a great mass of a glowing pale yellow color) taken out
of the furnaces (I shall never forget that Pot, shape, color, concomitants, more beautiful
than any antique statue,) pass'd into the adjoining casting-room, lifted by powerful machinery,
pour'd out on its bed (all glowing, a newer, vaster study for colorists, indescribable, a pale
red-tinged yellow, of tarry consistence, all lambent,) roll'd by a heavy roller into rough
plate glass, I should say ten feet by fourteen, then rapidly shov'd into the annealing oven,
which stood ready for it. The polishing and grinding rooms afterward--the great glass slabs,
hundreds of them, on their flat beds, and the see-saw music of the steam machinery constantly
at work polishing them--the myriads of human figures (the works employ'd 400 men) moving about,
with swart arms and necks, and no superfluous clothing--the vast, rude halls, with immense
play of shifting shade, and slow-moving currents of smoke and steam, and shafts of light, sometimes
sun, striking in from above with effects that would have fill'd Michel Angelo with rapture.

Coming back to St. Louis this evening, at sundown, and for over an hour afterward, we follow'd
the Mississippi, close by its western bank, giving me an ampler view of the river, and with
effects a little different from any yet. In the eastern sky hung the planet Mars, just up,
and of a very clear and vivid yellow. It was a soothing and pensive hour--the spread of the
river off there in the half-light-- the glints of the down-bound steamboats plodding along--and
that yellow orb (apparently twice as large and significant as usual) above the Illinois shore.
(All along, these nights, nothing can exceed the calm, fierce, golden, glistening domination
of Mars over all the stars in the sky.)

As we came nearer St. Louis, the night having well set in, I saw some (to me) novel effects
in the zinc smelting establishments, the tall chimneys belching flames at the top, while inside
through the openings at the facades of the great tanks burst forth (in regular position) hundreds
of fierce tufts of a peculiar blue (or green) flame, of a purity and intensity, like electric
lights--illuminating not only the great buildings themselves, but far and near outside, like
hues of the aurora borealis, only more vivid. (So that--remembering the Pot from the crystal
furnace--my jaunt seem'd to give me new revelations in the color line.)

SOME WAR MEMORANDA

Jotted Down at the Time

I find this incident in my notes (I suppose from "chinning" in hospital with some sick or wounded
soldier who knew of it):

When Kilpatrick and his forces were cut off at Brandy station (last of September, '63, or thereabouts,)
and the bands struck up "Yankee Doodle," there were not cannon enough in the Southern Confederacy
to keep him and them "in." It was when Meade fell back. K. had his large cavalry division (perhaps
5,000 men,) but the rebs, in superior force, had surrounded them. Things look'd exceedingly
desperate. K. had two fine bands, and order'd them up immediately; they join'd and play'd "Yankee
Doodle" with a will! It went through the men like lightning--but to inspire, not to unnerve.
Every man seem'd a giant. They charged like a cyclone, and cut their way out. Their loss was
but 20. It was about two in the afternoon.

WASHINGTON STREET SCENES

Walking Down Pennsylvania Avenue

April 7, 1864.--Warmish forenoon, after the storm of the past few days. I see, passing up,
in the broad space between the curbs, a big squad of a couple of hundred conscripts, surrounded
by a strong cordon of arm'd guards, and others interspers'd between the ranks. The government
has learn'd caution from its experiences; there are many hundreds of "bounty jumpers," and
already, as I am told, eighty thousand deserters! Next (also passing up the Avenue,) a cavalry
company, young, but evidently well drill'd and service-harden'd men. Mark the upright posture
in their saddles, the bronz'd and bearded young faces, the easy swaying to the motions of the
horses, and the carbines by their right knees; handsome and reckless, some eighty of them,
riding with rapid gait, clattering along. Then the tinkling bells of passing cars, the many
shops (some with large show-windows, some with swords, straps for the shoulders of different
ranks, hat-cords with acorns, or other insignia,) the military patrol marching along, with
the orderly or second-lieutenant stopping different ones to examine passes--the forms, the
faces, all sorts crowded together, the worn and pale, the pleas'd, some on their way to the
railroad depot going home, the cripples, the darkeys, the long trains of government wagons,
or the sad strings of ambulances conveying wounded--the many officers' horses tied in front
of the drinking or oyster saloons, or held by black men or boys, or orderlies.

THE 195TH PENNSYLVANIA

Tuesday, Aug. 1, 1865.--About 3 o'clock this afternoon (sun broiling hot) in Fifteenth street,
by the Treasury building, a large and handsome regiment, 195th Pennsylvania, were marching
by--as it happen'd, receiv'd orders just here to halt and break ranks, so that they might rest
themselves awhile. I thought I never saw a finer set of men--so hardy, candid, bright American
looks, all weather-beaten, and with warm clothes. Every man was home-born. My heart was much
drawn toward them. They seem'd very tired, red, and streaming with sweat. It is a one-year
regiment, mostly from Lancaster county, Pa.; have been in Shenandoah valley. On halting, the
men unhitch'd their knapsacks, and sat down to rest themselves. Some lay flat on the pavement
or under trees. The fine physical appearance of the whole body was remarkable. Great, very
great, must be the State where such young farmers and mechanics are the practical average.
I went around for half an hour and talk'd with several of them, sometimes squatting down with
the groups.

LEFT-HAND WRITING BY SOLDIERS

April 30, 1866.--Here is a single significant fact, from which one may judge of the character
of the American soldiers in this just concluded war: A gentleman in New York city, a while
since, took it into his head to collect specimens of writing from soldiers who had lost their
right hands in battle, and afterwards learn'd to use the left. He gave public notice of his
desire, and offer'd prizes for the best of these specimens. Pretty soon they began to come
in, and by the time specified for awarding the prizes three hundred samples of such left-hand
writing by maim'd soldiers had arrived.

I have just been looking over some of this writing. A great many of the specimens are written
in a beautiful manner. All are good. The writing in nearly all cases slants backward instead
of forward. One piece of writing, from a soldier who had lost both arms, was made by holding
the pen in his mouth.

CENTRAL VIRGINIA IN '64

Culpepper, where I am stopping, looks like a place of two or three thousand inhabitants. Must
be one of the pleasantest towns in Virginia. Even now, dilapidated fences, all broken down,
windows out, it has the remains of much beauty. I am standing on an eminence overlooking the
town, though within its limits. To the west the long Blue Mountain range is very plain, looks
quite near, though from 30 to 50 miles distant, with some gray splashes of snow yet visible.
The show is varied and fascinating. I see a great eagle up there in the air sailing with pois'd
wings, quite low. Squads of red-legged soldiers are drilling; I suppose some of the new men
of the Brooklyn 14th; they march off presently with muskets on their shoulders. In another
place, just below me, are some soldiers squaring off logs to build a shanty--chopping away,
and the noise of the axes sounding sharp. I hear the bellowing, unmusical screech of the mule.
I mark the thin blue smoke rising from camp fires. Just below me is a collection of hospital
tents, with a yellow flag elevated on a stick, and moving languidly in the breeze. Two discharged
men (I know them both) are just leaving. One is so weak he can hardly walk; the other is stronger,
and carries his comrade's musket. They move slowly along the muddy road toward the depot. The
scenery is full of breadth, and spread on the most generous scale (everywhere in Virginia this
thought fill'd me.) The sights, the scenes, the groups, have been varied and picturesque here
beyond description, and remain so.

I heard the men return in force the other night--heard the shouting, and got up and went out
to hear what was the matter. That night scene of so many hundred tramping steadily by, through
the mud (some big flaring torches of pine knots,) I shall never forget. I like to go to the
paymaster's tent, and watch the men getting paid off. Some have furloughs, and start at once
for home, sometimes amid great chaffing and blarneying. There is every day the sound of the
wood-chopping axe, and the plentiful sight of negroes, crows, and mud. I note large droves
and pens of cattle. The teamsters have camps of their own, and I go often among them. The officers
occasionally invite me to dinner or supper at headquarters. The fare is plain, but you get
something good to drink, and plenty of it. Gen. Meade is absent; Sedgwick is in command.

PAYING THE 1ST U. S. C. T.

One of my war time reminiscences comprises the quiet side scene of a visit I made to the First
Regiment U. S. Color'd Troops, at their encampment, and on the occasion of their first paying
off, July 11, 1863. Though there is now no difference of opinion worth mentioning, there was
a powerful opposition to enlisting blacks during the earlier years of the secession war. Even
then, however, they had their champions. "That the color'd race," said a good authority, "is
capable of military training and efficiency, is demonstrated by the testimony of numberless
witnesses, and by the eagerness display'd in the raising, organizing, and drilling of African
troops. Few white regiments make a better appearance on parade than the First and Second Louisiana
Native Guards. The same remark is true of other color'd regiments. At Milliken's Bend, at Vicksburg,
at Port Hudson, on Morris Island, and wherever tested, they have exhibited determin'd bravery,
and compell'd the plaudits alike of the thoughtful and thoughtless soldiery. During the siege
of Port Hudson the question was often ask'd those who beheld their resolute charges, how the
'niggers' behav'd under fire; and without exception the answer was complimentary to them. 'O,
tip-top!' 'first-rate!' 'bully!' were the usual replies. But I did not start out to argue the
case--only to give my reminiscence literally, as jotted on the spot at the time."

I write this on Mason's (otherwise Analostan) island, under the fine shade trees of an old
white stucco house, with big rooms; the white stucco house, originally a fine country seat
(tradition says the famous Virginia Mason, author of the Fugitive Slave Law, was born here.)
I reach'd the spot from my Washington quarters by ambulance up Pennsylvania avenue, through
Georgetown, across the Aqueduct bridge, and around through a cut and winding road, with rocks
and many bad gullies not lacking. After reaching the island, we get presently in the midst
of the camp of the 1st Regiment U. S. C. T. The tents look clean and good; indeed, altogether,
in locality especially, the pleasantest camp I have yet seen. The spot is umbrageous, high
and dry, with distant sounds of the city, and the puffing steamers of the Potomac, up to Georgetown
and back again. Birds are singing in the trees, the warmth is endurable here in this moist
shade, with the fragrance and freshness. A hundred rods across is Georgetown. The river between
is swell'd and muddy from the late rains up country. So quiet here, yet full of vitality, all
around in the far distance glimpses, as I sweep my eye, of hills, verdure-clad, and with plenteous
trees; right where I sit, locust, sassafras, spice, and many other trees, a few with huge parasitic
vines; just at hand the banks sloping to the river, wild with beautiful, free vegetation, superb
weeds, better, in their natural growth and forms, than the best garden. Lots of luxuriant grape
vines and trumpet flowers; the river flowing far down in the distance.

Now the paying is to begin. The Major (paymaster) with his clerk seat themselves at a table--the
rolls are before them--the money box is open'd--there are packages of five, ten, twenty-five
cent pieces. Here comes the first Company (B), some 82 men, all blacks. Certes, we cannot find
fault with the appearance of this crowd--negroes though they be. They are manly enough, bright
enough, look as if they had the soldier-stuff in them, look hardy, patient, many of them real
handsome young fellows. The paying, I say, has begun. The men are march'd up in close proximity.
The clerk calls off name after name, and each walks up, receives his money, and passes along
out of the way. It is a real study, both to see them come close, and to see them pass away,
stand counting their cash--(nearly all of this company get ten dollars and three cents each.)
The clerk calls George Washington. That distinguish'd personage steps from the ranks, in the
shape of a very black man, good sized and shaped, and aged about 30, with a military mustache;
he takes his "ten three," and goes off evidently well pleas'd. (There are about a dozen Washingtons
in the company. Let us hope they will do honor to the name.) At the table, how quickly the
Major handles the bills, counts without trouble, everything going on smoothly and quickly.
The regiment numbers to-day about 1,000 men (including 20 officers, the only whites.)

Now another company. These get $5.36 each. The men look well. They, too, have great names;
besides the Washingtons aforesaid, John Quincy Adams, Daniel Webster, Calhoun, James Madison,
Alfred Tennyson, John Brown, Benj. G. Tucker, Horace Greeley, &c. The men step off aside, count
their money with a pleas'd, half-puzzled look. Occasionally, but not often, there are some
thoroughly African physiognomies, very black in color, large, protruding lips, low forehead,
&c. But I have to say that I do not see one utterly revolting face.

Then another company, each man of this getting $10.03 also. The pay proceeds very rapidly (the
calculation, roll-signing, &c., having been arranged beforehand.) Then some trouble. One company,
by the rigid rules of official computation, gets only 23 cents each man. The company (K) is
indignant, and after two or three are paid, the refusal to take the paltry sum is universal,
and the company marches off to quarters unpaid.

Another company (I) gets only 70 cents. The sullen, lowering, disappointed look is general.
Half refuse it in this case. Company G, in full dress, with brass scales on shoulders, look'd,
perhaps, as well as any of the companies--the men had an unusually alert look. These, then,
are the black troops,--or the beginning of them. Well, no one can see them, even under these
circumstances--their military career in its novitiate--without feeling well pleas'd with them.

As we enter'd the island, we saw scores at a little distance, bathing, washing their clothes,
&c. The officers, as far as looks go, have a fine appearance, have good faces, and the air
military. Altogether it is a significant show, and brings up some "abolition" thoughts. The
scene, the porch of an Old Virginia slave-owner's house, the Potomac rippling near, the Capitol
just down three or four miles there, seen through the pleasant blue haze of this July day.

After a couple of hours I get tired, and go off for a ramble. I write these concluding lines
on a rock, under the shade of a tree on the banks of the island. It is solitary here, the birds
singing, the sluggish muddy-yellow waters pouring down from the late rains of the upper Potomac;
the green heights on the south side of the river before me. The single cannon from a neighboring
fort has just been fired, to signal high noon. I have walk'd all around Analostan, enjoying
its luxuriant wildness, and stopt in this solitary spot. A water snake wriggles down the bank,
disturb'd, into the water. The bank near by is fringed with a dense growth of shrubbery, vines, &c.

FIVE THOUSAND POEMS

There have been collected in a cluster nearly five thousand big and little American poems--all
that diligent and long-continued research could lay hands on! The author of 'Old Grimes is
Dead' commenced it, more than fifty years ago; then the cluster was pass'd on and accumulated
by C. F. Harris; then further pass'd on and added to by the late Senator Anthony, from whom
the whole collection has been bequeath'd to Brown University. A catalogue (such as it is) has
been made and publish'd of these five thousand poems--and is probably the most curious and
suggestive part of the whole affair. At any rate it has led me to some abstract reflection
like the following.

I should like, for myself, to put on record my devout acknowledgment not only of the great
masterpieces of the past, but of the benefit of all poets, past and present, and of all poetic
utterance--in its entirety the dominant moral factor of humanity's progress. In view of that
progress, and of evolution, the religious and esthetic elements, the distinctive and most important
of any, seem to me more indebted to poetry than to all other means and influences combined.
In a very profound sense religion is the poetry of humanity. Then the points of union and rapport
among all the poems and poets of the world, however wide their separations of time and place
and theme, are much more numerous and weighty than the points of contrast. Without relation
as they may seem at first sight, the whole earth's poets and poetry--en masse--the Oriental,
the Greek, and what there is of Roman--the oldest myths--the interminable ballad-romances of
the Middle Ages--the hymns and psalms of worship--the epics, plays, swarms of lyrics of the
British Islands, or the Teutonic old or new--or modern French--or what there is in America,
Bryant's, for instance, or Whittier's or Longfellow's--the verse of all tongues and ages, all
forms, all subjects, from primitive times to our own day inclusive--really combine in one aggregate
and electric globe or universe, with all its numberless parts and radiations held together
by a common centre or verteber. To repeat it, all poetry thus has (to the point of view comprehensive
enough) more features of resemblance than difference, and becomes essentially, like the planetary
globe itself, compact and orbic and whole. Nature seems to sow countless seeds--makes incessant
crude attempts--thankful to get now and then, even at rare and long intervals, something approximately
good.

THE OLD BOWERY

A Reminiscence of New York Plays and Acting Fifty Years Ago

In an article not long since, "Mrs. Siddons as Lady Macbeth," in "The Nineteenth Century,"
after describing the bitter regretfulness to mankind from the loss of those first-class poems,
temples, pictures, gone and vanish'd from any record of men, the writer (Fleeming Jenkin) continues:

  If this be our feeling as to the more durable works of art, what
  shall we say of those triumphs which, by their very nature, la
  no longer than the action which creates them--the triumphs of the
  orator, the singer, or the actor? There is an anodyne in the words,
  "must be so," "inevitable," and there is even some absurdity in
  longing for the impossible. This anodyne and our sense of humor
  temper the unhappiness we feel when, after hearing some great
  performance, we leave the theatre and think, "Well, this great thing
  has been, and all that is now left of it is the feeble print up
  my brain, the little thrill which memory will send along my nerves,
  mine and my neighbors; as we live longer the print and thrill must
  be feebler, and when we pass away the impress of the great artist
  will vanish from the world." The regret that a great art should in
  its nature be transitory, explains the lively interest which many
  feel in reading anecdotes or descriptions of a great actor.

All this is emphatically my own feeling and reminiscence about the best dramatic and lyric
artists I have seen in bygone days--for instance, Marietta Alboni, the elder Booth, Forrest,
the tenor Bettini, the baritone Badiali, "old man Clarke"--(I could write a whole paper on
the latter's peerless rendering of the Ghost in "Hamlet" at the Park, when I was a young fellow)--an
actor named Ranger, who appear'd in America forty years ago in genre characters; Henry Placide,
and many others. But I will make a few memoranda at least of the best one I knew.

For the elderly New Yorker of to-day, perhaps, nothing were more likely to start up memories
of his early manhood than the mention of the Bowery and the elder Booth, At the date given,
the more stylish and select theatre (prices, 50 cents pit, $1 boxes) was "The Park," a large
and well-appointed house on Park Row, opposite the present Post-office. English opera and the
old comedies were often given in capital style; the principal foreign stars appear'd here,
with Italian opera at wide intervals. The Park held a large part in my boyhood's and young
manhood's life. Here I heard the English actor, Anderson, in "Charles de Moor," and in the
fine part of "Gisippus." Here I heard Fanny Kemble, Charlotte Cushman, the Seguins, Daddy Rice,
Hackett as Falstaff, Nimrod Wildfire, Rip Van Winkle, and in his Yankee characters. (See pages
19, 20, "Specimen Days.") It was here (some years later than the date in the headline) I also
heard Mario many times, and at his best. In such parts as Gennaro, in "Lucrezia Borgia," he
was inimitable--the sweetest of voices, a pure tenor, of considerable compass and respectable
power. His wife, Grisi, was with him, no longer first-class or young--a fine Norma, though,
to the last.

Perhaps my dearest amusement reminiscences are those musical ones. I doubt if ever the senses
and emotions of the future will be thrill'd as were the auditors of a generation ago by the
deep passion of Alboni's contralto (at the Broadway Theatre, south side, near Pearl street)--or
by the trumpet notes of Badiali's baritone, or Bettini's pensive and incomparable tenor in
Fernando in "Favorita," or Marini's bass in "Faliero," among the Havana troupe, Castle Garden.

But getting back more specifically to the date and theme I started from--the heavy tragedy
business prevail'd more decidedly at the Bowery Theatre, where Booth and Forrest were frequently
to be heard. Though Booth pere, then in his prime, ranging in age from 40 to 44 years (he was
born in 1796,) was the loyal child and continuer of the traditions of orthodox English play-acting,
he stood out "himself alone" in many respects beyond any of his kind on record, and with effects
and ways that broke through all rules and all traditions. He has been well describ'd as an
actor "whose instant and tremendous concentration of passion in his delineations overwhelm'd
his audience, and wrought into it such enthusiasm that it partook of the fever of inspiration
surging through his own veins." He seems to have been of beautiful private character, very
honorable, affectionate, good-natured, no arrogance, glad to give the other actors the best
chances. He knew all stage points thoroughly, and curiously ignored the mere dignities. I once
talk'd with a man who had seen him do the Second Actor in the mock play to Charles Kean's Hamlet
in Baltimore. He was a marvellous linguist. He play'd Shylock once in London, giving the dialogue
in Hebrew, and in New Orleans Oreste (Racine's "Andromaque") in French. One trait of his habits,
I have heard, was strict vegetarianism. He was exceptionally kind to the brute creation. Every
once in a while he would make a break for solitude or wild freedom, sometimes for a few hours,
sometimes for days. (He illustrated Plato's rule that to the forming an artist of the very
highest rank a dash of insanity or what the world calls insanity is indispensable.) He was
a small-sized man--yet sharp observers noticed that however crowded the stage might be in certain
scenes, Booth never seem'd overtopt or hidden. He was singularly spontaneous and fluctuating;
in the same part each rendering differ'd from any and all others. He had no stereotyped positions
and made no arbitrary requirements on his fellow-performers.

As is well known to old play-goers, Booth's most effective part was Richard III. Either that,
or lago, or Shylock, or Pescara in "The Apostate," was sure to draw a crowded house. (Remember
heavy pieces were much more in demand those days than now.) He was also unapproachably grand
in Sir Giles Overreach, in "A New Way to Pay Old Debts," and the principal character in "The
Iron Chest."

In any portraiture of Booth, those years, the Bowery Theatre, with its leading lights, and
the lessee and manager, Thomas Hamblin, cannot be left out. It was at the Bowery I first saw
Edwin Forrest (the play was John Howard Payne's "Brutus, or the Fall of Tarquin," and it affected
me for weeks; or rather I might say permanently filter'd into my whole nature,) then in the
zenith of his fame and ability. Sometimes (perhaps a veteran's benefit night,) the Bowery would
group together five or six of the first-class actors of those days--Booth, Forrest, Cooper,
Hamblin, and John R. Scott, for instance. At that time and here George Jones ("Count Joannes")
was a young, handsome actor, and quite a favorite. I remember seeing him in the title role
in "Julius Caesar," and a capital performance it was.

To return specially to the manager. Thomas Hamblin made a first-rate foil to Booth, and was
frequently cast with him. He had a large, shapely, imposing presence, and dark and flashing
eyes. I remember well his rendering of the main role in Maturin's "Bertram, or the Castle of
St. Aldobrand." But I thought Tom Hamblin's best acting was in the comparatively minor part
of Faulconbridge in "King John"--he himself evidently revell'd in the part, and took away the
house's applause from young Kean (the King) and Ellen Tree (Constance,) and everybody else
on the stage--some time afterward at the Park. Some of the Bowery actresses were remarkably
good. I remember Mrs. Pritchard in "Tour de Nesle," and Mrs. McClure in "Fatal Curiosity,"
and as Millwood in "George Barnwell." (I wonder what old fellow reading these lines will recall
the fine comedietta of "The Youth That Never Saw a Woman," and the jolly acting in it of Mrs.
Herring and old Gates.)

The Bowery, now and then, was the place, too, for spectacular pieces, such as "The Last Days
of Pompeii," "The Lion-Doom'd" and the yet undying "Mazeppa." At one time "Jonathan Bradford,
or the Murder at the Roadside Inn, "had a long and crowded run; John Sefton and his brother
William acted in it. I remember well the Frenchwoman Celeste, a splendid pantomimist, and her
emotional "Wept of the Wishton-Wish." But certainly the main "reason for being" of the Bowery
Theatre those years was to furnish the public with Forrest's and Booth's performances--the
latter having a popularity and circles of enthusiastic admirers and critics fully equal to
the former--though people were divided as always. For some reason or other, neither Forrest
nor Booth would accept engagements at the more fashionable theatre, the Park. And it is a curious
reminiscence, but a true one, that both these great actors and their performances were taboo'd
by "polite society" in New York and Boston at the time--probably as being too robustuous. But
no such scruples affected the Bowery.

Recalling from that period the occasion of either Forrest or Booth, any good night at the old
Bowery, pack'd from ceiling to pit with its audience mainly of alert, well-dress'd, full-blooded
young and middle-aged men, the best average of American-born mechanics--the emotional nature
of the whole mass arous'd by the power and magnetism of as mighty mimes as ever trod the stage--the
whole crowded auditorium, and what seeth'd in it, and flush'd from its faces and eyes, to me
as much a part of the show as any--bursting forth in one of those long-kept-up tempests of
hand-clapping peculiar to the Bowery--no dainty kid-glove business, but electric force and
muscle from perhaps 2,000 full-sinew'd men--(the inimitable and chromatic tempest of one of
those ovations to Edwin Forrest, welcoming him back after an absence, comes up to me this moment)--Such
sounds and scenes as here resumed will surely afford to many old New Yorkers some fruitful
recollections.

I can yet remember (for I always scann'd an audience as rigidly as a play) the faces of the
leading authors, poets, editors, of those times--Fenimore Cooper, Bryant, Paulding, Irving,
Charles King, Watson Webb, N. P. Willis, Hoffman, Halleck, Mumford, Morris, Leggett, L. G.
Clarke, R. A. Locke and others, occasionally peering from the first tier boxes; and even the
great National Eminences, Presidents Adams, Jackson, Van Buren and Tyler, all made short visits
there on their Eastern tours.

Awhile after 1840 the character of the Bowery as hitherto described completely changed. Cheap
prices and vulgar programmes came in. People who of after years saw the pandemonium of the
pit and the doings on the boards must not gauge by them the times and characters I am describing.
Not but what there was more or less rankness in the crowd even then. For types of sectional
New York those days--the streets East of the Bowery, that intersect Division, Grand, and up
to Third avenue--types that never found their Dickens, or Hogarth, or Balzac, and have pass'd
away unportraitured--the young ship-builders, cartmen, butchers, firemen (the old-time "soap-lock"
or exaggerated "Mose" or "Sikesey," of Chanfrau's plays,) they, too, were always to be seen
in these audiences, racy of the East river and the Dry Dock. Slang, wit, occasional shirt sleeves,
and a picturesque freedom of looks and manners, with a rude good-nature and restless movement,
were generally noticeable. Yet there never were audiences that paid a good actor or an interesting
play the compliment of more sustain'd attention or quicker rapport. Then at times came the
exceptionally decorous and intellectual congregations I have hinted it; for the Bowery really
furnish'd plays and players you could get nowhere else. Notably, Booth always drew the best
hearers; and to a specimen of his acting I will now attend in some detail.

I happen'd to see what has been reckon'd by experts one of the most marvellous pieces of histrionism
ever known. It must have been about 1834 or '35. A favorite comedian and actress at the Bowery,
Thomas Flynn and his wife, were to have a joint benefit, and, securing Booth for Richard, advertised
the fact many days beforehand. The house fill'd early from top to bottom. There was some uneasiness
behind the scenes, for the afternoon arrived, and Booth had not come from down in Maryland,
where he lived. However, a few minutes before ringing-up time he made his appearance in lively
condition.

After a one-act farce over, as contrast and prelude, the curtain rising for the tragedy, I
can, from my good seat in the pit, pretty well front, see again Booth's quiet entrance from
the side, as, with head bent, he slowly and in silence, (amid the tempest of boisterous hand-clapping,)
walks down the stage to the footlights with that peculiar and abstracted gesture, musingly
kicking his sword, which he holds off from him by its sash. Though fifty years have pass'd
since then, I can hear the clank, and feel the perfect following hush of perhaps three thousand
people waiting. (I never saw an actor who could make more of the said hush or wait, and hold
the audience in an indescribable, half-delicious, half-irritating suspense.) And so throughout
the entire play, all parts, voice, atmosphere, magnetism, from

    "Now is the winter of our discontent,"

to the closing death fight with Richmond, were of the finest and grandest. The latter character
was play'd by a stalwart young fellow named Ingersoll. Indeed, all the renderings were wonderfully
good. But the great spell cast upon the mass of hearers came from Booth. Especially was the
dream scene very impressive. A shudder went through every nervous system in the audience; it
certainly did through mine.

Without question Booth was royal heir and legitimate representative of the Garrick-Kemble-Siddons
dramatic traditions; but he vitalized and gave an unnamable race to those traditions with his
own electric personal idiosyncrasy. (As in all art-utterance it was the subtle and powerful
something special to the individual that really conquer'd.)

To me, too, Booth stands for much else besides theatricals. I consider that my seeing the man
those years glimps'd for me, beyond all else, that inner spirit and form--the unquestionable
charm and vivacity, but intrinsic sophistication and artificiality--crystallizing rapidly upon
the English stage and literature at and after Shakspere's time, and coming on accumulatively
through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries to the beginning, fifty or forty years ago,
of those disintegrating, decomposing processes now authoritatively going on. Yes; although
Booth must be class'd in that antique, almost extinct school, inflated, stagy, rendering Shakspere
(perhaps inevitably, appropriately) from the growth of arbitrary and often cockney conventions,
his genius was to me one of the grandest revelations of my life, a lesson of artistic expression.
The words fire, energy, abandon, found in him unprecedented meanings. I never heard a speaker
or actor who could give such a sting to hauteur or the taunt. I never heard from any other
the charm of unswervingly perfect vocalization without trenching at all on mere melody, the
province of music.

So much for a Thespian temple of New York fifty years since, where "sceptred tragedy went trailing
by" under the gaze of the Dry Dock youth, and both players and auditors were of a character
and like we shall never see again. And so much for the grandest histrion of modern times, as
near as I can deliberately judge (and the phrenologists put my "caution" at 7)--grander, I
believe, than Kean in the expression of electric passion, the prime eligibility of the tragic
artist. For though those brilliant years had many fine and even magnificent actors, undoubtedly
at Booth's death (in 1852) went the last and by far the noblest Roman of them all.

London Edition, June 1887 If you will only take the following pages, as you do some long and
gossippy letter written for you by a relative or friend travelling through distant scenes and
incidents and jotting them down lazily and informally, but ever veraciously (with occasional
diversion of critical thought about sombody or something,) it might remove all formal or literary
impediments at once, and bring you and me closer together in the spirt in which the jottings
were collated to be read. You have had, and have, plenty of public events and facts and general
statistics of America;--in the following book is a common individual New World private life,
its birth and growth, its struggles for a living, its goings and comings and observations (or
representative portions of them) amid the United States of America the last thirty or forty
years, with their varied war and peace, their local coloring, the unavoidable egotism, and
the lights and shades and sights and joys and pains and sympathies common to humanity. Further
introductory light may be found in the paragraph, "A Happy Hour's Command," and the bottom
note belonging to it at the beginning of the book. I have said in the text that if I were required
to give good reason-for-being of "Specimen Days," I should be unable to do so. Let me fondly
hope that it has at least the reason and excuse of such off-hand gossippy letter as just alluded
to, portraying American life-sights and incidents as they actually occurred--their presentation,
making additions as far as it goes, to the simple experience and association of your soul,
from a comrade soul;--and that also, in the volume, as below any page of mine, anywhere, ever
remains, for seen or unseen basis-phrase, GOOD-WILL BETWEEN THE COMMON PEOPLE OF ALL NATIONS.

ADDITIONAL NOTE, 1887

To English Edition "Specimen Days"

As I write these lines I still continue living in Camden, New Jersey, America. Coming this
way from Washington city, on my road to the sea-shore (and a temporary rest, as I supposed)
in the early summer of 1873, I broke down disabled, and have dwelt here, as my central residence,
all the time since--almost 14 years. In the preceding pages I have described how, during those
years, I partially recuperated (in 1876) from my worst paralysis by going down to Timber creek,
living close to Nature, and domiciling with my dear friends George and Susan Stafford. From
1877 or '8 to '83 or '4 I was well enough to travel around, considerably--journey'd westward
to Kansas, leisurely exploring the Prairies, and on to Denver and the Rocky Mountains; another
time north to Canada, where I spent most of the summer with my friend Dr. Bucke, and jaunted
along the great lakes, and the St. Lawrence and Saguenay rivers; another time to Boston, to
properly print the final edition of my poems (I was there over two months, and had a "good
time.") I have so brought out the completed "Leaves of Grass" during this period; also "Specimen
Days," of which the foregoing is a transcript; collected and re-edited the "Democratic Vistas"
cluster (see companion volume to the present)--commemorated Abraham Lincoln's death, on the
successive anniversaries of its occurrence, by delivering my lecture on it ten or twelve times;
and "put in," through many a month and season, the aimless and resultless ways of most human lives.

Thus the last 14 years have pass'd. At present (end-days of March, 1887--I am nigh entering
my 69th year) I find myself continuing on here, quite dilapidated and even wreck'd bodily from
the paralysis, &c.--but in good heart (to use a Long Island country phrase,) and with about
the same mentality as ever. The worst of it is, I have been growing feebler quite rapidly for
a year, and now can't walk around--hardly from one room to the next. I am forced to stay in-doors
and in my big chair nearly all the time. We have had a sharp, dreary winter too, and it has
pinch'd me. I am alone most of the time; every week, indeed almost every day, write some--reminiscences,
essays, sketches, for the magazines; and read, or rather I should say dawdle over books and
papers a good deal--spend half the day at that.

Nor can I finish this note without putting on record--wafting over sea from hence--my deepest
thanks to certain friends and helpers (I would specify them all and each by name, but imperative
reasons, outside of my own wishes, forbid,) in the British Islands, as well as in America.
Dear, even in the abstract, is such flattering unction always no doubt to the soul! Nigher
still, if possible, I myself have been, and am to-day indebted to such help for my very sustenance,
clothing, shelter, and continuity. And I would not go to the grave without briefly, but plainly,
as I here do, acknowledging--may I not say even glorying in it?

PREFACE TO "DEMOCRATIC VISTAS" WITH OTHER PAPERS--English Edition

Mainly I think I should base the request to weigh the following pages on the assumption that
they present, however indirectly, some views of the West and Modern, or of a distinctly western
and modern (American) tendency, about certain matters. Then, too, the pages include (by attempting
to illustrate it,) a theory herein immediately mentioned. For another and different point of
the issue, the Enlightenment, Democracy and Fair-show of the bulk, the common people of America
(from sources representing not only the British Islands, but all the world,) means, at least,
eligibility to Enlightenment, Democracy and Fair-show for the bulk, the common people of all
civilized nations.

That positively "the dry land has appeared," at any rate, is an important fact.

America is really the great test or trial case for all the problems and promises and speculations
of humanity, and of the past and present.

I say, too, we[41] are not to look so much to changes, ameliorations, and adaptations in Politics
as to those of Literature and (thence) domestic Sociology. I have accordingly in the following
melange introduced many themes besides political ones.

Several of the pieces are ostensibly in explanation of my own writings; but in that very process
they best include and set forth their side of principles and generalities pressing vehemently
for consideration our age.

Upon the whole, it is on the atmosphere they are born in, and, (I hope) give out, more than
any specific piece or trait, I would care to rest.

I think Literature--a new, superb, democratic literature--is to be the medicine and lever,
and (with Art) the chief influence in modern civilization. I have myself not so much made a
dead set at this theory, or attempted to present it directly, as admitted it to color and sometimes
dominate what I had to say. In both Europe and America we have serried phalanxes who promulge
and defend the political claims: I go for an equal force to uphold the other.

WALT WHITMAN,

CAMDEN, NEW JERSEY, April, 1888.

Note:

[41] We who, in many departments, ways, make the building up of the masses, by building up
grand individuals, our shibboleth: and in brief that is the marrow of this book.

ABRAHAM LINCOLN

Glad am I to give--were anything better lacking--even the most brief and shorn testimony of
Abraham Lincoln. Everything I heard about him authentically, and every time I saw him (and
it was my fortune through 1862 to '65 to see, or pass a word with, or watch him, personally,
perhaps twenty or thirty times,) added to and anneal'd my respect and love at the moment. And
as I dwell on what I myself heard or saw of the mighty Westerner, and blend it with the history
and literature of my age, and of what I can get of all ages, and conclude it with his death,
it seems like some tragic play, superior to all else I know--vaster and fierier and more convulsionary,
for this America of ours, than Eschylus or Shakspere ever drew for Athens or for England. And
then the Moral permeating, underlying all! the Lesson that none so remote--none so illiterate--no
age, no class--but may directly or indirectly read!

Abraham Lincoln's was really one of those characters, the best of which is the result of long
trains of cause and effect--needing a certain spaciousness of time, and perhaps even remoteness,
to properly enclose them--having unequal'd influence on the shaping of this Republic (and therefore
the world) as to-day, and then far more important in the future. Thus the time has by no means
yet come for a thorough measurement of him. Nevertheless, we who live in his era--who have
seen him, and heard him, face to face, and are in the midst of, or just parting from, the strong
and strange events which he and we have had to do with--can in some respects bear valuable,
perhaps indispensable testimony concerning him.

I should first like to give a very fair and characteristic likeness of Lincoln, as I saw him
and watch'd him one afternoon in Washington, for nearly half an hour, not long before his death.
It was as he stood on the balcony of the National Hotel, Pennsylvania avenue, making a short
speech to the crowd in front, on the occasion either of a set of new colors presented to a
famous Illinois regiment, or of the daring capture, by the Western men, of some flags from
"the enemy," (which latter phrase, by the by, was not used by him at all in his remarks.) How
the picture happen'd to be made I do not know, but I bought it a few days afterward in Washington,
and it was endors'd by every one to whom I show'd it. Though hundreds of portraits have been
made, by painters and photographers, (many to pass on, by copies, to future times,) I have
never seen one yet that in my opinion deserv'd to be called a perfectly good likeness; nor
do I believe there is really such a one in existence. May I not say too, that, as there is
no entirely competent and emblematic likeness of Abraham Lincoln in picture or statue, there
is not--perhaps cannot be--any fully appropriate literary statement or summing-up of him yet
in existence?

The best way to estimate the value of Lincoln is to think what the condition of America would
be to-day, if he had never lived--never been President. His nomination and first election were
mainly accidents, experiments. Severely view'd, one cannot think very much of American Political
Parties, from the beginning, after the Revolutionary War, down to the present time. Doubtless,
while they have had their uses--have been and are "the grass on which the cow feeds"--and indispensable
economies of growth--it is undeniable that under flippant names they have merely identified
temporary passions, or freaks, or sometimes prejudice, ignorance, or hatred. The only thing
like a great and worthy idea vitalizing a party, and making it heroic, was the enthusiasm in
'64 for re-electing Abraham Lincoln, and the reason behind that enthusiasm.

How does this man compare with the acknowledg'd "Father of his country"? Washington was model'd
on the best Saxon, and Franklin--of the age of the Stuarts (rooted in the Elizabethan period)--was
essentially a noble Englishman, and just the kind needed for the occasions and the times of
1776-'83. Lincoln, underneath his practicality, was far less European, was quite thoroughly
Western, original, essentially non-conventional, and had a certain sort of out-door or prairie
stamp. One of the best of the late commentators on Shakspere, (Professor Dowden,) makes the
height and aggregate of his quality as a poet to be, that he thoroughly blended the ideal with
the practical or realistic. If this be so, I should say that what Shakspere did in poetic expression,
Abraham Lincoln essentially did in his personal and official life. I should say the invisible
foundations and vertebra of his character, more than any man's in history, were mystical, abstract,
moral and spiritual--while upon all of them was built, and out of all of them radiated, under
the control of the average of circumstances, what the vulgar call horse-sense, and a life often
bent by temporary but most urgent materialistic and political reasons.

He seems to have been a man of indomitable firmness (even obstinacy) on rare occasions, involving
great points; but he was generally very easy, flexible, tolerant, almost slouchy, respecting
minor matters. I note that even those reports and anecdotes intended to level him down, all
leave the tinge of a favorable impression of him. As to his religious nature, it seems to me
to have certainly been of the amplest, deepest-rooted, loftiest kind.

Already a new generation begins to tread the stage, since the persons and events of the secession
war.

I have fancied, I say, some such venerable relic of this time of ours, preserv'd to the next
or still the next generation of America. I have fancied, on such occasion, the young men gathering
around; the awe, the eager questions: "What! have you seen Abraham Lincoln--and heard him speak--and
touch'd his hand? Have you, with your own eyes, look'd on Grant, and Lee, and Sherman?"

Dear to Democracy, to the very last! And among the paradoxes generated by America, not the
least curious was that spectacle of all the kings and queens and emperors of the earth, many
from remote distances, sending tributes of condolence and sorrow in memory of one rais'd through
the commonest average of life--a rail-splitter and flat-boatman!

Consider'd from contemporary points of view--who knows what the future may decide?--and from
the points of view of current Democracy and The Union, (the only thing like passion or infatuation
in the man was the passion for the Union of These States,) Abraham Lincoln seems to me the
grandest figure yet, on all the crowded canvas of the Nineteenth Century.

NEW ORLEANS IN 1848

Walt Whitman gossips of his sojourn here years ago as a newspaper writer. Notes of his trip
up the Mississippi and to New York.

Among the letters brought this morning (Camden, New Jersey, Jan. 15, 1887,) by my faithful
post-office carrier, J.G., is one as follows:

"NEW ORLEANS, Jan. 11, '87.--We have been informed that when you were younger and less famous
than now, you were in New Orleans and perhaps have helped on the Picayune. If you have any
remembrance of the Picayune's young days, or of journalism in New Orleans of that era, and
would put it in writing (verse or prose) for the Picayune's fiftieth year edition, Jan. 25,
we shall be pleased," etc.

In response to which: I went down to New Orleans early in 1848 to work on a daily newspaper,
but it was not the Picayune, though I saw quite a good deal of the editors of that paper, and
knew its personnel and ways. But let me indulge my pen in some gossipy recollections of that
time and place, with extracts from my journal up the Mississippi and across the great lakes
to the Hudson.

Probably the influence most deeply pervading everything at that time through the United States,
both in physical facts and in sentiment, was the Mexican War, then just ended. Following a
brilliant campaign (in which our troops had march'd to the capital city, Mexico, and taken
full possession,) we were returning after our victory. From the situation of the country, the
city of New Orleans had been our channel and entrepot for everything, going and returning.
It had the best news and war correspondents; it had the most to say, through its leading papers,
the Picayune and Delta especially, and its voice was readiest listen'd to; from it "Chapparal"
had gone out, and his army and battle letters were copied everywhere, not only in the United
States, but in Europe. Then the social cast and results; no one who has never seen the society
of a city under similar circumstances can understand what a strange vivacity and rattle were
given throughout by such a situation. I remember the crowds of soldiers, the gay young officers,
going or coming, the receipt of important news, the many discussions, the returning wounded,
and so on.

I remember very well seeing Gen. Taylor with his staff and other officers at the St. Charles
Theatre one evening (after talking with them during the day.) There was a short play on the
stage, but the principal performance was of Dr. Colyer's troupe of "Model Artists," then in
the full tide of their popularity. They gave many fine groups and solo shows. The house was
crowded with uniforms and shoulder-straps. Gen. T. himself, if I remember right, was almost
the only officer in civilian clothes; he was a jovial, old, rather stout, plain man, with a
wrinkled and dark-yellow face, and, in ways and manners, show'd the least of conventional ceremony
or etiquette I ever saw; he laugh'd unrestrainedly at everything comical. (He had a great personal
resemblance to Fenimore Cooper, the novelist, of New York.) I remember Gen. Pillow and quite
a cluster of other militaires also present.

One of my choice amusements during my stay in New Orleans was going down to the old French
Market, especially of a Sunday morning. The show was a varied and curious one; among the rest,
the Indian and negro hucksters with their wares. For there were always fine specimens of Indians,
both men and women, young and old. I remember I nearly always on these occasions got a large
cup of delicious coffee with a biscuit, for my breakfast, from the immense shining copper kettle
of a great Creole mulatto woman (I believe she weigh'd 230 pounds.) I never have had such coffee
since. About nice drinks, anyhow, my recollection of the "cobblers" (with strawberries and
snow on top of the large tumblers,) and also the exquisite wines, and the perfect and mild
French brandy, help the regretful reminiscence of my New Orleans experiences of those days.
And what splendid and roomy and leisurely bar-rooms! particularly the grand ones of the St.
Charles and St. Louis. Bargains, auctions, appointments, business conferences, &c., were generally
held in the spaces or recesses of these bar-rooms.

I used to wander a midday hour or two now and then for amusement on the crowded and bustling
levees, on the banks of the river. The diagonally wedg'd-in boats, the stevedores, the piles
of cotton and other merchandise, the carts, mules, negroes, etc., afforded never-ending studies
and sights to me. I made acquaintances among the captains, boatmen, or other characters, and
often had long talks with them--sometimes finding a real rough diamond among my chance encounters.
Sundays I sometimes went forenoons to the old Catholic Cathedral in the French quarter. I used
to walk a good deal in this arrondissement; and I have deeply regretted since that I did not
cultivate, while I had such a good opportunity, the chance of better knowledge of French and
Spanish Creole New Orleans people. (I have an idea that there is much and of importance about
the Latin race contributions to American nationality in the South and Southwest that will never
be put with sympathetic understanding and tact on record.)

Let me say, for better detail, that through several months (1848) I work'd on a new daily paper,
The Crescent; my situation rather a pleasant one. My young brother, Jeff, was with me; and
he not only grew very homesick, but the climate of the place, and especially the water, seriously
disagreed with him. From this and other reasons (although I was quite happily fix'd) I made
no very long stay in the South. In due time we took passage northward for St. Louis in the
"Pride of the West" steamer, which left her wharf just at dusk. My brother was unwell, and
lay in his berth from the moment we left till the next morning; he seem'd to me to be in a
fever, and I felt alarm'd. However, the next morning he was all right again, much to my relief.

Our voyage up the Mississippi was after the same sort as the voyage, some months before, down
it. The shores of this great river are very monotonous and dull--one continuous and rank flat,
with the exception of a meagre stretch of bluff, about the neighborhood of Natchez, Memphis,
&c. Fortunately we had good weather, and not a great crowd of passengers, though the berths
were all full. The "Pride" jogg'd along pretty well, and put us into St. Louis about noon Saturday.
After looking around a little I secured passage on the steamer "Prairie Bird," (to leave late
in the afternoon,) bound up the Illinois river to La Salle, where we were to take canal for
Chicago. During the day I rambled with my brother over a large portion of the town, search'd
after a refectory, and, after much trouble, succeeded in getting some dinner.

Our "Prairie Bird" started out at dark, and a couple of hours after there was quite a rain
and blow, which made them haul in along shore and tie fast. We made but thirty miles the whole
night. The boat was excessively crowded with passengers, and had withal so much freight that
we could hardly turn around. I slept on the floor, and the night was uncomfortable enough.
The Illinois river is spotted with little villages with big names, Marseilles, Naples, etc.;
its banks are low, and the vegetation excessively rank. Peoria, some distance up, is a pleasant
town; I went over the place; the country back is all rich land, for sale cheap. Three or four
miles from P., land of the first quality can be bought for $3 or $4 an acre. (I am transcribing
from my notes written at the time.)

Arriving at La Salle Tuesday morning, we went on board a canal-boat, had a detention by sticking
on a mud bar, and then jogg'd along at a slow trot, some seventy of us, on a moderate-sized
boat. (If the weather hadn't been rather cool, particularly at night, it would have been insufferable.)
Illinois is the most splendid agricultural country I ever saw; the land is of surpassing richness;
the place par excellence for farmers. We stopt at various points along the canal, some of them
pretty villages.

It was 10 o'clock A.M. when we got in Chicago, too late for the steamer; so we went to an excellent
public house, the "American Temperance," and I spent the time that day and till next morning,
looking around Chicago.

At 9 the next forenoon we started on the "Griffith" (on board of which I am now inditing these
memoranda,) up the blue waters of Lake Michigan. I was delighted with the appearance of the
towns along Wisconsin. At Milwaukee I went on shore, and walk'd around the place. They say
the country back is beautiful and rich. (It seems to me that if we should ever remove from
Long Island, Wisconsin would be the proper place to come to.) The towns have a remarkable appearance
of good living, without any penury or want. After the unsatisfying theatre-diet which has fallen
to me of late I was doubly glad to get my teeth into Mr. St. JOHN
ERVINE'S good meaty ration at the Lyric Theatre, Hammersmith.

His theme is as old and new as Job. John Ferguson is a saintly Ulster farmer, apostle of the doctrine
of non- resistance (rare type in those parts, I understand) and eager justifier of the ways of
God to men. Ferguson's beloved farm is mortgaged; foreclosure imminent. Help is confidently
expected from brother Andrew in America, but does not come. Daughter Hannah, sent with a message
to the brutal mortgagee, is outraged by him. Prospective son-in-law James, man of great words
but little heart, rushes into the night to kill the ravisher.

But it is silent son Andrew (destined for the ministry) who does the killing, because he knows
James to be a craven.

John Ferguson urges confidently the will of God that James, whom he believes blood-guilty, should
not avoid arrest, and refuses to hide him. But when young Andrew insists on giving himself up
to save James and his own peace the old man's faith, weakened, falters; he protests in his anguish,
but rallies to accept this last blow from the hand of God--made none the easier to bear by
the arrival, just a fatal fortnight late, of the money from his brother, a forgetful sort of
man, who had mistaken the date of the mail. The tragic irony of the whole is skilfully heightened
by the fact that it is half-witted "Clutie," with his penny whistle
and his random words, who goads young Andrew to his vengeance.

A grim tale finely (perhaps just a little too diffusely) told and admirably presented. Mr. ERVINE'S
most effective stroke was, I think, the character of James Cæsar, with his pathetic yet revolting
self-condemnation, interpreted with a real mastery of art without artifice by Mr. J.M. KERRIGAN,
of the old band of "Irish Players." Miss MOYNA MACGILL (a name new to me) played her Hannah with
an exquisite sincerity and restraint. A particular moment when, from her hysterical laughter
at the careful choice made by her father's God of the moment for
the arrival of the money, she breaks into a passionate "It's not right!

It's not just!" was very fine. The whole character was skilfully built up. The part by no means
played itself.

Mr. HERBERT MARSHALL'S Andrew was also an excellent performance. Was it quite right, however, that
the morning after the murder he should appear so completely unruffled? (I admit I don't know my
Ulster intimately).

I rather think that Mr. MILES MALLESON'S well-studied "Clutie" might have been a little less
coherent, with more fawning in his manner. He seemed something too normal for his purpose in
the piece.

The way in which the other characters staved off his piping was beyond all praise. I should guess,
from specimens submitted, that his repertory was not extensive.

Mr. REA, as the father, was of course competent, but surely a little overplacid throughout.
He accepted the blow of his daughter's dishonour with scarcely a sign that submission caused him
any serious pang--a seeming indifference shared by Miss MAIRE O'NEILL
(Hannah's mother), who appeared quite untroubled a few minutes after
the harrowing relation, and indeed seemed throughout to be playing
too easily.

Mr. RAYMOND VALENTINE had a "fat" part as the villain, and well and fatly he played it.

I realise more than ever the difficulties of an Irish Settlement.

T.

*
* * * *

* * * * *

FAME.

From the New Orleans Picayune, Jan. 25, 1887.

SMALL MEMORANDA

Thousands lost--here one or two preserv'd

ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE, Washington, Aug. 22, 1865.--As I write this, about noon, the suite
of rooms here is fill'd with Southerners, standing in squads, or streaming in and out, some
talking with the Pardon Clerk, some waiting to see the Attorney General, others discussing
in low tones among themselves. All are mainly anxious about their pardons. The famous 13th
exception of the President's Amnesty Proclamation of ----, makes it necessary that every secessionist,
whose property is worth $20,000 or over, shall get a special pardon, before he can transact
any legal purchase, sale, &c. So hundreds and thousands of such property owners have either
sent up here, for the last two months, or have been, or are now coming personally here, to
get their pardons. They are from Virginia, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, North and South Carolina,
and every Southern State. Some of their written petitions are very abject. Secession officers
of the rank of Brigadier General, or higher, also need these special pardons. They also come
here. I see streams of the $20,000 men, (and some women,) every day. I talk now and then with
them, and learn much that is interesting and significant. All the southern women that come
(some splendid specimens, mothers, &c.) are dress'd in deep black.

Immense numbers (several thousands) of these pardons have been pass'd upon favorably; the Pardon
Warrants (like great deeds) have been issued from the State Department, on the requisition
of this office. But for some reason or other, they nearly all yet lie awaiting the President's
signature. He seems to be in no hurry about it, but lets them wait.

The crowds that come here make a curious study for me. I get along, very sociably, with any
of them--as I let them do all the talking; only now and then I have a long confab, or ask a
suggestive question or two.

If the thing continues as at present, the property and wealth of the Southern States is going
to legally rest, for the future, on these pardons. Every single one is made out with the condition
that the grantee shall respect the abolition of slavery, and never make an attempt to restore it.

Washington, Sept. 8, 9, &c., 1865.--The arrivals, swarms, &c., of the $20,000 men seeking pardons,
still continue with increas'd numbers and pertinacity. I yesterday (I am a clerk in the U.
S. Attorney General's office here) made out a long list from Alabama, nearly 200, recommended
for pardon by the Provisional Governor. This list, in the shape of a requisition from the Attorney
General, goes to the State Department. There the Pardon Warrants are made out, brought back
here, and then sent to the President, where they await his signature. He is signing them very
freely of late.

The President, indeed, as at present appears, has fix'd his mind on a very generous and forgiving
course toward the return'd secessionists. He will not countenance at all the demand of the
extreme Philo-African element of the North, to make the right of negro voting at elections
a condition and sine qua non of the reconstruction of the United States south, and of their
resumption of co-equality in the Union.

A GLINT INSIDE OF ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S CABINET APPOINTMENTS. ONE ITEM OF MANY

While it was hanging in suspense who should be appointed Secretary of the Interior, (to take
the place of Caleb Smith,) the choice was very close between Mr. Harlan and Col. Jesse K. Dubois,
of Illinois. The latter had many friends. He was competent, he was honest, and he was a man.
Mr. Harlan, in the race, finally gain'd the Methodist interest, and got himself to be consider'd
as identified with it; and his appointment was apparently ask'd for by that powerful body.
Bishop Simpson, of Philadephia, came on and spoke for the selection. The President was much
perplex'd. The reasons for appointing Col. Dubois were very strong, almost insuperable--yet
the argument for Mr. Harlan, under the adroit position he had plac'd himself, was heavy. Those
who press'd him adduc'd the magnitude of the Methodists as a body, their loyalty, more general
and genuine than any other sect--that they represented the West, and had a right to be heard--that
all or nearly all the other great denominations had their representatives in the heads of the
government--that they as a body and the great sectarian power of the West, formally ask'd Mr.
Harlan's appointment--that he was of them, having been a Methodist minister--that it would
not do to offend them, but was highly necessary to propitiate them.

Mr. Lincoln thought deeply over the whole matter. He was in more than usual tribulation on
the subject. Let it be enough to say that though Mr. Harlan finally receiv'd the Secretaryship,
Col. Dubois came as near being appointed as a man could, and not be. The decision was finally
made one night about 10 o'clock. Bishop Simpson and other clergymen and leading persons in
Mr. Harlan's behalf, had been talking long and vehemently with the President. A member of Congress
who was pressing Col. Dubois's claims, was in waiting. The President had told the Bishop that
he would make a decision that evening, and that he thought it unnecessary to be press'd any
more on the subject. That night he call'd in the M.C. above alluded to, and said to him: "Tell
Uncle Jesse that I want to give him this appointment, and yet I cannot. I will do almost anything
else in the world for him I am able. I have thought the matter all over, and under the circumstances
think the Methodists too good and too great a body to be slighted. They have stood by the government,
and help'd us their very best. I have had no better friends; and as the case stands, I have
decided to appoint Mr. Harlan."

NOTE TO A FRIEND

Written on the fly-leaf of a copy of Specimen Days, sent to Peter Doyle, at Washington, June, 1883]

Pete, do you remember--(of course you do--I do well)--those great long jovial walks we had
at times for years, (1866-'72) out of Washington city--often moonlight nights--'way to "Good
Hope";--or, Sundays, up and down the Potomac shores, one side or the other, sometimes ten miles
at a stretch? Or when you work'd on the horse-cars, and I waited for you, coming home late
together--or resting and chatting at the Market, corner 7th street and the Avenue, and eating
those nice musk or watermelons? Or during my tedious sickness and first paralysis ('73) how
you used to come to my solitary garret-room and make up my bed, and enliven me, and chat for
an hour or so--or perhaps go out and get the medicines Dr. Drinkard had order'd for me--before
you went on duty?... Give my love to dear Mrs. and Mr. Nash, and tell them I have not forgotten
them, and never will.

W.W.

WRITTEN IMPROMPTU IN AN ALBUM

Germantown, Phila., Dec. 26, '83. In memory of these merry Christmas days and nights--to my
friends Mr. and Mrs. Williams, Churchie, May, Gurney, and little Aubrey.... A heavy snow-storm
blocking up everything, and keeping us in. But souls, hearts, thoughts, unloos'd. And so--one
and all, little and big--hav'n't we had a good time?

W.W.

THE PLACE GRATITUDE FILLS IN A FINE CHARACTER

From the Philadelphia Press, Nov. 27, 1884, (Thanksgiving number)

Scene.--A large family supper party, a night or two ago, with voices and laughter of the young,
mellow faces of the old, and a by-and-by pause in the general joviality. "Now, Mr. Whitman,"
spoke up one of the girls, "what have you to say about Thanksgiving? Won't you give us a sermon
in advance, to sober us down?" The sage nodded smilingly, look'd a moment at the blaze of the
great wood fire, ran his forefinger right and left through the heavy white mustache that might
have otherwise impeded his voice, and began: "Thanksgiving goes probably far deeper than you
folks suppose. I am not sure but it is the source of the highest poetry--as in parts of the
Bible. Ruskin, indeed, makes the central source of all great art to be praise (gratitude) to
the Almighty for life, and the universe with its objects and play of action.

"We Americans devote an official day to it every year; yet I sometimes fear the real article
is almost dead or dying in our self-sufficient, independent Republic. Gratitude, anyhow, has
never been made half enough of by the moralists; it is indispensable to a complete character,
man's or woman's--the disposition to be appreciative, thankful. That is the main matter, the
element, inclination--what geologists call the trend. Of my own life and writings I estimate
the giving thanks part, with what it infers, as essentially the best item. I should say the
quality of gratitude rounds the whole emotional nature; I should say love and faith would quite
lack vitality without it. There are people--shall I call them even religious people, as things
go?--who have no such trend to their disposition."

LAST OF THE WAR CASES

Memorandized at the time, Washington, 1865-'66

[Of reminiscences of the secession war, after the rest is said, I have thought it remains to
give a few special words--in some respects at the time the typical words of all, and most definite-of
the samples of the kill'd and wounded in action, and of soldiers who linger'd afterward, from
these wounds, or were laid up by obstinate disease or prostration. The general statistics have
been printed already, but can bear to be briefly stated again. There were over 3,000,000 men
(for all periods of enlistment, large and small) furnish'd to the Union army during the war,
New York State furnishing over 500,000, which was the greatest number of any one State. The
losses by disease, wounds, kill'd in action, accidents, &c., were altogether about 600,000,
or approximating to that number. Over 4,000,000 cases were treated in the main and adjudicatory
army hospitals. The number sounds strange, but it is true. More than two-thirds of the deaths
were from prostration or disease. To-day there lie buried over 300,000 soldiers in the various
National army Cemeteries, more than half of them (and that is really the most significant and
eloquent bequest of the war) mark'd "unknown." In full mortuary statistics of the war, the
greatest deficiency arises from our not having the rolls, even as far as they were kept, of
most of the Southern military prisons--a gap which probably both adds to, and helps conceal,
the indescribable horrors of those places; it is, however, (restricting one vivid point only)
certain that over 30,000 Union soldiers died, largely of actual starvation, in them. And now,
leaving all figures and their "sum totals," I feel sure a few genuine memoranda of such things--some
cases jotted down '64, '65, and '66--made at the time and on the spot, with all the associations
of those scenes and places brought back, will not only go directest to the right spot, but
give a clearer and more actual sight of that period, than anything else. Before I give the
last cases I begin with verbatim extracts from letters home to my mother in Brooklyn, the second
year of the war.--W.W.]

Washington, Oct. 13, 1863.--There has been a new lot of wounded and sick arriving for the last
three days. The first and second days, long strings of ambulances with the sick. Yesterday
the worst, many with bad and bloody wounds, inevitably long neglected. I thought I was cooler
and more used to it, but the sight of some cases brought tears into my eyes. I had the luck
yesterday, however, to do lots of good. Had provided many nourishing articles for the men for
another quarter, but, fortunately, had my stores where I could use them at once for these new-comers,
as they arrived, faint, hungry, fagg'd out from their journey, with soil'd clothes, and all
bloody. I distributed these articles, gave partly to the nurses I knew, or to those in charge.
As many as possible I fed myself. Then I found a lot of oyster soup handy, and bought it all
at once.

It is the most pitiful sight, this, when the men are first brought in, from some camp hospital
broke up, or a part of the army moving. These who arrived yesterday are cavalry men. Our troops
had fought like devils, but got the worst of it. They were Kilpatrick's cavalry; were in the
rear, part of Meade's retreat, and the reb cavalry, knowing the ground and taking a favorable
opportunity, dash'd in between, cut them off, and shell'd them terribly. But Kilpatrick turn'd
and brought them out mostly. It was last Sunday. (One of the most terrible sights and tasks
is of such receptions.)

Oct. 27, 1863.--If any of the soldiers I know (or their parents or folks) should call upon
you--as they are often anxious to have my address in Brooklyn--you just use them as you know
how, and if you happen to have pot-luck, and feel to ask them to take a bite, don't be afraid
to do so. I have a friend, Thomas Neat, 2d N.Y. Cavalry, wounded in leg, now home in Jamaica,
on furlough; he will probably call. Then possibly a Mr. Haskell, or some of his folks, from
western New York: he had a son died here, and I was with the boy a good deal. The old man and
his wife have written me and ask'd me my Brooklyn address; he said he had children in New York,
and was occasionally down there. (When I come home I will show you some of the letters I get
from mothers, sisters, fathers, &c. They will make you cry.)

How the time passes away! To think it is over a year since I left home suddenly--and have mostly
been down in front since. The year has vanish'd swiftly, and oh, what scenes I have witness'd
during that time! And the war is not settled yet; and one does not see anything certain, or
even promising, of a settlement. But I do not lose the solid feeling, in myself, that the Union
triumph is assured, whether it be sooner or whether it be later, or whatever roundabout way
we may be led there; and I find I don't change that conviction from any reverses we meet, nor
delays, nor blunders. One realizes here in Washington the great labors, even the negative ones,
of Lincoln; that it is a big thing to have just kept the United States from being thrown down
and having its throat cut. I have not waver'd or had any doubt of the issue, since Gettysburg.

8th September, '63.--Here, now, is a specimen army hospital case: Lorenzo Strong, Co. A, 9th
United States Cavalry, shot by a shell last Sunday; right leg amputated on the field. Sent
up here Monday night, 14th. Seem'd to be doing pretty well till Wednesday noon, 16th, when
he took a turn for the worse, and a strangely rapid and fatal termination ensued. Though I
had much to do, I staid and saw all. It was a death-picture characteristic of these soldiers'
hospitals-- the perfect specimen of physique, one of the most magnificent I ever saw--the convulsive
spasms and working of muscles, mouth, and throat. There are two good women nurses, one on each
side. The doctor comes in and gives him a little chloroform. One of the nurses constantly fans
him, for it is fearfully hot. He asks to be rais'd up, and they put him in a half-sitting posture.
He call'd for "Mark" repeatedly, half-deliriously, all day. Life ebbs, runs now with the speed
of a mill race; his splendid neck, as it lays all open, works still, slightly; his eyes turn
back. A religious person coming in offers a prayer, in subdued tones, bent at the foot of the
bed; and in the space of the aisle, a crowd, including two or three doctors, several students,
and many soldiers, has silently gather'd. It is very still and warm, as the struggle goes on,
and dwindles, a little more, and a little more--and then welcome oblivion, painlessness, death.
A pause, the crowd drops away, a white bandage is bound around and under the jaw, the propping
pillows are removed, the limpsy head falls down, the arms are softly placed by the side, all
composed, all still,--and the broad white sheet is thrown over everything.

April 10, 1864.--Unusual agitation all around concentrated here. Exciting times in Congress.
The Copperheads are getting furious, and want to recognize the Southern Confederacy. "This
is a pretty time to talk of recognizing such--," said a Pennsylvania officer in hospital to
me to-day, "after what has transpired the last three years." After first Fredericksburg I felt
discouraged myself, and doubted whether our rulers could carry on the war. But that has pass'd
away. The war must be carried on. I would willingly go in the ranks myself if I thought it
would profit more than as at present, and I don't know sometimes but I shall, as it is. Then
there is certainly a strange, deep, fervid feeling form'd or arous'd in the land, hard to describe
or name; it is not a majority feeling, but it will make itself felt. M., you don't know what
a nature a fellow gets, not only after being a soldier a while, but after living in the sights
and influences of the camps, the wounded, &c.--a nature he never experienced before. The stars
and stripes, the tune of Yankee Doodle, and similar things, produce such an effect on a fellow
as never before. I have seen them bring tears on some men's cheeks, and others turn pale with
emotion. I have a little flag (it belong'd to one of our cavalry regiments,) presented to me
by one of the wounded; it was taken by the secesh in a fight, and rescued by our men in a bloody
skirmish following. It cost three men's lives to get back that four-by-three flag--to tear
it from the breast of a dead rebel--for the name of getting their little "rag" back again.
The man that secured it was very badly wounded, and they let him keep it. I was with him a
good deal; he wanted to give me some keepsake, he said,--he didn't expect to live,--so he gave
me that flag. The best of it all is, dear M., there isn't a regiment, cavalry or infantry,
that wouldn't do the like, on the like occasion.

April 12.--I will finish my letter this morning; it is a beautiful day. I was up in Congress
very late last night. The House had a very excited night session about expelling the men that
proposed recognizing the Southern Confederacy. You ought to hear (as I do) the soldiers talk;
they are excited to madness. We shall probably have hot times here, not in the military fields
alone. The body of the army is true and firm as the North Star.

May 6, '64.--M., the poor soldier with diarrhoea, is still living, but, oh, what a looking
object! Death would be a relief to him--he cannot last many hours. Cunningham, the Ohio soldier,
with leg amputated at thigh, has pick'd up beyond expectation; now looks indeed like getting
well. (He died a few weeks afterwards.) The hospitals are very full. I am very well indeed.
Hot here to-day.

May 23, '64.--Sometimes I think that should it come when it must, to fall in battle, one's
anguish over a son or brother kill'd might be temper'd with much to take the edge off. Lingering
and extreme suffering from wounds or sickness seem to me far worse than death in battle. I
can honestly say the latter has no terrors for me, as far as I myself am concern'd. Then I
should say, too, about death in war, that our feelings and imaginations make a thousand times
too much of the whole matter. Of the many I have seen die, or known of, the past year, I have
not seen or known one who met death with terror. In most cases I should say it was a welcome
relief and release. Yesterday I spent a good part of the afternoon with a young soldier of
seventeen, Charles Cutter, of Lawrence city, Massachusetts, 1st Massachusetts Heavy Artillery,
Battery M. He was brought to one of the hospitals mortally wounded in abdomen. Well, I thought
to myself, as I sat looking at him, it ought to be a relief to his folks if they could see
how little he really suffer'd. He lay very placid, in a half lethargy, with his eyes closed.
As it was extremely hot, and I sat a good while silently fanning him, and wiping the sweat,
at length he open'd his eyes quite wide and clear, and look'd inquiringly around. I said, "What
is it, my boy? Do you want anything?" He answer'd quietly, with a good-natured smile, "Oh,
nothing; I was only looking around to see who was with me." His mind was somewhat wandering,
yet he lay in an evident peacefulness that sanity and health might have envied. I had to leave
for other engagements. He died, I heard afterward, without any special agitation, in the course
of the night.

Washington, May 26, '63.--M., I think something of commencing a series of lectures, readings,
talks, &c., through the cities of the North, to supply myself with funds for hospital ministrations.
I do not like to be so beholden to others; I need a pretty free supply of money, and the work
grows upon me, and fascinates me. It is the most magnetic as well as terrible sight: the lots
of poor wounded and helpless men depending so much, in one ward or another, upon my soothing
or talking to them, or rousing them up a little, or perhaps petting, or feeding them their
dinner or supper (here is a patient, for instance, wounded in both arms,) or giving some trifle
for a novelty or change--anything, however trivial, to break the monotony of those hospital hours.

It is curious: when I am present at the most appalling scenes, deaths, operations, sickening
wounds (perhaps full of maggots,) I keep cool and do not give out or budge, although my sympathies
are very much excited; but often, hours afterward, perhaps when I am home, or out walking alone,
I feel sick, and actually tremble, when I recall the case again before me.

Sunday afternoon, opening of 1865.--Pass'd this afternoon among a collection of unusually bad
cases, wounded and sick secession soldiers, left upon our hands. I spent the previous Sunday
afternoon there also. At that time two were dying. Two others have died during the week. Several
of them are partly deranged. I went around among them elaborately. Poor boys, they all needed
to be cheer'd up. As I sat down by any particular one, the eyes of all the rest in the neighboring
cots would fix upon me, and remain steadily riveted as long as I sat within their sight. Nobody
seem'd to wish anything special to eat or drink. The main thing ask'd for was postage stamps,
and paper for writing. I distributed all the stamps I had. Tobacco was wanted by some.

One call'd me over to him and ask'd me in a low tone what denomination I belong'd to. He said
he was a Catholic--wish'd to find some one of the same faith--wanted some good reading. I gave
him something to read, and sat down by him a few minutes. Moved around with a word for each.
They were hardly any of them personally attractive cases, and no visitors come here. Of course
they were all destitute of money. I gave small sums to two or three, apparently the most needy.
The men are from quite all the Southern States, Georgia, Mississippi, Louisiana, &c.

Wrote several letters. One for a young fellow named Thomas J. Byrd, with a bad wound and diarrhoea.
Was from Russell county, Alabama; been out four years. Wrote to his mother; had neither heard
from her nor written to her in nine months. Was taken prisoner last Christmas, in Tennessee;
sent to Nashville, then to Camp Chase, Ohio, and kept there a long time; all the while not
money enough to get paper and postage stamps. Was paroled, but on his way home the wound took
gangrene; had diarrhoea also; had evidently been very low. Demeanor cool, and patient. A dark-skinn'd,
quaint young fellow, with strong Southern idiom; no education.

Another letter for John W. Morgan, aged 18, from Shellot, Brunswick county, North Carolina;
been out nine months; gunshot wound in right leg, above knee; also diarrhoea; wound getting
along well; quite a gentle, affectionate boy; wish'd me to put in the letter for his mother
to kiss his little brother and sister for him. [I put strong envelopes on these, and two or
three other letters, directed them plainly and fully, and dropt them in the Washington post-office
the next morning myself.]

The large ward I am in is used for secession soldiers exclusively. One man, about forty years
of age, emaciated with diarrhoea, I was attracted to, as he lay with his eyes turn'd up, looking
like death. His weakness was so extreme that it took a minute or so, every time, for him to
talk with anything like consecutive meaning; yet he was evidently a man of good intelligence
and education. As I said anything, he would lie a moment perfectly still, then, with closed
eyes, answer in a low, very slow voice, quite correct and sensible, but in a way and tone that
wrung my heart. He had a mother, wife, and child living (or probably living) in his home in
Mississippi. It was long, long since he had seen them. Had he caus'd a letter to be sent them
since he got here in Washington? No answer. I repeated the question, very slowly and soothingly.
He could not tell whether he had or not--things of late seem'd to him like a dream. After waiting
a moment, I said: "Well, I am going to walk down the ward a moment, and when I come back you
can tell me. If you have not written, I will sit down and write." A few minutes after I return'd;
he said he remember'd now that some one had written for him two or three days before. The presence
of this man impress'd me profoundly. The flesh was all sunken on face and arms; the eyes low
in their sockets and glassy, and with purple rings around them. Two or three great tears silently
flow'd out from the eyes, and roll'd down his temples (he was doubtless unused to be spoken
to as I was speaking to him.)Sickness, imprisonment, exhaustion, &c., had conquer'd the body,
yet the mind held mastery still, and call'd even wandering remembrance back.

There are some fifty Southern soldiers here; all sad, sad cases. There is a good deal of scurvy.
I distributed some paper, envelopes, and postage stamps, and wrote addresses full and plain
on many of the envelopes.

I return'd again Tuesday, August 1, and moved around in the same manner a couple of hours.

September 22, '65.--Afternoon and evening at Douglas hospital to see a friend belonging to
2d New York Artillery (Hiram W. Frazee, Serg't,) down with an obstinate compound fracture of
left leg receiv'd in one of the last battles near Petersburg. After sitting a while with him,
went through several neighboring wards. In one of them found an old acquaintance transferr'd
here lately, a rebel prisoner, in a dying condition. Poor fellow, the look was already on his
face. He gazed long at me. I ask'd him if he knew me. After a moment he utter'd something,
but inarticulately. I have seen him off and on for the last five months. He has suffer'd very
much; a bad wound in left leg, severely fractured, several operations, cuttings, extractions
of bone, splinters, &c. I remember he seem'd to me, as I used to talk with him, a fair specimen
of the main strata of the Southerners, those without property or education, but still with
the stamp which comes from freedom and equality. I liked him; Jonathan Wallace, of Hurd co.,
Georgia, age 30 (wife, Susan F. Wallace, Houston, Hurd co., Georgia.) [If any good soul of
that county should see this, I hope he will send her this word.] Had a family; had not heard
from them since taken prisoner, now six months. I had written for him, and done trifles for
him, before he came here. He made no outward show, was mild in his talk and behavior, but I
knew he worried much inwardly. But now all would be over very soon. I half sat upon the little
stand near the head of the bed. Wallace was somewhat restless. I placed my hand lightly on
his forehead and face, just sliding it over the surface. In a moment or so he fell into a calm,
regular-breathing lethargy or sleep, and remain'd so while I sat there. It was dark, and the
lights were lit. I hardly know why (death seem'd hovering near,) but I stay'd nearly an hour.
A Sister of Charity, dress'd in black, with a broad white linen bandage around her head and
under her chin, and a black crape over all and flowing down from her head in long wide pieces,
came to him, and moved around the bed. She bow'd low and solemn to me. For some time she moved
around there noiseless as a ghost, doing little things for the dying man.

December, '65.--The only remaining hospital is now "Harewood," out in the woods, northwest
of the city. I have been visiting there regularly every Sunday during these two months.

January 24, '66.--Went out to Harewood early to-day, and remain'd all day.

Sunday, February 4, 1866.--Harewood Hospital again. Walk'd out this afternoon (bright, dry,
ground frozen hard) through the woods. Ward 6 is fill'd with blacks, some with wounds, some
ill, two or three with limbs frozen. The boys made quite a picture sitting round the stove.
Hardly any can read or write. I write for three or four, direct envelopes, give some tobacco, &c.

Joseph Winder, a likely boy, aged twenty-three, belongs to 10th Color'd Infantry (now in Texas;)
is from Eastville, Virginia. Was a slave; belong'd to Lafayette Homeston. The master was quite
willing he should leave. Join'd the army two years ago; has been in one or two battles. Was
sent to hospital with rheumatism. Has since been employ'd as cook. His parents at Eastville;
he gets letters from them, and has letters written to them by a friend. Many black boys left
that part of Virginia and join'd the army; the 10th, in fact, was made up of Virginia blacks
from thereabouts. As soon as discharged is going back to Eastville to his parents and home,
and intends to stay there.

Thomas King, formerly 2d District Color'd Regiment, discharged soldier, Company E, lay in a
dying condition; his disease was consumption. A Catholic priest was administering extreme unction
to him. (I have seen this kind of sight several times in the hospitals; it is very impressive.)

Harewood, April 29, 1866. Sunday afternoon.--Poor Joseph Swiers, Company H, 155th Pennsylvania,
a mere lad (only eighteen years of age;) his folks living in Reedsburgh, Pennsylvania. I have
known him for nearly a year, transferr'd from hospital to hospital. He was badly wounded in
the thigh at Hatcher's Run, February 6, '65.

James E. Ragan, Atlanta, Georgia; 2d United States Infantry. Union folks. Brother impress'd,
deserted, died; now no folks, left alone in the world, is in a singularly nervous state; came
in hospital with intermittent fever.

Walk slowly around the ward, observing, and to see if I can do anything. Two or three are lying
very low with consumption, cannot recover; some with old wounds; one with both feet frozen
off, so that on one only the heel remains. The supper is being given out: the liquid call'd
tea, a thick slice of bread, and some stew'd apples.

That was about the last I saw of the regular army hospitals.

The time was signalized by the separation of the society of Friends, so greatly talked of--and
continuing yet--but so little really explain'd. (All I give of this separation is in a Note
following.)

Notes (such as they are) founded on

ELIAS HICKS

Prefatory Note--As myself a little boy hearing so much of E.H., at that time, long ago, in
Suffolk and Queens and Kings counties--and more than once personally seeing the old man--and
my dear, dear father and mother faithful listeners to him at the meetings--I remember how I
dream'd to write perhaps a piece about E.H. and his look and discourses, however long afterward--for
my parents' sake--and the dear Friends too! And the following is what has at last but all come
out of it--the feeling and intention never forgotten yet!

There is a sort of nature of persons I have compared to little rills of water, fresh, from
perennial springs--(and the comparison is indeed an appropriate one)--persons not so very plenty,
yet some few certainly of them running over the surface and area of humanity, all times, all
lands. It is a specimen of this class I would now present. I would sum up in E.H., and make
his case stand for the class, the sort, in all ages, all lands, sparse, not numerous, yet enough
to irrigate the soil--enough to prove the inherent moral stock and irrepressible devotional
aspirations growing indigenously of themselves, always advancing, and never utterly gone under
or lost.

Always E.H. gives the service of pointing to the fountain of all naked theology, all religion,
all worship, all the truth to which you are possibly eligible--namely in yourself and your
inherent relations. Others talk of Bibles, saints, churches, exhortations, vicarious atonements--the
canons outside of yourself and apart from man--E.H. to the religion inside of man's very own
nature. This he incessantly labors to kindle, nourish, educate, bring forward and strengthen.
He is the most democratic of the religionists--the prophets.

I have no doubt that both the curious fate and death of his four sons, and the facts (and dwelling
on them) of George Fox's strange early life, and permanent "conversion," had much to do with
the peculiar and sombre ministry and style of E.H. from the first, and confirmed him all through.
One must not be dominated by the man's almost absurd saturation in cut and dried biblical phraseology,
and in ways, talk, and standard, regardful mainly of the one need he dwelt on, above all the
rest. This main need he drove home to the soul; the canting and sermonizing soon exhale away
to any auditor that realizes what E.H. is for and after. The present paper, (a broken memorandum
of his formation, his earlier life,) is the cross-notch that rude wanderers make in the woods,
to remind them afterward of some matter of first-rate importance and full investigation. (Remember
too, that E.H. was a thorough believer in the Hebrew Scriptures, in his way.)

The following are really but disjointed fragments recall'd to serve and eke out here the lank
printed pages of what I commenc'd unwittingly two months ago. Now, as I am well in for it,
comes an old attack, the sixth or seventh recurrence, of my war-paralysis, dulling me from
putting the notes in shape, and threatening any further action, head or body. W.W., Camden,
N.J., July, 1888.

To begin with, my theme is comparatively featureless. The great historian has pass'd by the
life of Elias Hicks quite without glance or touch. Yet a man might commence and overhaul it
as furnishing one of the amplest historic and biography's backgrounds. While the foremost actors
and events from 1750 to 1830 both in Europe and America were crowding each other on the world's
stage--While so many kings, queens, soldiers, philosophs, musicians, voyagers, litterateurs,
enter one side, cross the boards, and disappear--amid loudest reverberating names--Frederick
the Great, Swedenborg, Junius, Voltaire, Rousseau, Linnaeus, Herschel--curiously contemporary
with the long life of Goethe--through the occupancy of the British throne by George the Third--amid
stupendous visible political and social revolutions, and far more stupendous invisible moral
ones--while the many quarto volumes of the Encyclopaedia Francaise are being published at fits
and intervals, by Diderot, in Paris--while Haydn and Beethoven and Mozart and Weber are working
out their harmonic compositions--while Mrs. Siddons and Talma and Kean are acting--while Mungo
Park explores Africa, and Capt. Cook circumnavigates the globe--through all the fortunes of
the American Revolution, the beginning, continuation and end, the battle of Brooklyn, the surrender
at Saratoga, the final peace of '83--through the lurid tempest of the French Revolution, the
execution of the king and queen, and the Reign of Terror--through the whole of the meteor-career
of Napoleon--through all Washington's, Adams's, Jefferson's, Madison's, and Monroe's Presidentiads--amid
so many flashing lists of names, (indeed there seems hardly, in any department, any end to
them, Old World or New,) Franklin, Sir Joshua Reynolds, Mirabeau, Fox, Nelson, Paul Jones,
Kant, Fichte, and Hegel, Fulton, Walter Scott, Byron, Mesmer, Champollion--Amid pictures that
dart upon me even as I speak, and glow and mix and coruscate and fade like aurora boreales--Louis
the 16th threaten'd by the mob, the trial of Warren Hastings, the death-bed of Robert Burns,
Wellington at Waterloo, Decatur capturing the Macedonian, or the sea-fight between the Chesapeake
and the Shannon--During all these whiles,

I say, and though on a far different grade, running parallel and contemporary with all--a curious,
quiet yet busy life centred in a little country village on Long Island, and within sound on
still nights of the mystic surf-beat of the sea. About this life, this Personality--neither
soldier, nor scientist, nor litterateur--I propose to occupy a few minutes in fragmentary talk,
to give some few melanges, disconnected impressions, statistics, resultant groups, pictures,
thoughts' of him, or radiating from him.

Elias Hicks was born March 19, 1748, in Hempstead township, Queens county, Long Island, New
York State, near a village bearing the old Scripture name of Jericho, (a mile or so north and
east of the present Hicksville, on the L.I. Railroad.) His father and mother were Friends,
of that class working with their own hands, and mark'd by neither riches nor actual poverty.
Elias as a child and youth had small education from letters, but largely learn'd from Nature's
schooling. He grew up even in his ladhood a thorough gunner and fisherman. The farm of his
parents lay on the south or sea-shore side of Long Island, (they had early removed from Jericho,)
one of the best regions in the world for wild fowl and for fishing. Elias became a good horseman,
too, and knew the animal well, riding races; also a singer fond of "vain songs," as he afterwards
calls them; a dancer, too, at the country balls. When a boy of 13 he had gone to live with
an elder brother; and when about 17 he changed again and went as apprentice to the carpenter's
trade. The time of all this was before the Revolutionary War, and the locality 30 to 40 miles
from New York city. My great-grandfather, Whitman, was often with Elias at these periods, and
at merry-makings and sleigh-rides in winter over "the plains."

How well I remember the region--the flat plains of the middle of Long Island, as then, with
their prairie-like vistas and grassy patches in every direction, and the 'kill-calf' and herds
of cattle and sheep. Then the South Bay and shores and the salt meadows, and the sedgy smell,
and numberless little bayous and hummock-islands in the waters, the habitat of every sort of
fish and aquatic fowl of North America. And the bay men--a strong, wild, peculiar race--now
extinct, or rather entirely changed. And the beach outside the sandy bars, sometimes many miles
at a stretch, with their old history of wrecks and storms--the weird, white-gray beach--not
without its tales of pathos--tales, too, of grandest heroes and heroisms. In such scenes and
elements and influences--in the midst of Nature and along the shores of the sea--Elias Hicks
was fashion'd through boyhood and early manhood, to maturity. But a moral and mental and emotional
change was imminent. Along at this time he says:

  My apprenticeship being now expir'd, I gradually withdrew from
  the company of my former associates, became more acquainted with
  Friends, and was more frequent in my attendance of meetings; and
  although this was in some degree profitable to me, yet I made but
  slow progress in my religious improvement. The occupation of part of
  my time in fishing and fowling had frequently tended to preser
  me from falling into hurtful associations; but through the rising
  intimations and reproofs of divine grace in my heart, I now began to
  feel that the manner in which I sometimes amus'd myself with my gun
  was not without sin; for although I mostly preferr'd going alone,
  and while waiting in stillness for the coming of the fowl,
  mind was at times so taken up in divine meditations, that the
  opportunities were seasons of instruction and comfort to me; yet, on
  other occasions, when accompanied by some of my acquaintances, and
  when no fowls appear'd which would be useful to us after being
  obtain'd, we sometimes, from wantonness or for mere diversion, would
  destroy the small birds which could be of no service to us. This
  cruel procedure affects my heart while penning these lines.

In his 23d year Elias was married, by the Friends' ceremony, to Jemima Seaman. His wife was
an only child; the parents were well off for common people, and at their request the son-in-law
mov'd home with them and carried on the farm--which at their decease became his own, and he
liv'd there all his remaining life. Of this matrimonial part of his career, (it continued,
and with unusual happiness, for 58 years,) he says, giving the account of his marriage:

  On this important occasion, we felt the clear and consoling evidence
  of divine truth, and it remain'd with us as a seal upon our spirits,
  strengthening us mutually to bear, with becoming fortitude, the
  vicissitudes and trials which fell to our lot, and of which we h
  a large share in passing through this probationary state. My wife,
  although not of a very strong constitution, liv'd to be the mother
  of eleven children, four sons and seven daughters. Our second
  daughter, a very lovely, promising child, died when young, with the
  small-pox, and the youngest was not living at its birth. The rest
  all arriv'd to years of discretion, and afforded us considerable
  comfort, as they prov'd to be in a good degree dutiful children. All
  our sons, however, were of weak constitutions, and were not able to
  take care of themselves, being so enfeebl'd as not to be able to
  walk after the ninth or tenth year of their age. The two eldest died
  in the fifteenth year of their age, the third in his seventeenth
  year, and the youngest was nearly nineteen when he died. But,
  although thus helpless, the innocency of their lives, and the
  resign'd cheerfulness of their dispositions to their allotments,
  made the labor and toil of taking care of them agreeable and
  pleasant; and I trust we were preserv'd from murmuring or repining,
  believing the dispensation to be in wisdom, and according to the
  will and gracious disposing of an all-wise providence, for purposes
  best known to himself. And when I have observ'd the great anxiety
  and affliction which many parents have with undutiful children who
  are favor'd with health, especially their sons, I could perceive
  very few whose troubles and exercises, on that account, did not far
  exceed ours. The weakness and bodily infirmity of our sons tended to
  keep them much out of the way of the troubles and temptations
  the world; and we believ'd that in their death they were happy, and
  admitted into the realms of peace and joy: a reflection, the most
  comfortable and joyous that parents can have in regard to their
  tender offspring.

Of a serious and reflective turn, by nature, and from his reading and surroundings, Elias had
more than once markedly devotional inward intimations. These feelings increas'd in frequency
and strength, until soon the following:

  About the twenty-sixth year of my age I was again brought, by the
  operative influence of divine grace, under deep concern of mind; and
  was led, through adorable mercy, to see, that although I had ceas'd
  from many sins and vanities of my youth, yet there were many
  remaining that I was still guilty of, which were not yet aton'd for,
  and for which I now felt the judgments of God to rest upon m
  This caus'd me to cry earnestly to the Most High for pardon and
  redemption, and he graciously condescended to hear my cry, and to
  open a way before me, wherein I must walk, in order to experience
  reconciliation with him; and as I abode in watchfulness and deep
  humiliation before him, light broke forth out of obscurity, and my
  darkness became as the noon-day. I began to have openings leading to
  the ministry, which brought me under close exercise and deep travail
  of spirit; for although I had for some time spoken on subjects of
  business in monthly and preparative meetings, yet the prospe
  of opening my mouth in public meetings was a close trial; but I
  endeavor'd to keep my mind quiet and resign' d to the heavenly call,
  if it should be made clear to me to be my duty. Nevertheless,
  I was, soon after, sitting in a meeting, in much weightiness of
  spirit, a secret, though clear, intimation accompanied me to spe
  a few words, which were then given to me to utter, yet fear so
  prevail'd, that I did not yield to the intimation. For this
  omission, I felt close rebuke, and judgment seem'd, for some time,
  to cover my mind; but as I humbl'd myself under the Lord's mighty
  hand, he again lifted up the light of his countenance upon me, and
  enabl'd me to renew covenant with him, that if he would pass by this
  my offence, I would, in future, be faithful, if he should again
  require such a service of me. 

Our balance is restored and we have not fallen; that is the comfortable reflection: we stand
as others do, and we will for the future be warned to avoid the dizzy stations which cry for
resources beyond a common equilibrium, and where a slip precipitates
us to ruin.

  
  
  When, further, it is a woman planted in a burning blush, having to
  idealize her feminine weakness, that she may not rebuke herself
  for grovelling, the mean material acts by which she sustains a tottering
  position are speedily swallowed in the one pervading flame. She sees
  but an ashen curl of the path she has traversed to safety, if
  anything.
  
  Knowing her lover was to come in the morning, Diana's thoughts dwelt
  wholly upon the way to tell him, as tenderly as possible without danger
  to herself, that her time for entertaining was over until she had finished
  her book; indefinitely, therefore. The apprehension of his complaining
  pricked the memory that she had something to forgive. He had sunk
  her in her own esteem by compelling her to see her woman's softness.
  But how high above all other men her experience of him could place
  him notwithstanding! He had bowed to the figure of herself, dearer
  than herself, that she set before him: and it was a true figure to the
  world; a too fictitious to any but the most knightly of lovers. She
  forgave; and a shudder seized her.--Snake! she rebuked the delicious
  run of fire through her veins; for she vas not like the idol
  women of imperishable type, who are never for a twinkle the
  prey of the blood: statues created by man's common desire to
  impress upon the sex his possessing pattern of them as domestic
  decorations.
  
  When she entered the room to Dacier and they touched hands, she rejoiced
  in her coolness, without any other feeling or perception active. Not
  to be unkind, not too kind: this was her task. She waited for the passage
  of commonplaces.
  
  'You slept well, Percy?'
  
  'Yes; and you?'
  
  'I don't think I even dreamed.'
  
  They sat. She noticed the cloud on him and waited for his allusion to
  it, anxious concerning him simply.
  
  Dacier flung the hair off his temples. Words of Titanic formation were
  hurling in his head at journals and journalists. He muttered his
disgust of them.

'Is there anything to annoy you in the papers to-day?'
she asked, and thought how handsome his face was in anger.

The paper
of Mr. Tonans was named by him. 'You have not seen it?

'I have not
opened it yet.'

He sprang up. 'The truth is, those fellows can now
afford to buy right and left, corrupt every soul alive! There must
have been a spy at the keyhole. I'm pretty certain--I could swear
it was not breathed to any ear but mine; and there it is this morning
in black and white.'

'What is?' cried Diana, turning to him on her
chair.

'The thing I told you last night.'

Her lips worked, as if
to spell the thing. 'Printed, do you say?' she rose.

'Printed. In
a leading article, loud as a trumpet; a hue and cry running from end
to end of the country. Matters thus appearing very
  difficult and embarrassing, it was unitedly concluded to refer the
  final determination thereof to the yearly meeting of Pennsylvania;
  and several Friends were appointed to attend that meeting in
  relation thereto, among whom I was one of the number. We accordingly
  set out on the 9th day of the 9th month, 1779, and I was accompanied
  from home by my beloved friend John Willis, who was likewise on the
  appointment. We took a solemn leave of our families, they feeling
  much anxiety at parting with us, on account of the dangers we were
  expos'd to, having to pass not only the lines of the two armies, but
  the deserted and almost uninhabited country that lay between them,
  in many places the grass being grown up in the streets, and many
  houses desolate and empty. Believing it, however, my duty to proceed
  in the service, my mind was so settled and trust-fix'd in the divine
  arm of power, that faith seem'd to banish all fear, and cheerfulness
  and quiet resignation were, I believe, my constant companions during
  the journey. We got permission, with but little difficulty, to pass
  the outguards of the king's army at Kingsbridge, and proceeded to
  Westchester. We afterwards attended meetings at Harrison's Purchase,
  and Oblong, having the concurrence of our monthly meeting to take
  some meetings in our way, a concern leading thereto having for some
  time previously attended my mind. We pass'd from thence to Nine
  Partners, and attended their monthly meeting, and then turn'd our
  faces towards Philadelphia, being join'd by several others of the
  Committee. We attended New Marlborough, Hardwick, and Kingswood
  meetings on our journey, and arriv'd at Philadelphia on the 7th day
  of the week, and 25th of 9th month, on which day we attended the
  yearly meeting of Ministers and Elders, which began at the eleventh
  hour. I also attended all the sittings of the yearly meeting until
  the 4th day of the next week, and was then so indispos'd with a
  fever, which had been increasing on me for several days, that I was
  not able to attend after that time. I was therefore not present when
  the subject was discuss' d, which came from our yearly meeting but I
  was inform'd by my companion, that it was a very solemn opportunity,
  and the matter was resulted in advising that the money should be
  return'd into the office from whence it was receiv'd, accompanied
  with our reasons for so doing: and this was accordingly done by the
  direction of our yearly meeting the next year.

Then, season after season, when peace and Independence reign'd, year following year, this remains
to be (1791) a specimen of his personal labors:

  I was from home on this journey four months and eleven days; rode
  about one thousand five hundred miles, and attended forty-nine
  particular meetings among Friends, three quarterly meetings, six
  monthly meetings, and forty meetings among other people.

And again another experience:

  In the forepart of this meeting, my mind was reduc'd into such a
  state of great weakness and depression, that my faith was almost
  ready to fail, which produc'd great searchings of heart, so that I
  was led to call in question all that I had ever before experienc'd.
  In this state of doubting, I was ready to wish myself at home, from
  an apprehension that I should only expose myself to reproach, and
  wound the cause I was embark'd in; for the heavens seem'd like
  brass, and the earth as iron; such coldness and hardness, I thought,
  could scarcely have ever been experienc'd before by any creature, so
  great was the depth of my baptism at this time; nevertheless, as I
  endeavor'd to quiet my mind, in this conflicting dispensation, and
  be resign'd to my allotment, however distressing, towards the latter
  part of the meeting a ray of light broke through the surrounding
  darkness, in which the Shepherd of Israel was pleas'd to arise, and
  by the light of his glorious countenance, to scatter those clouds of
  opposition. Then ability was receiv'd, and utterance given, to speak
  of his marvellous works in the redemption of souls, and to op
  the way of life and salvation, and the mysteries of his glorious
  kingdom, which are hid from the wise and prudent of this world, and
  reveal'd only unto those who are reduc'd into the state of little
  children and babes in Christ.

And concluding another jaunt in 1794:

  I was from home in this journey about five months, and travell
  by land and water about two thousand two hundred and eighty-three
  miles; having visited all the meetings of Friends in the New England
  states, and many meetings amongst those of other professions; and
  also visited many meetings, among Friends and others, in the upper
  part of our own yearly meeting; and found real peace in my labors.

Another 'tramp' in 1798:

  I was absent from home in this journey about five months and two
  weeks, and rode about sixteen hundred miles, and attended about one
  hundred and forty-three meetings.

Here are some memoranda of 1813, near home:

  First day. Our meeting this day pass'd in silent labor. The cloud
  rested on the tabernacle; and, although it was a day of much rain
  outwardly, yet very little of the dew of Hermon appear'd to distil
  among us. Nevertheless, a comfortable calm was witness'd towards the
  close, which we must render to the account of unmerited mercy and
  love.

  Second day. Most of this day was occupied in a visit to a sick
  friend, who appeared comforted therewith. Spent part of the evening
  in reading part of Paul's Epistle to the Romans.

  Third day. I was busied most of this day in my common vocations.
  Spent the evening principally in reading Paul. Found considerable
  satisfaction in his first epistle to the Corinthians; in which he
  shows the danger of some in setting too high a value on those who
  were instrumental in bringing them to the knowledge of the truth,
  without looking through and beyond the instrument, to the great
  first cause and Author of every blessing, to whom all the praise and
  honor are due.

  Fifth day, 1st of 4th month. At our meeting to-day found it, as
  usual, a very close steady exercise to keep the mind center'
  where it ought to be. What a multitude of intruding thoughts
  imperceptibly, as it were, steal into the mind, and turn it from its
  proper object, whenever it relaxes its vigilance in watching against
  them. Felt a little strength, just at the close, to remind Friends
  of the necessity of a steady perseverance, by a recapitulation of
  the parable of the unjust judge, showing how men ought always to
  pray, and not to faint.

  Sixth day. Nothing material occurr'd, but a fear lest the cares of
  the world should engross too much of my time.

  Seventh day. Had an agreeable visit from two ancient friends, which
  I have long lov'd. The rest of the day I employ'd in manual labor,
  mostly in gardening.

But we find if we attend to records and details, we shall lay out an endless task. We can briefly
say, summarily, that his whole life was a long religious missionary life of method, practicality,
sincerity, earnestness, and pure piety--as near to his time here, as one in Judea, far back--or
in any life, any age. The reader who feels interested must get--with all its dryness and mere
dates, absence of emotionality or literary quality, and whatever abstract attraction (with
even a suspicion of cant, sniffling,) the "Journal of the Life and Religious Labours of Elias
Hicks, written by himself," at some Quaker book-store. (It is from this headquarters I have
extracted the preceding quotations.) During E. H.'s matured life, continued from fifty to sixty
years--while working steadily, earning his living and paying his way without intermission--he
makes, as previously memorandized, several hundred preaching visits, not only through Long
Island, but some of them away into the Middle or Southern States, or north into Canada, or
the then far West--extending to thousands of miles, or filling several weeks and sometimes
months. These religious journeys--scrupulously accepting in payment only his transportation
from place to place, with his own food and shelter, and never receiving a dollar of money for
"salary" or preaching--Elias, through good bodily health and strength, continues till quite
the age of eighty. It was thus at one of his latest jaunts in Brooklyn city I saw and heard
him. This sight and hearing shall now be described.

Elias Hicks was at this period in the latter part (November or December) of 1829. It was the
last tour of the many missions of the old man's life. He was in the 8lst year of his age, and
a few months before he had lost by death a beloved wife with whom he had lived in unalloyed
affection and esteem for 58 years. (But a few months after this meeting Elias was paralyzed
and died.) Though it is sixty years ago since--and I a little boy at the time in Brooklyn,
New York--I can remember my father coming home toward sunset from his day's work as carpenter,
and saying briefly, as he throws down his armful of kindling-blocks with a bounce on the kitchen
floor, "Come, mother, Elias preaches to-night." Then my mother, hastening the supper and the
table-cleaning afterward, gets a neighboring young woman, a friend of the family, to step in
and keep house for an hour or so--puts the two little ones to bed--and as I had been behaving
well that day, as a special reward I was allow'd to go also.

We start for the meeting. Though, as I said, the stretch of more than half a century has pass'd
over me since then, with its war and peace, and all its joys and sins and deaths (and what
a half century! how it comes up sometimes for an instant, like the lightning flash in a storm
at night!) I can recall that meeting yet. It is a strange place for religious devotions. Elias
preaches anywhere--no respect to buildings--private or public houses, school-rooms, barns,
even theatres--anything that will accommodate. This time it is in a handsome ball-room, on
Brooklyn Heights, overlooking New York, and in full sight of that great city, and its North
and East rivers fill'd with ships--is (to specify more particularly) the second story of "Morrison's
Hotel," used for the most genteel concerts, balls, and assemblies--a large, cheerful, gay-color'd
room, with glass chandeliers bearing myriads of sparkling pendants, plenty of settees and chairs,
and a sort of velvet divan running all round the side-walls. Before long the divan and all
the settees and chairs are fill'd; many fashionables out of curiosity; all the principal dignitaries
of the town, Gen. Jeremiah Johnson, Judge Furman, George Hall, Mr. Willoughby, Mr. Pierrepont,
N.B. Morse, Cyrus P. Smith, and F.C. Tucker. Many young folks too; some richly dress'd women;
I remember I noticed with one party of ladies a group of uniform'd officers, either from the
U.S. Navy Yard, or some ship in the stream, or some adjacent fort. On a slightly elevated platform
at the head of the room, facing the audience, sit a dozen or more Friends, most of them elderly,
grim, and with their broad-brimm'd hats on their heads. Three or four women, too, in their
characteristic Quaker costumes and bonnets. All still as the grave.

At length after a pause and stillness becoming almost painful, Elias rises and stands for a
moment or two without a word. A tall, straight figure, neither stout nor very thin, dress'd
in drab cloth, clean-shaved face, forehead of great expanse, and large and clear black eyes,[42]
long or middling-long white hair; he was at this time between 80 and 81 years of age, his head
still wearing the broad-brim. A moment looking around the audience with those piercing eyes,
amid the perfect stillness. (I can almost see him and the whole scene now.) Then the words
come from his lips, very emphatically and slowly pronounc'd, in a resonant, grave, melodious
voice, What is the chief end of man? I was told in my early youth, it was to glorify God, and
seek and enjoy him forever.

I cannot follow the discourse. It presently becomes very fervid, and in the midst of its fervor
he takes the broad-brim hat from his head, and almost dashing it down with violence on the
seat behind, continues with uninterrupted earnestness. But, I say, I cannot repeat, hardly
suggest his sermon. Though the differences and disputes of the formal division of the Society
of Friends were even then under way, he did not allude to them at all. A pleading, tender,
nearly agonizing conviction, and magnetic stream of natural eloquence, before which all minds
and natures, all emotions, high or low, gentle or simple, yielded entirely without exception,
was its cause, method, and effect. Many, very many were in tears. Years afterward in Boston,
I heard Father Taylor, the sailor's preacher, and found in his passionate unstudied oratory
the resemblance to Elias Hicks's--not argumentative or intellectual, but so penetrating--so
different from anything in the books--(different as the fresh air of a May morning or sea-shore
breeze from the atmosphere of a perfumer's shop.)

While he goes on he falls into the nasality and sing-song tone sometimes heard in such meetings;
but in a moment or two more as if recollecting himself, he breaks off, stops, and resumes in
a natural tone. This occurs three or four times during the talk of the evening, till all concludes.

Now and then, at the many scores and hundreds--even thousands--of his discourses--as at this
one--he was very mystical and radical,[43] and had much to say of "the light within." Very
likely this same inner light, (so dwelt upon by newer men, as by Fox and Barclay at the beginning,
and all Friends and deep thinkers since and now,) is perhaps only another name for the religious
conscience. In my opinion they have all diagnos'd, like superior doctors, the real in-most
disease of our times, probably any times. Amid the huge inflammation call'd society, and that
other inflammation call'd politics, what is there to-day of moral power and ethic sanity as
antiseptic to them and all? Though I think the essential elements of the moral nature exist
latent in the good average people of the United States of to-day, and sometimes break out strongly,
it is certain that any mark'd or dominating National Morality (if I may use the phrase) has
not only not yet been develop'd, but that--at any rate when the point of view is turn'd on
business, politics, competition, practical life, and in character and manners in our New World--there
seems to be a hideous depletion, almost absence, of such moral nature. Elias taught throughout,
as George Fox began it, or rather reiterated and verified it, the Platonic doctrine that the
ideals of character, of justice, of religious action, whenever the highest is at stake, are
to be conform'd to no outside doctrine of creeds, Bibles, legislative enactments, conventionalities,
or even decorums, but are to follow the inward Deity-planted law of the emotional soul. In
this only the true Quaker, or Friend, has faith; and it is from rigidly, perhaps strainingly
carrying it out, that both the Old and New England records of Quakerdom show some unseemly
and insane acts.

In one of the lives of Ralph Waldo Emerson is a list of lessons or instructions, ("seal'd orders"
the biographer calls them,) prepar'd by the sage himself for his own guidance.

How thoroughly it fits the life and theory of Elias Hicks. Then in Omar Khayyam:

    I sent my soul through the Invisible,
      Some letter of that after-life to spell,
    And by-and-by my soul return'd to me,
      And answer'd, "I myself am Heaven and Hell."

Indeed, of this important element of the theory and practice of Quakerism, the difficult-to-describe
"Light within" or "Inward Law, by which all must be either justified or condemn'd," I will
not undertake where so many have fail'd--the task of making the statement of it for the average
comprehension. We will give, partly for the matter and partly as specimen of his speaking and
writing style, what Elias Hicks himself says in allusion to it--one or two of very many passages.
Most of his discourses, like those of Epictetus and the ancient peripatetics, have left no
record remaining--they were extempore, and those were not the times of reporters. Of one, however,
deliver'd in Chester, Pa., toward the latter part of his career, there is a careful transcript;
and from it (even if presenting you a sheaf of hidden wheat that may need to be pick'd and
thrash'd out several times before you get the grain,) we give the following extract:

  I don't want to express a great many words; but I want you to be
  call'd home to the substance. For the Scriptures, and all the
  books in the world, can do no more; Jesus could do no more than to
  recommend to this Comforter, which was the light in him. "God is
  light, and in him is no darkness at all; and if we walk in the
  light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another."
  Because the light is one in all, and therefore it binds us together
  in the bonds of love; for it is not only light, but love--that love
  which casts out all fear. So that they who dwell in God dwell in
  love, and they are constrain'd to walk in it; and if they "walk in
  it, they have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
  Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin."

  But what blood, my friends? Did Jesus Christ, the Saviour, ever have
  any material blood? Not a drop of it, my friends--not a drop of it.
  That blood which cleanseth from the life of all sin, was the life of
  the soul of Jesus. The soul of man has no material blood; but as the
  outward material blood, created from the dust of the earth, is the
  life of these bodies of flesh, so with respect to the soul, the
  immortal and invisible spirit, its blood is that life which God
  breath'd into it.

  As we read, in the beginning, that "God form'd man of the dust of
  the ground, and breath'd into him the breath of life, and man became
  a living soul." He breath'd into that soul, and it became alive to
  God.

Then, from one of his many letters, for he seems to have delighted in correspondence:

  Some may query, What is the cross of Christ? To these I answer, It
  is the perfect law of God, written on the tablet of the hear
  and in the heart of every rational creature, in such indelible
  characters that all the power of mortals cannot erase nor obliterate
  it. Neither is there any power or means given or dispens'd to the
  children of men, but this inward law and light, by which the true
  and saving knowledge of God can be obtain' d. And by this inward law
  and light, all will be either justified or condemn'd, and all made
  to know God for themselves, and be left without excuse, agreeably to
  the prophecy of Jeremiah, and the corroborating testimony of Jesus
  in his last counsel and command to his disciples, not to depart from
  Jerusalem till they should receive power from on high; assuring them
  that they should receive power, when they had receiv'd the pouring
  forth of the spirit upon them, which would qualify them to bear
  witness of him in Judea, Jerusalem, Samaria, and to the uttermost
  parts of the earth; which was verified in a marvellous manner on the
  day of Pentecost, when thousands were converted to the Christian
  faith in one day.

  By which it is evident that nothing but this inward light and law,
  as it is heeded and obey'd, ever did, or ever can, make a true
  and real Christian and child of God.

  But when all nations are made willing to make this inward law and
  light the rule and standard of all their faith and works, then we
  shall be brought to know and believe alike, that there is but one
  Lord, one faith, and but one baptism; one God and Father, that is
  above all, through all, and in all.

The exposition in the last sentence, that the terms of the texts are not to be taken in their
literal meaning, but in their spiritual one, and allude to a certain wondrous exaltation of
the body, through religious influences, is significant, and is but one of a great number of
instances of much that is obscure, to "the world's people," in the preachings of this remarkable
man.

Then a word about his physical oratory, connected with the preceding. If there is, as doubtless
there is, an unnameable something behind oratory, a fund within or atmosphere without, deeper
than art, deeper even than proof, that unnameable constitutional something Elias Hicks emanated
from his very heart to the hearts of his audience, or carried with him, or probed into, and
shook and arous'd in them--a sympathetic germ, probably rapport, lurking in every human eligibility,
which no book, no rule, no statement has given or can give inherent knowledge, intuition--not
even the best speech, or best put forth, but launch'd out only by powerful human magnetism:

    Unheard by sharpest ear--unformed in clearest eye, or cunningest
      mind,
    Nor lore, nor fame, nor happiness, nor wealth,
    And yet the pulse of every heart and life throughout the world,
      incessantly,
    Which you and I, and all, pursuing ever, ever miss;
    Open, but still a secret--the real of the real--an illusion;
    Costless, vouchsafed to each, yet never man the owner;
    Which poets vainly seek to put in rhyme----historians in prose;
    Which sculptor never chisel'd yet, nor painter painted;
    Which vocalist never sung, nor orator nor actor ever utter' d.

That remorse, too, for a mere worldly life--that aspiration towards the ideal, which, however
overlaid, lies folded latent, hidden, in perhaps every character. More definitely, as near
as I remember (aided by my dear mother long afterward,) Elias Hicks's discourse there in the
Brooklyn ball-room, was one of his old never-remitted appeals to that moral mystical portion
of human nature, the inner light. But it is mainly for the scene itself, and Elias's personnel,
that I recall the incident.

Soon afterward the old man died:

  On first day morning, the 14th of 2d month (February, 1830,) he was
  engaged in his room, writing to a friend, until a little after ten
  o'clock, when he return'd to that occupied by the family, apparently
  just attack'd by a paralytic affection, which nearly deprived h
  of the use of his right side, and of the power of speech. Being
  assisted to a chair near the fire, he manifested by signs, that the
  letter which he had just finish'd, and which had been dropp'd
  the way, should be taken care of; and on its being brought to him,
  appear'd satisfied, and manifested a desire that all should sit down
  and be still, seemingly sensible that his labours were brought to a
  close, and only desirous of quietly waiting the final change. The
  solemn composure at this time manifest in his countenance, w
  very impressive, indicating that he was sensible the time of his
  departure was at hand, and that the prospect of death brought no
  terrors with it. During his last illness, his mental faculti
  were occasionally obscured, yet he was at times enabled to give
  satisfactory evidence to those around him, that all was well, and
  that he felt nothing in his way.

  His funeral took place on fourth day, the 3rd of 3rd month. It was
  attended by a large concourse of Friends and others, and a solid
  meeting was held on the occasion; after which, his remains were
  interr'd in Friends' burial-ground at this place (Jericho, Queens
  county, New York.)

I have thought (even presented so incompletely, with such fearful hiatuses, and in my own feebleness
and waning life) one might well memorize this life of Elias Hicks. Though not eminent in literature
or politics or inventions or business, it is a token of not a few, and is significant. Such
men do not cope with statesmen or soldiers--but I have thought they deserve to be recorded
and kept up as a sample--that this one specially does. I have already compared it to a little
flowing liquid rill of Nature's life, maintaining freshness. As if, indeed, under the smoke
of battles, the blare of trumpets, and the madness of contending hosts--the screams of passion,
the groans of the suffering, the parching of struggles of money and politics, and all hell's
heat and noise and competition above and around--should come melting down from the mountains
from sources of unpolluted snows, far up there in God's hidden, untrodden recesses, and so
rippling along among us low in the ground, at men's very feet, a curious little brook of clear
and cool, and ever-healthy, ever-living water.

Note.--The Separation.--The division vulgarly call'd between Orthodox and Hicksites in the
Society of Friends took place in 1827, '8 and '9. Probably it had been preparing some time.
One who was present has since described to me the climax, at a meeting of Friends in Philadelphia
crowded by a great attendance of both sexes, with Elias as principal speaker. In the course
of his utterance or argument he made use of these words: "The blood of Christ--the blood of
Christ--why, my friends, the actual blood of Christ in itself was no more effectual than the
blood of bulls and goats--not a bit more--not a bit." At these words, after a momentary hush,
commenced a great tumult. Hundreds rose to their feet.... Canes were thump'd upon the floor.
From all parts of the house angry mutterings. Some left the place, but more remain'd, with
exclamations, flush'd faces and eyes. This was the definite utterance, the overt act, which
led to the separation. Families diverg'd--even husbands and wives, parents and children, were
separated.

Of course what Elias promulg'd spread a great commotion among the Friends. Sometimes when he
presented himself to speak in the meeting, there would be opposition--this led to angry words,
gestures, unseemly noises, recriminations. Elias, at such times, was deeply affected--the tears
roll'd in streams down his cheeks--he silently waited the close of the dispute. "Let the Friend
speak; let the Friend speak!" he would say when his supporters in the meeting tried to bluff
off some violent orthodox person objecting to the new doctrinaire. But he never recanted.

A reviewer of the old dispute and separation made the following comments on them in a paper
ten years ago: "It was in America, where there had been no persecution worth mentioning since
Mary Dyer was hang'd on Boston Common, that about fifty years ago differences arose, singularly
enough upon doctrinal points of the divinity of Christ and the nature of the atonement. Whoever
would know how bitter was the controversy, and how much of human infirmity was found to be
still lurking under broad-brim hats and drab coats, must seek for the information in the Lives
of Elias Hicks and of Thomas Shillitoe, the latter an English Friend, who visited us at this
unfortunate time, and who exercised his gifts as a peace-maker with but little success. The
meetings, according to his testimony, were sometimes turn'd into mobs. The disruption was wide,
and seems to have been final. Six of the ten yearly meetings were divided; and since that time
various sub-divisions have come, four or five in number. There has never, however, been anything
like a repetition of the excitement of the Hicksite controversy; and Friends of all kinds at
present appear to have settled down into a solid, steady, comfortable state, and to be working
in their own way without troubling other Friends whose ways are different."

Note.--Old persons, who heard this man in his day, and who glean'd impressions from what they
saw of him, (judg'd from their own points of views,) have, in their conversation with me, dwelt
on another point. They think Elias Hicks had a large element of personal ambition, the pride
of leadership, of establishing perhaps a sect that should reflect his own name, and to which
he should give especial form and character. Very likely. Such indeed seems the means, all through
progress and civilization, by which strong men and strong convictions achieve anything definite.
But the basic foundation of Elias was undoubtedly genuine religious fervor. He was like an
old Hebrew prophet. He had the spirit of one, and in his later years look'd like one. What
Carlyle says of John Knox will apply to him:

  He is an instance to us how a man, by sincerity itself, becomes
  heroic; it is the grand gift he has. We find in him a good, honest,
  intellectual talent, no transcendent one;--a narrow, inconsiderable
  man, as compared with Luther; but in heartfelt instinctive adherence
  to truth, in sincerity as we say, he has no superior; nay, one
  might ask, What equal he has? The heart of him is of the true
  Prophet cast. "He lies there," said the Earl of Morton at Knox's
  grave, "who never fear'd the face of man." He resembles, more than
  any of the moderns, an old Hebrew Prophet. The same inflexibility,
  intolerance, rigid, narrow-looking adherence to God's truth.

A Note yet. The United States to-day.--While under all previous conditions (even convictions)
of society, Oriental, Feudal, Ecclesiastical, and in all past (or present) Despotisms, through
the entire past, there existed, and exists yet, in ally and fusion with them, and frequently
forming the main part of them, certain churches, institutes, priesthoods, fervid beliefs, &c.,
practically promoting religious and moral action to the fullest degrees of which humanity there
under circumstances was capable, and often conserving all there was of justice, art, literature,
and good manners--it is clear I say, that, under the Democratic Institutes of the United States,
now and henceforth, there are no equally genuine fountains of fervid beliefs, adapted to produce
similar moral and religious results, according to our circumstances. I consider that the churches,
sects, pulpits, of the present day, in the United States, exist not by any solid convictions,
but by a sort of tacit, supercilious, scornful suffrance. Few speak openly--none officially--against
them. But the ostent continuously imposing, who is not aware that any such living fountains
of belief in them are now utterly ceas'd and departed from the minds of men?

A Lingering Note.--In the making of a full man, all the other consciences, (the emotional,
courageous, intellectual, esthetic, &c.,) are to be crown'd and effused by the religious conscience.
In the higher structure of a human self, or of community, the Moral, the Religious, the Spiritual,
is strictly analogous to the subtle vitalization and antiseptic play call'd Health in the physiologic
structure. To person or State, the main verteber (or rather the verteber) is Morality.

That is indeed the only real vitalization of character, and of all the supersensual, even heroic
and artistic portions of man or nationality. It is to run through and knit the superior parts,
and keep man or State vital and upright, as health keeps the body straight and blooming. Of
course a really grand and strong and beautiful character is probably to be slowly grown, and
adjusted strictly with reference to itself, its own personal and social sphere--with (paradox
though it may be) the clear understanding that the conventional theories of life, worldly ambition,
wealth, office, fame, &c., are essentially but glittering mayas, delusions. 

Ay, and the hissing of her treachery silenced. This maidenly hand put him at peace with the
world, instead of his defying it for a worthless woman--who could not do better than accept the shelter
of her husband's house, as she ought to be told, if her friends wished her to save her reputation.

Dacier
made his way downstairs to Quintin Manx, by whom he was hotly congratulated and informed of the
extent of the young lady's fortune: on the strength of which it was expected that he would
certainly speak a private word in elucidation of that newspaper article.

'I know nothing of it,' said Dacier, but promised to come and dine. Alone in her happiness Constance Asper
despatched various brief notes under her gold-symbolled crest to
sisterly friends; one to Lady Wathin, containing the, single line:

'Your
prophesy is confirmed.'

Dacier was comfortably able to face his Club
after the excitement of a proposal, with a bride on his hands.

He was assaulted concerning the article, and he parried capitally. Say that her lips were rather
cold: at any rate, they invigorated him. Her character was guaranteed--not the hazy idea of
a dupe. And her fortune would be enormous: a speculation merely due to worldly prudence and
prospective ambition.

At the dinner-table of four, in the evening, conversation would have seemed dull to him, by
contrast, had it not, been for the presiding grace of his bride, whose habitually eminent feminine
air of superiority to the repast was throned by her appreciative
receptiveness of his looks and utterances. Amid ceaseless sophistications all times,
the soul would seem to glance yearningly around for such contrasts--such cool, still offsets.

Notes:

[42]In Walter Scott's reminiscences he speaks of Burns as having the most eloquent, glowing,
flashing, illuminated dark-orbed eyes he ever beheld in a human face; and I think Elias Hicks's
must have been like them.

[43] The true Christian religion, (such was the teaching of Elias Hicks,) consists neither
in rites or Bibles or sermons or Sundays--but in noiseless secret ecstasy and unremitted aspiration,
in purity, in a good practical life, in charity to the poor and toleration to all. He said,
"A man may keep the Sabbath, may belong to a church and attend all the observances, have regular
family prayer, keep a well-bound copy of the Hebrew Scriptures in a conspicuous place in his
house, and yet not be a truly religious person at all." E. believ'd little in a church as organiz'd-even
his own--with houses, ministers, or with salaries, creeds, Sundays, saints, Bibles, holy festivals,
&c. But he believ' d always in the universal church, in the soul of man, invisibly rapt, ever-waiting,
ever-responding to universal truths.--He was fond of pithy proverbs. He said, "It matters not
where you live, but how you live." He said once to my father, "They talk of the devil--I tell
thee, Walter, there is no worse devil than man."

GEORGE FOX (AND SHAKSPERE)

While we are about it, we must almost Inevitably go back to the origin of the Society of which
Elias Hicks has so far prov'd to be the most mark'd individual result. We must revert to the
latter part of the 16th, and all, or nearly all of that 17th century, crowded with so many
important historical events, changes, and personages. Throughout Europe, and especially in
what we call our Mother Country, men were unusually arous'd--(some would say demented.) It
was a special age of the insanity of witch-trials and witch-hangings. In one year 60 were hung
for witchcraft in one English county alone. It was peculiarly an age of military-religious
conflict. Protestantism and Catholicism were wrestling like giants for the mastery, straining
every nerve. Only to think of it--that age! its events, persons--Shakspere just dead, (his
folios publish'd, complete)--Charles 1st, the shadowy spirit and the solid block! To sum up
all, it was the age of Cromwell!

As indispensable foreground, indeed, for Elias Hicks, and perhaps sine qua non to an estimate
of the kind of man, we must briefly transport ourselves back to the England of that period.
As I say, it is the time of tremendous moral and political agitation; ideas of conflicting
forms, governments, theologies, seethe and dash like ocean storms, and ebb and flow like mighty
tides. It was, or had been, the time of the long feud between the Parliament and the Crown.
In the midst of the sprouts, began George Fox--born eight years after the death of Shakspere.
He was the son of a weaver, himself a shoemaker, and was "converted" before the age of 20.
But O the sufferings, mental and physical, through which those years of the strange youth pass'd!
He claim'd to be sent by God to fulfill a mission. "I come," he said, "to direct people to
the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures." The range of his thought, even then, cover'd almost
every important subject of after times, anti-slavery, women's rights, &c. Though in a low sphere,
and among the masses, he forms a mark'd feature in the age.

And how, indeed, beyond all any, that stormy and perturb'd age! The foundations of the old,
the superstitious, the conventionally poetic, the credulous, all breaking--the light of the
new, and of science and democracy, definitely beginning--a mad, fierce, almost crazy age! The
political struggles of the reigns of the Charleses, and of the Protectorate of Cromwell, heated
to frenzy by theological struggles. Those were the years following the advent and practical
working of the Reformation--but Catholicism is yet strong, and yet seeks supremacy. We think
our age full of the flush of men and doings, and culminations of war and peace; and so it is.
But there could hardly be a grander and more picturesque and varied age than that.

Born out of and in this age, when Milton, Bunyan, Dryden and John Locke were still living--amid
the memories of Queen Elizabeth and James First, and the events of their reigns--when the radiance
of that galaxy of poets, warriors, statesmen, captains, lords, explorers, wits and gentlemen,
that crowded the courts and times of those sovereigns still fill'd the atmosphere--when America
commencing to be explor'd and settled commenc'd also to be suspected as destin'd to overthrow
the old standards and calculations--when Feudalism, like a sunset, seem'd to gather all its
glories, reminiscences, personalisms, in one last gorgeous effort, before the advance of a
new day, a new incipient genius--amid the social and domestic circles of that period--indifferent
to reverberations that seem'd enough to wake the dead, and in a sphere far from the pageants
of the court, the awe of any personal rank or charm of intellect, or literature, or the varying
excitement of Parliamentarian or Royalist fortunes--this curious young rustic goes wandering
up and down England.

George Fox, born 1624, was of decent stock, in ordinary lower life--as he grew along toward
manhood, work'd at shoemaking, also at farm labors--loved to be much by himself, half-hidden
in the woods, reading the Bible--went about from town to town, dress'd in leather clothes--walk'd
much at night, solitary, deeply troubled ("the inward divine teaching of the Lord")--sometimes
goes among the ecclesiastical gatherings of the great professors, and though a mere youth bears
bold testimony--goes to and fro disputing--(must have had great personality)--heard the voice
of the Lord speaking articulately to him, as he walk'd in the fields--feels resistless commands
not to be explain'd, but follow'd, to abstain from taking off his hat, to say Thee and Thou,
and not bid others Good morning or Good evening-was illiterate, could just read and write-testifies
against shows, games, and frivolous pleasures--enters the courts and warns the judges that
they see to doing justice--goes into public houses and market-places, with denunciations of
drunkenness and money-making--rises in the midst of the church-services, and gives his own
explanations of the ministers' explanations, and of Bible passages and texts--sometimes for
such things put in prison, sometimes struck fiercely on the mouth on the spot, or knock'd down,
and lying there beaten and bloody--was of keen wit, ready to any question with the most apropos
of answers--was sometimes press'd for a soldier, (him for a soldier!)--was indeed terribly
buffeted; but goes, goes, goes--often sleeping out-doors, under hedges, or hay stacks--forever
taken before justices--improving such, and all occasions, to bear testimony, and give good
advice--still enters the "steeple-houses," (as he calls churches,) and though often dragg'd
out and whipt till he faints away, and lies like one dead, when he comes-to--stands up again,
and offering himself all bruis'd and bloody, cries out to his tormenters, "Strike--strike again,
here where you have not yet touch'd! my arms, my head, my cheeks,"--Is at length arrested and
sent up to London, confers with the Protector, Cromwell,--is set at liberty, and holds great
meetings in London.

Thus going on, there is something in him that fascinates one or two here, and three or four
there, until gradually there were others who went about in the same spirit, and by degrees
the Society of Friends took shape, and stood among the thousand religious sects of the world.
Women also catch the contagion, and go round, often shamefully misused. By such contagion these
ministerings, by scores, almost hundreds of poor travelling men and women, keep on year after
year, through ridicule, whipping, imprisonment, &c.--some of the Friend-ministers emigrate
to New England--where their treatment makes the blackest part of the early annals of the New
World. Some were executed, others maim'd, par-burnt, and scourg'd--two hundred die in prison--some
on the gallows, or at the stake.

George Fox himself visited America, and found a refuge and hearers, and preach'd many times
on Long Island, New York State. In the village of Oysterbay they will show you the rock on
which he stood, (1672,) addressing the multitude, in the open air--thus rigidly following the
fashion of apostolic times.--(I have heard myself many reminiscences of him.) Flushing also
contains (or contain'd--I have seen them) memorials of Fox, and his son, in two aged white-oak
trees, that shaded him while he bore his testimony to people gather'd in the highway.--Yes,
the American Quakers were much persecuted--almost as much, by a sort of consent of all the
other sects, as the Jews were in Europe in the middle ages. In New England, the cruelest laws
were pass'd, and put in execution against them. As said, some were whipt--women the same as
men. Some had their ears cut off--others their tongues pierc'd with hot irons--others their
faces branded. Worse still, a woman and three men had been hang'd, (1660.)--Public opinion,
and the statutes, join'd together, in an odious union, Quakers, Baptists, Roman Catholics and
Witches.--Such a fragmentary sketch of George Fox and his time--and the advent of "the Society
of Friends" in America.

Strange as it may sound, Shakspere and George Fox, (think of them! compare them!) were born
and bred of similar stock, in much the same surroundings and station in life--from the same
England--and at a similar period. One to radiate all of art's, all literature's splendor--a
splendor so dazzling that he himself is almost lost in it, and his contemporaries the same--his
fictitious Othello, Romeo, Hamlet, Lear, as real as any lords of England or Europe then and
there--more real to us, the mind sometimes thinks, than the man Shakspere himself. Then the
other--may we indeed name him the same day? What is poor plain George Fox compared to William
Shakspere--to fancy's lord, imagination's heir? Yet George Fox stands for something too--a
thought--the thought that wakes in silent hours--perhaps the deepest, most eternal thought
latent in the human soul. This is the thought of God, merged in the thoughts of moral right
and the immortality of identity. Great, great is this thought--aye, greater than all else.
When the gorgeous pageant of Art, refulgent in the sunshine, color'd with roses and gold--with
all the richest mere poetry, old or new, (even Shakespere's) with all that statue, play, painting,
music, architecture, oratory, can effect, ceases to satisfy and please--When the eager chase
after wealth flags, and beauty itself becomes a loathing--and when all worldly or carnal or
esthetic, or even scientific values, having done their office to the human character, and minister'd
their part to its development--then, if not before, comes forward this over-arching thought,
and brings its eligibilities, germinations. Most neglected in life of all humanity's attributes,
easily cover'd with crust, deluded and abused, rejected, yet the only certain source of what
all are seeking, but few or none finding it I for myself clearly see the first, the last, the
deepest depths and highest heights of art, of literature, and of the purposes of life. I say
whoever labors here, makes contributions here, or best of all sets an incarnated example here,
of life or death, is dearest to humanity--remains after the rest are gone. And here, for these
purposes, and up to the light that was in him, the man Elias Hicks--as the man George Fox had
done years before him--lived long, and died, faithful in life, and faithful in death.

GOOD-BYE MY FANCY

AN OLD MAN'S REJOINDER

In the domain of Literature loftily consider'd (an accomplish'd and veteran critic in his just
out work[44] now says,) 'the kingdom of the Father has pass'd; the kingdom of the Son is passing;
the kingdom of the Spirit begins.' Leaving the reader to chew on and extract the juice and
meaning of this, I will proceed to say in melanged form what I have had brought out by the
English author's essay (he discusses the poetic art mostly) on my own, real, or by him supposed,
views and purports. If I give any answers to him, or explanations of what my books intend,
they will be not direct but indirect and derivative. Of course this brief jotting is personal.
Something very like querulous egotism and growling may break through the narrative (for I have
been and am rejected by all the great magazines, carry now my 72d annual burden, and have been
a paralytic for 18 years.)

No great poem or other literary or artistic work of any scope, old or new, can be essentially
consider'd without weighing first the age, politics (or want of politics) and aim, visible
forms, unseen soul, and current times, out of the midst of which it rises and is formulated:
as the Biblic canticles and their days and spirit--as the Homeric, or Dante's utterance, or
Shakspere's, or the old Scotch or Irish ballads, or Ossian, or Omar Khayyam. So I have conceiv'd
and launch'd, and work'd for years at, my 'Leaves of Grass'--personal emanations only at best,
but with specialty of emergence and background--the ripening of the nineteenth century, the
thought and fact and radiation of individuality, of America, the secession war, and showing
the democratic conditions supplanting everything that insults them or impedes their aggregate
way. Doubtless my poems illustrate (one of novel thousands to come for a long period) those
conditions; but "democratic art" will have to wait long before it is satisfactorily formulated
and defined--if it ever is.

I will now for one indicative moment lock horns with what many Think the greatest thing, the
question of art, so-call'd. I have not seen without learning something therefrom, how, with
hardly an exception, the poets of this age devote themselves, always mainly, sometimes altogether,
to fine rhyme, spicy verbalism, the fabric and cut of the garment, jewelry, concetti, style,
art. To-day these adjuncts are certainly the effort, beyond all else, yet the lesson of Nature
undoubtedly is, to proceed with single purpose toward the result necessitated, and for which
the time has arrived, utterly regardless of the outputs of shape, appearance or criticism,
which are always left to settle themselves. I have not only not bother'd much about style,
form, art, etc., but confess to more or less apathy (I believe I have sometimes caught myself
in decided aversion) toward them throughout, asking nothing of them but negative advantages--that
they should never impede me, and never under any circumstances, or for their own purposes only,
assume any mastery over me.

From the beginning I have watch'd the sharp and sometimes heavy and deep-penetrating objections
and reviews against my work, and I hope entertain'd and audited them; (for I have probably
had an advantage in constructing from a central and unitary principle since the first, but
at long intervals and stages--sometimes lapses of five or six years, or peace or war.) Ruskin,
the Englishman, charges as a fearful and serious lack that my poems have no humor. A profound
German critic complains that, compared with the luxuriant and well-accepted songs of the world,
there is about my verse a certain coldness, severity, absence of spice, polish, or of consecutive
meaning and plot. (The book is autobiographic at bottom, and may-be I do not exhibit and make
ado about the stock passions: I am partly of Quaker stock.) Then E.C. Stedman finds (or found)
mark'd fault with me because while celebrating the common people en masse, I do not allow enough
heroism and moral merit and good intentions to the choicer classes, the college-bred, the etat-major.
It is quite probable that S. is right in the matter. In the main I myself look, and have from
the first look'd, to the bulky democratic torso of the United States even for esthetic and
moral attributes of serious account--and refused to aim at or accept anything less. If America
is only for the rule and fashion and small typicality of other lands (the rule of the etat-major)
it is not the land I take it for, and should to-day feel that my literary aim and theory had
been blanks and misdirections. Strictly judged, most modern poems are but larger or smaller
lumps of sugar, or slices of toothsome sweet cake--even the banqueters dwelling on those glucose
flavors as a main part of the dish. Which perhaps leads to something: to have great heroic
poetry we need great readers--a heroic appetite and audience. Have we at present any such?

Then the thought at the centre, never too often repeated. Boundless material wealth, free political
organization, immense geographic area, and unprecedented "business" and products--even the
most active intellect and "culture"--will not place this Commonwealth of ours on the topmost
range of history and humanity--or any eminence of "democratic art"--to say nothing of its pinnacle.
Only the production (and on the most copious scale) of loftiest moral, spiritual and heroic
personal illustrations--a great native Literature headed with a Poetry stronger and sweeter
than any yet. If there can be any such thing as a kosmic modern and original song, America
needs it, and is worthy of it.

In my opinion to-day (bitter as it is to say so) the outputs through civilized nations everywhere
from the great words Literature, Art, Religion, &c., with their conventional administerers,
stand squarely in the way of what the vitalities of those great words signify, more than they
really prepare the soil for them--or plant the seeds, or cultivate or garner the crop. My own
opinion has long been, that for New World service our ideas of beauty (inherited from the Greeks,
and so on to Shakspere--query--perverted from them?) need to be radically changed, and made
anew for to-day's purposes and finer standards. But if so, it will all come in due time--the
real change will be an autochthonic, interior, constitutional, even local one, from which our
notions of beauty (lines and colors are wondrous lovely, but character is lovelier) will branch
or offshoot.

So much have I now rattled off (old age's garrulity,) that there is not space for explaining
the most important and pregnant principle of all, viz., that Art is one, is not partial, but
includes all times and forms and sorts--is not exclusively aristocratic or democratic, or oriental
or occidental. My favorite symbol would be a good font of type, where the impeccable long-primer
rejects nothing. Or the old Dutch flour-miller who said, "I never bother myself what road the
folks come--I only want good wheat and rye."

The font is about the same forever. Democratic art results of democratic development, from
tinge, true nationality, belief, in the one setting up from it.

Note:

[44] Two new volumes, "Essays Speculative and Suggestive," by John Addington Symonds. One of
the Essays is on "Democratic Art," in which I and my books are largely alluded to and cited
and dissected. It is this part of the vols. that has caused the off-hand lines above--(first
thanking Mr. S. for his invariable courtesy of personal treatment).

OLD POETS

Poetry (I am clear) is eligible of something far more ripen'd and ample, our lands and pending
days, than it has yet produced from any utterance old or new. Modern or new poetry, too, (viewing
or challenging it with severe criticism,) is largely a-void--while the very cognizance, or
even suspicion of that void, and the need of filling it, proves a certainty of the hidden and
waiting supply. Leaving other lands and languages to speak for themselves, we can abruptly
but deeply suggest it best from our own--going first to oversea illustrations, and standing
on them. Think of Byron, Burns, Shelley, Keats, (even first-raters, "the brothers of the radiant
summit," as William O'Connor calls them,) as having done only their precursory and 'prentice
work, and all their best and real poems being left yet unwrought, untouch'd. Is it difficult
to imagine ahead of us and them, evolv'd from them, poesy completer far than any they themselves
fulfill'd? One has in his eye and mind some very large, very old, entirely sound and vital
tree or vine, like certain hardy, ever-fruitful specimens in California and Canada, or down
in Mexico, (and indeed in all lands) beyond the chronological records--illustrations of growth,
continuity, power, amplitude and exploitation, almost beyond statement, but proving fact and
possibility, outside of argument.

Perhaps, indeed, the rarest and most blessed quality of transcendent noble poetry--as of law,
and of the profoundest wisdom and estheticism--is, (I would suggest,) from sane, completed,
vital, capable old age.

The final proof of song or personality is a sort of matured, accreted, superb, evoluted, almost
divine, impalpable diffuseness and atmosphere or invisible magnetism, dissolving and embracing
all--and not any special achievement of passion, pride, metrical form, epigram, plot, thought,
or what is call'd beauty. The bud of the rose or the half-blown flower is beautiful, of course,
but only the perfected bloom or apple or finish'd wheat-head is beyond the rest. Completed
fruitage like this comes (in my opinion) to a grand age, in man or woman, through an essentially
sound continuated physiology and psychology (both important) and is the culminating glorious
aureole of all and several preceding. Like the tree or vine just mention'd, it stands at last
in a beauty, power and productiveness of its own, above all others, and of a sort and style
uniting all criticisms, proofs and adherences.

Let us diversify the matter a little by portraying some of the American poets from our own
point of view.

Longfellow, reminiscent, polish'd, elegant, with the air of finest conventional library, picture-gallery
or parlor, with ladies and gentlemen in them, and plush and rosewood, and ground-glass lamps,
and mahogany and ebony furniture, and a silver inkstand and scented satin paper to write on.

Whittier stands for morality (not in any all-accepting philosophic or Hegelian sense, but)
filter'd through a Puritanical or Quaker filter--is incalculably valuable as a genuine utterance,
(and the finest,)--with many local and Yankee and genre bits--all hued with anti-slavery coloring--(the
genre and anti-slavery contributions all precious--all help.) Whittier's is rather a grand
figure, but pretty lean and ascetic--no Greek-not universal and composite enough (don't try--don't
wish to be) for ideal Americanism. Ideal Americanism would take the Greek spirit and law, and
democratize and scientize and (thence) truly Christianize them for the whole, the globe, all
history, all ranks and lands, all facts, all good and bad. (Ah this bad--this nineteen-twentieths
of us all! What a stumbling-block it remains for poets and metaphysicians--what a chance (the
strange, clear-as-ever inscription on the old dug-up tablet) it offers yet for being translated--what
can be its purpose in the God-scheme of this universe, and all?)

Then William Cullen Bryant--meditative, serious, from first to last tending to threnodies--his
genius mainly lyrical--when reading his pieces who could expect or ask for more magnificent
ones than such as "The Battle-Field," and "A Forest Hymn"? Bryant, unrolling, prairie-like,
notwithstanding his mountains and lakes--moral enough (yet worldly and conventional)--a naturalist,
pedestrian, gardener and fruiter--well aware of books, but mixing to the last in cities and
society. I am not sure but his name ought to lead the list of American bards. Years ago I thought
Emerson pre eminent (and as to the last polish and intellectual cuteness may-be I think so
still)--but, for reasons, I have been gradually tending to give the file-leading place for
American native poesy to W. C. B.

Of Emerson I have to confirm my already avow'd opinion regarding his highest bardic and personal
attitude. Of the galaxy of the past--of Poe, Halleck, Mrs. Sigourney, Allston, Willis, Dana,

