Into this atmosphere of quackery and delusion the report of the Committee on Currency and Foreign
Exchanges breathes a refreshing blast of sound common sense. Everybody ought to read it. It
costs but twopence; it is only a dozen pages long, and it is described (if you want to order
it) as Cd. 9182. In view of the many attacks that have been made on our banking system--especially
the Bank Act of 1844--by Chambers of Commerce and others before the war, it is rather surprising
that so little criticism should have been heard of this Report, which practically advocates
a return, as rapidly as possible, to the practice and principles imposed by that Act. The picture,
so minute in its touches, is true as death." Madame de Staël had many devoted friendships,
as would naturally be expected from the overwhelming wealth and ardor of her nature. Affinity
of genius and a common love of liberty drew Benjamin Constant and her into intimate relations; and she
maintained for years still closer relations with the all-knowing, all-cultured August Schlegel,
whose devouring egotism and ever-sensitive vanity put all her patience and generosity to the proof.


One of the most interesting--especially to advocates of sound finance--points in its Report
is the implied condemnation that it pronounces on the methods by which the war has been financed
by our rulers. It points out that "the need of the Government for funds wherewith to finance
the war in excess of the amounts raised by taxation or by loans from the public has made necessary
the creation of credits in their favour with the Bank of England.... The balances created by
these operations passing by means of payments to contractors and others to the Joint Stock
banks have formed the foundation of a great growth in their deposits, which have also been
swelled by the creation of credits in connection with the subscriptions to the various War
Loans.... The greatly increased volume of bank deposits, representing a corresponding increase
of purchasing power and, therefore, tending in conjunction with other causes to a great rise
of prices, has brought about a corresponding demand for legal tender currency which could not
have been satisfied under the stringent provisions of the Act of 1844." Here we have the story
of bad war finance put as clearly as it can be. Mandeville's Fable of the Bees is attacked in
the Second Dialogue, where Lysicles expounds some Mandevillian views but is theologically an atheist,
politically a revolutionary, and socially a leveller. In the Letter to Dion, however, Mandeville
assumes that Berkeley is charging him with all of these views, and accuses Berkeley of unfairness
and misrepresentation.

Neither Alciphron nor the Letter to Dion caused much of a stir. The Letter never had a second edition,[1]
and is now exceedingly scarce. The significance of the Letter would be minor if it were confined
to its role in the exchange between Berkeley and Mandeville.[2] Berkeley
had more sinners in mind than Mandeville, and Mandeville more critics
than Berkeley. Considering that the Committee included an ex-Governor
of the Bank and the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury it could hardly have been expected
to use much plainer language concerning the failure of our rulers to get money out of us in
the right way for the war and the vigour with which they made use of the demoralising weapon
of inflation.

It followed as a necessary consequence that the volume of legal tender currency had to be greatly
increased. As prices rose wages rose with them, and so much more "cash" was needed in order
to pay for a turnover of goods which, fairly constant in volume, demanded more currency because
of their inflated prices. I know, Sir, that in drawing those Characters, you design'd them for
Monsters to be abhorr'd and detested; and in this you have succeeded to Admiration, at least
with me; for I can assure you, that I never saw any two Interlocutors in the same Dialogue
or Drama, whose Behaviour and Principles I execrate more heartily, than I do theirs. And if
you would read the Fable of the Bees impartially, you would be convinced of this, from my Description
of the Company I would chuse to converse with.
 Strictly the amount
(about £5,000,000) by which these issues exceed the amount of gold and currency notes held
by those banks should be added to the figures of the present fiduciary issues given above.]

"There is also a certain amount of gold coin still in the hands of the public which ought to
be added to the last-mentioned figure, but the amount is unknown."

It will be noted that the gold held by the banks (other than the Bank of England) and by the
public has declined from £123 to £40 millions, according to the Committee's estimate, while,
on the other hand, the circulation of bank notes has risen by £27 millions and the issue of
currency notes has taken place to the tune of £259 millions (at the date of the Report; it
is now nearly £300 millions), making a net addition to legal tender currency of over £200 millions.
When we also remember that there has been a very heavy coinage of silver and copper, that the
Bank of England's deposits have risen by over £100 millions and the deposits of the other banks
by nearly £700 millions, and all this at a time when most of the industrial activity of the
country was going into the production of destructive weapons and the support of those who were
using them, the behaviour of commodities of ordinary use in rising by nearly 100 per cent.
seems to be an example of remarkable moderation. Promise me now.' She hung her head and was pale.
'Günderode,' said I, if thou art in earnest, give me a sign. She nodded.

"Two months passed away, when I again came to Frankfort. I ran to the chapter-house of the canonesses,
opened the gate, and lo! there she stood, and looked coldly at me.
'Günderode,' I cried, may I come in?' She was silent, and turned away.
'Günderode, say but one word, and my heart beats against thine.' 'No,'
she said, 'come no nearer, turn back, we must separate.' 'What does
this mean?' I asked.

