Transcriber's Note: ^ denotes the text following is superscripted.

GENERAL PREFACE.

This series of monographs has been planned to supply visitors to the great English Cathedrals
with accurate and well illustrated guide books at a popular price. The aim of each writer has
been to produce a work compiled with sufficient knowledge and scholarship to be of value to
the student of archæology and history, and yet not too technical in language for the use of
an ordinary visitor or tourist.

To specify all the authorities which have been made use of in each case would be difficult
and tedious in this place. But amongst the general sources of information which have been almost
invariably found useful are:--firstly, the great county histories, the value of which, especially
in questions of genealogy and local records, is generally recognized; secondly, the numerous
papers by experts which appear from time to time in the transactions of the antiquarian and
archæological societies; thirdly, the important documents made accessible in the series issued
by the Master of the Rolls; fourthly, the well-known works of Britton and Willis on the English
Cathedrals; and, lastly, the very excellent series of Handbooks to the Cathedrals, originated
by the late Mr. John Murray, to which the reader may in most cases be referred for fuller detail,
especially in reference to the histories of the respective sees.

                                      GLEESON WHITE.
                                      EDWARD F. STRANGE.
                                          Editors of the Series.

PREFACE.

Within the limits of a short preface it is impossible to enumerate all the sources of information,
printed and in manuscript, to which reference has been made in the writing of this little work
on the Cathedral church of the author's native city. He must especially mention the extent
to which he has consulted the works of the Rev. G. M. Livett, Mr. W. H. St. John Hope, and
Canon Scott Robertson among living authorities, while in the "Collections" made by Mr. Brenchley
Rye, preserved in the British Museum (where Mr. Rye was once a keeper), notes have been found
of many matters that might otherwise have escaped notice.

Most of the illustrations appear for the first time in this book. They are reproduced, by kind
permission, from pen-drawings by Messrs. H. P. Clifford and R. J. Beale, and from photographs
by Messrs. Horace Dan, J. L. Allen, F. G. M. Beaumont, and Messrs. Carl Norman and Co., of
Tunbridge Wells.

Thanks are also due to the Very Rev. the Dean, the Rev. E. J. Nash, Mr. George Payne, F.S.A.,
and Mr. S. S. Brister, for kindnesses and helpful suggestions, as also to the head-verger,
Mr. Miles, who, having been connected with the fabric for more than half a century, has a personal
knowledge of its history during that time.

                                      G. H. P.
  9th Jan., 1897.

CONTENTS.

                                                             PAGE
CHAPTER I.--The History of the Cathedral                        3

CHAPTER II.--The Exterior                                      38
  Tower and Bells                                              39
  West Front                                                   43
  West Doorway                                                 46
  Nave and Main Transept                                       50
  Choir and Gundulf's Tower                                    52
  Monastic Buildings                                           55
  Bishop's Palace                                              57
  Enclosure and Gates                                          59

CHAPTER III.--The Interior                                     63
  Nave                                                         63
    Lady Chapel                                                70
    Main Transept                                              70
    Font, Pulpit, and Stalls                                   75
    Monuments and Slabs                                        76
    Stained Glass                                              78
  North Choir Aisle                                            81
  Organ                                                        81
  Choir Screen                                                 83
  Choir and Choir Transept                                     83
    Pavement                                                   88
    Stalls                                                     89
    Paintings                                              90, 92
    Bishop's Throne                                            91
    Pulpit and Lectern                                         93
    Altar and Sedilia                                          94
    Communion Plate                                            95
    Monuments                                                  96
    Stained Glass                                             105
    Chapter House Doorway                                     107
    Chapter House and Library                                 108
  South Choir Aisle                                           112
  Crypt                                                       115

CHAPTER IV.--The Diocese and Bishops                          117

ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                             PAGE
The South Transept, from the south-east            Frontispiece

Arms of the See                                      Title-page

The West Doorway                                                2

North side of the Cathedral in the Seventeenth Century         14

North-west view, early Eighteenth Century                      26

North-west view, early Nineteenth Century                      31

The West end from the Castle Gardens                           36

North-east view, with ruins of Gundulf's Tower                 41

Capitals from the North side of the West door                  46

Capitals from the South side of the West door                  47

The new Chapter-Room and the ruins of the old                  56

The ruins of the Cloisters, East range                         57

A Doorway inserted in the old Roman Wall                       59

The Prior's Gate and old Grammar School, 1825                  60

Eastgate House, Rochester                                      62

Plan                                                           64

The Nave--looking West                                         67

Decorated Capital, South Arcade of Nave                        68

The Nave--looking East                                         69

One Bay of Norman work in the Nave (South Arcade)              70

The Nave, from the North Transept                              71

The South Transept                                             73

The Tomb of Bishop Hamo de Hythe                               82

The Choir Screen: Dean Scott Memorial                          84

The Choir--looking East                                        85

A Corbel in the Choir (by the Bishop's Throne)                 88

A Window of the Choir Clerestory                               89

Tracery of a Window near the Chapter-House door                90

A Corbel in the Choir (middle of North Wall)                   91

Bishop's Throne                                                92

The Wheel of Fortune, a fresco painting                        93

The Tomb of Bishop John de Sheppey                            101

The Tombs of Bishops G. de Glanvill and L. de St. Martin      104

Carved Coffin lid                                             105

The Chapter-House Doorway                                     109

The Tomb of Bishop John de Bradfield                          112

The Crypt, looking towards the North-east                     113

The Vane on the Guildhall                                     119

ROCHESTER CATHEDRAL.

CHAPTER I.

HISTORY OF THE CATHEDRAL CHURCH OF CHRIST AND THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY.

Long, eventful, and very interesting is the history of the cathedral, or rather of the successive
cathedrals, of the ancient city of Rochester. It is many centuries since, in 597, St. Augustine
and his fellow missionaries landed on the coast of Thanet, almost on the very spot where Hengist
and his bands had disembarked nearly one hundred and fifty years before. Hengist's descendant,
Ethelbert, King of Kent, received them in the open air on the chalk downs above Minster, and,
though he would not at once renounce the faith of his fathers, promised them shelter and protection. Admiral
Holmes took command of the little fleet now gathered above the town, and operations in that
quarter were systematically resumed.

To oppose them, Bougainville was sent from the camp at Beauport with fifteen hundred men. His
was a most arduous and exhausting duty.

He must watch the shores for fifteen or twenty miles, divide his force into detachments, and
subject himself and his followers to the strain of incessant vigilance and incessant marching.
Murray made a descent at Pointe-aux-Trembles, and was repulsed with loss. He tried a second
time at another place, was met before landing by a body of ambushed Canadians, and was again driven
back, his foremost boats full of dead and wounded. A third time he succeeded, landed at Deschambault,
and burned a large building filled with stores and all the spare baggage of the French regular
officers. The blow was so alarming that Montcalm hastened from Beauport to take command in
person; but when he arrived the English were gone.

Vaudreuil now saw his mistake in sending the French frigates up the river out of harm's way,
and withdrawing their crews to serve the batteries of Quebec. Had these ships been there,
they might have overpowered those of the English in detail as they passed the town. An attempt
was made to retrieve the blunder. The sailors were sent to man the frigates anew and attack
the squadron of Holmes. It was too late. Holmes was already too strong for them, and they were recalled.
Yet the difficulties of the English still seemed insurmountable. Dysentery and fever broke out
in their camps, the number of their effective men was greatly reduced, and the advancing season
told them that their work must be done quickly, or not done at all.

On the other side, the distress of the French grew greater every day. Their army was on short
rations. The operations of the English above the town filled the camp of Beauport with dismay,
for troops and Canadians alike dreaded the cutting off of their supplies. These were all drawn
from the districts of Three Rivers and Montreal; and, at best, they were in great danger, since
when brought down in boats at night they were apt to be intercepted, while the difficulty
of bringing them by land was extreme, through scarcity of cattle and horses. Discipline was
relaxed, disorder and pillage were rife, and the Canadians deserted so fast, that towards the end of
August two hundred of them, it is said, would sometimes go off in one night. Early in the
month the disheartening news came of the loss of Ticonderoga and Crown Point, the retreat of
Bourlamaque, the fall of Niagara, and the expected advance of Amherst on Montreal. It was
then that Levis was despatched to the scene of danger; and Quebec was deplorably weakened by his
absence. About this time the Lower Town was again set on fire by the English batteries, and a hundred
and sixty-seven houses were burned in a night. In the front of the Upper Town nearly every
building was a ruin. At the General Hospital, which was remote enough to be safe from the
bombardment, every barn, shed, and garret, and even the chapel itself, were crowded with sick
and wounded, with women and children from the town, and the nuns of the Ursulines and the
Hôtel-Dieu, driven thither for refuge. Bishop Pontbriand, though suffering from a mortal disease,
came almost daily to visit and console them from his lodging in the house of the curé at Charlesbourg.

Towards
the end of August the sky brightened again.

  It became known that Amherst was not moving on Montreal, and Bourlamaque
  wrote that his position at Isle-aux-Noix was impregnable.

On the twenty-seventh a deserter from Wolfe's army brought the welcome assurance that the invaders
despaired of success, and would soon sail for home; while there were movements in the English
camps and fleet that seemed to confirm what he said. Vaudreuil breathed more freely, and renewed
hope and confidence visited the army of Beauport.

Meanwhile a deep cloud fell on the English. Since the siege began, Wolfe had passed with ceaseless
energy from camp to camp, animating the troops, observing everything, and directing everything;
but now the pale face and tall lean form were seen no more, and the rumor spread that the General
was dangerously ill. He had in fact been seized by an access of the disease that had tortured
him for some time past; and fever had followed. His quarters were at a French farmhouse in the
camp at Montmorenci; and here, as he lay in an upper chamber, helpless in bed, his singular
and most unmilitary features haggard with disease and drawn with
pain, no man could less have looked the hero.

But as the needle, though quivering, points always to the pole, so, through torment and languor
and the heats of fever, the mind of Wolfe dwelt on the capture of Quebec. His illness, which
began before the twentieth of August, had so far subsided on the twenty-fifth that Knox wrote
in his Diary of that day: "His Excellency General Wolfe is on the recovery, to the inconceivable
joy of the whole army." On the twenty-ninth he was able to write or dictate a letter to the three
brigadiers, Monckton, Townshend, and Murray: "That the public service may not suffer by the General's
indisposition, he begs the brigadiers will meet and consult together for the public utility
and advantage, and consider of the best method to attack the enemy." The letter then proposes
three plans, all bold to audacity. The first was to send a part of the army to ford the Montmorenci
eight or nine miles above its mouth, march through the forest, and fall on the rear of the French
at Beauport, while the rest landed and attacked them in front. The second was to cross the ford
at the mouth of the Montmorenci and march along the strand, under the French intrenchments, till
a place could be found where the troops might climb the heights. The third was to make a general
attack from boats at the Beauport flats. Wolfe had before entertained two other plans, one
of which was to scale the heights at St. Michel, about a league above Quebec; but this he had abandoned
on learning that the French were there in force to receive him.

The other was to storm the Lower Town; but this also he had abandoned, because the Upper Town,
which commanded it, would still remain inaccessible.

  
  The brigadiers met in consultation, rejected the three plans proposed
  in the letter, and advised that an attempt should be made to gain
a footing on the north shore above the town, place the army between
Montcalm and his base of supply, and so force him to fight or surrender.

The scheme was similar to that of the heights of St. Michel. It seemed desperate, but so did all
the rest; and if by chance it should succeed, the gain was far greater than could follow any
success below the town. Wolfe embraced it at once.

Not that he saw much hope in it. He knew that every chance was against him. Disappointment
in the past and doom in the future, the pain and exhaustion of disease, toils, and anxieties
"too great," in the words of Burke, "to be supported by a delicate constitution, and a body
unequal to the vigorous and enterprising soul that it lodged," threw him at times into deep
dejection. By those intimate with him he was heard to say that he would not go back defeated, "to
be exposed to the censure and reproach of an ignorant populice." In other moods he felt that
he ought not to sacrifice what was left of his diminished army in vain conflict with hopeless
obstacles. But his final resolve once taken, he would not swerve from it. His fear was that
he might not be able to lead his troops in person.

"I know perfectly well you cannot cure me," he said to his physician; "but pray make me so
that I may be without pain for a few days, and able to do my duty: that is all I want."

In a despatch which Wolfe had written to Pitt, Admiral Saunders conceived that he had ascribed
to the fleet more than its just share in the disaster at Montmorenci; and he sent him a letter
on the subject. Major Barré kept it from the invalid till the fever had abated. Wolfe then wrote
a long answer, which reveals his mixed dejection and resolve. He owns the justice of what Saunders
had said, but adds: "I cannot leave out that part of my letter to Mr. Pitt which you object
to. I am sensible of my own errors in the course of the campaign, see clearly wherein I have
been deficient, and think a little more or less blame to a man that must necessarily be ruined,
of little or no consequences. I take the blame of that unlucky day entirely upon my own shoulders,
and I expect to suffer for it." Then, speaking of the new project of an attack above Quebec, he
says despondingly: "My ill state of health prevents me from executing my own plan; it is of too
desperate a nature to order others to execute." He proceeds, however, to give directions for it.
"It will be necessary to run as many small craft as possible above the town, with provisions
for six weeks, for about five thousand, which is all I intend to take. My letters, I hope, will
be ready to-morrow, and I hope I shall have strength to lead these
men to wherever we can find the enemy."

On the next day, the last of August, he was able for the first time to leave the house. It was
on this same day that he wrote his last letter to his mother: "My writing to you will convince
you that no personal evils worse than defeats and disappointments have fallen upon me. The
enemy puts nothing to risk, and I can't in conscience put the whole army to risk. My antagonist
has wisely shut himself up in inaccessible intrenchments, so that I can't get at him without spilling
a torrent of blood, and that perhaps to little purpose. The Marquis de Montcalm is at the head
of a great number of bad soldiers, and I am at the head of a small number of good ones, that
wish for nothing so much as to fight him; but the wary old fellow avoids an action, doubtful of the
behavior of his army. People must be of the profession to understand the disadvantages and difficulties
we labor under, arising from the uncommon natural strength of the country."

On the second of September a vessel was sent to England with his last despatch to Pitt. It begins
thus: "The obstacles we have met with in the operations of the campaign are much greater than
we had reason to expect or could foresee; not so much from the number of the enemy (though superior
to us) as from the natural strength of the country, which the Marquis
of Montcalm seems wisely to depend upon.

When I learned that succors of all kinds had been thrown into Quebec; that five battalions
of regular troops, completed from the best inhabitants of the country, some of the troops of the
colony, and every Canadian that was able to bear arms, besides several nations of savages, had
taken the field in a very advantageous situation,--I could not flatter myself that I should
be able to reduce the place. I sought, however, an occasion to attack their army, knowing
well that with these troops I was able to fight, and hoping that a victory might disperse them." Then,
after recounting the events of the campaign with admirable clearness, he continues: "I found
myself so ill, and am still so weak, that I begged the general officers to consult together for
the general utility. They are all of opinion that, as more ships and provisions are now got
above the town, they should try, by conveying up a corps of four or five thousand men (which
is nearly the whole strength of the army after the Points of Levi and Orleans are left in a proper state
of defence), to draw the enemy from their present situation and bring them to an action. I have
acquiesced in the proposal, and we are preparing to put it into execution."

Some days later, he wrote to the Earl of Holdernesse: "The Marquis of Montcalm has a numerous body
of armed men (I cannot call it an army), and the strongest country perhaps in the world. Our fleet
blocks up the river above and below the town, but can give no manner of aid in an attack upon
the Canadian army. We are now here [off Cap-Rouge] with about thirty-six
hundred men, waiting to attack them when and wherever they can best
be got at.

He had just learned, through the letter brought from Amherst by Ensign Hutchins, that he could
expect no help from that quarter.

Perhaps he was as near despair as his undaunted nature was capable
of being.

In his present state of body and mind he was a hero without the light and cheer of heroism. He
flattered himself with no illusions, but saw the worst and faced it all. He seems to have been
entirely without excitement.

The languor of disease, the desperation of the chances, and the greatness of the stake may have
wrought to tranquillize him. His energy was doubly tasked: to bear up his own sinking frame,
and to achieve an almost hopeless feat of arms.

Audacious as it was, his plan cannot be called rash if we may accept the statement of two well-informed
writers on the French side. They say that on the tenth of September the English naval commanders
held a council on board the flagship, in which it was resolved that the lateness of the season
required the fleet to leave Quebec without delay. They say further that Wolfe then went to the
Admiral, told him that he had found a place where the heights could be scaled, that he would
send up a hundred and fifty picked men to feel the way, and that if they gained a lodgment at the
top, the other troops should follow; if, on the other hand, the French were there in force to oppose
them, he would not sacrifice the army in a hopeless attempt, but embark them for home, consoled
by the thought that all had been done that man could do. Bigot says that, after the battle,
he was told by British officers that Wolfe meant to risk only an advance party of two hundred men,
and to reimbark if they were repulsed.]

As Wolfe had informed Pitt, his army was greatly weakened. Since the end of June his loss in
killed and wounded was more than eight hundred and fifty, including two colonels, two majors, nineteen
captains, and thirty-four subalterns; and to these were to be added a greater number disabled
by disease.

The squadron of Admiral Holmes above Quebec had now increased to twenty-two vessels, great
and small. One of the last that went up was a diminutive schooner, armed with a new swivels, and
jocosely named the "Terror of France." She sailed by the town in broad daylight, the French, incensed
at her impudence, blazing at her from all their batteries; but she passed unharmed, anchored
by the Admiral's ship, and saluted him triumphantly with her swivels.

Wolfe's first move towards executing his plan was the critical one of evacuating the camp at
Montmorenci. This was accomplished on the third of September. Montcalm sent a strong force
to fall on the rear of the retiring English. Monckton saw the movement from Point Levi, embarked
two battalions in the boats of the fleet, and made a feint of landing
at Beauport. Montcalm recalled his troops to repulse the threatened
attack; and the English withdrew from Montmorenci unmolested, some
to the Point of Orleans, others to Point Levi. On the night of the
fourth a fleet of flatboats passed above the town with the baggage
and stores. On the fifth, Murray, with four battalions, marched up
to the River Etechemin, and forded it under a hot fire from the French
batteries at Sillery. Monckton and Townshend followed with three more
battalions, and the united force, of about thirty-six hundred men,
was embarked on board the ships of Holmes, where Wolfe joined them
on the same evening.

These movements of the English filled the French
commanders with mingled perplexity, anxiety, and hope. A deserter
told them that Admiral Saunders was impatient to be gone. Vaudreuil
grew confident. "The breaking up of the camp at Montmorenci," he says,
"and the abandonment of the intrenchments there, the reimbarkation
on board the vessels above Quebec of the troops who had encamped on
the south bank, the movements of these vessels, the removal of the
heaviest pieces of artillery from the batteries of Point Levi,--these
and the lateness of the season all combined to announce the speedy
departure of the fleet, several vessels of which had even sailed down
the river already.

An indication of the completion of the church in this new form,--or rather, it is safer to
say, of the final destruction of its Saxon predecessor,--is perhaps contained in an entry that
has been found, that "Bishop John translated the body of St. Ythamar, Bishop of Rochester."
It seems peculiar that this relic was not moved to the new church at the same time as the remains
of St. Paulinus. It may be that the earlier Norman bishop and monks valued the greatest of
St. Augustine's fellow missionaries--a foreigner, like themselves, working here for the church--more
highly than his successor in the bishopric and fellow saint, who belonged to the recently conquered
and still despised English, and whose great glory was that of being the first bishop of their race.

The cathedral was apparently dedicated in 1130, by the Archbishop William de Corbeuil assisted
by thirteen bishops, but one authority gives 1133 as the date. In "The history and antiquities
of Rochester"[3] we read: "The city was honoured with a royal visit in the year 1130, when
Henry I., the Archbishop of Canterbury, and many of the nobility were present at the consecration
of St. Andrew's Church, then just finished: but their mirth was turned into sorrow, by their
being mournful spectators of a dreadful conflagration which broke out on the 7th of May, and,
without any regard to the majesty of the king, grandeur of the church, or solemnity of the
occasion, laid the city in ashes and much damaged the new church." The Chronicle says, as to
the extent of the damage done by this fire, "Civitas pene tota conflagravit."

  [3] Anonymous, but probably by the Rev. S. Denne and W. Shrubsole.
  Published in 1772; second edition, 1817.

The Rochester chronicler, Edmund de Hadenham, records two great fires under the years 1138
and 1177; Gervase also mentions these, but gives their dates as 1137 and 1179. The exact extent
of the damage and consequent repairs is not known in the case of either. It would seem from
Edmund de Hadenham's account of the earlier, that, in it, the offices suffered most; and he
speaks of their restoration under Bishop Ascelin. We read that the monks had to find other
quarters, for a time, for many of their number whom it had rendered homeless. Gervase says
of the same fire, "combusta est Ecclesia S. Andreæ Roffensis et tota civitas cum officinis
Episcopi et monachorum," and of the later one that in it the church, with the offices, was
burnt and reduced to a cinder.

Lambarde, staunch Protestant as he was, saw in these fires a token of God's disapproval of
such monastic institutions. After telling of the foundation by Gundulf, he continues, "but
God (who moderating all things by his divine providence, shewed himselfe alwaies a severe visitour
of these irreligious Synagogues) God (I say) set fire on this building twise within the compasse
of one hundreth yeeres after the erection of the same." He then goes on to attribute the quarrels
between Bishop Gilbert de Glanvill and the monks, and the church's losses through these, and
its spoliation by King John's troops, to the same divine judgment. His book contains a great
amount of accurate information, but often, as here, and in his account, quoted above, of Gundulf's
really good and useful work, shows the strong prejudices of the ordinary English Protestant
of his time.

In one or other of these two fires the eastern arm and transepts of Gundulf's fabric, and Ernulf's
conventual buildings, must have been much injured if not reduced to ruins, and to the date
of the second the outer part of the north choir aisle possibly belongs. Probably about 1190,
Gilbert de Glanvill, who was Bishop of Rochester from 1185 to 1214, built a new cloister and
the lower part of the outer wall of the south choir aisle as a portion of it. A great deal
of work was done about that time to the conventual buildings by different priors and monks.
Many records relating to it are gathered together in Mr. Ashpitel's paper.[4] He evidently
thought that the church was then neglected--though, as we shall see, it does not seem to have
been so--and apologizes for the monks, pointing out that there must have been enough of the
nave left for services, and that, this being the case, it was natural for them, in their almost
complete homelessness, to think of their dormitories, etc., before anything else.

  [4] See footnote on p. 6.

The development, by means of great additions and alterations, of the present eastern arm and
its magnificent crypt from the earlier and smaller Norman structures was probably taken in
hand about 1190. The new work seems to have been begun from the east and continued westwards.
It was at first perhaps roofed temporarily with wood, and only vaulted later. It may have been
far enough advanced to allow of William of Perth's burial, directly after his death in 1201,
in the north choir transept (still called by his name), where his tomb and shrine were afterwards
so much resorted to. On the other hand, his body may have been laid in the north choir aisle
until the new transept was ready to receive it. This was probably not the case however; it
certainly was not, if the conjecture be correct, that 1195 is the approximate date of the removal
of the eastern half of the Norman undercroft and of the portion of the presbytery above it,
and that a little work in the choir aisles had been done even earlier. Other authorities, though,
incline to the opinion that the part of the Norman presbytery which projected into the new
work was not removed before it was almost completely inclosed. This would put off its demolition
till later.

The "whole choir" was, we read, rebuilt by William de Hoo, the sacrist, with the offerings
at St. William's tomb. The word "choir" must here, of course, be used in its more restricted
sense, meaning the choir proper, as distinct from its transept and the presbytery. Even then
to say absolutely that he rebuilt it is to go too far, for the walls dividing it from its aisles
are still in the main of Norman construction, though they have Early English facings and decorations,
and additions of this later period to their upper parts. The original intention of the architect
had apparently been to change into arcades these solid walls, but, if so, he abandoned it.
When the work on the choir walls was finished, some re-modelling of its aisles was soon carried
out, buttresses being built within them to withstand the thrust of the new vaulting of the
central part. In William de Hoo's work at this time we must include the arches across the western
ends of the choir aisles, with the one bay of the transept clerestory over the northern of
them, and possibly also the choir arch, with the piers that carry it. It seems, however, that
these piers were only finally freed from the Norman nave arcade, and completed, as we now have
them, to be the eastern pair of supports to the central tower, by Richard de Eastgate about
twenty years later. It is recorded that the new work had been roofed and leaded by the sacrist
Radulfus de Ros and the prior Helias. The new choir was first used in 1227, when the monks
made their solemn entry into it, and the works, that have been described above, must have been
finished at that date. Some fittings, probably originally inserted at this early period, still
remain, viz., the eastern side of the pulpitum and some woodwork preserved in the present stalls.
Richard de Wendover, Bishop of Rochester, and Richard, Bishop of Bangor, dedicated the church,
or rather its new portions, but it was not until 1240 that the ceremony took place.

We must now go back a few years in order to mention the great losses that the cathedral sustained
in 1215. In that year King John besieged and captured Rochester Castle, stoutly held against
him by William de Albinet and other powerful barons. Then, Edmund de Hadenham tells us, the
church was so plundered that there was not a pyx left "in which the body of the Lord might
rest upon the altar." At such a time the offerings at St. William's tomb, which have been alluded
to above, were especially needed and especially acceptable.

Within the first half of the thirteenth century, but certainly several years later than the
entry into the choir, further great works were begun by the monk and sacrist Richard de Eastgate.
He probably commenced by clearing away the two eastern arches of each of the nave arcades,
which, it will be remembered, are thought to have been continued right up to the choir arch;
and, then, having completed the piers at the ends of the choir walls, laid the bases of the
two others that with them support the central tower. He next began the new north transept (ala
borealis versus portam beati Willelmi), and made it half as wide again as its slender predecessor.
Afterwards the north-west tower pier was erected at the junction of the transept and the nave,
and, finally, there is a discussion as to whether the northern tower arch was built now or
not until later. We are told that all this work, begun by Richard de Eastgate, was almost finished
by Thomas de Mepeham, who became sacrist in 1255. The laying out of the bases of the western
pair of piers to the central tower was formerly assigned to a much earlier date; while the
eastern piers were supposed to have been finally finished in William de Hoo's time. This work
would, however, scarcely have been done before the new wider transept was undertaken, and it
cannot have been carried out before the eastern part of the Norman nave was cleared away.

Only a short time elapsed then before the building of the south transept (ala australis versus
curiam) by Richard de Waldene, monk and sacrist, and next came the completion of the supports
for the central tower, by the construction of its south-west pier and the other arches. The
building of the eastern (the choir) arch, and the possible earlier date of the northern one,
have already been spoken of. The two bays of the nave nearest the crossing, were also rebuilt
in their present form, and the stability of the arches that were to bear the central tower
was thus secured. The reconstruction of the whole nave seems to have been intended by the architects
of this time; but want of funds, probably, stopped the work.

To leave purely architectural history for a while, we find the church on which all this labour
was so lovingly bestowed undergoing another terrible experience in 1264. On Good Friday of
that year it was desecrated by the troops of Simon de Montfort, after their capture of the
city. In the old annalist's account we read (in Latin) how they "entered the church of St.
Andrew on the day on which the Lord hung on the cross for sinners.... Armed knights on their
horses, coursing around the altars, dragged away with impious hands some who fled for refuge
thither, the gold and silver and other precious things being with violence carried off thence.
Many royal charters, too, and other muniments, in the Prior's Chapel, and necessary to the
church of Rochester, were destroyed and torn up. The oratories, cloisters, chapter house, infirmary
and all the sacred buildings were turned into horses' stables, and everywhere filled with the
dung of animals and the defilement of dead bodies."

There is a record of a later, more welcome visit from Earl Simon's conqueror. In 1300 Edward
I. made a progress in Kent, and we find the following items in the wardrobe accounts for this,
the twenty-eighth year of his reign. On the 18th of February he offered seven shillings at
the shrine of St. William, and a like amount again on the next day. He then went forward to
Canterbury, and on his return from the archiepiscopal city gave, on the 27th of the same month,
seven shillings each for the shrines of SS. Paulinus and Ythamar in the church of the Priory.

From March till October, 1314, we read that Isabel, the queen of Robert Bruce, was a prisoner
in Rochester Castle, permitted to walk at convenient times, under safe custody, within its
precincts and those of the Priory of St. Andrew adjoining. This is, however, to some extent
a matter of controversy.

The fourteenth century saw the junction of the new and the Norman work in the nave completed,
and the design of rebuilding the whole western arm finally abandoned. A beautiful capital at
the joining on the south side will call for especial mention later, and in the part of the
triforium just over it there is a piece of apparently later-Norman work, which is, however,
by builders of the "Decorated" period. They seem to have found it best to reproduce here, as
accurately as possible, what they had just destroyed. That it is by them is shown by the stone
used, which is greensand and not the Caen stone of later-Norman workmen, and by differences
in working. The early-Norman architects had chiefly used tufa, and these successive changes
of material are of great help in assigning their respective dates to various parts of the fabric.

About 1320 some alterations were made in the clerestory of the south transept, while on its
east side there was, apparently, a conversion of two arches into one to form a large altar
recess. This change seems to be alluded to when in 1322 the altar of the Blessed Virgin Mary
in this transept is spoken of as "de nova constructo." At this time there were many disputes
between the monks and the parishioners of St. Nicholas, whose altar[5] stood from 1322, at
any rate, till 1423, against the rood-screen across the end of the nave beneath the western
tower-arch. In 1327, in which year Mr. Walcott tells of a riotous assault by the townsfolk
on the pretence of a right of entrance by day or night for the ministration of the Viaticum,
an oratory was built, by agreement between the monks and the parishioners, "in angulo navis,"
for the Reserved Sacrament, and the small door was inserted in the west front. To dread of
such attacks or fear of the crowds of strangers constantly passing through the town, which
stood on the main road to Canterbury and the Continent, we must attribute the erection of the
screens and strong doors of this time, which shut off the choir from the rest of the cathedral,
and also the almost contemporaneous walling off of the priory from the town. Among these screens
is included the west side of the pulpitum, which still contains its original central doorway,
as well as the screens in the choir aisles. To this same period also belongs, apparently, the
western cloister door.

  [5] For further information about this altar, see p. 68.

In 1343 the central tower was at last raised by Bishop Hamo de Hythe, and capped by him with
a wooden spire in which he placed four bells named Dunstan, Paulinus, Ythamar, and Lanfranc.
The south tower had already been destroyed and with its demolition we approach the end of the
changes which have brought the south choir aisle to its present form and which will be described
in the chapter on the interior of the church.[6] The completion of this aisle is assigned to
W. de Axenham; its wooden roof seems to belong to King Edward II.'s time. Decorated tracery
was inserted in the presbytery windows soon after the erection of the tower, and Bishop Hamo
is recorded to have reconstructed in marble and alabaster the shrines of SS. Paulinus and Ythamar.
Finally, to this time, to about the middle of the fourteenth century, belongs the beautiful
doorway which leads to the present chapter room and library, and is one of the chief glories
of the church.

  [6] See p. 112.

In the painted decoration of the choir walls, with its alternate lions and fleurs-de-lis,--which
Sir Gilbert Scott partly saved and partly renewed,--we have probably a contemporary allusion
to and commemoration of, the victories won by our countrymen in France in Edward III.'s reign.
Rochester lay on the main route to the Continent and is sure to have seen much of the soldiers
who passed to and fro. In 1360 there is a record of the passage of John II. on his way back
to his own land. He had, it will be remembered, been defeated by the Black Prince at Poictiers
in 1356, and brought as a prisoner to England until arrangements should be made for his ransom.
It was on the 2nd of July that he went through the town, and, ere he left it, made an offering
of sixty crowns at the Church of St. Andrew.

The oratory that was constructed in 1327, and other attempted arrangements, did not settle
the differences between the monks and the parishioners of St. Nicholas. These were only finally
ended by the erection of a new church, for the use of the latter, in the cemetery called the
Green Church Haw, on the north side of the cathedral. The people were still allowed to pass
within the north side of the cathedral in their processions, and the Perpendicular doorway
which exists, walled up, towards the west end of the north aisle wall, was inserted for their
passage. The right that the mayor and corporation of the city still retain of entering the
cathedral in their robes and with their maces, etc., borne before them, by the great west door,
seems to be a relic of the old parochial use of the nave.

Later in the fifteenth century the clerestory and vaulting of the north choir aisle were finished,
and Perpendicular windows were inserted in the nave aisles. Then, about 1470, the great west
window was inserted, and the nave clerestory, together with the northern pinnacle of the west
gable, rebuilt. It was in 1490, or thereabouts, apparently, that the Perpendicular builders
carried out their last important work: the erection of the so-called Lady Chapel, in the corner
between the south transept and the nave. This seems to be really an extension of the Lady Chapel
in the south transept (where the altar to the Blessed Virgin Mary has been already mentioned),
to be a nave to this rather than a chapel itself.

There is now nothing very important to record until we come to the time, when, at the suppression
of the monasteries by Henry VIII., regulars, after more than four centuries and a half, ceased
at last to form the establishment of this cathedral. Two general visitations of religious houses
had been made in 1535 and 1537, but neither of the reports on this establishment seems to be
extant. If either could be found it would very possibly prove unfavourable. Some injunctions
by Bishop Wells, in 1439, nearly a century before, seem to show that he found deviations from
the rule of the order, and that he thought precautions against its infraction necessary.

During its later days the priory does not seem to have been in a flourishing state. In the
twentieth year of King Henry VIII.'s reign, the annual income of its estates was returned to
the exchequer as only £486 11s. 6d., and its financial condition, though it has not been accurately
ascertained, seems to have been bad. In 1498 there were only twenty-four monks in the house,
though the original establishment had been sixty, and this great diminution in numbers was
probably due to the want of funds. Later, to the priory's acknowledgment of the Royal Supremacy,
dated June 10th, 1534, there were only twenty signatures altogether.

The 20th of March, 1540, is the date of the commission to the Archbishop of Canterbury, George
Lord Cobham, and others to accept the surrender of the house and its possessions to the king.
On the 8th of April following the seal of the convent was affixed to the instrument of resignation,
a document which seems to us very ironical in its wording. It was sent in, we read by them
"with their unanimous assent and consent, deliberately and of their own certain knowledge and
mere motion, from certain just and reasonable causes, especially moving their minds and consciences,
of their own free will." Some pensions were granted on the day of surrender, the total number
given among the dispersed monks being thirteen. These seem very few, but possibly vacancies
had been left unfilled for some years in dread of such an event, and perhaps one or two of
the monks embraced the opportunity of release from their vows. Others, we know, were given
new appointments. Even the above small number soon dwindled. In Cardinal Pole's list of 1556
we find only one former member of this priory recorded as in receipt of an annuity, and five
as in receipt of pensions. The annuity was possibly a payment to which the house was already
liable at the time of the suppression, while the pensions would be the "convenient charity"
of the Crown.

When enforcing their surrender the king had said that the monks were to go, that the endowment
they had so long possessed "might be tornyd to better use as heraffter shall folow, werby Gods
word myght the better be sett forthe, cyldren brought up in learning, clerks nuryshyd in the
universites," etc. We shall now see how he tried to secure this improvement, and how, in some
respects, at any rate, his scheme was good. It was not hurried forth at once, the letters patent
for the new establishment not being issued till the 20th of June, 1542. It was then incorporated
under the title of "the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of Christ and the Blessed
Virgin Mary of Rochester."[7] Provision was made for a dean, six prebendaries, six minor canons,
a deacon, a sub-deacon, six lay clerks, a master of the choristers, eight choristers, an upper
and an under master of the grammar school, twenty scholars, six poor men, a porter, who was
also to be barber, a butler, a chief cook, and an assistant. A yearly pension of £5 was to
be paid also to four scholars, of whom two were to be members of each University.

  [7] The original dedication was to St. Andrew.

The offices of deacon and sub-deacon were disused after the Reformation, and the butler and
cooks ceased to be appointed when there was no longer a common table. Charles I. attached one
of the prebends to the archdeaconry of Rochester in 1637; a union which is still maintained.
Another was annexed by letters patent of 1713 to the provostship of Oriel College, Oxford,
and this connection was confirmed by Parliament in the same year, though it has, of course,
to lapse when, as has been the case, the provost is a layman. On the whole, the establishment,
thus originally provided for, is maintained, but the full numbers are not just now kept up
throughout, owing to a great loss of income due to the gradual decrease in value of landed
property. With regard to the educational provisions, it will, perhaps, be interesting just
to mention here, that it was chiefly owing to the late Rev. R. Whiston, long the head master
of the Rochester Grammar School, that this and similar institutions were, about the middle
of this century, made to conform more to the spirit of their original foundations, by the making
of alterations, especially in the terms of scholarships, to meet the great changes that have
since occurred in money values.

In 1541 panelled book-desks were provided for the new canons and singing men. Some of the panels
belonging to them still remain, and are incorporated in the present choir stalls.

For some years little of interest occurred directly concerning the cathedral itself, though
much happened of importance in the history of the see and its bishops. In 1558, however, the
body of Cardinal Pole lay here for a night in state, and we are able to give an eye-witness's
account, written by Francis Thynne, afterwards Lancaster Herald, and published in Holinshed's
Chronicles in 1587. "Cardinal Poole died the same daie wherein the Queene" (Mary) "died, the
third hour of the night.... His bodie was first conveyed from Lambeth to Rochester, where it
rested one night, being brought into the Church of Rochester at the West doore, not opened
manie yeres before. At what time myselfe, then a yoong scholer" (he was born in 1545), "beheld
the funeral pompe thereof, which trulie was great and answerable both to his birth and calling,
with store of burning torches and mourning weedes. At what time, his coffin, being brought
into the church, was covered with a cloth of blacke velvet, with a great crosse of white satten
over all the length and bredth of the same, in the middest of which crosse his Cardinal's hat
was placed. From Rochester he was conveied to Canterbury, where the same bodie (being first
before it came to Rochester inclosed in lead) was, after three daies spent in his commendations
set foorth in Latine and English, committed to the earth in the Chapell of Thomas Becket."

In 1568 we have a curious story, said to be taken originally from records in the Rochester
Diocesan Registry of the discovery and apprehension, at Rochester, of a Jesuit in disguise.
A certain Thomas Heth, purporting to be a poor minister, came and asked the dean to recommend
him for some preferment. The dean said that he would consider his case after he had heard him
preach before him in the cathedral. No fault seems to have been found with the sermon, but
in the pulpit afterwards, the sexton, Richard Fisher, picked up a letter that had been dropped,
and carried it to the bishop, Dr. Gest. This was directed to Th. Finne from Samuel Malta, a
noted Jesuit at Madrid. Heth was brought up and examined before the bishop; he acknowledged
that he had preached for six years in England, but said that he had left the hated order. He
was then remanded until the case had been reported to the queen and her council. Incriminating
papers were in the meantime found among his belongings, and, at a later second examination,
he confessed. He was pilloried, branded, and mutilated after the cruel manner of those days,
beside the High Cross at Rochester, and was condemned to be imprisoned for life. From this
imprisonment he was released by an early death.

We are next able to mention a visit by Good Queen Bess. She came to Rochester during her summer
progress in Kent in 1573, and lodged, during her first four days in the city, at the Crown
Inn. On the last day of her stay she was entertained by Mr. Richard Watts at his house, on
Boley Hill, which then, it is said, obtained its name of "Satis," she having answered with
this word his apologies for the poor accommodation that he had been able to offer to so great
a queen. On Sunday, the 19th of September, she attended divine service, and heard a sermon
at the cathedral.

In 1591 there is recorded the destruction of a great part of the chancel by fire, but the fabric
itself does not seem to have been much damaged. At any rate, in 1607 the dean and chapter were
able to certify to Archbishop Abbot, who was making a metropolitical visitation, that the church,
though requiring weekly repair from its antiquity, was, as a whole, in reasonable condition.
This statement was probably accurate, as the return was not followed by any injunctions from
the visitor.

During the preceding year, A.D. 1606, Christian IV. of Denmark, brother-in-law of James I.,
had visited Rochester in company with the latter King and Queen Anne, and their eldest son,
Prince Henry. These royal personages had separate lodgings during their stay, King James's
own being at the Bishop's house. It was on Saturday that they arrived, and "the next day,"
we are told, "being Sunday, ... their Majesties came to the Cathedrall Church of the Colledge,
where they heard a most learned sermon by a reverende grave and learned Doctor." This was Dr.
Parry, Dean of Chester, one of the most famous preachers at his time. King Christian is said
to have been much pleased with his discourse, and to have given him afterwards a very rich
ring. The royal travellers then visited the shipping, and on the Monday "set forwarde towardes
Gravesend."

In Archbishop Laud's annual report on the diocese to King Charles I., in 1633, it is said that
the Bishop (Dr. John Bowle) complained "that the cathedral suffered much for want of glass
in the windows, and the churchyard lay very indecently, and the gates down, because the dean
and chapter refused to be visited by him on pretence that the statutes were not confirmed under
the broad seal." Here the king wrote in the margin: "This must be remedied one way or other,
concerning which I expect a particular account of you." There was probably a considerable likelihood
then of the imposition of a new set of statutes of the archbishop's devising; the dean and
chapter, however, managed to retain the old ones. They submitted to a visit from the archbishop,
as metropolitan, in the following year, and in answer to one of his questions stated that the
cathedral was sufficiently repaired in all its parts, the only defects, and these small, being
in the glass of some of the windows. These defects had been left for a little while, owing
to the great charges that they had incurred of late years. If they had been among the first
parts repaired they would probably have wanted mending again before the other works were finished.
This would have involved more expense. In addition to their ordinary annual outlay on the fabric,
they had recently expended on it and on the "making of the organs" more than £1,000. The archbishop
evidently thought this report correct, for with regard to the cathedral and its furniture he
only found it necessary to enjoin: that the windows should be repaired without delay in a decent
manner, and the bells together with the frames put in good order; that there should be a new
fair desk in the choir, and new church books provided without delay; that the communion table
should be placed at the east end of the choir in a decent manner, and a fair rail put up to
go across the choir as in other cathedral churches. That they had not of their own accord seen
to what he considered such an important matter as this last, is sure to have influenced him
against them. In their answer the dean and chapter said that all these things were either done,
or would be taken in hand as soon as possible, but pointed out that, if the altar were removed
quite to the end, the clergyman ministering at it would be almost out of hearing of the congregation,
and suggested instead the erection of a screen behind it, in the more westerly position, where
it then was and again is, for it to stand against. This suggestion seems not to have been accepted.
They pointed out the impossibility of carrying out his injunctions as to the "verie handsome
fence" for their churchyard. They had before told him of parochial rights, and rights of way,
in the cemetery, and promised that it should be as decently kept as possible in the future,
and that they would report the mayor and citizens if they also did not do their best in the
matter. The maintenance of the establishment seems to have been generally satisfactory, but
there was some discussion as to requiring a "pettie canon" and two lay clerks, who were "gent,
of his Ma^ties chappell," to provide substitutes when they were at court. The new desk was
taken in hand, but they said: "for our church bookes, we conceave that noe church in England
hath newer or fayerer," and went on to give particulars. As to his enforcement of the wearing
of "square cappes" within the cathedral at times of service and sermons, they said that this
was the usual practice of the dean and canons in residence, and that care would be taken that
it should now be carried out by all.[8]

  [8] These answers are published in the Fourth Report of the Historical
  Manuscripts Commission.

In Lansdowne MS. no. 213, at the British Museum, there is included "A relation of a short survey
of the westerne counties of England, ... observed in a seven weekes journey begun at Norwich
and thence into the West on Thursday, August 4th, 1635, ... by the same Lieutenant, that, with
the Captaine and Ancient (Ensign) of the military company in Norwich, made a journey into the
North the yeere before." It includes an interesting, rather antithetical, account by this officer
of Rochester and its cathedral as they were just before the troublous times of the Civil War.
He says: "As I found this Citty little and sweet, so I found her cheife and best structures
correspondent to her smallnesse, which was neat and hansome, and neither great nor sumptuous.
And first I'le begin with her cheife seat the Cathedrall, which was consecrated in Hen. the
I. time; and though the same be but small and plaine, yet it is very lightsome and pleasant:
her quire is neatly adorn'd with many small pillars of marble; her organs though small yet
are they rich and neat; her quiristers though but few, yet orderly and decent." He then passes
on to the deanery, the episcopal palace, and the monuments in the church. He names some of
these last, and alludes to "diverse others also of antiquity, so dismembred, defac'd and abused
as I was forced to leave them to some better discovery than I was able to render of them; as
also the venerable shrine of St. William." John Weever, whose "Ancient funerall Monuments"
was published in 1631, agrees with our Norwich lieutenant as to the dilapidated state of the
older monuments in the church in his time. People are at times found, who thoughtlessly charge
the Roundheads with all such defacements as these, but the above authorities clear them in
many cases, though still leaving acts of "vandalism" that they are responsible for.

In "A perfect diurnall of the severall passages in our late Journey into Kent, from Aug. 19
to Sept. 3, 1642, by the appointment of both Houses of Parliament" we have an official account
of the doings of the Parliamentary soldiers in this cathedral as elsewhere in the county. Of
the last day of their stay in the town on their outward journey, we read: "On Wednesday, being
Bartholomew Day, before we marched forth, some of our souldiers (remembring their protestation
which they tooke) went to the Cathedrall about 9 or 10 of the clock, in the midst of their
superstitious worship, with their singing men and boys; they (owing them no reverence) marched
up to the place where the altar stood, and staying awhile, thinking they would have eased their
worship, and demanded a reason of their posture, but seeing they did not, the souldiers could
not forbeare any longer to wait upon their pleasure, but went about the worke they came for.
First they removed the Table to its place appointed, and then tooke the seate which it stood
upon, being made of deale board, having 2 or 3 steps to go up to the altar, and brake that
all to pieces; it seemed the altar was so holy that the ground was not holy enough to stand
upon. This being done they pluckt down the rails and left them for the poore to kindle their
fires; and so left the organs to be pluckt down when we came back again, but it appeared before
we came back they tooke them downe themselves. When this work was finished we then advanced
towards Maidstone." At Canterbury it was far worse. There, "on Saterday morning before we departed
some of our souldiers visited the great Cathedrall, and made havock of all their Popish reliques....
When they had done their pleasure we all marched to Dover." Their pleasure meant terrible injuries
to this grand church.

The Cavaliers themselves agree that Rochester Cathedral suffered far less mischief than many
other sacred edifices, from the bigotry of their opponents. The following passage, from a paper
entitled "Mercurius Rusticus," of 1647, is quoted in "The History and Antiquities of Rochester."
"In September, 1640" (apparently a mistake for August--September, 1642) "the rebels coming
to Rochester, brought the same affections which they express'd at Canterbury; but in wisdom
thought it not safe to give them scope here, as there; for the multitude, tho' mad enough yet
were not so mad, nor stood so prepared to approve such heathenish practices. By this means
the monuments of the dead, which elsewhere they brake up and violated, stood untouch'd; escocheons
and arms of the nobility and gentry remained undefaced; the seats and stalls of the quire escaped
breaking down; only those things which were wont to stuff up parliamentary petitions, and were
branded by the leaders of the faction for popery and innovations; in these they took liberty
to let loose their wild zeal: they brake down the rails about the Lord's table or altar; they
seized upon the velvet of the holy table; and, in contempt of those holy misteries which were
celebrated on the table, removed the table itself into a lower part of the church. To conclude
with this farther addition, as I am credibly informed, they so far profaned this place as to
make use of it in the quality of a tippling place, as well as dug several saw-pits, and the
city joiners made frames for houses in it." Even the Royalist and Church party, therefore,
allow that comparatively little damage was done here. The statement that the monuments "stood
untouch'd" is especially interesting and valuable as coming from them.

The name of one despoiler is on record. In the answer by the dean and chapter to an enquiry
by Bishop Warner, a certain John Wyld, a shoemaker of Rochester, is mentioned as having taken
down and sold iron and brass work from some of the tombs. The Rev. S. Denne gives the following
additional information,--on the testimony of "Mr. William Head, senior alderman of the city,
a very antient worthy man, who died March 5, 1732,"--that the church was used as a stable by
Fairfax's troops, who turned their horses' heads into the stalls in the choir.

Great efforts were made directly after the Restoration to bring the building into a decent
state once more. On the 10th of April, 1661, Samuel Pepys, then on a visit of inspection to
Chatham as Secretary to the Admiralty, tells, in his diary, how he went on to Rochester and
"there saw the Cathedrall, which is now fitting for use, and the organ then a-tuning." The
church must have been in a very bad state, for the dean and chapter reported to the bishop,
in 1662, that the repairs that they had already executed had cost them £8,000, and that the
defects still remaining in the fabric would need a further expenditure of not less than £5,000
to make them good. They said that they were unable to raise this sum themselves, but they remitted
a quarter of the arrears due to them towards it. The under steward, Sir Henry Selby, gave up
his salary for as long as should be thought fit; and several donations are recorded in the
minute books, with the donors' names.

At this time Mr. Peter Stowell paved with freestone a great part of the body of the church,
from the west door to the choir steps, at a cost of £100. This had been rendered necessary,
probably, by the saw-pits mentioned above. He also recovered at his own expense the iron frame
for the pulpit hour glass, and got back many books, records, etc., belonging to the church
that were in the custody of Mr. Duke, of Aylesford. Under the Commonwealth, Stowell had for
his loyalty suffered fine and imprisonment. He was joint registrar to the bishops from 1629
until his death in 1671, and was buried in the cathedral.

In 1664 the south aisle of the nave was re-cased, and in 1670 an agreement was made with Robert
Cable, to take down a length of 40 feet of the north aisle wall and re-erect it from the ground.

During the reign of King Charles II. two remarkable funerals took place in the cathedral. The
earlier of these was that of Cossuma Albertus, Prince of Transylvania, who, having been driven
out by the Germans, came to Charles II. for succour. He is said to have been kindly received
and given a sufficient maintenance. This prince was approaching Rochester on the 15th of October,
1661, when his chariot stuck fast in the mire within a mile of Strood, probably at Gad's Hill
("that woody and high old robbing hill," as our Norwich officer called it). He resolved to
sleep in his coach, and was there killed, with his own hanger, and plundered by his coachman,
Isaac Jacob, alias Jacques, a Jew, and his footman Casimirus Kausagi. The murderers were afterwards
caught in London, and executed, the footman having confessed. Cossuma's body was found on the
19th. One arm was brought by a dog to its master, a doctor of physic of Rochester, who was
out for a walk near, and a search was then instituted. Two contemporary accounts of his death
and of his funeral, which took place on Tuesday, the 22nd, have been found. From one of these,
in the "Mercurius Publicus" of October, 1661, the following is taken: "His body being brought
to the parish of Strood was accompanied from thence to the west door of the Cathedral Church
of Rochester by the Prebendaries of the said church in their formalities, with the gentry and
commonalty of the said City and places adjacent, with torches before them. Near the Cathedral
they were met by the choir who sung Te Deum before them; when Divine service was ended, the
Choir went before the body to the grave (which was made in the body of the Church) singing
Nunc dimittis. Thousands of people flockt to this Cathedral, amongst whom many gave large commendations
of the Dean and Chapter, who bestowed so honourable an interment on a stranger at their own
proper cost and charges." The exact site of this grave cannot be pointed out. An account of
the other funeral is to be seen in the diary of John Evelyn for 1672. We there read: "June
2, Trinity Sonday, I pass'd at Rochester; and on the 5^th, there was buried in the Cathedral
Mons^r Rabinière, Reare Admiral of the French squadron, a gallant person, who died of the wounds
he received in the fight. This ceremonie lay on me, which I perform'd with all the decency
I could, inviting the Mayor and Aldermen to come in their formalities; Sir Jonas Atkins was
there with his guards, and the Deane and Prebendaries; one of his countrymen pronouncing a
funeral oration at the brink of his grave, which I caus'd to be dug in the quire." Such was
the funeral of a brave ally; the English and French were then fighting together against the
Dutch.[9] It is interesting to note here that the corner of his coffin, in a position such
as Evelyn describes, beneath the choir, was touched when the tunnel was being made, in Sir
G. Scott's time, to connect the organ with its bellows in the crypt.

  [9] A longer account of the funeral was published in the Gazette at the
  time. Its date is given as the 6th May in the Cathedral Registers, but
  this must be wrong.

The steeple, a little later, had much attention devoted to it. It was in a dangerous way in
1679, and Mr. Guy, a celebrated architect, was asked to report on it. He stated that it was
very ruinous and ready to break down into the church; that the plates were rotten, the girders
quite rotted through, and all the lead so thin that it could not be repaired; that three corners
also of the stonework were so rent and crooked that they would need to be taken down. "He supposed
that the making good of the stone tower, the taking down of the old spire and putting up of
a new, and to sufficiently cover the same with lead would cost £1,000 over and besides the
old lead and timber." His was a very alarming statement, but he was not intrusted with the
superintendence of this extensive piece of work. The dean and chapter seem to have hoped that
the matter was not really quite so serious. A few months later they consulted Henry Fry, a
carpenter of Westminster, and he declared that the mending of the lead and of one end of a
beam at the lower end of the east side of the spire would be sufficient to keep it from falling.
He was evidently skilful and honest, for with his, and some slight subsequent repairs, the
spire stood for another sixty-nine years. One would think that he deserved more than the 30s.
paid to him for his visit and report.

A sum of £160 was, in 1688, spent on the repairing of the old organ and on a new chair organ,
a name often wrongly altered to 'choir organ.' In 1705 the nave was newly leaded, the names
of Henry Turner, carpenter, Thomas Barker, plumber, and John Gamball, bricklayer, being inscribed
with those of the bishop, dean, prebendaries, and verger on one of the sheets. The altar-piece
of Norway oak, "plain and neat," which retained its place throughout the century, was probably
constructed in 1707. A sketch of its history, with notices of the various adornments that it
had at different times, will be given when the furniture of the choir is described. In 1724
a return was made to Bishop Bradford that three-quarters of the whole roof had been re-leaded
within the previous twenty years, and that the rest was believed to be in good order. There
was then no defect in the walls reported; the windows were said to be in good repair and the
pavement also. Until 1730 the bells were rung from a loft or gallery over the steps to the
choir, the approach being from Gundulf's tower. This gallery was then removed, and the vaulting
of the crossing finished to match that of the south transept, which had been repaired and decorated
not long before according to a plan by Mr. James. At the same time the order was given for
the part of the organ screen towards the nave to be wainscoted.

Very considerable repairs and alterations were made in the choir during the years 1742-43,
under the direction of Mr. Sloane. While they were in progress, for the space of a year and
a quarter, the dean and chapter attended service at St. Nicholas Church. New stalls and pews
were erected and the partition walls wainscoted; a pavement was laid "with Bremen and Portland
stone beautifully disposed;" and an episcopal throne was presented by Bishop Wilcocks and placed
opposite the pulpit, where the present throne now stands. Much white-washing was done at this
time, even the numerous Purbeck marble shafts being covered with it. In 1788, however, they
are mentioned as polished once more and restored to their original beauty. From shortly after
the Restoration until about the time of these alterations, the inclosure of the bishop's consistory
court had been situated near the west end of the south aisle of the nave. It was now removed
to the Lady Chapel, where it remained until well on in the present century.

The steeple had, at last, to be rebuilt in 1749. Mr. Sloane's model of its woodwork was for
many years preserved in St. William's Chapel, and has since been kept in the crypt, where it
still remains, but in a very dilapidated condition. In 1763 the northern of the towers flanking
the west front was considered to be in a dangerous state, and was taken down, together with
the upper part of the north aisle end beside it. It was rebuilt soon afterwards. A bequest
of £100, in 1765, by Dr. John Newcome, dean of the cathedral and master of St. John's College,
Cambridge, towards the repair of the fabric, was probably intended to help this work. The new
tower was professedly a careful reproduction of the old, but its incongruities have formed
one of the reasons for the recent thorough renovation, instead of mere repairing, of the west
front. It was only carried up to about half its former height, and was there, with the aisle
end, finished off with battlements. This was all done before 1772, as an engraved view of the
west front in that year shows. The southern tower is in this view still unlowered, but it was
cut down, to match its fellow in height, soon afterwards.

For a long time previously the outer walls of the south choir aisle and south choir transept
had occasioned great anxiety. They were not buttressed originally, like the similarly situated
walls on the other side of the church, probably because they had the cloister and other conventual
buildings to support and shelter them. Several attempts were made, in particular, to render
the transept secure. A first was by the fixing of wooden ties, with large iron bolts, in the
main timbers of the roof; a second, in 1751, in pursuance of advice by Mr. Sloane, by the raising
of two great brick buttresses; and a third, about twenty years later, by lightening the roof.
These were useful for a time, but, as the wall was still evidently declining, Mr. Mylne was
consulted and, by his direction, piles of bricks were erected in the undercroft, and other
methods were used to discharge the weight of the upper works. These schemes were brutal and
inartistic. Though they answered their purpose for some years, they were afterwards found to
be doing harm rather than good.

In his "History of Kent" (1782) Hasted gives expression to some very gloomy views as to the
state of the fabric. We there read: "The whole bears venerable marks of its antiquity, but
time has so far impaired the strength of the materials with which it is built, that, in all
likelihood, the care and attention of the present chapter, towards the support of it, will
not be sufficient to prevent the fall of great part of it, even in their time." Dr. Denne,
however, thought the case, though bad, not quite so hopeless as this, and his more sanguine
opinion has proved to be correct. Constant care, however, has had to be bestowed on the place.

A fine new organ was constructed for the cathedral in 1791. During the closing years of the
eighteenth century or the earliest ones of the nineteenth occurred the destruction of the upper
portion of Gundulf's tower, which was, before it suffered this injury, one of the most curious
and interesting pieces of architecture in England. Some sketch-books of Mr. Essex, who was,
in the closing years of last century, employed on restorations in the cathedral, are preserved
in the Department of MSS. at the British Museum. They contain many notes on, and sketches of,
the building and details in it, but nothing of interest for this history as they do not illustrate
his work in the church.

Since the close of the Napoleonic wars the cathedral has passed through four busy periods of
restoration. The first of these lasted from the beginning of 1825 until about 1830. Mr. L.
N. Cottingham was in charge, Messrs. Bayfere, Smirke, Savage, and Twopeny being also consulted
at various times. The roofs of the choir and its transept, though they had been thoroughly
repaired only fourteen years before, were soon found to be quite unsafe and so eaten up with
dry-rot, that it was necessary to renew them. The part of the south wall between the main transept
and the chapter room was also dangerously out of the perpendicular. The great masses of brick
within and triangular buttresses without, the clumsy attempts of the eighteenth-century architects
to save it, had by their subsidence even increased the mischief. Cottingham removed them and
built up the wall, which deviated twenty-two inches from the upright, with a face of ashlar
which constituted an invisible buttress. He also found that the central tower consisted to
a great extent of rubble, and was incapable of supporting the spire. He almost entirely rebuilt
it from the roof, and left it in its present form, finished with corner pinnacles but without
a spire. All these serious works affecting the safety of the fabric involved the setting aside,
to a great extent, of restoration in an ornamental sense. The east end was, however, considerably
improved by the removal of the huge altar screen that concealed much of it. He opened out and
renewed the lower range of windows there, of which the central had been quite, and side ones
partially, blocked with brick, and lowered the altar and its pavement, to show the bases of
the chancel pillars. The ugly upper window he merely restored, and left it for Sir G. Scott
to erect in its stead the more appropriate tier of lancets that now take its place. Cottingham
also renewed many other windows, including the great west one, those on either side of the
presbytery, and the Decorated one by the chapter room. In the nave some red brick flooring
had York pavement substituted for it, and in the choir some Grecian panelling and a cornice
along the side walls were removed. The stalls also were repaired, and the paint cleared off
the seats in the choir. There are two other pieces of work in connection with which Cottingham's
name is often mentioned. One of these was the restoration of the chapter house door, with parts
of which much fault has been found. The other was not so remarkable in itself as for a great
discovery that it led to. I refer to the removal, quite at the beginning of 1825, of the mass
of masonry that had long concealed from view the famous monument of Bishop John de Sheppey,
whose effigy was made almost perfect by the careful re-fitting of some fragments that were
found. Unfortunately Cottingham had it re-coloured, though the fact seems generally forgotten.

Various other faults in Cottingham's work have since been pointed out, but at the time his
restoration received much praise. On the 30th of November, 1827, we find the dean and chapter
voting him an honorarium of £100, as a token of their appreciation of the ability and zeal
that he had shown.

The opening years of the fourth decade of the century form our next period, during which Cottingham
still had the direction of the works. He now substituted the present rich and elaborate, but
not altogether praiseworthy roof of the main crossing, for the plainer one that he had placed
there earlier, when he rebuilt the tower. He restored the canopy of Bishop John de Sheppey's
monument, designed a new pulpit, and a new bishop's throne for the choir, and later, in 1848,
was responsible for a new font in the nave. These will be described and their several fates
recorded later.

To Mr. Cottingham we also owe a repair of the ceilings of the choir and nave, and a final cleaning
from whitewash of the Purbeck marble shafts throughout the building. He cleared the crypt out
thoroughly, lowered the ground there to the base of the columns, repaired the whole, and, especially,
renewed the shafts. The organ was enlarged by Hill in 1842, at Canon Griffith's expense; and
at that of his wife, in 1852, the Lady Chapel was restored.

From the year 1871 till his death in 1877 the fabric was entrusted to Sir G. Scott, and the
work in it was all carried out from his designs and under his immediate superintendence. At
an early stage of his work he put the clerestory of the nave in sound repair, and the western
arm of the church was then used for services while the restoration of the choir was in progress.
During the latter part of the time its aisle walls were underpinned. To the western transepts
and crossing Scott devoted much attention, considering rightly that they formed one of the
most elegant parts of the structure. He largely repaired the masonry of both the south and
north transepts, underpinned the former's end, inserted some new windows in the west wall of
the latter, and gave it a new doorway and massive oak door, in place of the ruinous entry that
before existed. He did away with the low eighteenth century roofs and gables of both, restored
the former gables, chiefly on the authority of old prints, and erected roofs of the old high
pitch once more. In the south transept he made good, also, the interesting vaulting, with its
oak ribs, which were decayed and threatening to fall. The spaces between them, which had been
formerly boarded, he found filled only with lath and plaster. To the organ screen he gave back
its original plainness, which made it rather an eyesore, as there was now no further screen
in front of it, on the other side of the transept, as there had been when St. Nicholas' altar
stood at the east end of the nave. For the organ a new case was made after his design, which,
without any removal of the instrument or parts of it, preserves the vista of the choir. In
making a tunnel to connect the organ with its bellows in the crypt, many interesting discoveries
were made.

We now come to Sir G. Scott's work in the choir; it was very thorough. He restored the gables
to the east end, the north transept, and the aisle of the latter, but had not funds to raise
the roof to correspond. At the same time he replaced where they had been lost the curious little
pinnacles that surmount the flanking turrets of the north choir transept and of the east end.
The ugly, upper east window he, after some hesitation, decided to do away with, though it was
in sound condition after Cottingham's repairs. In its place was erected the present group of
lancets, which are certainly more appropriate, and have, with the tier below, from which he
removed some inserted decorated tracery, a very pleasing effect. The high altar was removed
from the east end to its old position, some distance in front, with a free passage all round.
For this old situation conclusive evidence was found when the floor of the presbytery was lowered
to show the bases of the piers round it. For the altar Scott himself designed its new reredos,
and the greater part of the eastern arm was floored by him with encaustic tiles, though some
would have preferred a pavement less showy and glittering in effect. The designs of most of
these tiles were taken from a few old ones still to be seen in the choir transepts. Under his
direction, too, new stalls for the dean and prebendaries were erected under the organ, and
new stalls for the choir constructed. In these latter as much earlier work as possible was
preserved. On the wall above them he restored a painting of which he found considerable portions
still remaining there. He also designed the new pulpit, which was put in a different position
to that of its predecessor, and the new throne. The earlier pulpit, by Cottingham, was removed
to the nave, and the old throne went later to St. Albans. By far the greater part of the money
for the work of all these three periods was found by the dean and chapter themselves, and for
this they deserve great praise. The new choir furniture was, however, provided for by Dr. Griffith,--who
had been formerly canon here,--and his wife, with a donation of £3,000. Earlier instances of
their liberality on the building's behalf have been already given. The episcopal throne was
the gift of Lord Dudley; and Dr. Claughton, then bishop of the see, gave the brass lectern
in the choir.

A little later the rather plain stalls in the nave were erected by the Rev. A. Cazenove, an
honorary canon, in memory of his father, who died in 1880. After the death of the late Dean
Scott, the great lexicographer, it was decided to raise a memorial to him in his cathedral.
The memorial took the form of a decoration of the choir screen with a series of statues under
canopies. This was designed by Mr. J. L. Pearson, and, though not faultless, is a great improvement
on the plain, flat wall left by Sir G. Scott.

Mr. Pearson has also been intrusted with the direction and superintendence of the last great
restoration, which has been devoted chiefly to the famous west front. After its underpinning
in 1888 a thorough repair of it was undertaken. This was absolutely necessary, for, in many
places, the facing was leaving the core, and, in some, pieces of it had already fallen. Many
of the stones needed replacing; in all such cases careful copies were substituted one by one.
The great west doorway was thoroughly restored, its shafts were given separate bases once more,
and new doors took the place of the old. The works, of this period also, were carried as far
as possible by the dean and chapter, but on the 27th of October, 1892, an influential meeting
was held at the Mansion House to find funds for their continuance. Subsequently the north flanking
tower--in its then form, the work of the eighteenth century--was demolished, and entirely rebuilt
for the second time, both it and its fellow being now raised again to their original height.
A comparison with the illustration given on p. 26 of the front as it was in 1719, shows how
careful and accurate the restoration has been. The north aisle end was at the same time restored
to its old form, and the northern gable turret,--a curious specimen of fifteenth century work,
which many were sorry to see disappear,--replaced by a copy of its fellow on the south.

After the death of Canon Burrows, in 1892, the new font, just within the west door, was erected
by subscription, as a memorial to him.

The last piece of work that we have to record is the inclosure of a series of new vestries
along the south side of the crypt. These have been paid for "with American dollars," the proceeds
of Dean Hole's recent lecturing tour on the other side of the Atlantic.

The cathedral still has great and pressing needs. The most crying is, perhaps, the fitting
of roofs to Sir G. Scott's gables in the eastern part, for their present isolated condition
makes them unpleasantly conspicuous. This the dean is anxious to see undertaken next. A spire
is also much wanted; the present tower, especially since it has been dwarfed by the raising
of the transept roofs, looks scarcely worthy of a moderately important parish church, much
less of a cathedral. However, when it is found possible to undertake the change, it should
be remembered that Rochester is a small cathedral, and that the opposite fault to the present
insignificance must also be avoided. The new spire must neither be too lofty nor too elaborate.
Finally, as Sir Gilbert Scott pointed out, the parapets of the nave and its aisles are unworthy
of the building, and a considerable amount of internal repair is necessary. These matters will
have to be seen to as soon as the requisite funds can be found.

CHAPTER II.

THE EXTERIOR, MONASTIC BUILDINGS, ENCLOSURE, AND GATES.

Rochester lies within a bend of the Medway and is bounded by that river on the north and west.
It is girt round by chalk hills, which, on the two sides mentioned, look down on it from across
the stream. Its houses have now begun to climb the hills in greater numbers, but the space
that used to be enclosed by the old city walls lies very low, the only piece of rising ground
within their line being the mound on which the castle stands. The cathedral church is one of
the smallest in England, and occupies a lowly position immediately beneath this mound and the
mighty keep that crowns it. It can claim attention therefore neither by magnitude and grandeur
nor by prominence of position. Its tower is, however, next to the castle keep, the most conspicuous
object in the town, and this fact makes our regret the greater, that it is not more worthy
of its position.

The cathedral, though unable to bear comparison in the matter of size with most others, and
though by no means an imposing building, is a very interesting structure and well worthy of
all the study and care bestowed upon it. It bears in itself many marks of its eventful history,
and the work of finding these and solving their significance is a most attractive one. Many
of its features, too, are important architecturally. The crypt, the Norman work in the nave,
the great west doorway, and that leading to the chapter-room, all rank among the best examples
of their respective kinds in England.

An excellent bird's-eye view of the cathedral can be obtained from the castle, either from
the keep itself, or from a convenient opening in the outer wall. On the church's own level
good views can be obtained of almost all the principal parts, though in some directions buildings
interfere. The famous west front can be well studied from the road before it; and from a favourable
position on the other side of the old cemetery, a good north-west prospect can be obtained.
Passengers along the High Street are now, by the substitution of an iron railing for a former
wall, enabled to gaze on the north side of the choir and the ruins of Gundulf's tower, across
a stretch of turf that generally bears visible testimony to Dean Hole's love of flowers. A
general view of the whole south side, together with the few remains of the monastic buildings,
can be obtained from the road through the precinct; and, of the exterior of the building, the
east end alone cannot be well seen except from private ground. There are other, more distant,
views, which are both interesting and picturesque.

#The Central Tower# is the first feature to claim our attention now that we are come to the
description of the exterior and its parts. The earliest tower over the crossing was raised,
in 1343, by Bishop Hamo de Hythe, who crowned it with a spire of wood, covered with lead, and
placed in it four bells, named Dunstan, Paulinus, Ythamar, and Lanfranc. This spire and the
masonry of the tower caused great anxiety at the end of the seventeenth century, but with some
not very considerable repairs then, and some slight ones later, lasted until 1749. Its height
was 156 feet, but the authorities for its form do not at all agree. It is given a very uncommon
shape in the north prospect by Daniel King, reproduced on p. 14. This seems to be followed
by many engravings which, however, bring no additional testimony, for they do not correct great
faults in other parts of it, such as the insertion of a bay too many in the nave, and the ignoring
of a story in the transept ends. The north-west view from Harris's "History of Kent" (1719)
makes the spire octagonal, and it appears of this form in many small sketches. Other engravings,
as another view in Harris's own book, show it square, but without the peculiar treatment of
the middle of each side, and with something simpler and plainer than the pairs of dormer windows
in the plate by King. Some reasons may, however, be given for thinking the latter's version
of the spire correct, though his engraving is elsewhere so inaccurate. Such are: (1) its abundant
detail, perhaps too abundant, as others do not support his dormer windows, for instance; (2)
the fact that Browne Willis, in his "Mitred Abbies," refers to this "draught" (when used to
illustrate Dugdale's "Monasticon"), in preference to attempting a description himself; and
(3) that the tiny view shown on the portrait engraving of Dr. Thorpe that forms the frontispiece
to his "Registrum Roffense," agrees with it well when we take into consideration the smallness
of its scale. The tower was square, without either battlements or corner pinnacles, and the
spire rose directly from it. On the west side, it will be noticed, the blind arcading under
a string course at the height of the ridges of the transept roofs, terminated downwards on
the lines of a pointed gable, and we may hence conclude that the nave used to have a high-pitched
roof before its present flat one.

The spire raised in 1749 was octagonal, and rose directly from the tower. It had neither parapet
nor corner pinnacles to hide the transition from the square to the octagon, nor splaying to
make this change less abrupt. Its form is shown in the 1816 view (p. 31), and Mr. Sloane's
model of its woodwork is still to be seen in the crypt, in a very damaged state. A curious
instance of the inaccuracy of some old engravings occurs in two plates by Metcalf, and by Ryland
after B. Ralphe, which reproduce the same view of this cathedral, and are, apparently, only
variations of the same plate. They represent the tower itself as octagonal, make it of excessive
breadth, and give it three windows in each face.

The new spire was demolished, after an existence of a little less than eighty years, by Mr.
Cottingham, who took down at the same time most of the old tower, and raised the present rather
plain one, which bears no spire. Our illustrations render any description of the form of this
tower unnecessary. It did not meet with approval, even before it was made more insignificant
in appearance by Sir Gilbert Scott's heightening of the transept roofs. An apologist for Mr.
Cottingham says that he was not altogether responsible for its faults, since he was compelled
to modify his design, through a strong conviction among the townspeople, especially among the
local builders, that he was overloading the supporting piers. He obtained expert opinion that
they were capable of bearing twice the weight, but at last yielded, though he complained that
by his so doing his work was spoiled.

#The Bells# are hung in this tower. They are six in number, and their sizes range from 34 to
52 inches. Mr. Stahlschmidt, from whose "Church Bells of Kent" the following particulars are
derived, regrets that he could find nothing of the bell-history of the cathedral between 1343,
the date of Bishop Hamo's four, whose names have just been given, and 1635, the year in which
the present third bell was, according to its inscription, made by John Wilner. In 1683 Christopher
Hodson, a London founder, re-cast the fifth and tenor bells for £120. The contract, which describes
him as of St. Mary Cray, where he had probably a branch establishment, still exists, and he
seems to have done the work near by, perhaps even within the precincts. The treble was re-cast
by John Wood, of Chancery Lane, in 1695, at a cost of £9, and the contract for this work also
is still preserved. In 1711 Richard Phelps, a well-known founder, supplied an estimate for
the re-casting of a cracked bell (the fourth) weighing 15 cwt. He did not, apparently, obtain
the commission, for this particular bell is recorded to have been re-cast during the next year
by James Bagley, of Cripplegate, London, on behalf of his father Matthew, who was then near
the end of his career. After finishing this work James, on his own and his father's behalf,
warranted the bell sound, and, further, that the second, which he agreed to turn, "the striking
sides being much worn," should be "as good as a new bell and retain the same note." This, the
second, bell is the only one that bears no inscription; the fifth has, besides its inscription,
the royal arms on its waist. The treble was again re-cast by Pack and Chapman, of London, in
1770, and in 1834 the tenor was re-made by Thomas Mears. After all these re-castings, it would
be interesting to know how much old metal, from Bishop Hamo's or even older bells, the present
peal still contains. Mention will be made of some very early bells when Gundulf's tower is
described.

#The West Front# has recently been very carefully restored. Its great central window, and the
flat gable above, belong to the Perpendicular period, but all the rest is either original Norman
work, or as accurate a reproduction of this as possible.

In design the façade surpasses those of many cathedrals. The aisle ends, for instance, are
not here, as in some cases, carried as screens to a greater height than is structurally necessary.
This is more correct and, at the same time, allows the flanking towers to be more imposing
and effective.

The nave end, the main central portion of the front, contains the great west door, to be described
later, and over it the great window, inserted during the second half of the fifteenth century.
The dripstone of the window terminates in two carved heads. On each side of the doorway is
a round-headed recess, and on the level of the door-arch, and interrupted by it, runs a row
of blind arcading, the shafts of which rise from plinths, that project in carved heads from
an elaborate string course. The first complete bays of this arcade, on the north and south
sides of the door, contain niches, within which statues of two bishops, Gundulf and John of
Canterbury, were placed, in 1894, by the Freemasons of Kent. These statues are not at all worthy
of praise. The space between the heads of the arcade and the decorated string course, crossing
at the level of the window sill, is filled with a diaper pattern. There are three more blind
arcades above, all interrupted by the window, before we come to those that run round the gable
turrets. The lowest has a band of chevron moulding crossing the tops of its shafts, while carvings
fill the lunettes in its heads. Next come two rows of a double interlacing fret, and then another
string course, from which the second row of arcading springs. This has semicircular heads,
with zigzag ornament, and a double series of intersecting arches above, like an arcade on Anselm's
Tower at Canterbury. The topmost arcade of the three rises over another string course and is
round-headed like the rest. Its arches do not, however, like theirs, run on continuously but
form two groups of two on each side. The crenellated gable parapet rises from a string course
with five sculptured masks, and has plain shields on its battlements. Of the gable turrets
the northern has, in the last restoration, been made to match the southern. Both are now octagonal,
and have two arcaded stories. Their tops are pyramidal, and ribs run down the edges from the
curious conical cap, which crowns the apex of each.

The aisle ends stand back somewhat. Each has a lofty, ornamented arch, rising to the height
of the sill of the central window, and containing, recessed within its upper part, a semicircular
headed window. We see, higher up on each side, a single narrow light, and higher still an arcaded
lean-to. At the end of the north aisle is a pointed doorway, inserted for the use of St. Nicholas'
parishioners in 1327.

We will now conclude our account of the front in its present form, with a description of its
flanking towers. The northern is square for its whole height, and has four rows, one above
the other, of blind arcading. The southern, with the same number of arcades, is also square
in its lower portion, but, for the two upper rows becomes octagonal, and finally terminates
in an octagonal pyramid. The spire of its fellow on the north can scarcely be called octagonal;
it is square, with the angles only slightly cut down, and with slight splaying at its base.
On the summits of both are curious conical caps (like those described as surmounting the gable
turrets), from which ribs run down the angles. The arcades are continued round the outer sides
of the lower parts of the towers, and right round when the roofs of the aisles are passed.
The heads of all the arches are as usual semicircular, and the second arcade from the top is
filled with a diaper of semicircles arranged in a curious scale-like pattern.

Generally, as we have said, except for the great Perpendicular window and the gable above it,
the front shows the design of the later Norman builders. The window that they constructed in
it was possibly wheel-shaped, but we have no representation of the cathedral previous to its
supplanting. The parts of the front that show their old form now have not, however, all continuously
retained it. At the time of the erection of the Perpendicular clerestory to the nave, the northern
gable turret was rebuilt in the curiously plain, octagonal, flat-topped form, which the oldest
engravings of the front illustrate. It has only quite recently been altered again to the earlier
shape of its fellow on the south; and is the only feature in which there is any conspicuous
difference between the front as now seen and as shown in our early eighteenth century view.
An earlier, seventeenth-century view exists, in which, if it were not so inaccurate, the front
would have the same appearance. In this, however, as in his north prospect, Daniel King shows
his great liability to err. We can point to the insertion of one tier of arcading too many
in the central portion of the front, and to the omission of the windows at the ends of the
aisles, as well as of the small door.

Our next view of the front dates from 1816, and shows the form in which it was left by the
great changes of 1763 and the succeeding years, when the northern flanking tower, having been
found to be in a dangerous state, was quite taken down. Its rebuilding (up to only half its
former height) and that of the upper part of the adjoining north aisle end, was completed before
1772 at any rate, and was professedly as accurate a reproduction as possible of the older work.
It was finished off with battlements. A comparison makes manifest other changes besides that
in the height. The first arcade was at a lower level; in the aisle end the narrow light disappeared;
and the old lean-to was replaced by a blind arcade of three arches, the central higher than
the others. A little later the south-western tower was correspondingly lowered, but no further
changes were made in it, and soon afterwards a precinct gateway that used to stand against
it was cleared away.

The front then remained untouched until 1888, when underpinning was undertaken preparatory
to a thorough restoration. After much of the older work had been carefully repaired--in some
places renewed stone by stone--an attempt was made to undo all the work of the eighteenth century
architects. All that they had erected was taken down and rebuilt, and all that they had demolished,
as accurately as possible replaced. The work was carried out under the direction of Mr. J.
L. Pearson, and for the skill and care shown in it, he has deserved, and receives, much praise.
It is regretted however by many that he did not preserve the north gable turret as he found
it, since it was so curious a specimen of fifteenth century restoration. One may hope too that
smoke and weather will soon tone down the new masonry so that it may be in less glaring contrast
with the old.

#The great West Doorway#, like the rest of the original work remaining in the front, dates
from later Norman times,--the first half of the twelfth century. It is formed by five receding
arches, and every stone of each of these is carved with varying ornamental designs. Between
the second and third of them runs a line of cable moulding, an ornament which occurs also inside
the door. Each arch has its own shaft, and the groups of five on each side are elaborately
banded. The shafts have richly sculptured capitals, and in those on the south side, as well
as in the tympanum, the signs of the Evangelists appear. The shafts second from the door on
either side are carved with statues, two of the oldest in England. These are much mutilated,
but they were thought worthy of great praise by Flaxman. That on the spectator's left is said
to represent King Henry I., and the other his wife, the "good Queen Maud." This attribution
is probably correct, as these sovereigns were both great benefactors to the cathedral, and
were living when the front was being built. The figure of the queen has suffered the more;
it is recorded to have been especially ill-used by the Parliamentarians in the days of the
great Civil War. The tympanum contains a figure of Our Lord, seated in Glory, within an aureole
supported by two angels. His right hand is raised in benediction, and his left hand holds a
book. Outside the aureole are the symbols of the four Evangelists: the Angel of St. Matthew
and the Eagle of St. John one on each side above the Winged Lion of St. Mark and the Ox of
St. Luke similarly placed below. A straight band of masonry crosses beneath the lunette, and
has carved on it twelve figures, now much mutilated, but supposed to have represented the twelve
Apostles. All the sculptured work of the portal has suffered greatly from age and exposure
and from the hand of man. In the recent restoration the coping has been renewed, the shafts
have been given separate bases once more, and many of the most worn stones have been replaced
by new ones carved in facsimile. Mr. Clifford's beautiful drawing of the doorway (facing p.
3) is especially valuable as he was able to take exact measurements of all its parts while
the repairers' scaffolding was still standing. The doors that he pictures have since been replaced
by a more elaborate pair with richly scrolled hinges and strengthening bands of iron.

This entrance is one of the best known features of the cathedral, so it will be interesting
to quote the words of a few great authorities concerning it. Fergusson, speaking of the cathedral
in his "Illustrated Handbook of Architecture," says: "Its western doorway, which remains intact,
is a fair specimen of the rich mode of decoration so prevalent in that age. It must be considered
rather as a continental than as an English example. Had it been executed by native artists
we should not entirely miss the billet moulding which was so favourite a mode of decoration
with all the nations of the north." Kugler, the great art historian, also thinks it continental
in style, and compares it with the architecture of the south-west of France. We even find it
spoken of, on account of the richness of its ornamentation, as Saracenic in character. The
late Prof. Freeman, in his "History of Architecture," is liberal with his praise, and probably
all Roffensians, at any rate, will agree with him, when, in speaking of Norman doors with tympana,
he says: "the superb western portal at Rochester Cathedral is by far the finest example of
this kind, if not the finest of all Norman doorways."

The doorway is structurally interesting, as we have therein exemplified a curious mode of forming
a straight head over an aperture. The arches of course bear all the weight of the super-structure,
but the straight band of masonry on which the figures of the Apostles are carved has to support
both itself and the stonework of the tympanum. The method by which it is enabled to do this
is as follows: the stones, the joints being vertical, are locked into one another by semicircular
ridges fitting into corresponding indentations. Mr. Smirke, writing on aperture heads in "Archæologia,"
vol. xxvii., said that he thought these excrescences, or in masons' language, "joggles," insufficient
for security, and suggested that perhaps inside, out of sight, the joints radiate like those
of a skeme arch. He also commented on the irregularity of the stones used here and throughout
the whole front. Another fact worthy of remark is that the semicircular arches of the doorway
are struck from slightly different centres.

The Mayor and Corporation of Rochester still have the right of entry in their robes and with
their insignia of office by the great west door. We find the privilege of having their insignia
borne in the cathedral on record as early as 1448 in indentures between Bishop Lowe on the
one part, and the bailiff and townspeople of Rochester on the other. The titles "mayor" and
"citizens" were only granted later by Edward IV., in a charter dated December 14th, 1461. In
the indentures it was agreed, among other matters, that the bailiff and his successors might
cause to be carried, before him and them by their sergeants, their mace or maces--and the sword
likewise if the king should ever give them one--not only to and in the parish church, but also
in the cathedral and cemetery, especially on festival days, and processions, and solemn sermons,
and at the reception and installation of bishops, and at all other fit times. On the other
side they were to make no execution or arrest within the precinct of the monastery and the
palace of the bishop, except the same should be specially required of the bishop or prior whenever
the same was made. Similar rights were granted to the dignitaries of other cities about this
time. For instance, in 1447 they were conceded at Exeter, and at Worcester in 1462. A sword
did not become a part of the Rochester insignia until quite recently, after the castle had
been acquired as the property of the city. One, given by Alderman J. R. Foord in 1871, is now
worn by the mayor as its constable. Besides the sword the insignia include a great mace, two
sergeant's maces, a silver oar (in token of admiralty jurisdiction over the Medway), two constable's,
and eight borsholder's staves, besides the mayor's chain and badge.

Pepys, speaking of the visit to the cathedral of himself and some friends in 1661, tells, in
his diary, that they went "then away thence, observing the great doors of the church, as they
say, covered with the skins of Danes." He is so accurate an observer that this must be taken
as conclusive evidence that there was such a tradition in his time, and some ground for it,
though no other record of anything of the kind is to be found. However, even if it were likely,
which many people will deny, that the skins of Danes were ever nailed to church doors at Rochester,
it certainly is not that they would have been transferred by Normans from the Saxon cathedral
to their new one, or that, if so transferred, they would have survived the fires and other
dangers through which this afterwards passed. There are traditions of the existence of human
skin on doors at Worcester Cathedral, where it is said to have belonged to a robber who stole
the sanctus bell from the high altar, and at Hadstock and Copford, East Anglian churches. In
these latter cases the Danes are again mentioned. In 1848 all these doors had been removed
from their original positions (the old north doors of Worcester being still preserved in the
crypt) but Mr. Way succeeded in obtaining fragments of the parchment-like substance from each
for microscopic examination. They were declared to be, in each case, human in their origin,
and to have belonged probably to fair-haired persons. These cases show flaying not to have
been unknown in England, even, to judge by the Worcester case, after the Norman Conquest, and
confirm the passages in records that seem to refer to its existence.

#The Nave# has nothing else remarkable in its exterior. The perpendicular windows in the north
aisle wall, part of which was rebuilt in 1670, are two-lighted, with irregular quatrefoils
in their heads. Those of the southern aisle, which was re-cased in 1664, are single-light,
and only three in number,--in the second, third, and fourth bays from the west.

The insertion of Perpendicular windows in the aisles took place about the middle of the fifteenth
century. The plainness of the south side, where the Lady Chapel does not hide it, is perhaps
explained by the fact that it used to be hidden by the Cathedral Almonry. The westernmost bay
of each aisle is plain, and the next on the north side contains the now walled-up Perpendicular
doorway, inserted, when their new church was built, for the entry, in their solemn processions,
of the parishioners of St. Nicholas, who passed out again by the west door. It is contained
within a rectangular framework, and has quatrefoils in the spandrels.

In the corner between the south aisle and the transept is the Perpendicular #Lady Chapel#,
three bays long from east to west, and two in width towards the south. Its windows are three-lighted.
They terminate in the obtuse arches of their time and have their heads filled with tracery.
At about half its height each is divided by a transom or horizontal mullion, beneath which
the lights have cusped heads. The chapel was originally vaulted, so is well buttressed, which
the aisle walls are not. The north aisle wall has its bays marked by flat pilaster-like buttresses,
and the southern has still less support, for the similar buttresses rise only to the original
level of the ground, which is now cut away for a few feet along the side of the church.

#The North Transept# is in the Early English style. Flat buttresses with offsets halve the
sides and flank the end. The high gable, with three circular windows and flanking pinnacles,
is the work of Sir G. Scott, who rebuilt it, in place of the low, commonplace one that had
replaced it about seventy years before. He also raised the roof to its original pitch. The
occurrence of blind arches between the windows here is to be noticed, making continuous arcades
of which the heads are carried by single shafts. The windows in the northern bay of the west
wall were all inserted by Scott, who found only dilapidated blind arcades there, and the doorway
in its present form is also by him, he having found the old entry very ruinous. The east side
used to be almost entirely hidden by Gundulf's tower, and is still slightly concealed. It has
therefore no windows except in the clerestory, and some bays even of this have none.

#The South Transept# is of rather later date than its fellow, and belongs to the Early Decorated
period. Its very interesting gable was lowered, with the roof, at the same time as that of
the north transept, but has fortunately, like it, been replaced by Sir G. Scott. The chief
authority for the restoration seems to have been an engraving in the 1788 edition of the "Custumale
Roffense." The gable stands back a little and has its base hidden by a parapet rising above
a decorated string course. Beneath a sculptured bust, near the apex, is a chequer-work cross,
and lower still a band of chequer-work bearing three shields of arms, the dark squares in each
case being formed by flints. The central shield contains the arms of the see, that on the left
three crowns, and that on the right a cross with martlets. The transept is well buttressed,
and the gable is flanked by pinnacles, beneath which curious gargoyles project. The five graduated
windows of the upper range have double shafts on each side, and the connected dripstone over
the lower range ends in carved heads. The clerestory of the west wall looking out over the
aisle and Lady Chapel roofs is similar to that on the east side and the quatrefoil heads of
the two-light windows help to mark the entry into the Decorated period. The little room in
the angle between the transept and the choir aisle is used as a vestry and will have to be
mentioned again.

#The North Side of the Choir# can, as has been said, be well seen from the High Street. To
one or two points in it attention may well be drawn. In the window heads, the dog-tooth moulding,
the characteristic ornament of the Early English style, constantly occurs, and the openings
often have side shafts. In the lower tier of the presbytery windows Decorated tracery has been
inserted; elsewhere we have Early English work, or, frequently, a modern copy of it. The lowest
row of windows lights the crypt. And the professors are so lovely! They explained everything so
beautifully.

L. Oh, how I'd like to have been there!

I. You'd have enjoyed it ever so much. They teach protoplasm, too, and if there's one thing
that is too sweetly divine, it's protoplasm. I really don't know which I like best, protoplasm
or molecules.

L. Tell me about protoplasm. I know I should adore it!

I. 'Deed you would. It's just too sweet to live. You know it's about how things get started, or
something of that kind. You ought to have heard the professors tell about it. Oh. dear! (Wipes
her eyes with handkerchief) The first time he explained about protoplasm there wasn't a dry eye
in the room. We all named our hats after the professors. This is a Darwinian hat. You see the
ribbon is drawn over the crown this way (takes hat and illustrates), and caught with a buckle
and bunch of flowers. Then you turn up the side with a spray of forget me-nots.

L. Oh, how utterly sweet! Do tell me some more of science. I adore it already.

I. Do you, dear? Well, I almost forgot about differentiation. I am really and truly positively
in love with differentiation. It's different from molecules and protoplasms, but it's every
bit as nice. And our professor! You should hear him enthuse about it; he's perfectly bound up
in it. This is a differentiation scarf--they've just come out. All the girls wear them--just
on account of the interest we take in differentiation.

L. What is it, anyway?

I. Mull trimmed with Languedoc lace, but--

L. I don't mean that--the other.

I. Oh, differentiation! That's just sweet. It's got something to do with species. And we learn all
about ascidians, too. They are the divinest things! If I only had an ascidian of my own! I
wouldn't ask anything else in the world.

L. What do they look like, dear? Did you ever see one?

I. Oh, no; nobody ever did but the poor dear professors; but they're something like an oyster
with a reticule hung on its belt. I think they are just too lovely for anything.

L. Did you learn anything else besides?

I. Oh, yes. We studied common philosophy, and logic, and metaphysics, and a lot of those ordinary
things, but the girls didn't care anything about those.

We were just in ecstasies over differentiations, and molecules, and the professor, and protoplasms,
and ascidians. I don't see why they put in those common branches; we couldn't hardly endure
them.

L. (Sighs.) Do you believe they'll have a course like that next year?

I. I think may be they will.

L. Dear me! There's the bell to dress for dinner. How I wish I could
study those lovely things!

I. You must ask your father if you can't spend the winter in Boston
with me.

I'm sure there'll be another course of Parlor Philosophy next winter. But how dreadful that
we must stop talking about it now to dress for dinner! You are going to have company, you said;
what shall you wear, dear?

L. Oh, almost anything. What shall you?

(Exeunt arm in arm.)

* * * * *

THE PROPOSED DUTCH INTERNATIONAL COLONIAL AND GENERAL EXPORT EXHIBITION.

The Amsterdam International Exhibition, the opening of which has been fixed for May 1, 1883,
is now in way of realization. This exhibition will present a special interest to all nations,
and particularly to their export trade. Holland, which is one of the great colonial powers, proposes
by means of this affair to organize a competition between the various colonizing nations, and to
contribute thus to a knowledge of the resources of foreign countries whose richness of soil is
their fundamental power.

The executive committee includes the names of some of the most prominent
persons of the Netherlands: M. Cordes, president; M. de Clercq, delegate;
M. Kappeyne van di Coppello, secretary; and M. Agostini, commissary
general.

The exhibition will consist of five great divisions, to wit: 1. A Colonial exhibition. 2. A General
Export exhibition. 3. A Retrospective exhibition of Fine Arts and of Arts applied to the Industries.
4. Special exhibitions. 5. Lectures and Scientific Reunions.

The colonial part forms the base of the exhibition, and will be devoted to a comparative study
of the different systems of colonization and colonial agriculture, as well as of the manners
and customs of ultramarine peoples. In giving an exact idea of what has been done, it will
indicate what remains to be done from the standpoint of a general development of commerce and
manufactures. Such is the programme of the first division.

The second division will include everything that relates to the export trade.

The third division will be reserved for works of art dating back from the most remote ages.

The fourth division will be devoted to temporary exhibitions, such as those of horticultural and
agricultural products, etc.

The fifth division will constitute the intellectual part, so to speak, of the exhibition. It will
be devoted to lectures, and to scientific meetings for the discussion of questions relating to teaching,
to the arts, to the sciences, to hygiene, to international jurisprudence, and to political economy.
Questions of colonial economy will naturally occupy the first rank.

As will be seen, the programme of this grand scheme organized by the Netherlands government
is a broad one; and, owing the experience acquired in recent universal exhibitions, especially
that of Paris in 1878, very happy results may be expected from it.

At present, we give an illustration showing the general plan of the exhibition. In future,
in measure as the work proceeds, we shall be able to give further details.--Le Genie Civil.
The most convenient method of operating is to steep small portions of the cloth under examination
in a little of the reagent placed at the bottom of a porcelain capsule. The bits are then laid on the
edge of the capsule, when the changes of color which they have undergone
may be conveniently observed.

It is useful to submit to the same reagents simultaneously portions of cloth dyed in a known manner
with the wares which are suspected of having been used in dyeing the goods under examination.

RED
COLORS.

By the action of caustic potassa, the reds are divided into four groups: 1, those which turn to
a violet or blue; 2, those which turn brown; 3, those which are changed to a light yellow or gray;
4, those which undergo little or no change.

The first group comprises madder, cochineal, orchil, alkanet, and murexide. Madder reds are turned
to an orange by hydrochloric acid, while the three next are not notably affected. Cochineal
is turned by the potassa to a violet-red, orchil to a violet-blue,
and alkanet to a decided blue.

Lac-dye presents the same reactions as cochineal, but has less brightness. Ammoniacal cochineal
and carmine may likewise be distinguished by the tone of the reds obtained.

A characteristic of madder reds is that, after having been turned yellow by hydrochloric acid,
they are rendered violet on treatment with milk of lime. A boiling soap-lye restores the original
red, though somewhat paler. Artificial alizarine gives the same reaction. Turkey-reds, however,
are quite unaffected by acid. Garancine and garanceux reds, if treated first with hydrochloric acid
and then with milk of lime, turn to a dull blue.

Madder dyes are sometimes slow in being turned to a violet by potassa, and this shade when
produced is often brownish. They might thus be confounded with the dyes of the fourth group, i.e.,
rosolic acid, coralline, eosine, and coccine. None of these colors gives the characteristic
reaction with milk of lime and boiling soap-lye. If plunged in milk of lime, they resume their
rose or orange shades, while the madder colors become violet. Murexide is turned, by potassa,
gray in its light shades and violet in its dark ones. It might, then, be confounded with orchil,
but it is decolorized by hydrochloric acid, which leaves orchil a red. Moreover, it is turned greenish
by stannous chloride.

A special character of this dye (murexide) is the presence of mercury,
the salts of which serve as mordants for fixing it, and may be detected
by the ordinary reagents.

The second group comprises merely sandal wood or sanders red, which turns to a brown. On boiling
it with copperas it becomes violet, while on boiling with potassium dichromate it changes
to a yellowish brown.

The third group includes safflower, magenta, and murexide (light shades). If the action of the
potassa is prolonged the (soft) red woods enter into this group. Safflower turns yellow by the action
of potassa, and the original rose shade is not restored by washing with water. Hydrochloric acid
turns it immediately yellow. Citric acid has no action. Magenta is completely decolorized
by potassa, but a prolonged washing in water reproduces the original
shade.

This reaction is common to many aniline colors. These decolorations and recolorations are easily
produced in dark shades, while in very light shades they are less easily observed, because there
is always a certain loss of color. Stannous chloride turns magenta reds to a violet. Hydrochloric
acid renders them yellowish brown (afterward greenish?). Water restores the purple red shade.

The
fourth group comprises saffranine, azo-dinaphthyldiamine, rosolic acid, coralline, pure eosine
and cosine modified by a salt of lead, coccina, artificial ponceau, and red-wood.

Saffranine is detected by the action of hydrochloric acid, which turns it to a beautiful blue;
the red color is restored by washing in water. Azo-dinaphthyl diamine is recognized by its peculiar
orange cast, and is turned by hydrochloric acid to a dull, dirty violet. Rosolic acid and
coralline, as well as eosine, are turned by hydrochloric acid to an orange-yellow: the two former
are distinguished from eosine by their shade, which inclines to a
yellow.

Potassa turns rosolic acid and coralline from an orange-red to a bright red, while it produces
no change in eosine. If the action of potassa is prolonged, modified eosine is blackened in
consequence of the decomposition of the wool, the sulphur of which forms lead sulphide. Coccine becomes
of a light lemon-yellow on treatment with hydrochloric acid. Washing with water restores the original
shade. It affords the same reactions as eosine, but its tone is more inclined to an orange.

Artificial
ponceau does not undergo any change on treatment with hydrochloric acid, and resists potash.
Red wood shades are turned toward a gooseberry-red by hydrochloric acid, especially if strong.
This last reaction not being very distinct, red-wood shades might be mistaken for those of
artificial ponceau but for the superior brightness of the latter. If the action of potassa is
prolonged, the red-wood shades are decolorized, and a washing with water then bleaches the tissue.
Rocelline affords the same reactions as artificial ponceau, but if steeped in a concentrated
solution of stannous chloride it is in time completely discharged, which is not the case with
artificial ponceau.

VIOLET COLORS.

Violets are divided into two groups: those affected by potassa, and those upon which it has no action.
The first group embraces logwood, orchil, alkanet, and aniline violets, including under the
latter term Perkin's violet, (probably the original "mauve"), dahlia,
Parme or magenta violet, methyl, and Hofmann's violets.

The action of potassa gives indications for each of these violets. Logwood violet is browned;
that of orchil, if slightly reddish, is turned to a blue-violet; that of alkanet is modified
to a fine blue. Lastly, Perkin's mauve, dahlia, and methyl violet become of a grayish brown,
which may be re-converted into a fine violet by washing in abundance of water. When the shades
are very heavy, this grayish brown is almost of a violet-brown, so that the violets might seem
to be unaltered.

The action of hydrochloric acid distinguishes these colors better still if the aid of ammonia
is called in for two cases.

The acid turns logwood violet to a fine red, and equally reddens orchil violet. But the two colors
cannot be confounded, first, because the two violet shades are very distinct, that of orchil
being much the brighter; and secondly, because ammonia has no action on logwood violet, while
it turns orchil violet, if at all reddish, to a blue shade. Hydrochloric acid, whether dilute
or concentrated, is without action on alkanet violet. If the acid is dilute, it is equally without
action on Perkin's violet and dahlia. If it is strong, it turns them blue, and even green if
in excess. Hofmann's violet turns green even with dilute acid, but prolonged washing restores
the original violet shade.

Dahlia gives a more blue shade than Perkin's mauve. The action of acid is equally characteristic
for methyl violet. It becomes green, then yellow. Washing in water re-converts it first to
a green, and then to a violet.

The second group includes madder violet, cochineal violet, and the compound violet of cochineal
and extract of indigo. These three dyes are thus distinguished: Hydrochloric acid turns the madder
violet-orange, slightly brownish, or a light brown, and it affords the characteristic reaction
of the madder colors described above under reds. Cochineal violets are reddened. Sometimes they
are decolorized, and become finally yellow, but do not pass through a brown stage.

The compound violet of cochineal and extract of indigo presents this characteristic reaction,
that if boiled with very weak solution of sodium carbonate the liquid becomes blue, rather greenish,
while the cloth becomes a vinous-red--Moniteur Scientifique.--Chem. News.

* * * * *

CHEVALET'S CONDENSO-PURIFIER FOR GAS.

The condenso-purifier shown in the accompanying cut operates as follows:
Water is caused to flow over a metallic plate perforated with innumerable
holes of from one to three millimeters in diameter, and then, under
this disk, which is exactly horizontal, a current of gas is introduced.

Under these circumstances the liquid does not traverse the holes in
the plate, but is supported by the gas coming in an opposite direction.

Provided that the gas has sufficient pressure, it bubbles up through
the water and becomes so much the more divided in proportion as the
holes are smaller and more numerous.

  

The gas is washed by traversing the liquid, and freed from the tar and coal-dust carried along
with it; while, at the same time, the ammonia that it contains dissolves in the water, and this,
too, so much the better the colder the latter is. This apparatus, then, permits of obtaining two
results: a mechanical one, consisting in the stoppage of the solid matters, and a chemical one, consisting
in the stoppage of the soluble portions, such as ammonia, sulphureted hydrogen, and carbonic acid.

The
condenso-purifier consists of three perforated diaphragms, placed one over the other in rectilinear
cast-iron boxes. These diaphragms are movable, and slide on projections running round the interior
of the boxes. In each of the latter there is an overflow pipe, g, that runs to the box or compartment
below, and an unperforated plate, f, that slides over the diaphragm
so as to cover or uncover as many of the holes as may be necessary.
A stream of common water runs in through the funnel, e, over the upper
diaphragm, while the gas enters the apparatus through the pipe, a,
and afterward takes the direction shown by the arrows. Reaching the
level of the overflow, the water escapes, fills the lower compartment,
covers the middle diaphragm, then passes through the second overflow-pipe
to cover the lower diaphragm, next runs through the overflow-pipe
of the third diaphragm on to the bottom of the purifier, and lastly
makes its exit, through a siphon. A pressure gauge, having an inlet
for the gas above and below, serves for regulating the pressure absorbed
for each diaphragm, and which should vary between 0.01 and 0.012 of
a meter.

The effect of this purifier is visible when the operation
is performed with an apparatus made externally of glass. The gas is
observed to enter in the form of smoke under the first diaphragm,
and the water to become discolored and tarry. When the gas traverses
the second diaphragm, it is observed to issue from the water entirely
colorless, while the latter becomes slightly discolored, and finally,
when it traverses the third diaphragm, the water is left perfectly
limpid.

Two diaphragms have been found sufficient to completely remove
the solid particles carried along by the gas, the third producing
only a chemical effect.

This apparatus may replace two of the systems
employed in gas works: (1) mechanical condensers, such as the systems
of Pelouze & Audouin, and of Servier; and (2) scrubbers of different
kinds and coke columns. Nevertheless, it is well to retain the last
named, if the gas works have them, but to modify their work.

This
purifier should always be placed directly after the condensers, and
is to be supplied with a stream of pure water at the rate of 50 liters
of water per 1,000 cubic meters of gas. Such water passes only once
into the purifier, and issues therefrom sufficiently rich in ammonia
to be treated.

If there are coke columns in the works, they are placed
after the purifier, filled with wood shavings or well washed gravel,
and then supplied with pure cold water in the proportion stated above.
The water that flows from the columns passes afterward into the condenso-purifier,
where it becomes charged with ammonia, and removes from the gas the
tar that the latter has carried along, and then makes its exit and
goes to the decanting cistern.

In operating thus, all the remaining
ammonia that might have escaped the condenso-purifier is removed,
and the result is obtained without pumps or motor, with apparatus
that costs but little and does not occupy much space. The advantages
that are derived from this, as regards sulphate of ammonia, are important;
for, on treating ammoniacal waters with condensers, scarcely more
than four to five kilogrammes of the sulphate are obtained per ton
of coal distilled, while by washing the gas perfectly with the small
quantity of water indicated, four to five kilogrammes more can be
got per 1,000 kilogrammes of coal, or a total of eight to ten kilogrammes
per ton.

When the gas is not washed sufficiently, almost all of the
ammonia condenses in the purifying material.

The pressure absorbed
by the condenso purifier is from ten to twelve millimeters per washing-diaphragm.
In works that are not provided with an extractor, two diaphragms,
or even a single one, are employed when it is desired simply to catch
the tar.

The apparatus under consideration was employed in the St.
Quentin gas works during the winter of 1881-1882, without giving rise
to any obstruction; and, besides, it was found that by its use there
might be avoided all choking up of the pipes at the works and the
city mains through naphthaline.

In cases of obstruction, it is very
easy to take out the perforated diaphragms; this being done by removing
the bolts from the piece that holds the register, f, and then removing
the diaphragm and putting in another. This operation takes about ten
minutes. The advantages of such a mounting of the diaphragms is that
it allows the gas manufacturer to employ (and easily change) the number
of perforations that he finds best suited to his needs.

These apparatus
are constructed for productions of from 1,000 to 100,000 cubic meters
of gas per twenty four hours. They have been applied advantageously
in the washing of smoke from potassa furnaces, in order to collect
the ammonia that escapes from the chimneys. In one of such applications,
the quantity of gas and steam washed reached a million cubic meters
per twenty-four hours.--Revue Industrielle.

* * * * *

ARTIFICIAL
IVORY.

It is said that artificial ivory of a pure white color and
very durable has been manufactured by dissolving shellac in ammonia,
mixing the solution with oxide of zinc, driving off ammonia by heating,
powdering, and strongly compressing in moulds.

* * * * *

CREOSOTE
IMPURITIES.

[Footnote: Read at the meeting of the American Pharmaceutical
Association held at Niagara Falls. 1882.]

By Prof. P. W. BEDFORD.

The
object of this query can be but one, namely, to inquire whether the
wood creosote offered for sale is a pure article, or not; and if not,
what is the impurity present?

The relative commercial value of the
articles sold as coal tar creosote and wood creosote disposes of the
question as to the latter being present in the former article, and
we are quite certain that the cheap variety is nothing more or less
than a phenol or carbolic acid. Wood creosote, it has been frequently
stated, is adulterated with coal tar creosote, or phenol. The object
of my experiments has been to prove the identity of wood creosote
and its freedom from phenol. Many features of the building are indeed remarkable in other
respects, but we are probably correct in saying that, as a whole, it is, to students of architecture,
chiefly historically interesting.

#The Ground Plan# is of the double cross form, frequent in buildings of this class. The nave
and choir both have aisles, but those of the choir are walled off from it. The main transept
is aisleless, but the north and south choir transepts have each an aisle, or small chapel,
on the eastern side. Beneath the whole eastern part of the church extends the magnificent crypt.
The total length of the building is 305½ feet, of which 147½ feet belong to the eastern arm.
The main transept is 120 feet long, the choir transept 88 feet.

#The Nave.#--After passing beneath the great west doorway, through its new richly-hinged doors,
we descend by a flight of four steps into the nave. On the inner side of the doorway arch are
found a fine cable moulding, occurring also on its outside, and the billet moulding, of which
the omission is so noticeable there. In the blind arcades that decorate the nave end inside,
we see, besides plain mouldings, specimens of both the zigzag and the billet. The two upper
arcades are so abruptly cut by the great Perpendicular window as to make most conspicuous the
fact that this is a later insertion.

Of the aisle ends the northern contains the early fourteenth century doorway, inserted for
the use of the parishioners of St. Nicholas' altar, while the lower part of the southern has
a blind arcade of three arches like those at the same level on either side of the great west
door. Each aisle end has also a round-headed Norman window, with a plain circular moulding,
and of the two small lights above, the northern belongs to the recent restoration. In the south-west
corner of the nave is a beautiful little Norman doorway, which, opening into the tower flanking
the front on that side, has a fine embattled moulding round its arch. The shafts of this small
door, of the great west door, and of the aisle end windows, all have scalloped caps, and other
caps of this form are seen in the arcades.

We will now, leaving the inside of the front, direct our attention to the nave arcades. Rochester
and Peterborough possess probably the best examples of the Norman nave in this country, and
the former is interesting, also, as possibly giving us some idea of the appearance of this
part of the Norman church at Canterbury. The connection between the archiepiscopal cathedral
and this its eldest daughter was always close, and the resemblances that can be pointed out
in them are still numerous. Mr. Parker, by the way, was so struck by the similarities in later,
Early English, work, as to suggest that the Rochester William de Hoo may have been the William
the Englishman, the younger William, of Canterbury.

It has been noticed that the architecture is plainer here than in contemporary examples in
France, but lighter, probably because intended to have a wooden roof. From the west wall the
Norman work extends as far as the sixth bay of the nave arcades, the seventh and eighth bays
being, with part of the sixth, the work of Early Decorated builders. The half piers at the
west wall and the Norman piers facing each other in the nave arcades form pairs, but each pair
differs from the rest. The pier capitals are flat, with scalloped ornaments. The semi-cylindrical
shafts starting from them are now stopped by the plain string course that divides this from
the next story. If they were continued further they would only emphasize the irregular placing
of the Perpendicular clerestory windows, but they probably rose originally to bear the main
timbers of the roof. The arches of the lowest story are semicircular, of course, and are in
two orders. Both orders were, it is believed, plain throughout, in early Norman times, and
they still continue to be so on the aisle side of the south arcade. The inner order is still
plain everywhere, but the outer has zigzag and other mouldings. In each bay of the triforium,
the tympanum is filled with an elaborate diaper around a central ornament. This decoration
varies in every bay, and is thought to be a later insertion. It is noteworthy that the triforium
arcades open into the aisles as well as into the nave, an unusual arrangement, which seems,
however, here to be part of the design of the twelfth century. This opinion is supported by
the existence of the narrow gallery, now blocked up, in the thickness of the wall. The early
Norman triforium arcades seem to have been removed by the architects of the following period,
and replaced in the present form. The aisles were perhaps originally vaulted; the flat pilasters
of their outer walls might then have been built as vaulting shafts. If such was the case, the
vaulting must have been found too heavy for the walls, and a wooden roof have been therefore
adopted in its stead. The easternmost bay of the triforium, on each side, is apparently later
Norman like the rest, but is really the work of masons of the Decorated period. It had been
demolished in connection with the rebuilding of the nave, in progress at that time but abandoned
when only two bays were finished. It was then found that the best way to make the junction
of the styles good would be to restore the old work as accurately as possible. This was well
done, but differences of material and in methods of working save us from being deceived.

The two bays of Early Decorated work, just alluded to, complete the nave eastwards. The transition
from the round-arched to the pointed style is made still more conspicuous by an increase in
the height of the arcades, which involved the discontinuance of the triforium; and the banded
shafts of dark Purbeck marble clustered round the later piers also emphasize the change. The
two piers at the junctions of the styles do not pair, but we cannot regret the difference on
the south side, as we owe thereto the beautiful foliated capital here illustrated (p. 68).

The clerestory of the nave is divided from the stories below by an enriched string course.
It is of the same style throughout and dates from the Perpendicular period. The predilection
of the architects of that time to substitute work of their own for that of their predecessors
in clerestories and great west windows of ecclesiastical buildings, has been noticed by many
writers. At Rochester they could not in either case resist temptation. Their clerestory contains
plain and uninteresting three-light windows, which are, moreover, unsymmetrically placed with
regard to the arches beneath them. The roof is apparently of the same date; it is flat and
of wood, carried by corbels carved and painted to represent angels bearing shields.

The two tower piers at the end of the nave, where the latter joins the main transept, have
their Purbeck marble shafts stopped at some height from the ground. The most likely explanation
of this is, that there used to be here a solid stone screen [1], or rood loft, against which
the parish altar of St. Nicholas stood before 1423. On the west side of the northern of the
two rises a mass of masonry, so high as to partly block the arch. It is built, to a great extent,
at any rate, of old materials, for on both sides of it are to be seen stones with fragments
of plaited Norman diapers. The purpose of this masonry has been the subject of much discussion.
It was at one time generally believed to have been raised, as a buttress, to aid the pier in
supporting the weight of the tower, but this notion has since been ridiculed. The tower, we
are reminded, was not raised until 1343; the stability of its piers had been secured before
this date by the two new bays of the nave, and additional support can not have been needed.
Others suppose that the masonry belonged to the stone screen spoken of above. A fine walled
up arch on the north side adds to rather than lessens our difficulties. It has good mouldings,--springing
from the capitals of two Purbeck marble shafts, of which the eastern has unfortunately been
broken away,--and the dripstone terminates in a head, so mutilated that the face is quite lost.
This archway seems too wide to have been the entrance to the stairs leading to the rood loft,
a use which has been suggested for it. The occurrence of the above-mentioned fragments of diapers
on the wall within the arch, as well as on the other side of the mass, may perhaps justify
us in concluding that these two surfaces are both of the same date, and that the archway was
walled up originally.

It seems possible that we have, after all, a buttress to deal with here. It is known that the
north transept and the north-west tower pier were raised before the adjoining parts to the
south and west, but many have supposed that the north tower-arch was not thrown across until
later. If it was built at the earlier time, a temporary support to the pier against its thrust
may have been judged expedient, until the new work at the end of the nave should be completed.
The mass that we are discussing seems to have been hurriedly raised with old materials at hand,
and, from the carelessness which allowed fragments of old ornament to appear here and there
on the surface, not to have been intended to be permanent. It was not until 1320, or later,
apparently, that the design of rebuilding the nave was finally abandoned, and a junction of
the new and the Norman work made. It seems, therefore, no great thing to suppose that the originally
temporary support lingered on until 1327, to be then retained in connection with the oratory
made, in angulo navis, for the Reserved Sacrament, for the parishioners of St. Nicholas. I
have never seen or heard of any record as to which corner is the angulum referred to. It is
known, however, that provision for the reservation of the Blessed Sacrament was often made
to the north of the altar, and that we find Sacrament Houses in this position in churches that
possess them.

#The Aisle Walls# have the bays marked by flat pilasters, to be traced back perhaps to Early
Norman vaulting shafts. Springings of the Early Decorated vaulting, that once covered the two
eastern bays, are still to be seen, but the aisles are now roofed with wood throughout. String
courses are continued beneath the windows, which latter have been described and commented on
in our chapter on the exterior of the church.

The so-called #Lady Chapel# was really built as a nave to the Lady Chapel proper in the south
transept. On the east side a single broad arch opens into the transept, and in the wall above
are to be seen traces of the outer mouldings of the two arches (like those on the north side)
that this single wide one replaced. A tablet on the south wall records that the chapel was
restored, in 1852, by M. E. G., i.e., the wife of Canon Griffith. It is now used for morning
prayers by the Grammar School, and for some sparsely-attended services. From 1742 until well
into the present century the Bishop's consistory court sat here, after having been held formerly
at the western end of the south aisle of the nave. The chapel seems to have been vaulted, and
we have, perhaps, to regret here the loss of a fine fan-traceried roof.

#The South Transept# is of the Early Decorated period, and rather later than its fellow. In
the east wall, opposite the wide arch leading into the so-called Lady Chapel, two bays were,
about 1320, included under one arch to form a larger recess for the altar of the Blessed Virgin
Mary. The king and queen corbel heads of this arch were once painted, and the colours are said
to have been still tolerably fresh in 1840. The clerestory windows on each side are two-lighted,
with quatrefoil heads. They have a gallery running before them, but the screens to this vary.
On the east side the screen before each window has a broad pointed arch of the width of the
window, flanked by a pair of narrow ones; on the west it copies the window. The occurrence
of the dog-tooth moulding should be noticed. The transept end has an upper range of five single-light
pointed windows, graduated in height towards the centre, divided by narrow blind arches, and
having a screen arcade of five arches in front, one arch before each light. The whole arrangement
of the end is shown in our illustration. Figures in fresco could, in 1840, in spite of coats
of whitewash, still be traced on the lower part of the wall.

The roof of the transept is almost entirely of wood, though in the form of a quadripartite
stone vault with longitudinal and transverse ridge pieces. The springings of the ribs are indeed
of stone but otherwise the ceiling is of wood throughout. Sir G. Scott found the whole greatly
in need of repair,--the ribs rotten and decayed, and the spaces between them filled principally
with plaster,--and thoroughly restored it.

This part of the church, and all the rest to the east of the nave, is enriched with shafts
of the famous dark marble from the quarries of the Isle of Purbeck. The vaulting shafts of
this material are generally carried to the ground, but over the head of the wide outer arches
in the east and west walls here, they rise from finely carved console heads.

At the southern end of the great altar recess in the east wall, a small pointed doorway opens
into the little room [2], so noticeable outside, in the angle between the transept and the
south choir aisle. This room, like so many other parts of the building, has had considerable
vicissitudes. Here are said to have been kept at one time the valuables belonging to the altars
in this part of the church. Then, at the end of the eighteenth and during the earlier part
of this century, the room is mentioned and marked on plans as the coal hole. It is now more
honourably used again, as the vestry of the masters and king's scholars of the Grammar School,
who have to attend the cathedral services on Sundays and Saints' Days.

#The Crossing# is noticeable for the finely clustered shafts--the tower piers. The clearance
hence, in 1730, of a ringers gallery has been already mentioned. In 1825 Mr. Cottingham found
the space vaulted. His changes in the tower included a replacing of the vault with a flat wooden
ceiling, of which the main beams ran from east to west. This he changed again in 1840 for the
present more elaborate, but not altogether satisfactory ceiling, with its great cross beams
and pendant bosses. An admiring contemporary account tells us that the largest of these bosses,
though looking so small from below, are 3 feet 3 inches in diameter, while the beam mouldings
are 5 feet 3 inches in girth, and the wall mouldings 5 feet 7½ inches. The ceiling is coloured,
but for neither colouring nor ornament does it deserve praise.

#The North Transept# was erected about 1235, in the Early English period and style. The screens
to the gallery before the clerestory lancets have a main arch in each bay, with dog-tooth moulding,
divided into three by Purbeck marble shafts placed the width of the window apart. In each bay
without a window there is a row of blind arcading, which, like the mouldings of the arches
by which the gallery passes through the wall piers, springs from carved corbel heads. In the
transept end the screens before the three lancets of the clerestory are of the usual form,
but are adapted to their graduated heights, and there are small additional arches, one at each
side.

The arch opening into the north aisle shows a curious device for preserving a different level
on each of its sides. On the transept side we see the mouldings of an arch like, and on the
same level as, its neighbours to the north. The western half of the whole thickness of the
wall is, however, continued lower, exhibiting a plain surface to the east, but terminating
on the aisle side, at the height of the eastern arches of the nave, in mouldings that we should
have expected to find higher up. This lower level was necessary on account of the vaulting
at this end of the aisle, of which traces still remain, but the whole arrangement was clumsy,
and we cannot be surprised at not finding it repeated on the other side of the church.

The next bay has on the triforium level a curious windowless recess, the mouldings of whose
arch spring from two shafts on each side. There is another very similar recess opposite, but
with only single side shafts.

The two northern bays of the east wall are occupied by a wide and deep recess [3], the arched
ceiling of which rises to within 3 or 4 feet of the clerestory level. The outside shafts, and
those from which the central ribs of the ceiling used to spring, have all gone, though their
caps remain. Within this great recess there is, on the spectator's right, a small one, with
side shafts, containing a piscina. On the left, in the church's north wall, is a window, which
rises to only half the height of the pointed arch, with side shafts, within which it is inclosed.
It was at one time the general belief that this recess used to be the site of the parochial
altar of St. Nicholas, which may possibly have stood here during the short time between the
completion of the north transept and that of the new work at the east end of the nave, for
a document published in the "Registrum Roffense" tells us that, after a dispute about a removal,
the position before the pulpitum was assigned to it in 1322. Arrangements were then made to
avoid any mutual disturbance of the services of the monks and the parishioners, and the new
church for the latter was already talked of. The writer of the "History and Antiquities of
Rochester,"[11] quotes a will that suggests a possibility that an altar of Jesu stood on this spot.

  [11] See note on p. 10.

The transept end and its west wall have windows of the same form at the triforium level, and
there is a similar resemblance in the blind arcades below, except for the doorway restored
by Sir G. Scott, and surmounted by an obtuse arch. The arch to the east of this doorway was
cleared of masonry in 1840. A large figure, in distemper, of St. Christopher bearing the Infant
Christ was then uncovered, but only to fall away as the air was admitted to it. Miss Stevens,
daughter of the dean, made as complete a copy of it as possible, as stone by stone was carefully
removed to disclose only a small piece at a time, and her drawing, with a note by Mr. Spence,
is preserved in the British Museum.

The vaulting of this transept is rather remarkable. It is octopartite in plan, developed from
the sexpartite form by the addition of a longitudinal ridge-rib which divides its larger cells.
The fine bosses in both transepts merit attention, and so do the corbel-heads to the intermediate
vaulting shafts in this one.

#The Font# [4] standing in the centre of the nave, only a short distance from the west door
was erected in memory of the late Canon Burrows, who held a stall here from 1881 until his
death in 1892. Executed for the subscribers, in Hopton Wood stone, by Mr. T. Earp, it is round
in form, supported by a central column, of quatrefoil section, and four shafts placed corner-wise,
rising from a double plinth, on which, facing the door, is the brass inscription tablet. Round
the bowl are four groups in relief, facing the cardinal points, with eight single figures inserted
in pairs between them. The subject of the west group is "Suffer little children to come unto
me;" then passing round to our left we see, in order, figures of Noah and Moses, the Baptism
of the Gentile (typified by the Ethiopian), figures of St. Bartholomew and St. Mary Magdalene,
the Baptism of our Lord, figures of St. Barnabas and St. Cornelius, the Baptism of the Jew
(typified by St. Paul), and finally, figures of St. Lydia and St. Winfred.

The old font, now removed to Deptford parish church, used to stand beneath the second arch,
from the west, of the south nave arcade. Made in 1848, this was first used in 1850. In form,
it was square and enriched, and borne by a circular column and four corner shafts. A still
earlier font is to be seen in an engraving made by John Coney during the second decade of the
present century. This stood under the eastern side of the third arch of the same nave arcade,
was octagonal in form, with panelled sides, and had a substantial railing round it.

#The Pulpit# [5] in the nave is more elaborate in form and decoration than that now in the
choir. It was designed for the choir by Mr. Cottingham, in 1840, and stood there, opposite
the bishop's throne, until it was removed to its present position by Sir Gilbert Scott. #The
Stalls# are modern and very plain. A tablet on them tells us that they were erected in memory
of Mr. Philip Cazenove, who died in 1880, by his son Arthur, an honorary canon. #The Lectern#
is of carved wood, of the well-known form in which the book is borne by an eagle's out-spread
wings.

#Monuments.#--The nave and main transept possess none that are very old or very remarkable,
but the following seem to deserve mention. Against the south wall, in the fourth bay from the
west, is the monument of John, Lord Henniker [6], who died in 1803. Over the sarcophagus in
relief Honour is crowning Benevolence, while a medallion of the deceased, with a coronet and
an unfolded patent of peerage, and his coat of arms are seen against the base. This monument
was erected by J. Bacon, jun., in 1806, and is signed with his name.

The next bay to the east contains no window, but is occupied by the monument to Lady Henniker
[7], who died in 1792, before her husband was ennobled. This monument is, to a great extent,
constructed of "Coad's artificial stone," and rises beneath "a neat Gothic arch" of that material.
It shows, on a base of gray marble, a sarcophagus of white marble between two figures of Time
and Eternity. In this case the sarcophagus is detached and not in relief, and the figures also
stand free.

On the wall at the end of the south transept, under the central window, is a monument to Richard
Watts, Esq. [8], erected in his memory by the mayor and citizens in 1736. A coloured bust,
with long gray beard, stands forth curiously above the inscription. This bust was given, to
be placed here, by Joseph Brooke, Esq., whose family had acquired possession of Watts's house
by purchase. There has been much discussion as to its material, which seems, however, to be
not terra-cotta or some other composition, but firestone. Watts sat as member for Rochester
in Queen Elizabeth's second Parliament, and we have already told how he had the honour of entertaining
her 1573, at his house, "Satis." He is famous for the provisions that he made in his will for
the relief of the poor of Rochester, Watts's Almshouses on the Maidstone road being one of
the sights of the town; but he is perhaps best known of all for his foundation of the "House
of the 6 poor travellers." Poor wayfarers, to this number nightly, "not being Rogues or Proctors,"
are here provided with supper, bed and breakfast, and presented besides with 4d. each when
they leave. Wonderful tales of wicked lawyers have at times been current in explanation of
this coupling of Proctors with Rogues, but the true explanation is that Proctor is used in
a quite obsolete sense here. It has the same meaning, probably, as in the following passage
from Harrison's "Description of Britain," 1577: "Among Roges and idle persons we finde to be
comprised all Proctors that go up and down with counterfeit licences, cosiners, and such as
go about the countrey using unlawful games," etc. It was used also of mendicant lepers, the
"Proctors to some spittal house," and of men who carried dispensations about the country. Watts's
will was proved on the 20th of September, 1579.

Just beneath the Watts monument is a brass tablet in memory of the writer who has made the
House of the six poor travellers so well known throughout the English-speaking world.

The same transept contains on its east wall a monument, with a medallion bust, to another charitable
Roffensian, Sir Richard Head, an alderman of the city after the Restoration, and one of its
members of Parliament in 1667. He was again member in 1678-79, and before this had been made
a baronet. It was at his house that King James II. stayed, at Rochester, after his flight from
London. Sir Richard died on the 18th of September, 1689, at the age of eighty, arranging by
his will that the profits of some cottages and land at Higham should be distributed, to the
amount of two shillings a week, in bread, to the poor at St. Nicholas Church. The overplus
was at the end of the year to be divided among four of the most ancient men, and four of the
most ancient women of the parish. The charity still remains, but its scheme has been to some
extent modified by the Charity Commissioners.

In the same transept, near the entrance to the south choir aisle, stands a bust of Dr. Franklin,
who died in 1833. This monument is by S. Joseph, and near it on the south wall is a tablet,
with a medallion bust, in memory of Joseph Maas, the great tenor singer, whose name is not
yet forgotten in the musical world.

The recess on the east side of the north transept contains a mural tablet in memory of Dr.
Augustine Caesar, who died in 1683. This is chiefly remarkable for its pompous Latin inscription,
which tells how he came, saw, and conquered diseases invincible to others, and calls on fevers
and all human ills to exult now that their great foe has passed away in a happy death, and
is as a Caesar, enrolled among the gods. From other sources we learn how he obtained his degree
of M.D. from Oxford, in 1660, after a petition in which he explained that it was to escape
oaths contrary to his loyalty, that he had forborne to take it during "the late troubles."

#The Pavement# of this part of the church is of plain stone. In the floor are still to be seen
many #Memorial slabs#, but more have been either covered up or lost. In the centre of the south
transept there still remains the matrix of what was once a splendid brass, representing a bishop,
in his episcopal robes and with his crozier, beneath a rich canopy with a shield of arms on
either side of his head. In the great recess in the north transept there is placed against
the wall, lozenge-wise, the matrix of a brass of several figures. We are told, by Mr. Spence,
of the existence, as recently as 1840, of three matrices in the south aisle, six in the nave,
one in the north aisle, nine in the north transept, besides a tenth on the wall, and five in
the south transept. Of the six in the nave, one near the steps at the west end had evidently
held a fine episcopal brass, and another very ancient, had once contained the figure of a knight.
There was also here a slab with a hollow, said to have been a socket for an axe, but evidently
due to a wearing of the stone, a piece of Sussex marble. The death of Cardinal Fisher was said
to have been commemorated by this. The specimen in the north aisle was very elaborate, intended
for the figure of a bishop, in whose dress it was noticeable that both peaks of the mitre were
intended to be shown. The matrix that Mr. Spence especially described in the south transept
is evidently the one that still remains there. Besides all these matrices or sockets of brasses
he mentions a slab to the north of the steps leading to the choir which he thought to be, probably,
a coffin-lid reversed.

#The Stained Glass# in the western part of the church is all modern. In it we see specimens
of the work of Messrs. Clayton and Bell, whose later windows are certainly finer than their
earlier ones. Even with their best before us we cannot, however, help wishing for old work.
We hope to see soon all the clerestory and aisle windows bright with colour. They will then
be more beautiful in themselves, and they will also moderate the glaring light which detracts
much from the effect of the nave.

The great west window is, below the springing of its arch, separated into eight lights, which
are divided into two tiers by a transom or horizontal mullion. Beginning from the left or south
side we have, in the eight spaces of the lower tier, Abraham, blessed by Melchisedec after
his victory over the five kings; Moses and the overthrow of the Egyptians in the Red Sea; Joshua
commanding the sun to stand still; Gideon, overthrowing the Midianites; Jephthah's victorious
return; Samson carrying off the gates of Gaza; David slaying the lion; and finally Nehemiah
at the building of the walls of Jerusalem. In the upper eight spaces are single figures of
the heroes celebrated in these scenes. In the next row, of twelve complete spaces, the lowest
in the head of the window are the figures of other heroes. These are, in order, from the left,
Caleb, Othniel, Deborah, Barak, Samuel, Jonathan, Beraiah, Jehosophat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Matthias,
and Judas Maccabeus. Next above come ten military saints: SS. Maurice, David, Edmund, Alban,
George, Andrew, Louis, Martin, Patrick and Gereon. There are besides in the head of the window
devices of the corps of Royal Engineers; the badges of the grenade and crown; the national
emblems of the rose, thistle, shamrock and leek; emblematic subjects, such as the Helmet of
Salvation and the Breastplate of Righteousness; and armed angels. The arrangement of the window
is well seen in our view of the nave looking west. It is in memory of the officers and men
of the Royal Engineers who fell in the South African and Afghan campaigns. Their names are
recorded in crudely coloured mosaic tablets in the upper of the two arcades below.

The window at the end of the north aisle is in memory of Lieut. T. Rue Henn, R.E., killed at
Maiwand in 1880. It contains three medallions, of scenes from the life of Jonathan:[12] his
victorious onslaught on the Philistines, made when attended only by his armour-bearer; his
bestowal of his robes and arms on David; and his death, slain by the Philistines in the battle
of Mount Gilboa.

  [12] Sam. xiv. 4-14; xviii. 1-4; xxxi. 2.

The corresponding window at the end of the south aisle is in memory of Col. A. W. Durnford,
R.E., who fell at Isandlwhana in 1879. This has three similar medallions illustrating great
deeds of Judas Maccabeus:[13] his taking of the spoils of the "great host out of Samaria,"
with the sword of Apolonius their general; his exhortation of the small part of his army that
had not fled to die manfully; and finally his death in this his last battle.

  [13] 1 Macc. iii. 12; ix. 10; ix. 18.

The only window with stained glass in the aisle walls is the first from the west on the south
side, in memory of Lieut. R. da Costa Porta, who died in the Egyptian expedition of 1882. It
has two scenes: Peter walking on the water, and Christ stilling the tempest.

The windows in the north transept end are filled with stained glass in memory of Archdeacon
King. In the lower tier of three, we see, beginning from the left, a figure of St. Philip,
the deacon, with a representation below of the laying on of hands (Acts, vi. 6); the Lord Jesus,
with three angels on either side, and underneath a scene with six figures, including a saint
in chains before a judge; St. Stephen, the proto-martyr, with the scene of his death beneath.
Some money remained after the completion of these windows, so the upper range was also filled.
In it are figures of the three archangels: St. Raphael, St. Michael slaying the dragon, and
St. Gabriel.

The upper range of five windows in the south transept end commemorates the officers of the
corps of Royal Engineers, who died in the Peninsular and Waterloo campaigns. Their names are
recorded in the mosaic tablets in the lowest arcade at the west end of the nave. The subjects,
from the left, are St. Maurice, St. Nicholas, St. George, St. James and St. Adrian. The three
central of these windows have small scenes beneath the figures. The lower windows, given by
the same corps, are in memory of General Gordon and others of its members who died in the Egyptian
campaign. The three windows are each two-lighted, and each light contains a single figure.
There are represented in them, in order, St. Florian, St. Gereon, St. Martin, St. Alban, St.
Denis, and St. Longinus. The Royal Engineers, it will be seen, have appropriately chosen Old
Testament heroes, and military saints for representation in all their glass.

#The North Choir Aisle# and the southern are both walled off from the choir itself. One of
the screens that used to divide the monastic from the parochial part of the church halves the
four bays of the north aisle, the door in it being approached by a flight of eight wooden steps,
which cover those of stone so worn by the passage of the pilgrims who in old times thronged
to St. William's shrine. The westernmost door in the north wall formerly gave access to Gundulf's
tower, the easternmost now leads to the belfry.

#Monuments.#--Coming from the north transept we see, to the right, the tomb ascribed to Bishop
Hamo de Hythe, who died in 1352. It is certainly in the style of that time. The elaborate ornamentation
of the arch under the canopy is worthy of attention. At the back, beneath the canopy, is the
demi-figure of an angel, holding a shield, but the high, panelled tomb has lost its effigy,
if it ever bore one. The monument has suffered much, but still bears many traces of colour.
Just opposite it is a mural monument commemorative of William Streaton, who died in 1609, after
having been no less than nine times mayor of the city.

In the plain stone pavement there are crowded together, to the west of the steps, as many as
eleven matrices of brasses.

#The Organ#, on the screen beneath the choir arch, owes its present form to Sir G. Scott, who
divided it, placing half at either end of the screen, and thus preserved the vista of the choir,
when he designed the new case.

In early times we read of the gift of an organ by Bishop Gilbert de Glanvill and that, during
the terrible visitation of Simon de Montfort's troops, the "organs were raised in the voice
of weeping." Such casual references are all that we find before the seventeenth century. In
1634, however, Archbishop Laud is informed of a recent great expenditure on the "making of
the organs." This new purchase narrowly escaped rough usage at the hands of the Roundhead soldiery
in 1642, for the troops, in their journey into Kent, left "the organs to be pluckt downe" on
their return, but found them, then, already removed, of course with more gentle handling than
they themselves would have used. The instrument was soon set up again after the Restoration,
and Pepys, on April 10th, 1661, heard "the organs then a-tuning." In 1688, £160 was spent on
its renovation and on a new "chair organ," a smaller, portable form. In 1791 a fine new organ
was constructed by Greene, which stood over the middle of the screen and its case, with pinnacles,
etc., "in the Gothic style" was designed by the Rev. -- Ollive. This instrument was added to
by Hill towards the middle of the present century at Canon Griffith's expense. The choir arch,
above, continued draped until Scott's time, though many complained of the tawdriness of this
decoration, which hid also from the nave the vaulting of the choir.

#The Organ Screen#, at the head of the flight of ten steps by which the higher level of the
choir is reached, has had its face towards the nave decorated recently, in memory of the late
Dean Scott, joint compiler of the famous lexicon. The four figures on each side of the original
fourteenth century doorway, represent, in order from the left, St. Andrew, King Ethelbert,
St. Justus, St. Paulinus, Bishop Gundulf, the sacrist William de Hoo, Bishop Walter de Merton,
and Cardinal John Fisher. The whole was designed by Mr. John Pearson, R.A., and the statues
were executed, in Weldon stone, by Mr. Hitch. The work is careful, but it is amusing to notice
that in the model held by Gundulf, and presumably intended for his own church, there appears
the great Perpendicular window, now so prominent in the west front.

Sir Gilbert Scott had, with archæological correctness, left this side of the screen bare. It
was kept so originally on account of the position before it of the other screen, the one against
which St. Nicholas' altar stood. Earlier attempts than the present one have, however, been
made to ornament it. In 1730 an order was given for the face towards the nave to be wainscoted,
and in the "Gentleman's Magazine" for October, 1798, we read a criticism of some work then
just carried out. We are told of pointed arches and tracery merely punched out, of crockets
and finials barely hinted without any fine forms or beautiful relief, and of the lack of any
"deep-shadowed infinity of mouldings."

#The Choir# is entered through the iron gates in the central doorway of the screen. The height
of its floor above that of the nave is due to the splendid crypt on which it stands. It is
all, excepting one or two features which we must point out later, in the Early English style,
and was finished early in the thirteenth century.

Very noticeable to everyone coming into this part of the church is the great, some think excessive,
use made of the famous dark marble from the quarries of Purbeck, in the vaulting and other
shafts, in their bands, and in the string-courses that divide the stories. These, though now
so dull, will admit of a high polish, but, unfortunately, do not retain it long. A small specimen
in the south choir transept shows how beautiful the polished stone is. Polishing would probably
also relieve them of their present rather heavy effect. The shafts generally spring from the
ground, from bases of the coarser Petworth or Bethersden marble, and some of them have caps
of hard stone. Above the choir stalls the main groups of vaulting shafts rise from finely carved
brackets, of which two are here illustrated (pp. 88, 91), and the intermediate single ones
from carved corbel heads, all of the same fine material as the shafts themselves. Some of these
ornaments were, when uncovered in 1840, "very skilfully restored in mastic by Mr. Hamerton,
a sculptor in the employ of Mr. Cottingham."

The vaulting is worthy of attention and is generally sexpartite in plan, although the simpler
quadripartite form occurs in places. An inequality in the division of the side cells of the
transept vaulting, due to the difference in width of the bays, has a rather curious effect.
The ribs of the vaulting, throughout the eastern arm, are painted with simple lines of colour,
with a rather pleasing effect.

The gallery before the single light clerestory windows gave once an open passage all round,
but it is now blocked at the end of the south transept. In front of each window it has a triple
screen of which the general form is shown in our illustration of a window of the choir proper
and in our view of the east end. It is owing to the existence over the transept aisles of two
rooms, known as the Treasury and the Indulgence Chamber, that no clerestory windows are to
be seen there, but only blind arcading and blank wall. In the inner, wider bays of the transepts
we notice that the usual triple screens are extended by two additional arches of the lower
height towards the centre of the church.

The clerestory gallery is, on each side of the choir proper, quite in the thickness of the
wall. The core of the latter is Norman, but its facing, including the blind arcade at the triforium
level, belongs to the Early English period.

On either side of the presbytery the clerestory gallery springs from wall-piers with clustered
Purbeck shafts. The tracery of the windows, thus ornamented here, is later than the windows
themselves, and is an insertion of the Decorated period. So is also that of the windows on
the east side, and at the end, of the south transept aisle. The latter is unique in this cathedral,
and we have thought it worthy of illustration. Remains of clustered columns, to be seen in
the east wall of the north transept aisle, remind us of the numerous changes that so many parts
of the fabric have undergone.

The east end has only taken its present form since Sir G. Scott's work, between 1870 and 1875.
In 1825 Cottingham removed a huge altar screen thence, and opened and renewed the lower range
of windows, of which the central had been quite, and the other two partly, blocked with brickwork.
He, however, still left the communion table against the wall, and, instead of doing away with
the great upper window then existing, only repaired it. This great window, occupying the whole
space from the gallery to the vaulting, was divided into nine lights, of which the inner seven
were cut by a transom or horizontal mullion. Photographs of three drawings by Mr. Gunning,
made in 1842, are preserved in the chapter room, and show this east end, and the two sides
of the organ screen, as they were before Scott's alterations.

The north transept end is very like the east end in its general design, but has, low down,
the two windows lighting the Merton tomb, and the tiny one over the same bishop's Elizabethan
effigy. The south transept end is again much the same, but has the spaces between the wall-piers
and under its outer windows filled in with masonry, in which are the openings to two passages,
now blocked, which led respectively up to the Indulgence Chamber and down to the crypt.

There are three other doorways, the uses of which we must also mention. One at the north-west
corner of the north transept leads to the staircase in the angle turret there; another, on
the other side of the transept, is the way to the Treasury, to the clerestory gallery, and,
by the gallery, to the Indulgence Chamber. The third is the splendid chapter-house doorway
in the south transept aisle. To this one a special section will presently be devoted.

We have spoken more than once of the Treasury and the Indulgence Chamber. The latter is little
used now, if at all, possibly because of the rather adventurous approach to it; but in the
former the cathedral plate is still kept.

In the #Paving# of the choir there is a considerable variety. Up the choir proper we see slabs
of variously coloured stones arranged in a not very elaborate pattern, part of the north transept
and the whole of its aisle are also paved with stones of different colours "beautifully disposed,"
and there is a similar but simpler flooring behind the altar. To nearly all the rest of the
eastern arm was given by Sir G. Scott a glittering floor of encaustic tiles; but much of the
pavement of the south transept and its aisle is still of plain stone. The tiles have mostly
old designs, taken from some mediæval examples still to be seen in the south choir transept
and under an arch on the east side of the northern. To the east of the crossing is the matrix
of a fine brass, of a bishop in full robes with mitre and crosier, with two shields of arms
on each side of the figure. Farther on, between the altar and its rails, the tiling is very
elaborate and, in a ring of it there, the signs of the zodiac appear. At the top of the dark
marble altar steps there are tiles again. Those in front have representations of the seven
virtues, and two others, with angels, are to be seen on each side.

#The Stalls# of the dean and canons stand against the organ screen and face towards the east.
They were designed, in the Gothic style, by Sir G. Scott, and have no canopies on account of
the painted decoration above. The choir stalls also owe their present form to Scott, but he
incorporated in them as much old work as possible. The seats against the wall on each side
(the misericords) are all new, but not so are the trefoil-headed arcade and the massive oak
beam which bear the standards supporting their book-rests. This arcade still has some of its
original colouring, and belongs probably to the original furniture of the choir at the time
of its completion, early in the thirteenth century. Many sections of the heavy beam above are
also old, perhaps of the same age. The backs of the front row of seats, bearing the book-rests
to the middle row, are chiefly constructed of old Tudor panelling, which once belonged to the
book-desks made for the new establishment in 1541. Tracing the history of the furniture from
this time, we find Archbishop Laud, in 1634, ordering a new fair desk to be provided without
delay. After the Civil War considerable repairs were no doubt needed, but it is not until 1742-43
that we find any great works undertaken. Wainscoting and pews were then erected, and we read
of a furnishing of choir seats, and of stalls for the dean and prebendaries under the organ.
Only slight alterations were made in these by Mr. Cottingham, but they were, in 1840, cleared
of paint under his direction, and "beautifully grained as panel oak." Finally, in 1870-75,
they were done away with by Scott, whose new stalls were, together with other interior fittings
of the choir, paid for with a sum of £3,000 generously given by Dr. and Mrs. Griffith, to whom
the cathedral was already greatly indebted.

The old pews mentioned above rose in tiers, high and plain, on either side of the central alley,
and the wainscoting behind them shut off the transepts, turning them into separate chapels.
They and it were only removed in 1867.

#Decorative Mural Painting.#--On removing the panelling at the back of the old choir stalls,
Sir Gilbert Scott found that the whole length of the walls had once been painted. The old stalls
were fortunately so high that they had saved not only the lower border, which, with its ribbon
pattern and yellow six-petalled roses, is the same on each wall, but nearly a complete row
of the main design as well. Scott retained this, and repeated it over the rest of the space,
up to the top border, of which traces remained just under the first string-course. This upper
border varies slightly on the different sides. The shields in it, formerly blank, are now occupied
with the coats-of-arms of bishops of the see.

The pattern that covers the space between the borders is certainly heraldic. The lions in the
red quatrefoils, and the fleurs-de-lis in the alternate blue spaces, correspond in every possible
way--in form, colour, and ground--with those of the royal arms of England and of France. Dating,
as they almost certainly do, from the fourteenth century, they remind us of the attempts of
Edward III. and his brave son to unite both realms under his sway. The idea of the design may
have come from Canterbury, where an earlier border, of similar materials, alluded perhaps to
Edward II.'s marriage with Isabella of France. After making this suggestion, Canon Scott Robertson[14]
records a mention of the use, at much the same time, of a similarly constituted pattern on
some altar-cloths at Westminster Abbey.

  [14] "Archæologia Cantiana," x. 70.

The painting is continued on oak panelling across the organ screen. A piece of the original
panelling, with a fragment of an earlier rather tartan-like pattern also, is now hung, under
glass, on a pier opposite the chapter-house door.

#The Bishop's Throne#, on the south side, just to the west of the crossing, is of carved oak,
in the Gothic style, and has a rich canopy. It was designed by Scott, and was a present to
the cathedral from Lord Dudley, a brother-in-law of Bishop Claughton. Of two of its predecessors
some particulars can be given. In 1743 Bishop Wilcocks gave a throne, classical in style, with
a flat pedimental canopy supported by massive columns. The place of this was taken in 1840
by a new work of Cottingham's, which was still more quickly supplanted by the present throne.
Cottingham's did not, however, long remain unused; it was taken to St. Albans in 1877 for the
enthronement of Dr. Claughton as the first bishop of that new see.

On the north wall, directly opposite the bishop's throne, there still remains a portion, about
5 ft. 10 in. high and 2 ft. 2 in. wide, of an old fresco painting of that favourite mediæval
subject, #The Wheel of Fortune#. This was uncovered when the older pulpit was taken down to
make room for Mr. Cottingham's in 1840. At that time, we are told, the background had a diaper
of small flowers, and there was the outline of a shield above, in which, however, no charges
could be traced. Fortune, pictured as a queen, is robed in yellow, and regulates the movement
of her wheel, of the same colour, with her right hand. It is interesting to trace the changes
in the dress of the other figures. At her feet a man, plainly clad in a dark red gown, with
green stockings and black shoes, is trying to gain a position on the wheel. Above this poor
struggling one we see one who has risen halfway to the summit, and whose attire is correspondingly
richer. His gown is a little lighter in colour, and has a hood to match; his sleeves are yellow,
his stockings green, and his shoes ornamented. At the top is proudly and comfortably seated
the present favourite, richly arrayed in a full robe of red turned up with white, with furs
round his neck, a white belt and green hose. He looks towards the missing half of the picture,
where others were no doubt represented as falling or fallen from the high place that he now
holds, and his countenance seems to express mingled satisfaction and inquietude.

This fresco dates probably from as far back as the thirteenth century. Attempts have been made
to attach a more particular interpretation to it, to make it represent the rapid rise of Gundulf,
for instance; but it seems correct to give it a general signification, to look on it as typical
of the uncertainty and changeableness of earthly things.

#The Pulpit#, of plain wood, designed by Sir G. Scott, stands at the north-east corner of the
crossing. Its predecessor, by Cottingham, used to be directly in front of the bishop's throne,
and is now in the nave. #The Lectern#, of brass, and in the well-known eagle form, is a gift
from Bishop Claughton, and the stand to it was presented by Dean Scott.

#The Altar# stands, it will be noticed, some distance in front of the east end, and there is
a free passage all round. This position was proved to be archæologically correct when Sir G.
Scott lowered the floor of this part of the church. The reredos, one of the fittings provided
by Dr. and Mrs. Griffith, and designed by Scott, projects beyond the altar-table on each side
in a way that is unusual and not altogether pleasing. It is of Caen stone, and contains a representation
of the Last Supper in rather high relief, within a three-gabled canopy. The dark marble columns
supporting the central gable are beautifully veined.

The altar seems to have kept its old position until 1634, when Laud, greatly shocked, gave
orders to "place the communion-table at the end of the choir in a decent manner, and make a
fair rail to go across the aisle as in other cathedral churches." The dean and chapter protested
slightly, pointing out that, if placed quite at the end it would be almost out of hearing of
the congregation, and suggested as an alternative the erection of a screen behind it where
it then stood. In 1642 some soldiers of the Parliament visited the cathedral, moved the altar,
broke up the steps on which it was raised, and tore down its rails, leaving the wood as firing
for the poor. Repairs must have been needed here, therefore, when the Restoration came. Later,
by a chapter act of the 2nd June, 1707, the clerk was empowered to sign an agreement with a
Mr. Coppinger for a new altar-piece, which seems to have been still in existence in 1788, and
to be the one then described as of Norway oak, plain and neat, by the Rev. S. Denne. A resolution
had been passed a little before, on the 6th December, 1706, that "the piece of rich silk and
silver brocade given by the Bishop of Rochester should be put up." If applied to the new altar-piece
this did not last long, for in 1752 a large piece of rich velvet, in a frame elegantly carved
and gilt, was purchased with £50 given by Archbishop Herring, a former dean, to take the place
of the central panel of plain wainscot. This was itself removed in 1788, when a picture by
Sir Benjamin West, P.R.A., "The Angels appearing to the Shepherds," was inserted in its stead.
This picture was presented anonymously, but the name of the donor, J. Wilcocks, Esq., a son
of the bishop, transpired after his death. When Mr. Cottingham removed the old "Corinthian"
altar-piece, West's work was, in 1826, lent to St. Mary's church, Chatham, on the condition
that it should be returned when no longer needed. Archdeacon Laws was then rector. A later
rector, Canon Jelf, was, in 1886, able to announce to his vestry that the dean and chapter
waived all their rights, so the picture is still to be seen hanging over the vestry door. It
cannot be called a great work, and we can scarcely wonder that it was thought by many unworthy
of its high place in the cathedral.

The three great panels of #Mosaic# occupying the lower part of the east end, behind the altar,
are a memorial to Mrs. Scott, the wife of the late dean. When the whitewash was scraped off,
after the removal of the altar-piece in 1825, this wall was found to have been enriched with
elaborate decorative paintings "of birds and beasts, fleurs-de-lis, lilies, crescents, stars,
scroll foliage, fleury crosses, lace work borders, etc., arranged in most beautiful order and
finely contrasted in colours, which consist of the brightest crimsons, purples, azures, greens,
etc."

The fine #Piscina# in the easternmost bay on the north side, just behind the altar, deserves
notice. Its recess has a richly cusped arch, and in the wall below is a curious cupboard, intended
probably for the sacramental vessels.

#The Sedilia# stand on the other side, in the third bay from the east. The stalls are of stone,
three in number, and in date late Perpendicular. The arms on their canopies are those of the
see of Rochester, of the Priory of St. Andrew, Rochester, and of that of Christ Church, Canterbury.
Within the sedilia, at one time often mis-named "confessionals," painted figures of bishops
were formerly visible, even within the present century. The brass book-rest at the foot of
the polished marble steps in front was given in Dean Scott's memory by his sons and daughters.
Opposite, on the other side of the chancel, stands a richly carved episcopal chair upholstered
with blue velvet.

#The Communion Plate# is still kept in an old iron-bound chest in the "Treasury," over the
north choir transept aisle.

The chief service, consisting of two cups with covers, two flagons, an alms-dish and two patens
with covers, was made for James, Duke of Lenox and Richmond, in London in 1653-54. Sir Joseph
Williamson, a later resident at Cobham Hall bequeathed it to the cathedral by his will of 1701.
The whole service was gilt, and the bequest included also a pair of magnificent pricket candlesticks,
each nearly 20 inches high, with rich stems and massive scrolled bases. It is described by
Canon Scott Robertson in "Archæologia Cantiana," vol. xvi., and illustrated in vol. xvii.

Two other gilt cups and two patens, made at London in 1662-63, were given to the cathedral
by Dr. R. Cooke, who had, the inscriptions tell us, become a prebendary in 1660. Each cup has
engraved on it a copy of the common seal of the dean and chapter, with Dr. Cooke's arms above.
The button bases of the patens bear the donor's crest.

The oldest and most interesting pieces at Rochester are, however, two alms-basins or patens
(perhaps originally ciboria), made at London in 1530-31. The insides of the bowls, except the
nearly vertical rims, are embossed with a honeycomb pattern, and beneath each hexagon here,
there is a plain circle outside. The knops are ornamented with flowers and half-flowers, and
the stems beneath have each a frilled collar and a pattern in repoussé of overlapping scales
or leaves. The foot, under a cable moulding, is beaten into an egg-and-tongue pattern. One
has on its rim, in Lombardic capitals, the inscription, Benedicamus Patrem et Filium cum Sancto
Spiritu, and the other, the same except for the curious contraction, Sper., for the last word.
There is also a cover of silver gilt, which was made at London in 1532-33. Its button handle
has four supports, moulded like cords, and it is itself decorated in repoussé.

One solitary survivor of the old monastic plate remains, and some mention of it seems appropriate
here. We allude to the famous #Rochester mazer#, made in 1532, and given to the refectory per
fratrem Robertum Pecham. This is now in the possession of Sir A. W. Franks, by whom it was
acquired at the sale of the Fontaine collection at Narford Hall. It is illustrated in "Archæologia,"
xxiii., 393, and described by Mr. St. John Hope in the same publication, vol. 1., 168.

#Monuments, etc.#--When the great bishop, Walter de Merton, died, in 1772, a sumptuous monument
was erected over his remains at the end of the north choir transept. His executors' accounts
give us particulars as to the cost. The chief feature was the enamel work by Jean de Limoges,
who was paid £40 5s. 6d. for executing it, bringing it over and setting it up. The balance
between this sum and the total amount of £67 14s. 6d. was paid for the rich, vaulted canopy
and other masonry, the two stained glass windows and the iron railing.

This tomb suffered much at the time of the Reformation, and the Merton College authorities
undertook its repair, during Sir Henry Savile's wardenship, in 1598. It was then opened, and
the body of the bishop, who had been buried in his robes, with his pastoral staff and chalice,
disclosed. The staff on being touched fell to pieces but the chalice was removed to the college
to be treasured there. The original enamelled work seems to have been injured beyond repair,
so was replaced by the alabaster effigy now in the next bay. This effigy is remarkable for
the anachronisms it shows. The bishop wears the rochet, the episcopal dress of the Reformed
church instead of his proper robes, and the plain crook beside him bears no resemblance to
the rich crosiers of the thirteenth century. The ruff round his neck and his broad-toed shoes
are also plainly out-of-date. The mantle of estate refers of course to his rank as Chancellor,
as did also the bag or purse that used to hang on the wall above. The inscriptions were on
the front of the tomb, whence came also the death's head panels to be seen with the effigy now.

Fresh injuries, suffered during the Civil War period, were made good by the college in 1662,
and a tablet recording this, and balanced by the bishop's arms, was placed at the back of the
tomb where the windows had been blocked up. There were fresh renovations in 1701, and in 1770,
when all the whitewash was cleaned off. The College also made an annual payment for care of
the tomb.

The monument received its present form in 1849, when the Elizabethan effigy and details, and
the old railing, were removed to the next bay, where they are still to be seen. The skeleton
was then once more uncovered showing the bishop to have been a fine tall man, and a trace of
the former opening of the tomb was found in a misplacement of the bones of the right arm, which
had probably been disturbed when the chalice was removed. Fragments of wood and cloth, presumably
remains of his staff and robes, were still to be seen. The two windows under the canopy were
reopened and filled with stained glass, and on the tomb was placed a stone slab, "engraved
according to the style of the thirteenth century," with an ornamented cross having foliations
on each side. "A new ornamental railing," coloured and gilt, and of a tawdry character was
placed in front of all. The canopy, with its crockets and pinnacles, and the quatrefoils of
carved foliage in its gables are worthy of attention.

The tomb in the easternmost bay of the transept end is reputed to be that of St. William of
Perth, the great Rochester saint. This transept formed his chapel, and his shrine is believed
to have stood on a slab marked with six crosses, that lay in the centre of the floor until
the present elaborate pavement was put down. Lambarde gives the following account of the saint,
saying that he derives it from the "Nova Legenda" itself. "He was by birth, a Scot, of Perthe
(now commonly called Saint Johns Town), by trade of life a Baker of bread and thereby got his
living: in charity so aboundant, that he gave to the poore the tenth loafe of his workmanship:
in zeale so fervent, that in vow he promised, and in deede attempted, to visit the holy land
(as they called it) and the places where Christ was conversant on earth: in which journey,
as he passed through Kent, hee made Rochester his way: where after that he had rested two or
three daies he departed toward Canterbury. But ere he had gone farre from the Citie, his servant
that waited on him, led him (of purpose) out of the high way, and spoiled him both of his money
and life. This done, the servant escaped, and the Maister (bicause he died in so holy a purpose
of minde) was by the Monkes conveied to Saint Andrewes, (and) laide in the quire." In Baring-Gould's
"Lives of the Saints" (under May 23rd) we read that the murderer was a foundling, who had been
brought up out of charity by him whom he slew. The pilgrim's death occurred in 1201, and soon
"he moalded miracles plentifully" at his tomb, so plentifully that with the offerings consequently
there made, the choir of the cathedral was completed, ready for the solemn entry in 1227. His
fame continued to grow so much, that in 1266 Bishop Lawrence de St. Martin went to Rome and
procured his canonization, and he did not pass out of repute until Protestant times. The high
coffin tomb, of dark marble, has on its lid a foliated cross in relief, and on its front four
circular medallions with crosses of four sculptured leaves. The arch of the recess, springing
from corbels of elaborately carved foliage, retains traces of colouring, and the wall within
is painted with green foliated scroll-work on a dark red ground.

Under the northern arch on the east side of the transept is the curious sarcophagus tomb of
Bishop Lowe, who died in 1467. This stood, until the time when the transept was thrown open,
against the centre of the wainscot that separated the chapel of St. William from the choir.
The arms on the shield at the end of the front are those of the bishop, and they occur again,
borne by an angel carved in relief, on the right end, impaling there the coat of the see on
the sinister side.

We pass now to the railed-off transept aisle, known as St. John the Baptist's Chapel, or as
the Warner Chapel from the three seventeenth century monuments that it contains. These are
all in the "Palladian" style in vogue at that time, and constructed chiefly of touch (black
marble) and white marble. They are in memory of Bishop John Warner (d. 1666), of his nephew
Archdeacon John Lee Warner (d. 1679), and of the latter's eldest son, Lee Warner, Esq. (d.
1698). The bishop's monument is signed by the sculptor, Jos. Marshall, of London.

In the same chapel, in a recess beside Bishop Warner's monument, is an old and weather-worn
statue traditionally said to represent the great architect-bishop Gundulf. This was brought
hither by Mr. Pearson, when he rebuilt the north-west tower, in the lower arcade of which it
had been carefully replaced in the changes of about 1770. The mitre is almost lost, the face
has suffered greatly, and the hands, feet and parts of the crosier are quite gone. The chasuble
hangs in curious, close, U-like folds and the crosier staff passes diagonally across the body.
From an etching published in the "Journal of the British Archæological Association," in 1853,
when the sculpture was, of course, less worn than now, there seems to be under the chasuble
a dalmatic, and then under the dalmatic an alb over which the ends of the stole appear.

Under the arch between the aisle and the choir, is the most remarkable of all the monuments
in the church, the tomb of Bishop John de Sheppey. Its very existence had long been forgotten,
when Mr. Cottingham, in 1825, removed the chalk and masonry, with which it had for many years
been covered and concealed. Whether this covering was to save it from the Roundhead soldiery
or from earlier iconoclastic reformers is not known. Alluding to the bishop, Bishop Weever
wrote, in 1631, "his portraiture is in the wall over his place of buriall." The use of the apparatus
is only truly effective in cases where it is necessary to have, before everything else, an energetic
and exceedingly constant current.--La Nature.

* * * * *

SIEMENS' TELEMETER

The accompanying cut illustrates a telemeter which was exhibited at the Paris Exhibition of Electricity,
and which is particularly interesting from the fact that it is the first apparatus of this kind.
It will be remembered that the object of a telemeter is to make known at any moment whatever the distance
of a movable object, and that, too, by a direct reading and without any calculation. In Mr. Siemens'
apparatus the problem is solved in the following manner:

The movable object (very often a vessel) is sighted from two different stations--two points of
the coast, for example--by two different observers. The sighting is done with two telescopes,
A1 and A2, which the observers revolve around a vertical axis by
means of two winches, K1 and K2, that gear with two trains of clockwork.

There is thus constantly formed a large triangle, having for its apices the movable point sighted
and the vertical axes, A1 and A2, of the two telescopes. On another hand, at a point situated
between the two telescopes, there is a table, T T, that carries two alidades, a1v1, and a2v2,
movable around their vertical axes, a1 and a2. The line, a1 a2, that joins these axes is parallel with
that which joins the axes of the two telescopes; and the alidades are connected electrically with
the telescopes by a system such that each alidade always moves parallel with the telescope that
corresponds to it. It follows from this that the small triangle that has for apices, a1 a2, and the
crossing point of the two alidades will always be like the large triangle formed by the line
that joins the telescopes and the two lines of vision. If, then, we know the ratio of a1, a2 to
A1 A2, it will suffice to measure on one of the alidades the distance
from its axis to the point of crossing in order to know the distance
from the movable object to the axis of the corresponding telescope.
If the table, T T, be covered with a chart giving the space over which
the ship is moving, so that a1 and a2 shall coincide with the points
which A1 and A2 represent, the crossing of the threads of the alidades
will permit of following on the chart all the ship's movements. Matters are still worse when we see Mr. Harris complaining (in a letter now at the
British Museum) that the renovation according to his drawing was done "by an unskilful hand,
consequently the remains of the beautiful colouring were destroyed, which was much regretted
by the dean, Dr. Stevens, at the time." The sculpture seems fortunately not to have been tampered
with; some fragments luckily discovered were fitted in their places, but no further restoration
was attempted. These fragments were the top of the mitre, most of the fingers, the feet, and
the head of one of the little dogs lying thereby.

The bishop's face, naturally coloured like the rest of the effigy, is rather mutilated, but
seems to have been close shaven. Under his outermost robe, the chasuble, comes the dalmatic,
through the side openings of which the rich green of the tunic appears. The colour of the latter
robe used, however, to be scarcely visible. The ends of the stole do not appear, but, under
all, the alb hangs down to the feet. The apparel of the alb, the amice round his neck, and
the maniple of his left arm are shown as richly embroidered with gold. The bishop wears jewelled
gloves, and on the fourth finger of his left hand the episcopal ring, of gold set with a ruby.
His head, with the precious mitre, rests on two cushions, and finally against his left shoulder
lies the splendid crosier, of which, unfortunately, the crook is gone.

On the side towards the choir, of the slab on which he rests, we read "HIC IACET DNS IOHANS
DE SCHEPEIE EPUS HUIUS ECCLIE." The same words appear on the other side, except that ISTIUS
takes the place of HUIUS, a change which implies some independence in the chapel.

The railing before the tomb perhaps belonged to it originally. Along the upper band should
be noticed the curious pounced pattern, and its three massive lily spikes cannot but attract
attention. It was the occurrence of the letters I S, the bishop's initials, just under the
central spike, that led to the railing being brought hither from another part of the church.

A rare set of six lithographs, published by Mr. Cottingham, to which the text seems never to
have been printed, shows us the monument as it was when found. Its present appearance can be
judged, without a visit to Rochester, from the cast at the Crystal Palace, a fine set of drawings
by Mr. Lambert at the South Kensington Museum, or the engravings published in an article by
Mr. Kempe in the "Archæologia," vol. xxv. The author of this paper, which was read to the Society
of Antiquaries only seven years after the restoration, seems to have been unaware of any thing
of this sort having been attempted.

In the rubbish over the effigy some remarkable fragments of polychrome sculpture were found.
These are still preserved in the crypt.

Passing along the north side of the church, we see in the third bay from the east end, the
curious shrine-like monument of dark marble, ascribed to Bishop Gilbert de Glanvill, who died
in 1214. A very similar monument at Canterbury was once the subject of much discussion, but
has lately been opened and proved to be the tomb of the renowned Archbishop Hubert Walter.
He and Gilbert were contemporaries and friends, so the ascription of the Rochester example
to the latter is very probably correct.

In the next bay is a coffin-shaped tomb of dark marble, with the recumbent effigy of a bishop,
whose features are much mutilated, and whose hands and feet are gone. This tomb is assigned,
it seems rightly, to Bishop Lawrence de St. Martin (d. 1274). The canopy over the head of the
effigy is a fine and rich example of architectural work of the Early Decorated style.

Behind the altar is a great slab, which once bore the effigies, in brass, of a lady and of
a knight in armour. When the slab had to be removed, during the erection of the new reredos,
a leaden coffin was found, and a female body closely wrapped in lead. The knight here buried
was Sir William Arundel, K.G., governor of the city and castle of Rochester, whose will, dated
1st August, 1400, gave directions for his "body to be buried in the Priory at Rochester, at
the back of the high altar." His lady, afterwards, in her will of the 6th September, 1401,
arranged for her dead body to be laid "in the Priory of St. Andrews in Rochester, under the
tomb where my husband and me are pictured." Sir Richard Arundel, a brother of Sir William,
and the next constable of the castle, was possibly also buried in this church when he died
in 1412. In his will of the 8th July, 1417, he had expressed the wish that his grave should
be made in the Lady Chapel.

On the south side of the chancel, in the easternmost bay, is a plain, dark-coloured marble
coffin, without any inscription or ornament. This is ascribed to Bishop Gundulf, who died in
1107, but as it is rectangular and not of the old coffin form, Mr. Bloxam thinks that it cannot
be placed earlier than the fifteenth century. Gundulf's remains may, however, have been moved
when the great eastward extension was made, and have been subsequently placed here. This would
justify the tradition that the monument has contained his bones.

In the next bay to the west we have a dark marble monument, very like that of Bishop Lawrence
de St. Martin, and possibly even by the same artist. Its canopy is, however, simpler. This
tomb seems to be correctly attributed to Bishop Inglethorp, who died in 1291.

Passing the sedilia we come to a peculiar, probably thirteenth century, coffin, which still
contained a skeleton when it was found in the crypt under the north choir transept during the
clearance of some rubbish in 1833. The lid rises in dos d'âne form, and along the ridge run
two leafed rods, in relief, which bend outwards in scrolls, at the centre, just before they
meet (see p. 105).

We now turn, finally, to notice another interesting stone coffin in the middle of the south
choir transept end. This, also probably of the thirteenth century, has on its lid a cross in
relief, the stem of which, with three pairs of curious drooping leaves, rises from a graduated
base. This is probably one of two coffins, to which the Rev. S. Denne alludes as having existed
in this part of the church. This, or the other, had been, he says, broken open by the Parliamentarians,
and a chalice and crucifix removed therefrom.

#Stained Glass in the Choir.#--The six windows of the east end were given, in 1873, by ladies
and gentlemen of the neighbourhood. They celebrate the successive dedications of the church
to St. Andrew, and to Christ and the Blessed Virgin Mary. The middle window of the upper range
contains a representation of Our Lord in Glory, that of the lower tier the scene of his Ascension.
On the right hand is a figure of the Blessed Virgin above a picture of the Nativity, while
on the other side a figure of St. Andrew, and the Call of that Apostle and St. Peter, are to
be seen.

The four upper windows on the south side of the presbytery contain single figures of the four
Evangelists, and commemorate, in order, Dean Stevens, T. H. Day, Esq., Mrs. Day and Mrs. Thorold.
In the corresponding windows on the other side are pictured four writers of Epistles, St. Paul,
St. James, St. Jude, and St. Peter.

It has been arranged that the four lower, three-lighted windows on the south side shall contain
the twelve Apostles, one figure in each light. In the second from the east end we see (in memory
of Alfred Smith, Esq.) St. John, St. Bartholomew, and St. Philip; and in the fourth (which
commemorates Miss Nicholson), St. Jude, St. Simon, and St. Matthias appear. The others are
still unfilled. The similar windows opposite illustrate scriptural allusions to Christ as the
Good Shepherd. They are in memory of Dr. T. Robinson, Mrs. Griffith, General Travers, R.M.,
and Dr., once Canon Griffith; and show the Shepherd tending his sheep (St. John, x. 14-16);
the Shepherd smitten and the sheep scattered (Zech., xiii. 7, St. Matt., xxvi. 31); the Crucifixion,
where the Shepherd gives his life for the sheep (St. John, x. ii); and lastly, the Son of Man
dividing the good from the evil, as a Shepherd divides the sheep from the goats (St. Matt.,
xxv. 31-46).

In St. John the Baptist's Chapel there is a single stained window, with our Lord's Ascension,
in memory of Lieut. F. N. Hassard, R.E. Passing to the north transept we find the outer upper
windows filled only with plain glass, while the middle one has a figure of St. Gregory, inserted
in memory of Captain W. Walton Robinson, R.E., who died at Aden in 1887. The windows of the
lower range contain figures of St. Gundulf, St. Paulinus, and Walter de Merton, and commemorate
respectively Canon S. Dewe (d. 1885), Dr. G. Murray, Bishop of Sodor and Man and afterwards
of Rochester (d. 1860), and Mrs. Maxwell Hyslop (d. 1888). Each of these four windows of the
transept end contains a small scene beneath the single figure. The tiny light over Walter de
Merton's Elizabethan effigy was glazed, after the recovery of Mr. Thomas Aveling from a serious
illness, by his family, and illustrates the miracle of the healing of the nobleman's son.

All the glass described above is the work of Messrs. Clayton and Bell. The two plainer windows
to the Merton tomb are by J. Miller.

Of the two windows in the south choir transept aisle, the first, by Gibbs, and given by the
officers of the Royal Engineers in memory of their comrade, General Ballard, represents the
Raising of Lazarus. The other, with Our Lord's Resurrection was given by the Rev. T. T. Griffith,
precentor, in memory of Thos. Griffith, Esq., and was executed by Hardman.

The windows of the south choir transept are also by Clayton and Bell. Those of the upper tier
commemorate Major S. Anderson, C.M.G., Capt. W. J. Gill, R.E., and Capt. J. Dundas, V.C., and
their respective subjects are: Moses during the fight against Amalek (Exod., xvii. 11, 12),
Joshua and the Captain of the Lord's Host (Josh., v. 13-15), and David advancing to do battle
with Goliath (I. Sam., xvii. 48-49). Those of the lower range,--in memory of Major R. Hume,
C.B., Capt. R. Nichols Buckle, R.E., and Capt. C. W. Innes, represent the centurion's appeal
to Christ for his servant's healing (St. Luke, vii. 9), the Crucifixion, with the centurion
at the foot of the Cross (St. Mark, xv. 39), and the appearance of the angel to another centurion,
Cornelius, with the legend: "What is it, Lord (Acts, x. 4)."

The famous #Chapter House Doorway#, one of the finest pieces of English Decorated in existence,
dates from the middle of the fourteenth century, probably from the episcopate of Hamo de Hythe.

The full-length figures, one on each side of the door, symbolizing the Church and the Synagogue,
were both headless when Mr. Cottingham restored the doorway, between 1825 and 1830. Much fault
has been found with him for turning the first, which is thought to have been like the other
a female figure, into a mitred, bearded bishop holding a cross in his right hand and the model
of a church in his left. The blindfolded "Synagogue," by her broken staff, and the tables of
the law held reversed in her right hand, typifies the overthrow of the Mosaic dispensation.
Above are figures, two on each side, seated at book desks under canopies. These are supposed
to be the four great Doctors of the Church: Saints Augustine, Gregory, Jerome, and Ambrose.
Quite at the head of the arch, under a lofty pyramidal canopy, we see a tiny nude figure which
represents probably a pure soul just released from Purgatory. If this is so, it would account
for the flames from which the angels, on each side, bearing scrolls, seem to be rising. It
has been suggested likewise that the distorted heads, which alternate with squares of foliage
in the wider inside moulding of the doorway typify the sufferings of the soul in its passage.
The outside moulding is also interesting, being a wide hollow in the bottom of which circular
holes are cut at intervals. Through these can be seen the broad stem from which spring the
leaves that ornament the intervening spaces. The arch head is ogee-shaped outside, with large
external, and smaller, but not less rich, internal crockets. The square back to it, and the
spaces beneath the corbels, on which the Church and Synagogue figures stand, are filled with
noteworthy diapers. The first is divided diagonally into sunken squares, each containing a
flower; and the others have lion masks in quatrefoils, with five petalled roses in the alternate
spaces.

The present door dates from Cottingham's time. He had found the archway partially blocked,
so that an ordinary square-headed door might be inserted, a most barbarous arrangement. In
the passage within is a portrait of Bishop Sprat, and in the #Chapter Room# itself one of King
James I. and a view in St. Patrick's Cathedral, Dublin.

The #Cathedral Library#, also contained in the Chapter Room, is a small, rather general collection,
which, though increased from time to time by the dean and chapter, had no regular provision
made for its increase until "an excellent regulation was made (some years before 1772) ...
that every new dean and prebendary should give a certain sum of money, or books to that value,
in lieu of those entertainments that were formerly made on their admission." This arrangement
dates from the deanship of Dean Prat, who is recorded to have given a large book-case, which
had once belonged to H.R.H. the Duke of York.

In the library there are several valuable bibles, including a copy of the famous first polyglot,
known as the Complutensian, which was printed in six volumes at Alcala in Spain between 1502
and 1517, but was not published until 1522, owing probably to the death of its great promoter,
Cardinal Ximenes. The Greek New Testament seems to have been first printed herein, though the
edition of Erasmus (1516) forestalled it in publication. Brian Walton's Polyglot, published,
also in six volumes, at London in 1657, is likewise on the shelves. Of rare English bibles
the cathedral possesses a copy of Miles Coverdale's first complete edition in English (of 1535),
of the rare and valuable Great Bible (Cranmer's) printed under Cromwell's patronage and published
in 1539, and one of the first edition of Parker's or the Bishop's Bible, which dates from 1565.
There is no early Book of Common Prayer, but a Missal (Salisbury use) of 1534 has been noticed.

To turn now to manuscripts, disregarding the other classes of printed books, the cathedral
possesses a great treasure in the #Textus Roffensis#, which is said to be the work of Bishop
Ernulf and dates from early in the twelfth century. It contains old English codes of law, beginning
with Ethelbert's, much ecclesiastical and historical information, records of privileges of
the cathedral, and some interesting forms of excommunication, oaths, etc. In 1633 the dean
(Dr. Balcanqual) and chapter had to obtain a bill in chancery to enforce its restitution by
a Dr. Leonard who had got it into his possession. During the Civil Wars it was in the charge
of Sir Roger Twysden and was used by Dugdale for his great work. The book was at London in
1712 for Dr. Harriss, a prebendary of the cathedral, to use for his "History of Kent" (published
in 1719). It was taken thither and back by water, and on the return journey fell into the Thames. Its
dimensions proved too small for the extensive trade which it had to support, and the depth
of water was increased to 7 feet, and the extreme breadth of the canal to 60 feet. There are
84 locks on the main line. These locks, originally 90 feet in length and 15 in breadth, and with
an average lift of 8 feet 2 inches, have since been much enlarged.

The total rise and fall is 692 feet. The towpath is elevated 4 feet above the level of the water,
and is 10 feet in breadth. At Lockport the canal descends 60 feet by means of 5 locks excavated
in solid rock, and afterward proceeds on a uniform level for a distance of 63 miles to the Genesee River,
over which it is carried on an aqueduct having 9 arches of 50 feet span each. Eight and a half
miles from this point it passes over the Cayuga marsh, on an embankment
2 miles in length, and in some places 70 feet in height.

At Syracuse, the "long level" commences, which extends for a distance of 691/2 miles to Frankfort,
without an intervening lock. After leaving Frankfort, the canal crosses the river Mohawk, first
by an aqueduct 748 feet in length, supported on 16 piers, elevated 25 feet above the surface
of the river, and afterward by another aqueduct 1,188 feet in length, and emerges into the
Hudson at Albany.

This great work was finished in 1825, and its completion was the occasion of great public rejoicing.
The same year that the Erie Canal was begun, ground was broken for a canal from Lake Champlain to
the Hudson, sixty-three miles in length. This work was completed in 1823.

The construction of these two water ways was attended with the most interesting consequences. Even
before they were completed their value had become clearly apparent. Boats were placed upon
the Erie Canal as fast as the different levels were ready for use, and set to work in active
transportation. They were small affairs compared with those of the present day, being about
50 or 60 tons burden, the modern canal boat being 180 or 200 tons.

Small as they were, they reduced the cost of transportation immediately to one-tenth what it
had been before. A ton of freight by land from Buffalo to Albany cost at that time $100. When the
canal was open its entire length, the cost of freight fell from fifteen to twenty-five dollars
a ton, according to the class of article carried; and the time of transit from 20 to 8 days,
Wheat at that time was worth only $33 a ton in western New York, and it did not pay to send it
by land to New York. When sent to market at all, it was floated down the Susquehanna to Baltimore,
as being the cheapest and best market. The canal changed that. It now became possible to send
to market a wide variety of agricultural produce--fruit, grain, vegetables, etc.--which, before
the canal was built, either had no value at all, or which could be disposed of to no good advantage.
It is claimed by the original promoters of the Erie Canal, who lived to see its beneficial effects
experienced by the people of the country, that their work, costing
less than $8.000,000 and paying its whole cost of construction in
a very few years, added $100,000,000 to the value of the farms of
New York by opening up good and ready markets for their products.

The canal had another result. It made New York city the commercial metropolis of the country.
An old letter, written by a resident of Newport, R. I., in that age, has lately been discovered,
which speaks of New York city, and says: "If we do not look out, New York will get ahead of
us." Newport was then one of the principal seaports of the country;
it had once been the first.

New York city certainly did "get ahead of us" after the Erie Canal was built. It got ahead
of every other commercial city on the coast. Freight, which had previously gone overland from
Ohio and the West to Pittsburg, and thence to Philadelphia, costing $120 a ton between the
two cities named, now went to New York by way of the Hudson River and the Erie Canal and the
lakes. Manufactures and groceries returned to the West by the same route, and New York became
a flourishing and growing emporium immediately. The Erie Canal was enlarged in 1835, so as
to permit the passage of boats of 100 tons burden, and the result was a still further reduction
of the cost of freighting, expansion of traffic, and an increase
of the general benefits conferred by the canal.

The Champlain Canal had an effect upon the farms and towns lying along Lake Champlain, in Vermont
and New York, kindred in character to that above described in respect to the Erie Canal.
 Just inside the
doorway, with its peculiar flatly-pointed head under a pointed arch, there is, to the right,
a small square cell which may have been used as a place of confinement.

The crypt is one of the finest in England, and the later, main portion of it is the last great
work of the kind carried out in this country. The two western severies, consisting of the old
Norman work, are now shut off to contain the organ bellows and their machinery, and the whole
southernmost aisle has been partitioned off into a series of new vestries, erected with the
proceeds of Dean Hole's recent lecturing tour in America. The whole width is divided into seven
aisles, three under the choir proper and two under each transept. Each seems to have had an
altar at its east end; several piscinas still remain. The main walls above are carried by heavy
masses of masonry, which rather break the vistas, while other masses help the usual columns
to bear the steps on which the altar stands.

In the early Norman work extending for two bays from the west we see circular shafts, with
rough, convex, cushion capitals, and the lower corners chamfered. The plain rubble cross-vaults
here have no ribs but the groins are pinched down to make them more prominent. The rest of
the crypt is Early English, with circular and octagonal columns both occurring and having quadripartite
vaulting. The clever way in which the architects overcame the difficulty caused by differences
of span is worthy of attention. On the vaults, traces of painting, of floral diapers, etc.,
can still be seen, and in "The New British Traveller" (1819) we have a description of a subject
medallion then to be seen beneath St. William's Chapel. "In a circle is a representation of
a vessel sailing, with a large fish in the water in front, and on one side the upper part of
a monk, with his hands uplifted as in prayer," apparently an illustration of the story of Jonah.

In the crypt are preserved many interesting fragments, including the pieces of polychrome sculpture
found with Bishop John de Sheppey's monument. The most important is a statue of Moses, who
bears his name on the tablet of stone that he holds.

CHAPTER IV.

THE DIOCESE AND BISHOPS.

According to a curious legend,[15] widely circulated in the Middle Ages, the men of Rochester
did not accord a patient hearing to St. Augustine when he first came thither to preach the
Gospel. They, instead, used him rudely, and in mockery threw at him and hung on his dress a
lot of fish-tails. In anger the saint prayed to God to avenge him on his persecutors and "the
Lord smote them in posteriora to their everlasting ignominy, so that not only on their own
but on their successors' persons similar tails grew ever after." A way of escape was, however,
according to the fourteenth century prose version of the "Brut," soon provided, for "whenne
the kyng herde and wiste of this vengeance that was falle thurghe saynt Austines powere he
lette make one howse in honour of God ... at the brugges end," children born in which would
not be afflicted with the dreaded appendage. Other versions of the story give Dorchester as
the place where the saint was thus ill-used and his assailants were thus punished, but both
Kent and Dorset have been zealous to repudiate any concern with it, and Lambarde in his "Perambulation"
has written an indignant diatribe in defence of the former county.

  [15] This account of it is chiefly taken from a paper by G. Neilson,
  first published in "Transactions of the Glasgow Archæological Society,"
  1896.

Later, in the legends concerning St. Thomas à Becket, another form of the same fable appears.
The men of Strood are said to have docked the tail of his horse and to have been punished in
the same way as St. Augustine's persecutors. In the story Rochester sometimes appears instead
of Strood, and this is our excuse for alluding to the variation here. It seems to be due to
a confusion of the old story with a new fact, as we have a contemporary statement that St.
Thomas, on the Christmas Day before his death, excommunicated a certain Robert de Broc, because
the latter had, to insult and shame him, cut off the tail of a mare in his service.

In the Middle Ages the matter was of national concern, for the disgrace said to have befallen
the inhabitants of one or other of the small towns mentioned became "a scandal to their unoffending
country." When the story spread, as it did, nearly all over Europe, foreigners did not particularize,
but offensively alluded to all Englishmen as caudati, or tailed. Such allusions often occur
in narratives of the Crusades, and the French and Scotch were especially keen to hurl the epithet
at their hereditary foes. Even in the sixteenth century John Bale says, "that an Englyshman
now can not travayle in an other land by waye of merchandyce or any other honest occupyenge,
but yt ys most contumelyouslye throwne in his tethe that all Englishmen have tayles." The name
"Kentish Longtails" seems to have been early current, and in Drayton's "Polyolbion" we find
"Longtails and Liberty" given almost as a motto for the county.

We are not told whether it was due to this miracle of the "tails," but it is certain that the
conversion of the townspeople of Rochester must have been rapid, for we know that a see was
founded here as early as 604. The diocese placed under its bishop's care was a small one, including
no more than the western part of the ancient kingdom of Kent, the dividing line being roughly
the course of the Medway, or, more precisely, that of its tributary, the Teise. The whole diocese
formed only a single archdeaconry, which was divided into four deaneries, and of this small
number one was subject, as a peculiar, to the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
"who holdeth his prerogative wheresoever his lands do lye."

Not only "hath the See at Rochester well holden her owne: for during the whole succession of
... Bishops, which in right line have followed Justus, she hath continually mainteined her
Chaire at this one place, whereas in most partes of the Realme besides, the Sees of the Bishops
have suffred sundry translations," but it was long also before the ancient limits of the diocese
were changed. In 1845 it was enlarged so as to include Essex and Hertfordshire, and was then
divided into the four archdeaconries of Rochester, Colchester, Essex and St. Alban's. The old
palace at Bromley, which had been since Cardinal Fisher's time the chief home of the bishops,
was at the same time quitted for Danbury in Essex. In 1863 the archdeaconries of Rochester
and St. Albans were joined into one, and in 1867 the total number of archdeaconries was reduced
to two: Rochester and St. Albans forming one, and Essex the other. The extent and composition
of the diocese was again entirely changed in 1877, when the new diocese of St. Albans was formed.
Since that time the diocese of Rochester has included West Kent and part of Surrey, and has
comprised three archdeaconries: Rochester, Kingston, and Southwark. In 1877 Danbury Palace
had to be given up and Selsdon in Surrey became for a time the episcopal home. Quite recently
a new palace has been completed at Kennington, in the most populous and needy part of the diocese.

In mediæval times the bishops of Rochester had a town house at Southwark. This was afterwards
changed for the one at Lambeth Marsh, where the attempt to poison Bishop Fisher occurred. They
had also other country homes at Halling and Trottescliffe. Our space will not, however, allow
us to deal at length with these palaces outside the cathedral precincts.

The poverty of the Church at the time of the Conquest has been already mentioned, and even
later we find that the episcopal revenue continued to be very small. One diocese only, we are
told, paid a lower "Rome-scot," and only two English bishoprics appear as inferior in value
in the King's books. Some old sources of episcopal and monastic income seem to us curious.
The bulk was, of course, derived from manors or estates, but we find also that the bishop was
entitled to a share of the whales killed on the shores of his diocese and that the monks of
the priory of St. Andrew owned oyster fisheries. Out of the estates assigned to them the monks
had to make an annual contribution, in kind, called the Xenium, to the bishop's income, and
this, due on St. Andrew's Day, was on several occasions a subject of dispute. In Henry VIII.'s
time we find the bishopric valued at £358 4s. 9½d., and later, in 1595, it is stated that the
clear annual profits did not exceed £220. To supplement this paltry revenue the bishops often
held other appointments in commendam. During the latter part of the seventeenth century and
the greater part of the eighteenth, the deanery of Westminster was, in this way, almost continuously
attached to the bishopric of Rochester. Such pluralities are, of course, no longer allowed,
the estates of this, as of other sees, being administered by the Ecclesiastical Commissioners,
through whom the bishop receives the regular and more adequate income that he now enjoys. Poor
though the see has been, we find many distinguished men among those who have held it. A great
number of such passed on soon to richer bishoprics, and some even attained the archiepiscopal
dignity, but one or two of the greatest consistently refused to be thus advanced.

For the sake of convenient reference, we now give a list of the bishops, in chronological order.

#St. Justus#, sent to reinforce the English mission in 601, became the first bishop in 604;
fled to Gaul in 617, on the great relapse into idolatry after Ethelbert's death; summoned back
after a year by the new king Eadbald; succeeded Mellitus as Archbishop of Canterbury in 624;
died in 627.

#Romanus#, consecrated in 624; drowned while on a mission to Rome (absorptus fluctibus Italici
Maris) probably in 627, but certainly before November, 630.

#St. Paulinus# came over with Justus; ordained Bishop of York, in 625, to accompany Ethelburga,
princess of Kent, when she went to marry Edwin of Northumbria; baptised Edwin himself in April,
627, and earned well his title of the Apostle of Northumbria; preached also, we are told, in
Lancashire, in Cumbria, on the Trent, and at Lincoln; fled with the widowed queen on Edwin's
overthrow in 633, as he owed attendance to her; gladly received in Kent and persuaded to accept
the see of Rochester, where, probably, he received the pallium sent him in 634; died in 644;
buried in the secretarium of the church, whence his remains were afterwards transferred to
the Norman cathedral.

#St. Ythamar#, the first bishop who was an Englishman by birth; died in 655; like Paulinus,
buried in the church, and much revered, though the Normans seem to have been less eager to
translate his remains.

#Damian# succeeded in 656, died in 664.

#Putta# succeeded five years later in 669; translated to Hereford in 676; died in 688.

#Cuichelm# resigned the see, through poverty, after only two years.

#Gebmund#, appointed in 678, died in 693.

#Tobias#, appointed in 693; famous for his great learning, which included a knowledge of both
Greek and Latin; died in 726; buried in the Porticus of St. Paul, which he had himself built
on to the cathedral.

Then came #Alduulf#, 726--d. 739 or 741; #Duina#, 741-747; #Earduulf#, 747 (or 757)-765; #Diora#,
778--d. 781; #Wermund#, 788-802; #Beornmod#, 803 (or 811)-814; #Tathnoth#, 841 (or 844)-  
; #Godwin I.#; #Cutherwulf#, 868-   ; #Swithulf#, 880-   ; #Ruhric#; #Cheolmund#; #Chinefurth#;
#Burrhic#; #Alfstan# (#Athelstan#), 955-   ; #Godwin II.# (#Godric#) and #Godwin III.#, c.
995--c. 1012. This is as complete a list as can be given until we come to Bishop Siward.

#Siward# was appointed in 1058; under him the establishment reached the greatest extreme of
poverty, but, though it is suspected that the services of the church were also neglected, he
was allowed to retain the see after the Conquest until his death in 1075.

#Ernost#, a monk, appointed by Lanfranc in 1076, died in the same year.

#Gundulf#, consecrated in 1077; came over with Lanfranc; also a great friend of Anselm; a skilful
architect, rebuilt much of the cathedral, built the White Tower in London, St. Leonard's Tower
and the nunnery at Malling, part of Dartford Church, and a tower at Rochester earlier than
the present keep; substituted Benedictines for the old secular establishment of the cathedral;
famous for piety and holiness, and in favour with the Conqueror and the two sons who succeeded
him; died in 1108, aged 84; buried by Anselm in the cathedral, where a plain tomb is still
called by his name.

#Ralph d'Escures#, an abbot of Sées who had been forced to flee by Robert of Bellême; a friend
of Gundulf; some architectural work at Rochester carried out under his sway; Archbishop of
Canterbury in 1114; died in 1122.

#Ernulf# came next in 1115; had been successively Prior of Canterbury and Abbot of Peterborough;
built at both those places as well as at Rochester; famous for saintliness, and a great authority
on canon law; perhaps best known generally by Sterne's comments in "Tristram Shandy" on the
terrible excommunication curse contained in his "Textus Roffensis"; died in 1124.

#John#, formerly Archdeacon of Canterbury; Bishop of Rochester in 1125; cathedral consecrated
in his time; died in 1137.

#John#, formerly Abbot of Sées; appointed in 1137; died in 1142.

#Ascelin#, succeeded in 1142; active bishop, even visited Rome for the monks of his cathedral;
died in 1148.

#Walter#, chosen in 1148; the first bishop elected by the monks of the Priory of St. Andrew,
the right being granted them by his brother Archbishop Theobald; formerly Archdeacon of Canterbury;
died in 1182.

#Gualeran#, appointed in 1182; formerly Archdeacon of Bayeux; died in 1184.

#Gilbert de Glanvill#, consecrated in 1185; employed earlier by Becket on a mission to the
Pope; quarrelled with his monks and helped Archbishops Baldwin and Hubert Walter (a friend
of his own) against those of Canterbury; died 1214, before the Interdict was removed; buried
at Rochester, where a tomb is shown as his.

#Benedict de Sansetun#, succeeded in 1215; saw cathedral plundered, and great works in new
choir; died in 1226.

#Henry Sandford#; new choir entered in his first year, 1227; in a sermon at Sittingbourne said
that the release from Purgatory, in one day, of Richard I., Stephen Langton, and a chaplain
of the latter, had been revealed to him; died in 1235.

#Richard de Wendover#, not consecrated till 1238; monks had to appeal to Rome, against the
archbishop's claims, to get their election of him confirmed; died in 1250.

#Lawrence de Saint Martin#, succeeded in 1251; appealed to Pope against a robbery of his see
by Archbishop Boniface; at Rome for the canonization of St. William in 1256; died in 1274;
his tomb (in the choir) has been described.

#Walter de Merton#, appointed in 1274; before this, chancellor (1261-63; 1272-74) and justiciar;
founded his college at Maldon, and afterwards transferred it to Oxford; drowned in the Medway
in 1277; buried in the cathedral (north choir transept).

#John de Bradfield#, a monk at Rochester; became bishop in 1277; died in 1283; buried in the
cathedral (south choir aisle).

#Thomas Inglethorp#, appointed in 1283; formerly Dean of St. Paul's and Archdeacon of Middlesex;
died in 1291; buried in the cathedral (chancel).

#Thomas de Wouldham#, Prior of Rochester, became bishop in 1292; died in 1317.

#Hamo de Hythe#, appointed in 1319 after a delay caused by Pope's wish to nominate John de
Puteoli; did much for church and renewed the shrines of St. Paulinus and St. Ythamar; died
in 1352; tomb in the cathedral (north choir aisle). 

It also feeds on the samara of maple, as we reared the moth in June, 1881, from larvae infesting
these winged seeds that had been collected by Mr. A.J. Wethersby,
of Cincinnati, O.

2d.

We have an allied species, boring in the leaf-stalk of buckeye, in Ohio, as observed by Mr. Claypole.
It bears some resemblance to Proteoteras aesculana, but differs from
it in the following particulars, so far as can be ascertained from
the poor material examined: The primaries are shorter and more acuminate
at apex.

Their general color is paler, with the dark markings less distinctly
separated.

No distinct tufts of scales or knobs appear, and the ocellated region is traversed by four or
five dark longitudinal lines.

It would be difficult to distinguish it from a rubbed and faded specimen of aesculana, were
it not for the form of the wing, on which, however, one dare not
count too confidently.

It probably belongs to the same genus, and we would propose for it the name of claypoleana. The
larva is distinguished from that of aesculana by having the minute
granulations of the skin smooth, whereas in the latter each granule
has a minute sharp point.

3d. Sericoris instrutana is a totally different insect. It is more abundant, so I am informed, than
it has ever been before. In some places hardly any trees of the two species to which its attack
is here limited have escaped. These are the black or yellow oak (Q. tinctoria) with its variety
(coccinea), the scarlet oak and, the scrub oak (Q. ilicifolia).

These trees appear brown on the hill-sides from a distance, in consequence of being altogether
stripped of their leaves.

The sound of the falling frass from the thousands of caterpillars resembles a shower of rain.


#John Alcock# succeeded in 1472; Privy Councillor, 1470-71; Lord Chancellor, 1474; first Lord
President of Wales, 1476; tutor to Edward V., removed by Gloucester; under Henry VII., baptized
Prince Arthur; comptroller of the royal works, and again Lord Chancellor; a great architect,
works at Ely and Cambridge; translated to Worcester in 1476, to Ely in 1486; "devoted to learning
and piety"; died in 1500.

#John Russell#, succeeded in 1476; translated to Lincoln, 1480; died in 1494.

#Edmund Audley#, Canon of York; Bishop of Rochester, 1480; of Hereford, 1492; of Salisbury,
1502; died in 1524; a legatee and executor of Henry VII.

#Thomas Savage#, Canon of York, Dean of the King's Chapel at Westminster; Bishop of Rochester,
1492, of London, 1496; Archbishop of York, 1501; died in 1507.

#Richard FitzJames# succeeded in 1496; translated to Chichester in 1503 and to London in 1506;
died in 1522; a famous warden of Merton; Royal Almoner in 1495; did not favour Colet's efforts
at reform.

#John Fisher#, having risen to the Chancellorship of Cambridge University in 1504, was then
made, for his "grete and singular virtue," Bishop of Rochester; he and his patron, Lady Margaret,
were great benefactors to Cambridge; a friend of Erasmus; opposed Henry VIII.'s divorce and
the royal supremacy; made a cardinal just before he bravely and resignedly met his death in 1535.

#John Hilsey# came then in 1535; formerly Prior of the Dominicans in London; one of Cromwell's
commissioners, compiled at his orders a service book in English; exposed the miraculous rood
of Boxley at St. Paul's Cross; died in 1538.

#Richard Heath#, succeeded in 1539; had been Almoner to Henry VIII.; translated to Worcester,
1543; deprived for a time, but restored on Queen Mary's accession; Archbishop of York, 1555;
Chancellor; held both the last appointments under Elizabeth, whose accession he proclaimed,
but had to resign when the Act of Supremacy was enforced.

#Henry Holbeach#, succeeded in 1543; translated to Lincoln in 1546; previously suffragan Bishop
of Bristol, and Prior (later Dean) of Worcester.

#Nicholas Ridley#, succeeded in 1547; translated to London when Bonner was removed in 1550;
a famous Protestant, learned and pious; the story of his martyrdom with Latimer at Oxford,
in 1555, is well known.

#John Poynet#, succeeded in 1550; translated to Winchester, 1551; left England when Mary became
Queen; died at Strasburg in 1556.

#John Scory#, appointed in 1551; a great preacher; translated to Chichester in 1552; bishop
of Hereford in 1559, when able to return from Friesland; died in 1585.

#Maurice Griffith#, appointed after an interval of about two years; educated by the Dominicans
at Oxford; formerly Archdeacon of Rochester; one or two Protestants were burnt during his episcopacy;
died in 1558.

#Edmund Gheast#, consecrated in 1559 and made Almoner to the Queen; transferred to Salisbury,
1571; died in 1578.

#Edmund Freake#, succeeded in 1571; previously Dean of Rochester, and of Salisbury; Queen's
Almoner in 1572; translated to Norwich in 1575, to Worcester in 1584; scandal at Norwich, his
wife "will looke on him as the Divell lookes over Lincoln;" troubles with Puritans; died in
1590-91.

#John Piers#, succeeded in 1576; Bishop of Salisbury, 1577; Archbishop of York, 1589; Lord
High Almoner, 1576; employed and consulted by the Queen; died in 1594.

#John Yonge#, became bishop in 1578; thought avaricious, but the annual revenue of his see
shown not to exceed £220; died in 1605.

#William Barlow#, succeeded in 1605; wrote other works besides his account, denounced as partial
by the Puritans, of the famous Hampton Court Conference; translated to Lincoln, 1608; died in 1613.

#Richard Neile#, succeeded in 1608; introduced Laud to the King's notice; Bishop of Lichfield,
1610, of Durham, 1617 and of Winchester, 1627; Archbishop of York, 1631; privy councillor;
employed in famous Essex divorce case; sat in the courts of High Commission and of the Star
Chamber; died in 1640.

#John Buckeridge#, formerly a canon at Rochester; confirmed as bishop in 1611; formerly a royal
chaplain; took part in Essex case; active in religious discussions; translated to Ely, 1628;
died in 1631.

#Walter Curle#, appointed in 1628; translated to Bath and Wells in 1629, to Winchester in 1632;
deprived by Parliamentarians and apparently in great straits before he died, c. 1650.

#John Bowle#, appointed in 1629; apparently in ill-health, and consequently neglectful, for
three years before his death in 1637.

#John Warner#, succeeded in 1638; seems to have been the last to struggle for his order's place
in Parliament; deprived of revenues, but allowed to stay at Bromley under the Commonwealth;
one of the nine bishops who lived till the Restoration; employed in the Savoy Conference; wealthy;
benefactor to the cathedral and to Magdalen and Balliol Colleges, Oxford; founded college for
clergymen's widows at Bromley; died in 1666; the last bishop buried in the cathedral.

#John Dolben#, made bishop in 1666; had served at Marston Moor and been wounded at York; retained
his deanery of Westminster in commendam; translated to York in 1683; died in 1686.

#Francis Turner#, succeeded in 1683; translated to Ely in 1684; one of the seven bishops who
petitioned against the Declaration of Indulgence, though he had been James II.'s chaplain;
had to give up his see on account of his belief in James' divine right; died in 1700.

#Thomas Sprat#, Dean of Westminster, became Bishop of Rochester in 1685; of such literary ability
as to have a place in Johnson's "Lives of the Poets;" wrote a poem on the death of Cromwell,
a history of the Royal Society, a life of Cowley, etc.; in no great favour with William's government;
implicated in the fabricated Flower-pot Plot, the papers concerning which were said to have
been found in a flower-pot at Bromley; seems to have been somewhat of a time-server; died in 1713.

#Francis Atterbury#, born in 1662; took orders after the Revolution; became a Royal Chaplain,
but still lived usually at Oxford; took part in the great controversy between Boyle and Bentley,
on the Epistles of Phalaris; successively Archdeacon of Totnes, Dean of Carlisle, Dean of Christ
Church, Oxford, and finally in 1713 Bishop of Rochester; in 1710 composed the speech for Sacheverell's
defence before the House of Lords; a Tory, but, though he had tried to procure the proclamation
of James III., he assisted at George I.'s coronation; deprived, for Jacobitism, of his see
and banished in 1723; retired to Brussels and then for his health's sake to Paris; served James
almost as a prime minister; in 1728 he left this service owing to bad treatment, but re-entered
it before his death, after nine years of exile, in 1731-2. 

The smaller lumps are placed in the core of the heap, the larger lumps thrown upon them, and 40
tons of tank residues thrown over all to exclude excess of air; 500 lb. of salt is then distributed
through the pile, and it is then set afire. After well alight the draught-holes are closed
up, and the pile is left to burn, which it does for six months.

At the expiration of that time the pile is broken into and sorted, the imperfectly roasted ore
is returned to a fresh roast-heap, and the rest trammed to the

LEACH-VATS.

These are 50 in number, 10 having been recently added. The first 40 are four feet by six feet
and four feet deep, the remaining 10 twice as large.

About two tons of burnt ore is put in the small vats (twice as much
in the larger ones), half the vats being tilled at one time, and then
enough cold water is turned in to cover the ore. Steam is then injected
beneath the ore, thus boiling the water.

After boiling for some time, the steam is turned off and the water allowed to go cold. The water,
which after the boiling process turns to a dark red color, is then drawn off. This water carries
the copper in a state of solution. The ore is then boiled a second time, after which the tank residues
are thrown out and water kept sprinkling over them. This water collects the copper still left
in the residues, and is then run into a reservoir, and from the reservoirs still further on into
settling tanks, previous to
PRECIPITATION,

and is then conducted through a system of boxes filled
with scrap iron, thus precipitating the copper.

The richer copper
liquors which have been drawn from the tanks fire not allowed to run
in with that which comes from the dump heaps.

The Bishops of Rochester during this century have been #Thomas Dampier#, from 1802 to 1808,
when he was translated to Ely; #Walter King#, from 1809 to 1827; #Hugh Percy#, appointed in
1827 but translated in the same year to Carlisle; #George Murray#, from 1827 to 1860; #Joseph
Cotton Wigram#, from 1860 to 1867; #Thomas Legh Claughton#, from 1867 until his transfer to
the new see of St. Alban's in 1877; #Anthony Wilson Thorold#, from 1877 until his translation
to Winchester in 1891; #Dr. Randall Thomas Davidson#, who succeeded Dr. Thorold at Rochester,
and again, on his death, at Winchester in 1895, and #Dr. Edward Stuart Talbot#, appointed in
1895, and still governing the diocese. These have all been worthy of their distinguished position
and of their predecessors in the see.

EDITED BY GLEESON WHITE AND E. F. STRANGE.

In specially designed cloth cover, crown 8vo, 1s. 6d. each.

Now Ready: CANTERBURY.       SALISBURY. CHESTER.          ROCHESTER.

In Preparation: EXETER.            LINCOLN.          ST. ALBANS. OXFORD.            NORWICH.
ST. PAUL'S. DURHAM.            WORCESTER.        WELLS. CARLISLE.          HEREFORD.      
WINCHESTER. RIPON.             GLOUCESTER.       BRISTOL. ELY.               LICHFIELD.   
YORK. PETERBOROUGH.      CHICHESTER.

"Visitors to the cathedral cities of England must often have felt the need of some work dealing
with the history and antiquities of the city itself, and the architecture and associations
of the cathedral, more portable than the elaborate monographs which have been devoted to some
of them, more scholarly and satisfying than the average local guide-book, and more copious
than the section devoted to them in the general guide-book of the county or district. Such
a legitimate need the 'Cathedral Series' now being issued by Messrs. George Bell and Sons under
the editorship of Mr. Gleeson White and Mr. E. F. Strange seems well calculated to supply.

"Half the charm of this little book on Canterbury springs from the writer's recognition of
the historical association of so majestic a building with the fortunes, destinies, and habits
of the English people.... One admirable feature of the book is its artistic illustrations. In
one or two centuries none will survive unless they be in Museums.

To preserve the counterfeit presentment of some which remain seems a duty.

Many may share the quest, but no one has yet come out to start. Let
your servant shew the way.

"There is likely to be a large demand for these attractive handbooks."--Globe.

"Bell's 'Cathedral Series,' so admirably edited by Mr. Gleeson White, is more than a description
of the various English cathedrals. It will be a valuable historical record, and a work of much
service also to the architect. We have received the small volumes devoted to Salisbury and
Canterbury. The illustrations are well selected, and in many cases not mere bald architectural
drawings but reproductions of exquisite stone fancies, touched in their treatment by fancy
and guided by art."--Star.

"A set of little books which may be described as very useful, very pretty, and very cheap ...
and alike in the letterpress, the illustrations, and the remarkably choice binding, they are
ideal guides."--Liverpool Daily Post.

