During this interval, a man named Ansart, a land owner at Anglure, mounted his horse, and hurried
at the utmost speed to Sezanne in order to inform the marshal that the enemy were pursued by
the Emperor, and about to cross the Aube.  Having reached the Duke, and seeing that the corps
he commanded was not taking the road to Anglure, he hastened to speak. Apparently the Emperor's,
orders had not been received; for the marshal would not listen to him, treated him as a spy,
and it was with much difficulty this brave man escaped being shot.

While this scene was taking place, his Majesty had already reached Sezanne; and seeing many
inhabitants of this village around him, he requested some one to guide him to Fere Champenoise,
whereupon a bailiff presented himself.  The Emperor immediately set out, escorted by the officers
who had accompanied him to Sezanne, and left the town, saying to his guide, "Go in front, monsieur,
and take the shortest road."  Arrived at a short distance from the battlefield of Fere Champenoise,
his Majesty saw that every report of the artillery made the poor bailiff start.  "You are afraid,"
said the Emperor to him.  "No, Sire."--"Then, what makes you dodge your head?"--"It is because
I am not accustomed like your Majesty to hearing all this uproar."--"One should accustom himself
to everything. Fear nothing; keep on."  But the guide, more dead than alive, reined in his
horse, and trembled in every limb.  "Come, come; I see you are really afraid.  Go behind me."
He obeyed, turned his horse's head, and galloped as far as Sezanne without stopping, promising
himself most faithfully never again to serve as guide to the Emperor on such an occasion.

At the battle of Mery, the Emperor, under the very fire of the enemy, had a little bridge thrown
over the river which flows near the town.  This bridge was constructed in an hour by means
of ladders fastened together, and supported by wooden beams; but as this was not sufficient,
it was necessary that planks should be placed on this.  None could be found, however; for those
who might have been able to procure them did not dare to approach the exposed spot his Majesty
occupied at this moment. Impatient, and even angry, because he could not obtain the planks
for this bridge, his Majesty had the shutters of several large houses a short distance from
the river taken down, and had them placed and nailed down under his own eyes. A pair of gray
eyes, red-rimmed and lashless, looked forlornly out of a countenance which was flattened something
after the fashion of a pumpkin, and surmounted by a Don Quixote nose that rose out of it like a monolith
above a plain.

Astonished to see this young girl in so perilous a place, the Emperor said to her, smiling,
"You would make a brave soldier, Mademoiselle; and if you are willing to wear epaulets you
shall be one of my aides-de- camp."  The young girl blushed, and made a courtesy to the Emperor,
and was going away, when he held out his hand to her, and she kissed it. "Later," he said,
"come to Paris, and remind me of the service you have rendered me to-day.  You will be satisfied
of my gratitude."  She thanked the Emperor and withdrew, very proud of his words of commendation.

The day of the battle of Nangis an Austrian officer came in the evening to headquarters, and
had a long, secret conference with his Majesty. Forty-eight hours after, at the close of the
engagement at Mery, appeared a new envoy from the Prince von Schwarzenberg, with a reply from
the Emperor of Austria to the confidential letter which his Majesty had written two days before
to his father-in-law.  We had left Mery in flames; and in the little hammock of Chatres, where
headquarters had been established, there could no shelter be found for his Majesty except in
the shop of a wheelwright; and the Emperor passed the night there, working, or lying on the
bed all dressed, without sleeping.  It was there also he received the Austrian envoy, the Prince
of Lichtenstein.  The prince long remained in conversation with his Majesty; and though nothing
was known of the subject of their conversation, no one doubted that it related to peace.  After
the departure of the prince, the Emperor was in extraordinarily high spirits, which affected
all those around him.

Our army had taken from the enemy thousands of prisoners; Paris had just received the Russian
and Prussian banners taken at Nangis and Montereau; the Emperor had put to flight the foreign
sovereigns, who even feared for a time that they might not be able to regain the frontiers;
and the effect of so much success had been to restore to his Majesty his former confidence
in his good fortune, though this was unfortunately only a dangerous illusion.

The Prince of Lichtenstein had hardly left headquarters when M. de Saint- Aignan, the brother-in-law
of the Duke of Vicenza, and equerry of the Emperor, arrived. Just you leave your lodge as soon as
you have lined your purse here, and you shall see what will become of us both."
"Lined my purse!" cried Cibot. "I am incapable of taking the worth
of a single pin; you mind that, Remonencq!  It seems that before leaving
Paris M. de Saint-Aignan held an interview with the Duke of Rovigo and another, minister, and
they had given him a verbal message to the Emperor.  This mission was both delicate and difficult.
He would have much preferred that these gentlemen should have sent in writing the communications
which they insisted he should bear to his Majesty, but they refused; and as a faithful servant
M. de Saint-Aignan performed his duty, and prepared to speak the whole truth, whatever danger
he might incur by so doing.

When he arrived at the wheelwright's shop at Chatres, the Emperor, as we have just seen, was
abandoning himself to most brilliant dreams; which circumstance was most unfortunate for M.
de Saint-Aignan, since he was the bearer of disagreeable news.  He came, as we have learned
since, to announce to his Majesty that he should not count upon the public mind at the capital,
since they were murmuring at the prolongation of the war, and desired that the Emperor should
seize the occasion of making peace. It has even been stated that the word disafection was uttered
during this secret conference by the sincere and truthful lips of M. de Saint-Aignan. I cannot
assert that this is true; for the door was closely shut, and M. de Saint-Aignan spoke in a
low tone.  It is certain, however, that his report and his candor excited his Majesty's anger
to the highest degree; and in dismissing him with an abruptness he had certainly not merited,
the Emperor raised his voice to such a pitch as to be heard outside. When M. de Saint-Aignan
withdrew, and his Majesty summoned me to my duties near him, I found him much agitated, and
pale with anger.  A few hours after this scene the Emperor ordered his horse, and M. de Saint-
Aignan, who had resumed his duties as equerry, approached to hold his stirrup; but as soon
as the Emperor perceived him he threw on him an angry glance, made him a sign to withdraw,
exclaiming loudly, "Mesgrigny!"  This was Baron de Mesgrigny, another of his Majesty's squires.
In compliance with his Majesty's wishes, M. de Mesgrigny performed the duties of M. de Saint-Aignan,
who withdrew to the rear of the army to wait till the storm should be past.  At the end of
a few days his disgrace was ended, and all who knew him rejoiced; for the Baron de Saint-Aignan
was beloved by all for his affability and loyalty.

From Chatres the Emperor marched on Troyes.  The enemy who occupied this town seemed at first
disposed to defend themselves there, but soon yielded, and evacuated it at the close of a capitulation.
During the short time the, allies passed at Troyes, the Royalists had publicly announced their
hatred to the Emperor, and their adherence to the allied powers, who came, they said, only
to establish the Bourbons on the throne, and even had the imprudence to display the white flag
and white cockade; and the foreign troops had consequently protected them, while exercising
extreme harshness and severity towards those inhabitants who held contrary opinions.

Unfortunately for the Royalists they were in a very feeble minority, and the favor shown to
them by the Russians and Prussians led the populace oppressed by the latter to hate the proteges
as much as their protectors.

Even before the entrance of the Emperor into Troyes, Royalist proclamations addressed to the
officers of his household or the army had fallen into his hands.  He had showed no anger, but
had urged those who had received, or who might receive, communications of this nature, to destroy
them, and to inform no one of the contents.  On his arrival at Troyes his Majesty rendered
a decree proclaiming penalty of death against all Frenchmen in the service of the enemy, and
those who wore the emblems and decorations of the ancient dynasty.  An unfortunate emigre,
accused before a council of war, was convicted of having worn the cross of St. Louis and the
white cockade during the stay of the allies at Troyes, and of having furnished to the foreign
generals all the information in his power. 

And ever since, the two gentlemen have been as different as can be. So you have brought all my
troubles upon me; I might have lost my influence with M. Pons, but I was sure of the German; just
now he was talking of marrying me or of taking me with him--it is all one."
.