PART XII.

CHAPTER I.

The Hegira is completed,--we have all taken roost in the old Tower.  My father's books have
arrived by the wagon, and have settled themselves quietly in their new abode,--filling up the
apartment dedicated to their owner, including the bed chamber and two lobbies.  The duck also
has arrived, under wing of Mrs. Primmins, and has reconciled herself to the old stewpond, by
the side of which my father has found a walk that compensates for the peach-wall, especially
as he has made acquaintance with sundry respectable carps, who permit him to feed them after
he has fed the duck,--a privilege of which (since, if any one else approaches, the carps are
off in an instant) my father is naturally vain.  All privileges are valuable in proportion
to the exclusiveness of their enjoyment.

Now, from the moment the first carp had eaten the bread my father threw to it, Mr. Caxton had
mentally resolved that a race so confiding should never be sacrificed to Ceres and Primmins.
But all the fishes on my uncle's property were under the special care of that Proteus Bolt;
and Bolt was not a man likely to suffer the carps to earn their bread without contributing
their full share to the wants of the community. But, like master, like man!  Bolt was an aristocrat
fit to be hung a la lanterne.  He out-Rolanded Roland in the respect he entertained for sounding
names and old families; and by that bait my father caught him with such skill that you might
see that if Austin Caxton had been an angler of fishes, he could have filled his basket full
any day, shine or rain.

"You observe, Bolt," said my father, beginning artfully, "that those fishes, dull as you may
think them; are creatures capable of a syllogism; and if they saw that, in proportion to their
civility to me, they were depopulated by you, they would put two and two together, and renounce
my acquaintance."

"Is that what you call being silly Jems, sir?" said Bolt. "Faith! there is many a good Christian
not half so wise."

"Man," answered my father, thoughtfully, "is an animal less syllogistical or more silly-Jemical,
than many creatures popularly esteemed his inferiors.  Yes, let but one of those Cyprinidae,
with his fine sense of logic, see that if his fellow-fishes eat bread, they, are suddenly jerked
out of their element and vanish forever, and though you broke a quartern loaf into crumbs,
he would snap his tail at you with enlightened contempt.  If," said my father, soliloquizing,
"I had been as syllogistic as those scaly logicians, I should never have swallowed that hook
which--Hum! there--least said soonest mended.  But, Mr. Bolt, to return to the Cyprinidae."

"What's the hard name you call them 'ere carp, yer honor?"  asked Bolt.

"Cyprinidae,--a family of the section Malacoptergii Abdominales," replied Mr. Caxton; "their
teeth are generally confined to the Pharyngeans, and their branehiostegous rays are but few,--marks
of distinction from fishes vulgar and voracious."

"Sir," said Bolt, glancing to the stewpond, "if I had known they had been a family of such
importance, I am sure I should have treated them with more respect."

"They are a very old family, Bolt, and have been settled in England since the fourteenth century.
A younger branch of the family has established itself in a pond in the gardens of Peterhoff
(the celebrated palace of Peter the Great, Bolt,--an emperor highly respected by my brother,
for he killed a great many people very gloriously in battle, besides those whom he sabred for
his own private amusement); and there is an officer or servant of the Imperial household, whose
task it is to summon those Russian Cyprinidae to dinner, by ringing a bell, shortly after which,
you may see the emperor and empress, with all their waiting ladies and gentlemen, coming down
in their carriages to see the Cyprinidae eat in state.  So you perceive, Bolt, that it would
be a republican, Jacobinical proceeding to stew members of a family so intimately associated
with royalty."

"Dear me, sir," said Bolt, "I am very glad you told me.  I ought to have known they were genteel
fish, they are so mighty shy,--as all your real quality are."

My father smiled, and rubbed his hands gently,--he had carried his point; and henceforth the
Cyprinidae of the section Malacoptergii Abdominales were as sacred in Bolt's eyes as cats and
ichneumons were in those of a priest in Thebes.

My poor father, with what true and unostentatious philosophy thou didst accommodate thyself
to the greatest change thy quiet, harmless life had known since it had passed out of the brief,
burning cycle of the passions!  Lost was the home endeared to thee by so many noiseless victories
of the mind, so many mute histories of the heart; for only the scholar knoweth how deep a charm
lies in monotony, in the old associations, the old ways and habitual clockwork of peaceful
time.  Yet the home may be replaced,--thy heart built its home round itself everywhere,--and
the old Tower might supply the loss of the brick house, and the walk by the stewpond become
as dear as the haunts by the sunny peach-wall. There is no legislative assemblies in the general acceptation
of the term. The village governs himself, and around the city, to meet annually outdoors to
choose their leaders of all kinds, to approve bills, vote on budgets, pass laws and appoint representatives
to the federal Diet, and in the districts, running the same operations on a reduced scale. The people
live happy with that noble scheme political and social fellowship, freedom, equality and autonomy,
and each of these citizens manifested in behavior and acts of his life that is conscious of
its rights, the habit of exercising consistently, and modest pride and loyalty to the traditions independence
and freedom that are necessary to all people worthy of living in the land under the protection
of God.

       * * * * *

The valley that lies between the Muottas and Lake Zug, enclosed by the mountains Mythen and
corresponding to the group Rigi, is graceful and peaceful, halfway up Goldau by landslides
and some rocky hills. The first part, the closest to Schwyz, lies at the bottom of the valley
the small and very funny Lowerz lake, surrounded by inclines and rolling hills. The lonely little
lake, on whose banks turn two ways road, and whose clear waves lie some little boats lost in
the rush to edge of small harbors that are not without grace, measures just 5 kilometers in
length, as 2 and 1 / 2 wide and 18 meters deep. It is one of many toys for hydrography Switzerland,
themselves rather to delight the traveler to serve the commerce and navigation.

At the point that the vast bulk of the Rigi has its eastern flank, facing Rossberg, which stands opposite
an emaciated monster, the valley has a look of desolation to grieve, especially for the memories
awakened by huge naked pedrizcos scattered at the site in 1806 occupied the town or village
of Goldau. Today there are no but a chapel, a hotel for travelers and forming a street a few
houses built in recent times. As we prepare the horses that we ride to raise the Rigi, we wanted
to go on foot, between rough weeds, rocks shattered and disordered overcrowding the remains of the
terrible crash, the scene of desolation that witnessed the disaster. Still found some burned
bed ponds, remnants of the waters of Lake Lowerz, coming up there and that was violently filled
in part by the sudden fall of a quadroon the Rossberg.

Upstairs has the ugly face of the mountain, whose side came off in a thousand large moles of rocks
and dust, falling over the valley and crushing and grinding the old town Goldau. The huge
red patch that was on the mountain gives you a look of death and horror to tremble, because
the traveler remembers that many Swiss people living under such constant threat of landslides.
The desolation of Goldau and flank of the mountain makes the most rude contrast to the beautiful
panorama of the valley and the rest of the valley, from the Zug Lake to the banks of Muottas.

It
was three o'clock when we began to ascend the Rigi, in convoy with
another ten or twelve hikers.

The mountain was displayed to our eyes full of beauty and majesty in Joint and surprises in their
thanks and relief, his deep gullies, its magnificent forests, the lonely prairies, their scattered
houses and its thousands of interesting features. Suddenly, when the sun was more sharp and stronger
heat, in spite of the high peaks towards ascension, brought us air bursts threatening blight the
sky, and everything changed in appearance with how quickly a theater decoration is changed.
The storm broke out with violence, Fortunately when we got to stop a house, but after twenty
minutes dissipated with the same swiftness. So are the storms in almost all lakes and mountain
regions Switzerland.

I confess that the accident, far from disappointed, gave us keen pleasure,
and because it gave us chance to see one of those violent weather
and interesting transitions Switzerland and because it presented a
spectacle of immeasurable beauty, who had never contemplated under
similar conditions and that can only be found in narrow valleys formed
by high mountains and lakes in the background.

By the time the rain fell with more violence and abundance on the height where we were, the valley
was a wonderful theater lighting scene, color shades and superb contrast. The valley, green,
wet and shiny, perfectly illuminated by the slanting rays of the sun, seemed an immense carpet
of emerald dotted spots and opal jet and waved at the bottom of the lake waves with Lowerz recent
tremors caused by the breath of the storm. The two steep hills Rossberg and Rigi were still
perfectly black, hooded by phalanxes of dark clouds that seemed attached to the crêpe dark
fir forests, the majesty of doubling the naked peaks and precipices timid. Finally, in the middle
of the sidewall of the two opposite mountains, lay the ends of a huge rainbow, the most perfect
and bright I've seen, lying on the valley and lake, from one side to another, such as an air
bridge raised to make way above the abyss of light to a legion of fairies or invisible spirits.
I have not ever seen such a small space in a spectacle of nature witchcraft so sudden, great
and varied as the look there for ten minutes.

The rocky slope, parched and choked a little before the August sun, was intoxicated with the bathroom
of the storm, and when we were barely visible progress in humidity signals the soil, the green
patch of grass beads, braids hair bright liquid Leaves falling from the conical firs, and doubled flow
of some streams that were lost jumping into waterfalls hidden in the depths of the forest and
depths.

The air was filled with the richest perfumes thickets of ferns sacudian their wet manes on
the wings of the wind, and wild rumors concert rose the bosom of the deep gullies or streams
would gather the sound of bells waving cows and goats to roam the broken patch of grass on
the mountain, eating with eagerness and delight the grass wet.

From the hostel where we had defended the storm begins a series of chapels or niches (12 or 13) placed
at certain distances in more or less picturesque sites, to the edge the road. If all the Catholic
cantons abound on the roads these signs of worship religious rises in Rigi, and especially that of
Goldau make an important role. On the one hand mark the seasons of the pilgrims going to visit
Our Lady of Snow, on the other to serve as rookeries unhappy begging
to disabled passengers and do during the summer months its full-year
provision.

A short distance from the summit of Rigi delay in the middle of forests and very rough patch
of grass Hospice of the famous Notre-Dame, much revered for the miracles of the Virgin Nieves
attributed to him and inhabited by three or four friars. At around the chapel and Hospice highlight
many inns, some substantial and attractive appearance, inhabited by a whole population of people
nervous and sickly women who are going to be cured with sera exercise
and fresh air.

There was less than two hundred people staying there when we pass, and judging by their warm familiarity
ought to be so pleasant residence. Forty minutes after we got to the eminence of Staffel,
a kind of introduction to the higher call Kulm. They bring together the three main roads that
lead opposite points to the top, and the traveler is suddenly in the presence of a superb picture,
leaving the Road closed basin to a small plateau that records the entire view canton of Lucerne
and part of Unterwalden. Half an hour later, walking on the back naked from the mountain, we
went to get down to the door of great Rigi-Kulm hotel that is the highest point of the mountain
and the end of the excursion.

Nothing is more curious than European Babel built on such a high summit, amid a swarm of lakes,
valleys and mountains in the center of the free and picturesque Switzerland. There meet in
one night all the European races and even some of the New World, they all speak languages,
and they come in contact not only faces the most diverse but all vanities extravagances, the
childishness, the candideces, notables in excursion and all genres
Esplin nuisance and is easy to find in a big reunion of travelers.

More we were three hundred people gathered there, mostly in the Kulm Hotel and was to see
the contrast of faces and ways that offered the married couples in moon honey (still novices,
naive in his soft, sentimental demonstrations), the literati wanderers and unemployed, to hunt
for business to make stories and novels, women tired the world, the race of the misunderstood, dragging
their tails on taffeta or Linon carpet of grass, the men serious, qualified by character and
of itself, with be sure not challenged by their unknown partners, the English Fancy or moody,
or boring, always in the majority in number or very large, in short, traders withdrawn, determined
to put on airs of counts traveling incognito, and revealing their manners that beneath his
gloves while resisted in the streets against the years of plebeian work. Perhaps nowhere are they more
ridiculous and obvious vanities and nonsense of Skinny humanity in those places where nature holds
as sovereign nudity caste their thanks or the majesty of its magnificent forms.

The panorama view ranges from the sublime imponderably Kulm is varied and surprising. Switzerland
appears around with all its contrasts, its huge and horrible ways some places, peaceful and picturesque
in others, wherever beautiful and seductive, or imposing. It was six o'clock when we watched to
the warm setting sun that world mountains and lakes, valleys and plains, forests and grasslands,
and cities and towns Verjel. Nature has its charms every hour different, because each has its
mysteries of life and love, by the way in patting the divine magician called Light. Thus, we avidity
we admire so much in recent afternoon as the first of morning.

If the next day we had seen, by a singular fortune, the three major phenomena Optical and weather that
is usually supplied to the Rigi, in the afternoon, it was clear but full of poetic melancholy,
we saw the immense panorama under the peaceful aspect.

From the high vantage point of Kulm we registered, to the naked eye or through a huge telescope
almost the whole of the east-central Switzerland and a vast region in the south, in direction more
colossal chains to the Alps. We were in sight, in whole or in part, the plains valleys and high reliefs
of thirteen or fourteen cantons of the Confederation under to the great basin of the Rhine
and its tributaries, and saw below, and to our feet as depths opal and pale blue, and he more or
less considerable distances and with the most diverse forms, twelve major lakes: the Four-cantons,
at parties, Sempach, Baldeg and Hallwyl, to the west, the Zug, district
in Zurich, Greiffertz, Egeria and Pfoeffikon, to the north, and those
of Lowerz and Wallenstatter (Between Glarus and St. Gallen) to N.-E.
With the telescope we could see distinctly all households, and even
small objects from Lucerne, Art, Zug, district in Zurich and many
other localities, and in the circle a hundred leagues to cover, we
were perplexed to choose the most beautiful among so many beauties.

To the north the sight is lost in the direction of the Rhine, stopping in distant chain of the Forest-Black,
which forms the mountains of the Grand Duchy of Baden and a part the kingdom of Württemberg.
South side of Nidwalden, is also the lake of Sarnen, and the look is confronted with severe mole
Pilate and the magnificent peaks of the Alps. Al west lie the smiling plains of the canton of Lucerne
and the basins of the Reuss and the Aar, whose ripples will give the appearance of a sea of
​​pale or yellow vegetables. For Finally, the east is developed tumultuous chaos of the Alps of
Glarus, and Appenzel Graubünden, towering towards the S.-E. the most gigantic refrigerators. That
is huge in proportions and prodigiously beautiful!

* * * * *

It was four o'clock when the bagpipes are keen alpine woke us up and put Moving them all. We went
to watch the sunrise, which is one of the most sublime shows that can be seen from a high summit
of the Alps. Our fortune was such that not only had that pleasure for several minutes, but
we see the spectrum solar in all its frightening majesty, and the sudden formation of a lake
storm Lucerne. The dawn was just beginning when more than three hundred people we were at
the point peak, watching the moment when the sun was rising over the Alps.

All the immense panorama in the afternoon before we had seen was in darkness, but not in deep darkness,
but covered with crape vague dark gray ink, something lighter on
the spaces of the lakes, whose breasts were lifted mists and vapors
fixed it seems, at first, and then wandering and dispersed.

       The stars were still a glow pale and dying, and dead silence reigned
in the bottom of all deep.

A lamp of light appeared in the east like a speck of white undecided, then spread at the foot
of the horizon in a huge pink ribbon and light, and the stars dimmed his trembling brilliance.
A few minutes they stopped and the clear and pure light appeared on the heights from heaven,
saw that began to shine the leadership of the highest and distant peaks, whilst that the great mass
of the landscape was covered with deep shadows. Then the huge amphitheater Alpine was offering
a succession of occurrences: the light falling on the alti-plains and valleys in countless waterfalls,
collapsed suddenly, from moment to moment, of a great top to lowest
rung of another, this to a lower, and so on to flood the entire grandstand
clearly titanic mountain ranges.

Then a light closer, like the glow of a fire invisible, appeared on the first summit of the
east, above the Rigi, a minute later appeared the edge of the solar disk then a fourth, half,
finally all astro sovereign physical creation, huge, red as the gaping mouth of a furnace full
of fire, and as close to under the optical illusion, it seemed as attached to the back of
the mountain and threatening to come upon us. All time was flooded with light that sea of ​​blue
ocean flowed, all depths were clarified, reverberated lakes like mirrors, and a shout in unison
chord and three hundred throats greeted the appearance of universal lover! I was tempted to fall on
his knees before that majesty supreme beauty which offered me the best image, the only quite expressive
of supreme foresight, wisdom and goodness and unfailing love of God .... I seemed to feel that the delight
of my blood and my soul silent adoration of summarizing all the thrills of organic life from
creation to greet the appearance of the wondrous star ....

But how little was to take this unique show! While approaching divine appearance, it was lifted
from the bottom of Lake Lucerne, from the foot of Pilate Küssnach to the apex of a terrible storm,
and phenomena happened in the fourth of the time needed to describe quickly. All part of the
lake N.-O. of Kulm had been in the dark when light reigned high in the East, and while Alpnach
side that came a huge whirlwind rising to the lower horizon a horrible chaos, the bottom of the
Gulf of Küssnach was erected a huge wall of black fumes and thick, producing between his line
and the massive valley Rigi imaginary stranger aspect. The wall had come down to half the height
of the Rigi when the sun showed all disk. It was then that for a minute, we could see the phenomenon
of the solar spectrum. The image of the summit of Rigi is reflected in all objects that the
crown wall vertical black clouds, and human figures that appear in the phantasmagoria most
extravagant forms and the most romantic spot.

But sun, solar spectrum, sky, lakes, landscapes and mountains, visible for a moment, disappeared
then as if by magic in a few seconds. Alpnach the storm, spawned by the treacherous blow of Pilate,
rose, rose and rose, with a prodigious rate, climbing the mountain as a anger and wallowing in the
abyss its swirling gusts and rain with the violence of the sea angrily shaking his mane of immense
reefs. The waterspout rose to the top, wrapped completely the mountain, dark as we had seen playing
with his big night horrors, and vomited their hail falls often and arrows of water on top as the
sun browning had their tongues of fire. All returned to the hotel and request the dream.


On the back of the canvas I observed, as I now replaced the picture against the wall, a label
in Roland's handwriting, though in a younger and more running hand than he now wrote.  The
words were these "The best and bravest of our line, He charged by Sidney's side on the field
of Zutphen; he fought in Drake's ship against the armament of Spain.  If ever I have a--" 
The rest of the label seemed to have been torn off.

I turned away, and felt a remorseful shame that I had so far gratified my curiosity,--if by
so harsh a name the powerful interest that had absorbed me must be called.  I looked round
for Blanche; she had retreated from my side to the door, and, with her hands before her eyes,
was weeping.  As I stole towards her, my glance fell on a book that lay on a chair near the
casement and beside those relics of an infancy once pure and serene.  By the old-fashioned
silver clasps I recognized Roland's Bible.  I felt as if I had been almost guilty of profanation
in my thoughtless intrusion.  I drew away Blanche, and we descended the stairs noiselessly;
and not till we were on our favorite spot, amidst a heap of ruins on the feudal justice-hill,
did I seek to kiss away her tears and ask the cause.

"My poor brother!" sobbed Blanche, "they must have been his,--and we shall never, never see
him again!--and poor papa's Bible, which he reads when he is very, very sad!  I did not weep
enough when my brother died. I know better what death is now!  Poor papa! poor papa!  Don't
die, too, Sisty!"

There was no running after butterflies that morning; and it was long before I could soothe
Blanche.  Indeed, she bore the traces of dejection in her soft looks for many, many days; and
she often asked me, sighingly, "Don't you think it was very wrong in me to take you there?"
Poor little Blanche, true daughter of Eve, she would not let me bear my due share of the blame;
she would have it all, in Adam's primitive way of justice,--"The woman tempted me, and I did
eat."  And since then Blanche has seemed more fond than ever of Roland, and comparatively deserts
me to nestle close to him, and closer, till he looks up and says, "My child, you are pale;
go and run after the butterflies;" and she says now to him, not to me, "Come too!" drawing
him out into the sunshine with a hand that will not loose its hold.

Of all Roland's line, this Herbert de Caxton was "the best and bravest!" yet he had never named
that ancestor to me,--never put any forefather in comparison with the dubious and mythical
Sir William.  I now remembered once that, in going over the pedigree, I had been struck by
the name of Herbert,--the only Herbert in the scroll,--and had asked, "What of him, uncle?"
and Roland had muttered something inaudible, and turned away. And I remembered also that in
Roland's room there was the mark on the wall where a picture of that size had once hung.  The
picture had been removed thence before we first came, but must have hung there for years to
have left that mark on the wall,--perhaps suspended by Bolt during Roland's long Continental
absence.  "If ever I have a--"  What were the missing words?  Alas! did they not relate to
the son,--missed forever, evidently not forgotten still?

CHAPTER IV.

My uncle sat on one side the fireplace, my mother on the other; and I, at a small table between
them, prepared to note down the results of their conference; for they had met in high council,
to assess their joint fortunes,--determine what should be brought into the common stock and
set apart for the Civil List, and what should be laid aside as a Sinking Fund.  Now my mother,
true woman as she was, had a womanly love of show in her own quiet way,--of making "a genteel
figure" in the eyes of the neighborhood; of seeing that sixpence not only went as far as sixpence
ought to go, but that, in the going, it should emit a mild but imposing splendor,--not, indeed,
a gaudy flash, a startling Borealian coruscation, which is scarcely within the modest and placid
idiosyncracies of sixpence,--but a gleam of gentle and benign light, just to show where a sixpence
had been, and allow you time to say "Behold!" before

     "The jaws of darkness did devour it up."

Thus, as I once before took occasion to apprise the reader, we had always held a very respectable
position in the neighborhood round our square brick house; been as sociable as my father's
habits would permit; given our little tea-parties, and our occasional dinners, and, without
attempting to vie with our richer associates, there had always been so exquisite a neatness,
so notable a housekeeping, so thoughtful a disposition, in short, of all the properties indigenous
to a well-spent sixpence, in my mother's management, that there was not an old maid within
seven miles of us who did not pronounce our tea-parties to be perfect; and the great Mrs. Rollick,
who gave forty guineas a year to a professed cook and housekeeper, used regularly, whenever
we dined at Rollick Hall, to call across the table to my mother (who therewith blushed up to
her ears) to apologize for the strawberry jelly.  It is true that when, on returning home,
my mother adverted to that flattering and delicate compliment, in a tone that revealed the
self-conceit of the human heart, my father--whether to sober his Kitty's vanity into a proper
and Christian mortification of spirit, or from that strange shrewd ness which belonged to him--would
remark that Mrs. Rollick was of a querulous nature; that the compliment was meant, not to please
my mother, but to spite the professed cook and housekeeper, to whom the butler would be sure
to repeat the invidious apology.

In settling at the Tower, and assuming the head of its establishment, my mother was naturally
anxious that, poor battered invalid though the Tower was, it should still put its best leg
foremost.  Sundry cards, despite the thinness of the neighborhood, had been left at the door;
various invitations, which my uncle had hitherto declined, had greeted his occupation of the
ancestral ruin, and had become more numerous since the news of our arrival had gone abroad;
so that my mother saw before her a very suitable field for her hospitable accomplishments,--a
reasonable ground for her ambition that the Tower should hold up its head as became a Tower
that held the head of the family.

But not to wrong thee, O dear mother! as thou sittest there, opposite the grim Captain, so
fair and so neat,--with thine apron as white, and thy hair as trim and as sheen, and thy morning
cap, with its ribbons of blue, as coquettishly arranged as if thou hadst a fear that the least
negligence on thy part might lose thee the heart of thine Austin,--not to wrong thee by setting
down to frivolous motives alone thy feminine visions of the social amenities of life, I know
that thine heart, in its provident tenderness, was quite as much interested as ever thy vanities
could be, in the hospitable thoughts on which thou wert intent.  For, first and foremost, it
was the wish of thy soul that thine Austin might, as little as possible, be reminded of the
change in his fortunes,--might miss as little as possible those interruptions to his abstracted
scholarly moods at which, it is true, he used to fret and to pshaw and to cry Papa! but which
nevertheless always did him good, and freshened up the stream of his thoughts.  And, next,
it was the conviction of thine understanding that a little society and boon companionship,
and the proud pleasure of showing his ruins and presiding at the hall of his forefathers, would
take Roland out of those gloomy reveries into which he still fell at times.  And, thirdly,
for us young people, ought not Blanche to find companions in children of her own sex and age?
Already in those large black eyes there was something melancholy and brooding, as there is
in the eyes of all children who live only with their elders. And for Pisistratus, with his
altered prospects, and the one great gnawing memory at his heart,--which he tried to conceal
from himself, but which a mother (and a mother who had loved) saw at a glance,--what could
be better than such union and interchange with the world around us, small though that world
might be, as woman, sweet binder and blender of all social links, might artfully effect?  So
that thou didst not go, like the awful Florentine,--

          "Sopra for vanita che par persona,"--

"over thin shadows that mocked the substance of real forms," but rather it was the real forms
that appeared as shadows, or vanita.

What a digression!  Can I never tell my story in a plain, straightforward way?  Certainly I
was born under Cancer, and all my movements are circumlocutory, sideways, and crab-like.

CHAPTER V.

"I think, Roland," said my mother, "that the establishment is settled,-- Bolt, who is equal
to three men at least; Primmins, cook and housekeeper; Molly, a good, stirring girl, and willing
(though I've had some difficulty in persuading her to submit not to be called Anna Maria).
Their wages are but a small item, my clear Roland."

"Hem!" said Roland; "since we can't do with fewer servants at less wages, I suppose we must
call it small."

"It is so," said my mother, with mild positiveness.  "And indeed, what with the game and fish,
and the garden and poultry-yard, and your own mutton, our housekeeping will be next to nothing,"

"Hem!" again said the thrifty Roland, with a slight inflection of the beetle brows.  "It may
be next to nothing, ma'am,--sister,--just as a butcher's shop may be next to Northumberland
House; but there is a vast deal between nothing and that next neighbor you have given it."

This speech was so like one of my father's--so naive an imitation of that subtle reasoner's
use of the rhetorical figure called Antanaclasis (or repetition of the same words in a different
sense)--that I laughed and my mother smiled.  But she smiled reverently, not thinking of the
Antanaclasis, as, laying her hand on Roland's arm, she replied in the yet more formidable figure
of speech called Epiphonema (or exclamation), "Yet, with all your economy, you would have had us--"

"Tut!" cried my uncle, parrying the Epiphonema with a masterly Aposiopesis (or breaking off);
"tut! if you had done what I wished, I should have had more pleasure for my money!"

My poor mother's rhetorical armory supplied no weapon to meet that artful Aposiopesis; so she
dropped the rhetoric altogether, and went on with that "unadorned eloquence" natural to her,
as to other great financial reformers: "Well, Roland, but I am a good housewife, I assure you,
and--Don't scold; but that you never do;--I mean, don't look as if you would like to scold.
The fact is, that even after setting aside L100 a year for our little parties--"

"Little parties!--a hundred a year!" cried the Captain, aghast.

My mother pursued her way remorselessly,--"which we can well afford; and without counting your
half-pay, which you must keep for pocket-money and your wardrobe and Blanche's,--I calculate
that we can allow Pisistratus L150 a year, which, with the scholarship he is to get, will keep
him at Cambridge" (at that, seeing the scholarship was as yet amidst the Pleasures of Hope,
I shook my head doubtfully), "and," continued my mother, not heeding that sign of dissent,
"we shall still have something to lay by."

The Captain's face assumed a ludicrous expression of compassion and horror; he evidently thought
my mother's misfortunes had turned her head.

His tormentor continued.

"For," said my mother, with a pretty calculating shake of her head, and a movement of the right
forefinger towards the five fingers of the left hand, "L370,--the interest of Austin's fortune,--and
L50 that we may reckon for the rent of our house, make L420 a year.  Add your L330 a year from
the farm, sheep-walk, and cottages that you let, and the total is L750.  Now, with all we get
for nothing for our housekeeping, as I said before, we can do very well with L500 a year, and
indeed make a handsome figure.  So, after allowing Sisty L150, we still have L100 to lay by
for Blanche."

"Stop, stop, stop!" cried the Captain in great agitation; "who told you that I had L330 a year?"

"Why, Bolt,--don't be angry with him."

"Bolt is a blockhead.  From L330 a year take L200, and the remainder is all my income, besides
my half-pay."

My mother opened her eyes, and so did I.

"To that L130 add, if you please, L130 of your own.  All that you have over, my dear sister,
is yours or Austin's, or your boy's; but not a shilling can go to give luxuries to a miserly,
battered old soldier.  Do you understand me?"

"No, Roland," said my mother; "I don't understand you at all.  Does not your property bring
in L330 a year?"

"Yes, but it has a debt of L200 a year on it," said the Captain, gloomily and reluctantly.

"Oh, Roland!" cried my mother tenderly, and approaching so near that, had my father been in
the room, I am sure she would have been bold enough to kiss the stern Captain, though I never
saw him look sterner and less kissable.  "Oh, Roland!" cried my mother, concluding that famous
Epiphonema which my uncle's Aposiopesis had before nipped in the bud, "and yet you would have
made us, who are twice as rich, rob you of this little all!"

"Ah!" said Roland, trying to smile, "but I should have had my own way then, and starved you
shockingly.  No talk then of 'little parties' and such like.  But you must not now turn the
tables against me, nor bring your L420 a year as a set-off to my L130."

"Why," said my mother generously, "you forget the money's worth that you contribute,--all that
your grounds supply, and all that we save by it. I am sure that that's worth a yearly L300
at the least."

"Madam,--sister," said the Captain, "I'm sure you don't want to hurt my feelings.  All I have
to say is, that if you add to what I bring an equal sum,--to keep up the poor old ruin,--it
is the utmost that I can allow, and the rest is not more than Pisistratus can spend."

So saying, the Captain rose, bowed, and before either of us could stop him, hobbled out of
the room.

"Dear me, Sisty!" said my mother, wringing her hands; "I have certainly displeased him.  How
could I guess he had so large a debt on the property?"

"Did not he pay his son's debts?  Is not that the reason that--"

"Ah!" interrupted my mother, almost crying, "and it was that which ruffled him; and I not to
guess it!  What shall I do?"

"Set to work at a new calculation, dear mother, and let him have his own way."

"But then," said my mother, "your uncle will mope himself to death, and your father will have
no relaxation, while you see that he has lost his former object in his books.  And Blanche--and
you too.  If we were only to contribute what dear Roland does, I do not see how, with L260
a year, we could ever bring our neighbors round us!  I wonder what Austin would say!  I have
half a mind--No, I'll go and look over the week-books with Primmins."

My mother went her way sorrowfully, and I was left alone.

Then I looked on the stately old hall, grand in its forlorn decay.  And the dreams I had begun
to cherish at my heart swept over me, and hurried me along, far, far away into the golden land
whither Hope beckons youth. To restore my father's fortunes; re-weave the links of that broken
ambition which had knit his genius with the world; rebuild those fallen walls; cultivate those
barren moors; revive the ancient name; glad the old soldier's age; and be to both the brothers
what Roland had lost,--a son: these were my dreams; and when I woke from them, to! they had
left behind an intense purpose, a resolute object.

CHAPTER VI.

Letter From Pisistratus Caxton TO Albert Trevanion, Esq., M.P.

(The confession of a youth who in the Old World finds himself one too many.)

     My Dear Mr. Trevanion,--I thank you cordially, and so we do all,
     for your reply to my letter informing you of the villanous traps
     through which we have passed,--not indeed with whole skins, but
     still whole in life and limb,--which, considering that the traps
     were three, and the teeth sharp, was more than we could reasonably
     expect.  We have taken to the wastes, like wise foxes as we are,
     and I do not think a bait can be found that will again snare the
     fox paternal.  As for the fox filial it is different, and I am
     about to prove to you that he is burning to redeem the family
     disgrace.  Ah! my dear Mr. Trevanion, if you are busy with "blue-
     books" when this letter reaches you, stop here, and put it aside
     for some rare moment of leisure.  I am about to open my heart to
     you, and ask you, who know the world so well, to aid me in an
     escape from those flammantia maenia wherewith I find that world
     begirt and enclosed.  For look you, sir, you and my father were
     right when you both agreed that the mere book-life was not meant
     for me.  And yet what is not book-life, to a young man who would
     make his way through the ordinary and conventional paths to
     fortune?  All the professions are so book-lined, book-hemmed, book-
     choked, that wherever these strong hands of mine stretch towards
     action, they find themselves met by octavo ramparts, flanked with
     quarto crenellations.  For first, this college life, opening to
     scholarships, and ending, perchance, as you political economists
     would desire, in Malthusian fellowships,--premiums for celibacy,--
     consider what manner of thing it is!

     Three years, book upon book,--a great Dead Sea before one; three
     years long, and all the apples that grow on the shore full of the
     ashes of pica and primer!  Those three years ended, the fellowship,
     it may be, won,--still books, books, if the whole world does not
     close at the college gates.  Do I, from scholar, effloresce into
     literary man, author by profession?  Books, books!  Do I go into
     the law?  Books, books!  Ars longa, vita brevis, which,
     paraphrased, means that it is slow work before one fags one's way
     to a brief!  Do I turn doctor?  Why, what but books can kill time
     until, at the age of forty, a lucky chance may permit me to kill
     something else?  The Church (for which, indeed, I don't profess to
     be good enough),--that is book-life par excellence, whether,
     inglorious and poor, I wander through long lines of divines and
     Fathers; or, ambitious of bishoprics, I amend the corruptions, not
     of the human heart, but of a Greek text, and through defiles of
     scholiasts and commentators win my way to the See.  In short,
     barring the noble profession of arms,--which you know, after all,
     is not precisely the road to fortune,--can you tell me any means by
     which one may escape these eternal books, this mental clockwork and
     corporeal lethargy?  Where can this passion for life that runs riot
     through my veins find its vent?  Where can these stalwart limbs and
     this broad chest grow of value and worth in this hot-bed of
     cerebral inflammation and dyspeptic intellect?  I know what is in
     me; I know I have the qualities that should go with stalwart limbs
     and broad chest.  I have some plain common-sense, some promptitude
     and keenness, some pleasure in hardy danger, some fortitude in
     bearing pain,--qualities for which I bless Heaven, for they are
     qualities good and useful in private life.  But in the forum of
     men, in the market of fortune, are they not flocci, nauci, nihili?

     In a word, dear sir and friend, in this crowded Old World there is
     not the same room that our bold forefathers found for men to walk
     about and jostle their neighbors.  No; they must sit down like boys
     at the form, and work out their tasks, with rounded shoulders and
     aching fingers.  There has been a pastoral age, and a hunting age,
     and a fighting age; now we have arrived at the age sedentary.  Men
     who sit longest carry all before them,--puny, delicate fellows,
     with hands just strong enough to wield a pen, eyes so bleared by
     the midnight lamp that they see no joy in that buxom sun (which
     draws me forth into the fields, as life draws the living), and
     digestive organs worn and macerated by the relentless flagellation
     of the brain.  Certainly, if this is to be the Reign of Mind, it is
     idle to repine, and kick against the pricks; but is it true that
     all these qualities of action that are within me are to go for
     nothing?  If I were rich and happy in mind and circumstance, well
     and good; I should shoot, hunt, farm, travel, enjoy life, and snap
     my fingers at ambition.  If I were so poor and so humbly bred that
     I could turn gamekeeper or whipper in, as pauper gentlemen
     virtually did of old, well and good too; I should exhaust this
     troublesome vitality of mine by nightly battles with poachers, and
     leaps over double dikes and stone walls.  If I were so depressed of
     spirit that I could live without remorse on my father's small
     means, and exclaim, with Claudian, "The earth gives me feasts that
     cost nothing," well and good too; it were a life to suit a
     vegetable, or a very minor poet.  But as it is,--here I open
     another leaf of my heart to you!  To say that, being poor, I want
     to make a fortune, is to say that I am an Englishman.  To attach
     ourselves to a thing positive, belongs to our practical race.  Even
     in our dreams, if we build castles in the air, they are not Castles
     of Indolence,--indeed they have very little of the castle about
     them, and look much more like Hoare's Bank, on the east side of
     Temple Bar!  I desire, then, to make a fortune.  But I differ from
     my countrymen, first, by desiring only what you rich men would call
     but a small fortune; secondly, in wishing that I may not spend my
     whole life in that fortune-making.  Just see, now, how I am placed.

     Under ordinary circumstances, I must begin by taking from my father
     a large slice of an income that will ill spare paring.  According
     to my calculation, my parents and my uncle want all they have got,
     and the subtraction of the yearly sum on which Pisistratus is to
     live till he can live by his own labors, would be so much taken
     from the decent comforts of his kindred.  If I return to Cambridge,
     with all economy, I must thus narrow still more the res angusta
     domi; and when Cambridge is over, and I am turned loose upon the
     world,--failing, as is likely enough, of the support of a
     fellowship,--how many years must I work, or rather, alas! not work,
     at the Bar (which, after all, seems my best calling) before I can
     in my turn provide for those who, till then, rob themselves for me;
     till I have arrived at middle life, and they are old and worn out;
     till the chink of the golden bowl sounds but hollow at the ebbing
     well?  I would wish that, if I can make money, those I love best
     may enjoy it while enjoyment is yet left to them; that my father
     shall see "The History of Human Error" complete, bound in russia on
     his shelves; that my mother shall have the innocent pleasures that
     content her, before age steals the light from her happy smile; that
     before Roland's hair is snow-white (alas! the snows there thicken
     fast), he shall lean on my arm while we settle together where the
     ruin shall be repaired or where left to the owls, and where the
     dreary bleak waste around shall laugh with the gleam of corn.  For
     you know the nature of this Cumberland soil,--you, who possess much
     of it, and have won so many fair acres from the wild; you know that
     my uncle's land, now (save a single farm) scarce worth a shilling
     an acre, needs but capital to become an estate more lucrative than
     ever his ancestors owned.  You know that, for you have applied your
     capital to the same kind of land, and in doing so, what blessings--
     which you scarcely think of in your London library--you have
     effected, what mouths you feed, what hands you employ!  I have
     calculated that my uncle's moors, which now scarce maintain two or
     three shepherds, could, manured by money, maintain two hundred
     families by their labor.  All this is worth trying for; therefore
     Pisistratus wants to make money.  Not so much,--he does not require
     millions; a few spare thousand pounds would go a long way, and with
     a modest capital to begin with, Roland should become a true
     squire,--a real landowner, not the mere lord of a desert.  Now
     then, dear sir, advise me how I may, with such qualities as I
     possess, arrive at that capital--ay, and before it is too late--so
     that money-making may not last till my grave.

     Turning in despair from this civilized world of ours, I have cast
     my eyes to a world far older,--and yet more to a world in its giant
     childhood.  India here, Australia there,--what say you, sir, you
     who will see dispassionately those things that float before my eyes
     through a golden haze, looming large in the distance?  Such is my
     confidence in your judgment that you have but to say, "Fool, give
     up thine El Dorados and stay at home; stick to the books and the
     desk; annihilate that redundance of animal life that is in thee;
     grow a mental machine: thy physical gifts are of no avail to thee;
     take thy place among the slaves of the Lamp,"--and I will obey
     without a murmur.  But if I am right; if I have in me attributes
     that here find no market; if my repinings are but the instincts of
     nature that, out of this decrepit civilization, desire vent for
     growth in the young stir of some more rude and vigorous social
     system,--then give me, I pray, that advice which may clothe my idea
     in some practical and tangible embodiments.  Have I made myself
     understood?

     We take no newspaper here, but occasionally one finds its way from
     the parsonage; and I have lately rejoiced at a paragraph that spoke
     of your speedy entrance into the Administration as a thing certain.
     I write to you before you are a minister, and you see what I seek
     is not in the way of official patronage.  A niche in an office,--
     oh, to me that were worse than all!  Yet I did labor hard with you,
     but,--that was different.  I write to you thus frankly, knowing
     your warm, noble heart, and as if you were my father.  Allow me to
     add my humble but earnest congratulations on Miss Trevanion's
     approaching marriage with one worthy, if not of her, at least of
     her station.  I do so as becomes one whom you have allowed to
     retain the right to pray for the happiness of you and yours.  My
     dear Mr. Trevanion, this is a long letter, and I dare not even read
     it over, lest, if I do, I should not send it.  Take it with all its
     faults, and judge of it with that kindness with which you have
     judged ever,

               Your grateful and devoted servant,

               Pisistratus Caxton.

Letter From Albert Trevanion, Esq., M. P., To Pisistratus Caxton.

     Library of the House of Commons, Tuesday Night.

     My Dear Pisistratus,-- ----- is up; we are in for it for two mortal
     hours!  I take flight to the library, and devote those hours to
     you. Carmela, Carmela, come back on you.

CARMELA (returning from his swoon and rise.) Oh, my Jesus!

SEELENFÜHRER .-- girl, answer me frankly.

Have you been teasing me? What mischief are yours?

CARMELA .-- What mischief must be but that V. and that makes me have
finally cost me expensive?

I had a nightmare ferocious round I've fallen on the floor, and I am sure I have the body covered
with bruises.

SEELENFÜHRER .-- And do not remember anything you said?

CARMELA .-- Nothing memory. Let me V. now. I have need of rest.

(Carmela leaves.)

AUTHOR .-- My dear Doctor: I do not know what to think of what I see and hear, but frankly, all
this pessimism, atheism and spiritualism seem unhealthy and absurd.

SEELENFÜHRER .-- I knew V. thought and V. is a metaphysical surface, mocking and skeptical he
does not know what fish .-- You are an infidel, dated in over a hundred years, a disciple Voltaire.

I
will be as .-- AUTHOR V. he pleases.

Although I have not taken per teacher Voltaire, Voltaire I enjoy,
and the Germans pessimistic bore me.

Voltaire's Candide though, was not a radical pessimist.

      Voltaire, at bottom, was as optimistic
    as Leibnitz, who wanted to mock. I would
    be easy to prove, if he were not in
    a hurry. As for the skepticism, I
    say Voltaire never seriously denied
    the highest and consoling truths
    that are fundamental the existence
    of God, His justice, His providence,
    and freedom and responsibility of
    man. I venture, finally, to take
    for granted that, if Voltaire had not
    provided the abominable and desperate
    schemes of recent times, instead of waging
    war against Christianity had become
      friendly with the Jesuits, had heard
    Mass daily, he fasted once a week and
    each month had confessed a couple of times.

SANTA

(Episode
    of the Mahabharata)
    
    The king of Anga, Lomapad glorious
    A Brahmin offended, not giving a
    reward A sacrifice that should give.
    Then angry Brahmin Everyone came
    out of his kingdom: the smoke Holocaust
    did not rise to heaven; Indra denied
    the fruitful rain, And the misery the
    people ate. Lomapad, dismayed, wanted
    to know The opinion of learned men,
    And they called a council, and asked
    What means were to appease the wrath
    God of lightning and piles launches
    In the sky the water the rapids. Thousand
    sentences were given, but after The
    wisest of the wise men said: - Hear
    O King! brahman while no That
    sacrifice in this land offers, Indra
    did not quench his thirst opening The
    liquid wealth of the clouds. The Brahmins,
    moved to anger, The sacrifice is not provided.
    Hey To meet the venerable rite Finding
    only a priest can. In the fertile banks
    of Kausiki, As elusive and hidden in the
    forest, Of humane treatment away,
      your home Vinfandák is the son of Kasyapa,
    Brahman austere and penitent. Live In
    the wilderness with him his only
    son, The pious youth Risyaringa. He saw
    no better man than his father
    ever; Only wild fruits, herbs only
    And liquor flowing among rocks only,
    Gave food and drink. So innocent and pure
      is the youth, That is what women have
    no idea. Command therefore king, a beautiful
    maiden Go to the woods, talked, and spell
    Love, captivated the city will bring.
    As soon as your foot in your thirsty
    fields The stamped mark, do not hesitate,
    Indra Suitable for irrigation will sigh.
    Thus spoke the wise and judicious notice King
    was very pleased. Money and honors He promised the maid Lomapad That
business brought into the naive young man But all watched with horror
Vifandák the curse of horrible, And they cried: - O Prince! forgives
Does not reach such extremes our audacity. Meanwhile, so fierce were
showing The drought and famine, who lost All hope the king and his
subjects When St., King's only daughter, Virgin for his wonderful
beauty, Modestly approached his father Thus spoke: - If you want,
my father I shall try to come to our land The young man was not human.  Don't dream of emigrating unless you can enjoy its
     hardships,--to bear them is not enough!

     Australia is the land for you, as you seem to surmise.  Australia
     is the land for two classes of emigrants: first, the man who has
     nothing but his wits, and plenty of them; secondly, the man who has
     a small capital, and who is contented to spend ten years in
     trebling it.  I assume that you belong to the latter class.  Take
     out L3,000, and before you are thirty years old you may return with
     L10,000 or L12,000.  If that satisfies you, think seriously of
     Australia.  By coach, tomorrow, I will send you down all the best
     books and reports on the subject; and I will get you what detailed
     information I can from the Colonial Office.  Having read these, and
     thought over them dispassionately, spend some months yet among the
     sheep-walks of Cumberland; learn all you can from all the shepherds
     you can find,--from Thyrsis to Menalcas.  Do more,--fit yourself in
     every way for a life in the Bush, where the philosophy of the
     division of labor is not yet arrived at.  Learn to turn your hand
     to everything.  Be something of a smith, something of a carpenter,
     --do the best you can with the fewest tools; make yourself an
     excellent shot; break in all the wild horses and ponies you can
     borrow and beg.  Even if you want to do none of these things when
     in your settlement, the having learned to do them will fit you for
     many other things not now foreseen.  De-fine-gentlemanize yourself
     from the crown of your head to the sole of your foot, and become
     the greater aristocrat for so doing; for he is more than an
     aristocrat, he is a king, who suffices in all things for himself,--
     who is his own master, because he wants no valetaille.  I think
     Seneca has expressed that thought before me; and I would quote the
     passage, but the book, I fear, is not in the library of the House
     of Commons.  But now (cheers, by Jove!  I suppose ---- is down.  Ah!
     it is so; and C--- is up, and that cheer followed a sharp hit at me.
     How I wish I were your age, and going to Australia with you!)--But
     now--to resume my suspended period--but now to the important
     point,--capital.  You must take that, unless you go as a shepherd,
     and then good-by to the idea of L10,000 in ten years.  So, you see,
     it appears at the first blush that you must still come to your
     father; but, you will say, with this difference, that you borrow
     the capital with every chance of repaying it instead of frittering
     away the income year after year till you are eight and thirty or
     forty at least.  Still, Pisistratus, you don't, in this, gain your
     object at a leap; and my dear old friend ought not to lose his son
     and his money too.  You say you write to me as to your own father.
     You know I hate, professions; and if you did not mean what you say,
     you have offended me mortally.  As a father, then, I take a
     father's rights, and speak plainly.  A friend of mine, Mr. Bolding,
     a clergyman, has a son,--a wild fellow, who is likely to get into
     all sorts of scrapes in England, but with plenty of good in him
     notwithstanding, frank, bold, not wanting in talent, but rather in
     prudence, easily tempted and led away into extravagance.  He would
     make a capital colonist (no such temptations in the Bush!) if tied
     to a youth like you.  Now I propose, with your leave, that his
     father shall advance him L1,500, which shall not, however, be
     placed in his hands, but in yours, as head partner in the firm.
     You, on your side, shall advance the same sum of L1,500, which you
     shall borrow from me for three years without interest.  At the end
     of that time interest shall commence; and the capital, with the
     interest on the said first three years, shall be repaid to me, or
     my executors, on your return.  After you have been a year or two in
     the Bush, and felt your way, and learned your business, you may
     then safely borrow L1,500 more from your father; and, in the mean
     while, you and your partner will have had together the full sum of
     L3,000 to commence with.  You see in this proposal I make you no
     gift, and I run no risk even by your death.  If you die insolvent,
     I will promise to come on your father, poor fellow; for small joy
     and small care will he have then in what may be left of his
     fortune.  There--I have said all; and I will never forgive you if
     you reject an aid that will serve you so much and cost me so
     little.

     I accept your congratulations on Fanny's engagement with Lord
     Castleton.  When you return from Australia you will still be a
     young man, she (though about your own years) almost a middle-aged
     woman, with her head full of pomps and vanities. In those counties the priest in charge of managing religious
interests of free flock derives its authority from the believers who place their trust in him
and the bishop does nothing to confirm the election or consecrate. It is the right of patronage
of its rightful owner, the people of faith, or is somewhat reminiscent of the early church.
I believe that to this singular advantage must mainly attributed the phenomenon (which is today
and was not in time) of the coexistence Roman Catholicism with liberty and pure democratic republic
in the cantons of I am speaking Catholicism, practiced as it existed in the first centuries of
the church, is indeed a religion essentially democratic, because it is not only the religion
of fraternizing crowds, but also test the free will of the flock in the acceptance their pastors.
The habit of electing freely has been kept alive and persistent Uri, Schwyz and Nidwalden the democratic
feeling of the right of each and every one of the partners, because nothing so powerfully influences
on the ideas, customs, and institutions policies of a nation as religious practices and traditions.
These are the starting the man in possession of his conscience, and having a conscience free,
healthy and dignified in religion, can only have it on moral and political issues.

Another interesting phenomenon that shows in these counties corresponding
to the basins of lakes district in Zurich and the Four-cantons, is
the contrast between peoples political traditions not dissimilar in
race, language and religion, and whose borders are in fact imperceptible,
since the topography is smooth.

Indeed, they are in contact in these two lake basins of seven or eight cantons whose institutions
have differed and still differ greatly, and the spirit of its inhabitants. In Lucerne, the
trend has prevailed very aristocratic exaggerated and absolute centralization. In the half-cantons
of Nidwalden and Uri, Schwyz and Zug, pure democratic republic, decentralized to all districts.
In Glarus has governed worse than the aristocratic government: the most retrograde theocracy or
stagnant. Finally, Saint-Gall (formerly dominated by abbots and bishops) and district in Zurich,
has predominated tempered liberal spirit: that of the representative republic, which emanate
from any authority Legislative Assembly elected by the people.

How to explain such marked differences between similar populations that have almost the same history
and play an almost common ground? Explanation will be sought in isolation secular of a trade and
contact with other advanced nations

?
  Far from me, as from any mind of some manliness, be the attempt
to create interest by dwelling at length on the struggles against a rash and misplaced attachment,
which it was my duty to overcome; but all such love, as I have before implied, is a terrible
unsettler,--

     "Where once such fairies dance, no grass doth ever grow."

To re-enter boyhood, go with meek docility through its disciplined routine--how hard had I
found that return, amidst the cloistered monotony of college!  My love for my father, and my
submission to his wish, had indeed given some animation to objects otherwise distasteful; but
now that my return to the University must be attended with positive privation to those at home,
the idea became utterly hateful and repugnant.  Under pretence that I found myself, on trial,
not yet sufficiently prepared to do credit to my father's name, I had easily obtained leave
to lose the ensuing college term and pursue my studies at home.  This gave me time to prepare
my plans and bring round -----.  How shall I ever bring round to my adventurous views those
whom I propose to desert?  Hard it is to get on in the world,--very hard; but the most painful
step in the way is that which starts from the threshold of a beloved home.

How--ah, how indeed!  "No, Blanche, you cannot join me to-day;  I am going out for many hours.
So it will be late before I can be home."

Home,--the word chokes me!  Juba slinks back to his young mistress, disconsolate; Blanche gazes
at me ruefully from our favorite hill-top, and the flowers she has been gathering fall unheeded
from her basket.  I hear my mother's voice singing low as she sits at work by her open casement.
How,--ah, how indeed!

