THE YOUNG STEP-MOTHER;

or

A CHRONICLE OF MISTAKES.

By CHARLOTTE M YONGE

Fail--yet rejoice, because no less The failure that makes thy distress May teach another full
success.

Nor with thy share of work be vexed
Though incomplete and even perplexed
It fits exactly to the next.
                       ADELAIDE A PROCTOR

CHAPTER I.

'Have you talked it over with her?' said Mr. Ferrars, as his little slender wife met him under
the beeches that made an avenue of the lane leading to Fairmead vicarage.

'Yes!' was the answer, which the vicar was not slow to understand.

'I cannot say I expected much from your conversation, and perhaps we ought not to wish it.
We are likely to see with selfish eyes, for what shall we do without her?'

'Dear Albinia!  You always taunted me with having married your sister as much as yourself.'

'So I shall again, if you cannot give her up with a good grace.'

'If I could have had my own way in disposing of her.'

'Perhaps the hero of your own composition might be less satisfactory to her than is Kendal.'

'At least he should be minus the children!'

'I fancy the children are one great attraction.  Do you know how many there are?'

'Three; but if Albinia knows their ages she involves them in a discreet haze.  I imagine some
are in their teens.'

'Impossible, Winifred, he is hardly five-and-thirty.'

'Thirty-eight, he said yesterday, and he married very early.  I asked Albinia if her son would
be in tail-coats; but she thought I was laughing at her, and would not say.  She is quite eager
at the notion of being governess to the girls.'

'She has wanted scope for her energies,' said Mr. Ferrars.  'Even spoiling her nephew, and
being my curate, have not afforded field enough for her spirit of usefulness.'

'That is what I am afraid of.'

'Of what, Winifred?'

'That it is my fault.  Before our marriage, you and she were the whole world to each other;
but since I came, I have seen, as you say, that the craving for work was strong, and I fear
it actuates her more than she knows.'

'No such thing.  It is a case of good hearty love.  What, are you afraid of that, too?'

'Yes, I am.  I grudge her giving her fresh whole young heart away to a man who has no return
to make.  His heart is in his first wife's grave.  Yes, you may smile, Maurice, as if I were
talking romance; but only look at him, poor man!  Did you ever see any one so utterly broken
down?  She can hardly beguile a smile from him.'

'His melancholy is one of his charms in her eyes.'

'So it may be, as a sort of interesting romance.  I am sure I pity the poor man heartily, but
to see her at three-and-twenty, with her sweet face and high spirits, give herself away to
a man who looks but half alive, and cannot, if he would, return that full first love--have
the charge of a tribe of children, be spied and commented on by the first wife's relations--Maurice,
I cannot bear it.'

'It is not what we should have chosen,' said her husband, 'but it has a bright side.  Kendal
is a most right-minded, superior man, and she appreciates him thoroughly.  She has great energy
and cheerfulness, and if she can comfort him, and rouse him into activity, and be the kind
mother she will be to his poor children, I do not think we ought to grudge her from our own home.'

'You and she have so strong a feeling for motherless children!'

'Thinking of Kendal as I do, I have but one fear for her.'

'I have many--the chief being the grandmother.'

'Mine will make you angry, but it is my only one. The first theme of the movement proper (beginning
at the Allegro con anima), on the same harmonic basis as the motto
and derived from it rhythmically, is given out pp by a solo clarinet
and solo bassoon, accompanied by very light detached chords in the
strings, e.g.

[Music]

This is elaborately and brilliantly developed
until, in measure 79 (counting from the Allegro), we reach a transitional,
subsidiary theme in B minor.

This is followed by some striking sequences, exquisitely scored, and then (at un pochettino
più animato) there is a quickened presentation of the transitional
theme, interspersed by syncopated calls--on the horns and wood-wind--a
presentation which introduces the second theme in D major, marked
molto più tranquillo.

  Have you heard anything about these connexions of his? Did you not write
to Mrs. Nugent?  I wish she were at home.'

'I had her answer by this afternoon's post, but there is nothing to tell.  Mr. Kendal has only
been settled at Bayford Bridge a few years, and she never visited any one there, though Mr.
Nugent had met Mr. Kendal several times before his wife's death, and liked him. Emily is charmed
to have Albinia for a neighbour.'

'Does she know nothing of the Meadows' family?'

'Nothing but that old Mrs. Meadows lives in the town with one unmarried daughter.  She speaks
highly of the clergyman.'

'John Dusautoy?  Ay, he is admirable--not that I have done more than see him at visitations
when he was curate at Lauriston.'

'Is he married?'

'I fancy he is, but I am not sure.  There is one good friend for Albinia any way!'

'And now for your investigations.  Did you see Colonel Bury?'

'I did, but he could say little more than we knew.  He says nothing could be more exemplary
than Kendal's whole conduct in India, he only regretted that he kept so much aloof from others,
that his principle and gentlemanly feeling did not tell as much as could have been wished.
He has always been wrapped up in his own pursuits--a perfect dictionary of information.'

'We had found out that, though he is so silent.  I should think him a most elegant scholar.'

'And a deep one.  He has studied and polished his acquirements to the utmost.  I assure you,
Winifred, I mean to be proud of my brother-in-law.'

'What did you hear of the first wife?'

'It was an early marriage.  He went home as soon as he had sufficient salary, married her,
and brought her out.  She was a brilliant dark beauty, who became quickly a motherly, housewifely,
common-place person--I should think there had been a poet's love, never awakened from.'

'The very thing that has always struck me when, poor man, he has tried to be civil to me. 
Here is a man, sensible himself, but who has never had the hap to live with sensible women.'

'When their children grew too old for India, she came into some little property at Bayford
Bridge, which enabled him to retire. Colonel Bury came home in the same ship, and saw much
of them, liked him better and better, and seems to have been rather wearied by her. A very
good woman, he says, and Kendal most fondly attached; but as to comparing her with Miss Ferrars,
he could not think of it for a moment.  So they settled at Bayford, and there, about two years
ago, came this terrible visitation of typhus fever.'

'I remember how Colonel Bury used to come and sigh over his friend's illness and trouble.'

'He could not help going over it again.  The children all fell ill together--the two eldest
were twin boys, one puny, the other a very fine fellow, and his father's especial pride and
delight.  As so often happens, the sickly one was spared, the healthy one was taken.'

'Then Albinia will have an invalid on her hands!'

'The Colonel says this Edmund was a particularly promising boy, and poor Kendal felt the loss
dreadfully.  He sickened after that, and his wife was worn out with nursing and grief, and
sank under the fever at once.  Poor Kendal has never held up his head since; he had a terrible
relapse.'

'And,' said Winifred, 'he no sooner recovers than he goes and marries our Albinia!'

'Two years, my dear.'

'Pray explain to me, Maurice, why, when people become widowed in any unusually lamentable way,
they always are the first to marry again.'

'Incorrigible.  I meant to make you pity him.'

'I did, till I found I had wasted my pity.  Why could not these Meadowses look after his children!
Why must the Colonel bring him here?  I believe it was with malice prepense!'

'The Colonel went to see after him, and found him so drooping and wretched, that he insisted
on bringing him home with him, and old Mrs. Meadows and her daughter almost forced him to accept
the invitation.'

'They little guessed what the Colonel would be at!'

'You will be better now you have the Colonel to abuse,' said her husband.

'And pray what do you mean to say to the General?'

'Exactly what I think.'

'And to the aunts?' slyly asked the wife.

'I think I shall leave you all that correspondence.  It will be too edifying to see you making
common cause with the aunts.'

'That comes of trying to threaten one's husband; and here they come,' said Winifred.  'Well,
Maurice, what can't be cured must be endured. Albinia'a heart is gone, he is a very good man,
and spite of India, first wife, and melancholy, he does not look amiss!'

Mr. Ferrars smiled at the chary, grudging commendation of the tall, handsome man who advanced
through the beech-wood, but it was too true that his clear olive complexion had not the line
of health, that there was a world of oppression on his broad brow and deep hazel eyes, and
that it was a dim, dreamy, reluctant smile that was awakened by the voice of the lady who walked
by his side, as if reverencing his grave mood.

She was rather tall, very graceful, and well made, but her features were less handsome than
sweet, bright, and sensible.  Her hair was nut-brown, in long curled waves; her eyes, deep
soft grey, and though downcast under the new sympathies, new feelings, and responsibilities
that crowded on her, the smile and sparkle that lighted them as she blushed and nodded to her
brother and sister, showed that liveliness was the natural expression of that engaging face.

Say what they would, it was evident that Albinia Ferrars had cast in her lot with Edmund Kendal,
and that her energetic spirit and love of children animated her to embrace joyfully the cares
which such a choice must impose on her.

As might have been perceived by one glance at the figure, step, and bearing of Mr. Ferrars,
perfectly clerical though they were, he belonged to a military family.  His father had been
a distinguished Peninsular officer, and his brother, older by many years, held a command in
Canada.  Maurice and Albinia, early left orphans, had, with a young cousin, been chiefly under
the charge of their aunts, Mrs. Annesley and Miss Ferrars, and had found a kind home in their
house in Mayfair, until Maurice had been ordained to the family living of Fairmead, and his
sister had gone to live with him there, extorting the consent of her elder brother to her spending
a more real and active life than her aunts' round of society could offer her.

The aunts lamented, but they could seldom win their darling to them for more than a few weeks
at a time, even after their nephew Maurice had--as they considered--thrown himself away on
a little lively lady of Irish parentage, no equal in birth or fortune, in their opinion, for
the grandson of Lord Belraven.

They had been very friendly to the young wife, but their hopes had all the more been fixed
on Albinia; and even Winifred could afford them some generous pity in the engagement of their
favourite niece to a retired East India Company's servant--a widower with three children.

CHAPTER II.

The equinoctial sun had long set, and the blue haze of March east wind had deepened into twilight
and darkness when Albinia Kendal found herself driving down the steep hilly street of Bayford.
The town was not large nor modern enough for gas, and the dark street was only lighted here
and there by a shop of more pretension; the plate-glass of the enterprising draper, with the
light veiled by shawls and ribbons, the 'purple jars,' green, ruby, and crimson of the chemist;
and the modest ray of the grocer, revealing busy heads driving Saturday-night bargains.

'How well I soon shall know them all,' said Albinia, looking at her husband, though she knew
she could not see his face, as he leant back silently in his corner, and she tried to say no
more.  She was sure that coming home was painful to him; he had been so willing to put it off,
and to prolong those pleasant seaside days, when there had been such pleasant reading, walking,
musing, and a great deal of happy silence.

Down the hill, and a little way on level ground--houses on one side, something like hedge or
shrubbery on the other--a stop--a gate opened--a hollow sound beneath the carriage, as though
crossing a wooden bridge--trees--bright windows--an open door--and light streaming from it.

'Here is your home, Albinia,' said that deep musical voice that she loved the better for the
subdued melancholy of the tones, and the suppressed sigh that could not be hidden.

'And my children,' she eagerly said, as he handed her out, and, springing to the ground, she
hurried to the open door opposite, where, in the lamp-light, she saw, moving about in shy curiosity
and embarrassment, two girls in white frocks and broad scarlet sashes, and a boy, who, as she
advanced, retreated with his younger sister to the fireplace, while the elder one, a pretty,
and rather formal looking girl of twelve, stood forward.

Albinia held out her arms, saying, 'You are Lucy, I am sure,' and eagerly kissed the girl's
smiling, bright face.

'Yes, I am Lucy,' was the well-pleased answer, 'I am glad you are come.'

'I hope we shall be very good friends,' said Albinia, with the sweet smile that few, young
or old, could resist.  'And this is Gilbert,' as she kissed the blushing cheek of a thin boy
of thirteen--'and Sophia.'

Sophia, who was eleven, had not stirred to meet her.  She alone inherited her father's fine
straight profile, and large black eyes, but she had the heaviness of feature that sometimes
goes with very dark complexions.  The white frock did not become her brown neck and arms, her
thick black hair was arranged in too womanly a manner, and her head and face looked too large;
moreover, there was no lighting-up to answer the greeting, and Albinia was disappointed.

Poor child, she thought, she is feeling deeply that I am an interloper, it will be different
now her father is coming.

Mr. Kendal was crossing the hall, and as he entered he took the hand and kissed the forehead
of each of the three, but Sophia stood with the same half sullen indifference--it might be
shyness, or sensibility.

'How much you are grown!' he said, looking at the children with some surprise.

In fact, though Albinia knew their ages, they were all on a larger scale than she had expected,
and looked too old for the children of a man of his youthful appearance.  Gilbert had the slight
look of rapid growth; Lucy, though not so tall, and with a small, clear, bright face, had the
air of a little woman, and Sophia's face might have befitted any age.

'Yes, papa,' said Lucy; 'Gilbert has grown an inch-and-a-half since October, for we measured him.'

'Have you been well, Gilbert?' continued Mr. Kendal, anxiously.

'I have the toothache, said Gilbert, piteously.

'Happily, nothing more serious,' thrust in Lucy; 'Mr. Bowles told Aunt Maria that he considers
Gilbert's health much improved.'

Albinia asked some kind questions about the delinquent tooth, but the answers were short; and,
to put an end to the general constraint, she asked Lucy to show her to her room.

It was a pretty bay-windowed room, and looked cheerful in the firelight.  Lucy's tongue was
at once unloosed, telling that Gilbert's tutor, Mr. Salsted, had insisted on his having his
tooth extracted, and that he had refused, saying it was quite well; but Lucy gave it as her
opinion that he much preferred the toothache to his lessons.

'Where does Mr. Salsted live?'

'At Tremblam, about two miles off; Gilbert rides the pony over there every day, except when
he has the toothache, and then he stays at home.'

'And what do you do?'

'We went to Miss Belmarche till the end of our quarter, and since that we have been at home,
or with grandmamma.  Do you really mean that we are to study with you?'

'I should like it, my dear.  I have been looking forward very much to teaching you and Sophia.'

'Thank you, mamma.'

The word was said with an effort as if it came strangely, but it thrilled Albinia's heart,
and she kissed Lucy, who clung to her, and returned the caress.

'I shall tell Gilbert and Sophy what a dear mamma you are,' she said. 'Do you know, Sophy says
she shall never call you anything but Mrs. Kendal; and I know Gilbert means the same.'

'Let them call me whatever suits them best,' said Albinia; 'I had rather they waited till they
feel that they like to call me as you have done--thank you for it, dear Lucy.  You must not
fancy I shall be at all hurt at your thinking of times past.  I shall want you to tell me of
them, and of your own dear mother, and what will suit papa best.'

Lucy looked highly gratified, and eagerly said, 'I am sure I shall love you just like my own
mamma.'

'No,' said Albinia, kindly; 'I do not expect that, my dear.  I don't ask for any more than
you can freely give, dear child.  You must bear with having me in that place, and we will try
and help each other to make your papa comfortable; and, Lucy, you will forgive me, if I am
impetuous, and make mistakes.'

Lucy's little clear black eyes looked as if nothing like this had ever come within her range
of observation, and Albinia could sympathize with her difficulty of reply. 

The Russian liturgy is exceedingly old, and Russian church music, always unaccompanied, has
long been celebrated for its dignified character, especially those
portions rendered by men's voices, which are capable of unusually
low notes,[305] as majestic as those of an organ.
She said something good-natured to each, but neither responded graciously, and Lucy went on
talking, showing off the room, the chiffonieres, the ornaments, and some pretty Indian ivory
carvings.  There was a great ottoman of Aunt Maria's work, and a huge cushion with an Arab
horseman, that Lucy would uncover, whispering, 'Poor mamma worked it,' while Sophy visibly
winced, and Albinia hurried it into the chintz cover again, lest Mr. Kendal should come.  But
Lucy had full time to be communicative about the household with such a satisfied, capable manner,
that Albinia asked if she had been keeping house all this time.

'No; old Nurse kept the keys, and managed till now; but she went this morning.'

Sophy's mouth twitched.

'She was so very fond--' continued Lucy.

'Don't!' burst out Sophy, almost the first word Albinia had heard from her; but no more passed,
for Mr. Kendal came in, and Lucy's conversation instantly was at an end.'

Before him she was almost as silent as the others, and he seldom addressed himself to her,
only inquiring once after her grandmamma's health, and once calling Sophy out of the way when
she was standing between the fire and--He finished with the gesture of command, whether he
said 'Your mamma,' none could tell.

