By way of an apologue for the aged, when they feel more  than usually tempted to offer their
advice, let me recommend  the following little tale.  A child who had been remarkably  fond
of toys (and in particular of lead soldiers) found  himself growing to the level of acknowledged
boyhood without  any abatement of this childish taste.  He was thirteen;  already he had been
taunted for dallying overlong about the  playbox; he had to blush if he was found among his
lead  soldiers; the shades of the prison-house were closing about  him with a vengeance.  There
is nothing more difficult than to  put the thoughts of children into the language of their
elders; but this is the effect of his meditations at this  juncture: "Plainly," he said, "I
must give up my playthings,  in the meanwhile, since I am not in a position to secure  myself
against idle jeers.  At the same time, I am sure that  playthings are the very pick of life;
all people give them up  out of the same pusillanimous respect for those who are a  little
older; and if they do not return to them as soon as  they can, it is only because they grow
stupid and forget.  I  shall be wiser; I shall conform for a little to the ways of  their foolish
world; but so soon as I have made enough money,  I shall retire and shut myself up among my
playthings until  the day I die." Glimmers . . . goes out . . . and there, O, there where it fades, What
grace, what glamour, what wild will, Transfigure the shadows? Whose, Heart of my heart, Soul
of my soul, but yours?

Ghosts--ghosts--the sapphirine air Teems with them even to the gleaming ends Of the wild day-spring!
Ghosts, Everywhere--everywhere--till I and you At last--dear love,
at last! - Are in the dreaming, even as Life and Death, Twin-ministers
of the unoriginal Will.

XI

Gulls in an aery morrice Gleam and vanish and gleam . . . The full sea, sleepily basking, Dreams
under skies of dream.

Gulls in an aery morrice Circle and swoop and close . . . Fuller and ever fuller The rose of
the morning blows.

Gulls, in an aery morrice Frolicking, float and fade . . . O, the way of a bird in the sunshine,
The way of a man with a maid!

XII

Some starlit garden grey with dew, Some chamber flushed with wine and fire, What matters where,
so I and you Are worthy our desire?
Behind, a past that scolds and jeers For ungirt loins and lamps unlit;
In front, the unmanageable years, The trap upon the Pit;

Think on
the shame of dreams for deeds, The scandal of unnatural strife, The
slur upon immortal needs, The treason done to life:

Arise! no more
a living lie, And with me quicken and control Some memory that shall
magnify The universal Soul.

What of the incantation That forced the
huddled shapes on yonder shore To take and wear the night Like a material
majesty? That touched the shafts of wavering fire About this miserable
welter and wash - (River, O River of Journeys, River of Dreams!) -
Into long, shining signals from the panes Of an enchanted pleasure-house,
Where life and life might live life lost in life For ever and evermore?

O
Death! O Change! O Time! Without you, O, the insuperable eyes Of these
poor Might-Have-Beens, These fatuous, ineffectual Yesterdays!

XIV--To
J. A. C.

Fresh from his fastnesses Wholesome and spacious, The North
Wind, the mad huntsman, Halloas on his white hounds Over the grey,
roaring Reaches and ridges, The forest of ocean, The chace of the
world.  How if there were no centre at all, but just one alley  after another, and the whole
world a labyrinth without end or  issue?

I overheard the other day a scrap of conversation, which  I take the liberty to reproduce.
"What I advance is true,"  said one.  "But not the whole truth," answered the other.   "Sir,"
returned the first (and it seemed to me there was a  smack of Dr. Johnson in the speech), "Sir,
there is no such  thing as the whole truth!"  Indeed, there is nothing so  evident in life
as that there are two sides to a question.   History is one long illustration.  The forces
of nature are  engaged, day by day, in cudgelling it into our backward  intelligences.  We
never pause for a moment's consideration  but we admit it as an axiom.  An enthusiast sways
humanity  exactly by disregarding this great truth, and dinning it into  our ears that this
or that question has only one possible  solution; and your enthusiast is a fine florid fellow,
dominates things for a while and shakes the world out of a  doze; but when once he is gone,
an army of quiet and  uninfluential people set to work to remind us of the other  side and
demolish the generous imposture.  While Calvin is  putting everybody exactly right in his INSTITUTES,
and hot- headed Knox is thundering in the pulpit, Montaigne is already  looking at the other
side in his library in Perigord, and  predicting that they will find as much to quarrel about
in the  Bible as they had found already in the Church.  Age may have  one side, but assuredly
Youth has the other.  There is nothing  more certain than that both are right, except perhaps
that  both are wrong.  Let them agree to differ; for who knows but  what agreeing to differ
may not be a form of agreement rather  than a form of difference?

I suppose it is written that any one who sets up for a  bit of a philosopher, must contradict
himself to his very  face.  For here have I fairly talked myself into thinking that  we have
the whole thing before us at last; that there is no  answer to the mystery, except that there
are as many as you  please; that there is no centre to the maze because, like the  famous sphere,
its centre is everywhere; and that agreeing to  differ with every ceremony of politeness, is
the only "one  undisturbed song of pure concent" to which we are ever likely  to lend our musical
voices.  And yet this should not be.

CHAPTER IV - ORDERED SOUTH

BY a curious irony of fate, the places to which we are  sent when health deserts us are often
singularly beautiful.   Often, too, they are places we have visited in former years,  or seen
briefly in passing by, and kept ever afterwards in  pious memory; and we please ourselves with
the fancy that we  shall repeat many vivid and pleasurable sensations, and take  up again the
thread of our enjoyment in the same spirit as we  let it fall.  We shall now have an opportunity
of finishing  many pleasant excursions, interrupted of yore before our  curiosity was fully
satisfied.  It may be that we have kept in  mind, during all these years, the recollection
of some valley  into which we have just looked down for a moment before we  lost sight of it
in the disorder of the hills; it may be that  we have lain awake at night, and agreeably tantalised
ourselves with the thought of corners we had never turned, or  summits we had all but climbed:
we shall now be able, as we  tell ourselves, to complete all these unfinished pleasures,  and
pass beyond the barriers that confined our recollections.

The promise is so great, and we are all so easily led  away when hope and memory are both in
one story, that I  daresay the sick man is not very inconsolable when he receives  sentence
of banishment, and is inclined to regard his ill- health as not the least fortunate accident
of his life.  Nor  is he immediately undeceived.  The stir and speed of the  journey, and the
restlessness that goes to bed with him as he  tries to sleep between two days of noisy progress,
fever him,  and stimulate his dull nerves into something of their old  quickness and sensibility.
And so he can enjoy the faint  autumnal splendour of the landscape, as he sees hill and  plain,
vineyard and forest, clad in one wonderful glory of  fairy gold, which the first great winds
of winter will  transmute, as in the fable, into withered leaves.  And so too  he can enjoy
the admirable brevity and simplicity of such  little glimpses of country and country ways as
flash upon him  through the windows of the train; little glimpses that have a  character all
their own; sights seen as a travelling swallow  might see them from the wing, or Iris as she
went abroad over  the land on some Olympian errand.  Here and there, indeed, a  few children
huzzah and wave their hands to the express; but  for the most part it is an interruption too
brief and isolated  to attract much notice; the sheep do not cease from browsing;  a girl sits
balanced on the projecting tiller of a canal boat,  so precariously that it seems as if a fly
or the splash of a  leaping fish would be enough to overthrow the dainty  equilibrium, and
yet all these hundreds of tons of coal and  wood and iron have been precipitated roaring past
her very  ear, and there is not a start, not a tremor, not a turn of the  averted head, to
indicate that she has been even conscious of  its passage. 

Nay, What makes this insolent and comely stream Of appetence, this freshet of desire (Milk
from the wild breasts of the wilful Day!), Down Piccadilly dance and murmur and gleam In genial
wave on wave and gyre on gyre? Why does that nymph unparalleled splash and churn The wealth
of her enchanted urn Till, over-billowing all between Her cheerful margents, grey and living
green, It floats and wanders, glittering and fleeing, An estuary of the joy of being?
  Whether it come  early or late,
however, this pleasure will not end with the  anticipation, as do so many others of the same
family.  It  will leave him wider awake than it found him, and give a new  significance to
all he may see for many days to come.  There  is something in the mere name of the South that
carries  enthusiasm along with it.  At the sound of the word, he pricks  up his ears; he becomes
as anxious to seek out beauties and to  get by heart the permanent lines and character of the
landscape, as if he had been told that it was all his own - an  estate out of which he had
been kept unjustly, and which he  was now to receive in free and full possession.  Even those
who have never been there before feel as if they had been; and  everybody goes comparing, and
seeking for the familiar, and  finding it with such ecstasies of recognition, that one would
think they were coming home after a weary absence, instead of  travelling hourly farther abroad.

