Maxwell will never forget the feeling with which for the first time he stood before the grimy-faced
audience of working men. Like hundreds of other ministers, he had never spoken to any gatherings
except those made up of people of his own class in the sense that they were familiar in their
dress and education and habits. This was a new world to him, and nothing but his new rule of
conduct could have made possible his message and its effect. He spoke on the subject of satisfaction
with life; what caused it, what its real sources were. He had the great good sense on this
his first appearance not to recognize the men as a class distinct from himself. He did not
use the term working man, and did not say a word to suggest any difference between their lives
and his own.

The men were pleased. A good many of them shook hands with him before going down to their work,
and the minister telling it all to his wife when he reached home, said that never in all his
life had he known the delight he then felt in having the handshake from a man of physical labor.
The day marked an important one in his Christian experience, more important than he knew. It
was the beginning of a fellowship between him and the working world. It was the first plank
laid down to help bridge the chasm between the church and labor in Raymond.

Alexander Powers went back to his desk that afternoon much pleased with his plan and seeing
much help in it for the men. He knew where he could get some good tables from an abandoned
eating house at one of the stations down the road, and he saw how the coffee arrangement could
be made a very attractive feature. The men had responded even better than he anticipated, and
the whole thing could not help being a great benefit to them.

He took up the routine of his work with a glow of satisfaction. After all, he wanted to do
as Jesus would, he said to himself.

It was nearly four o'clock when he opened one of the company's long envelopes which he supposed
contained orders for the purchasing of stores. He ran over the first page of typewritten matter
in his usual quick, business-like manner, before he saw that what he was reading was not intended
for his office but for the superintendent of the freight department.

He turned over a page mechanically, not meaning to read what was not addressed to him, but
before he knew it, he was in possession of evidence which conclusively proved that the company
was engaged in a systematic violation of the Interstate Commerce Laws of the United States.
It was as distinct and unequivocal a breaking of law as if a private citizen should enter a
house and rob the inmates. The discrimination shown in rebates was in total contempt of all
the statutes. Under the laws of the state it was also a distinct violation of certain provisions
recently passed by the legislature to prevent railroad trusts. There was no question that he
had in his hands evidence sufficient to convict the company of willful, intelligent violation
of the law of the commission and the law of the state also.

He dropped the papers on his desk as if they were poison, and instantly the question flashed
across his mind, "What would Jesus do?" He tried to shut the question out. He tried to reason
with himself by saying it was none of his business. He had known in a more or less definite
way, as did nearly all the officers of the company, that this had been going on right along
on nearly all the roads. He was not in a position, owing to his place in the shops, to prove
anything direct, and he had regarded it as a matter which did not concern him at all. The papers
now before him revealed the entire affair. They had through some carelessness been addressed
to him. What business of his was it? If he saw a man entering his neighbor's house to steal,
would it not be his duty to inform the officers of the law? Was a railroad company such a different
thing? Was it under a different rule of conduct, so that it could rob the public and defy law
and be undisturbed because it was such a great organization? What would Jesus do? Then there
was his family. Of course, if he took any steps to inform the commission it would mean the
loss of his position. His wife and daughter had always enjoyed luxury and a good place in society.
If he came out against this lawlessness as a witness it would drag him into courts, his motives
would be misunderstood, and the whole thing would end in his disgrace and the loss of his position.
Surely it was none of his business. He could easily get the papers back to the freight department
and no one be the wiser. Let the iniquity go on. Let the law be defied. What was it to him?
He would work out his plans for bettering the condition just before him. What more could a
man do in this railroad business when there was so much going on anyway that made it impossible
to live by the Christian standard? But what would Jesus do if He knew the facts? That was the
question that confronted Alexander Powers as the day wore into evening.

The lights in the office had been turned on. The whirr of the great engine and the clash of
the planers in the big shop continued until six o'clock. Then the whistle blew, the engine
slowed up, the men dropped their tools and ran for the block house.

Powers heard the familiar click, click, of the clocks as the men filed past the window of the
block house just outside. He said to his clerks, "I'm not going just yet. I have something
extra tonight." He waited until he heard the last man deposit his block. The men behind the
block case went out. The engineer and his assistants had work for half an hour but they went
out by another door.

WHEN Rachel Winslow and Virginia Page separated after the meeting at the First Church on Sunday
they agreed to continue their conversation the next day. Virginia asked Rachel to come and
lunch with her at noon, and Rachel accordingly rang the bell at the Page mansion about half-past
eleven. Virginia herself met her and the two were soon talking earnestly.

"The fact is," Rachel was saying, after they had been talking a few moments, "I cannot reconcile
it with my judgment of what Christ would do. I cannot tell another person what to do, but I
feel that I ought not to accept this offer."

"What will you do then?" asked Virginia with great interest.

"I don't know yet, but I have decided to refuse this offer."

Rachel picked up a letter that had been lying in her lap and ran over its contents again. It
was a letter from the manager of a comic opera offering her a place with a large traveling
company of the season. The salary was a very large figure, and the prospect held out by the
manager was flattering. He had heard Rachel sing that Sunday morning when the stranger had
interrupted the service. He had been much impressed. There was money in that voice and it ought
to be used in comic opera, so said the letter, and the manager wanted a reply as soon as possible.

"There's no great virtue in saying 'No' to this offer when I have the other one," Rachel went
on thoughtfully. "That's harder to decide. But I've about made up my mind. To tell the truth,
Virginia, I'm completely convinced in the first case that Jesus would never use any talent
like a good voice just to make money. But now, take this concert offer. Here is a reputable
company, to travel with an impersonator and a violinist and a male quartet, all people of good
reputation. I'm asked to go as one of the company and sing leading soprano. The salary--I mentioned
it, didn't I?--is guaranteed to be $200 a month for the season. But I don't feel satisfied
that Jesus would go. What do you think?"

"You mustn't ask me to decide for you," replied Virginia with a sad smile. "I believe Mr. Maxwell
was right when he said we must each one of us decide according to the judgment we feel for
ourselves to be Christ-like. I am having a harder time than you are, dear, to decide what He
would do."

"Are you?" Rachel asked. She rose and walked over to the window and looked out. Virginia came
and stood by her. The street was crowded with life and the two young women looked at it silently
for a moment. Suddenly Virginia broke out as Rachel had never heard her before:

"Rachel, what does all this contrast in conditions mean to you as you ask this question of
what Jesus would do? It maddens me to think that the society in which I have been brought up,
the same to which we are both said to belong, is satisfied year after year to go on dressing
and eating and having a good time, giving and receiving entertainments, spending its money
on houses and luxuries and, occasionally, to ease its conscience, donating, without any personal
sacrifice, a little money to charity. I have been educated, as you have, in one of the most
expensive schools in America; launched into society as an heiress; supposed to be in a very
enviable position. I'm perfectly well; I can travel or stay at home. I can do as I please.
I can gratify almost any want or desire; and yet when I honestly try to imagine Jesus living
the life I have lived and am expected to live, and doing for the rest of my life what thousands
of other rich people do, I am under condemnation for being one of the most wicked, selfish,
useless creatures in all the world. I have not looked out of this window for weeks without
a feeling of horror toward myself as I see the humanity that passes by this house."

Virginia turned away and walked up and down the room. Rachel watched her and could not repress
the rising tide of her own growing definition of discipleship. Of what Christian use was her
own talent of song? Was the best she could do to sell her talent for so much a month, go on
a concert company's tour, dress beautifully, enjoy the excitement of public applause and gain
a reputation as a great singer? Was that what Jesus would do?

She was not morbid. She was in sound health, was conscious of her great powers as a singer,
and knew that if she went out into public life she could make a great deal of money and become
well known. It is doubtful if she overestimated her ability to accomplish all she thought herself
capable of. And Virginia--what she had just said smote Rachel with great force because of the
similar position in which the two friends found themselves.

Lunch was announced and they went out and were joined by Virginia's grandmother, Madam Page,
a handsome, stately woman of sixty-five, and Virginia's brother Rollin, a young man who spent
most of his time at one of the clubs and had no ambition for anything but a growing admiration
for Rachel Winslow, and whenever she dined or lunched at the Page's, if he knew of it he always
planned to be at home.

These three made up the Page family. Virginia's father had been a banker and grain speculator.
Her mother had died ten years before, her father within the past year. The grandmother, a Southern
woman in birth and training, had all the traditions and feelings that accompany the possession
of wealth and social standing that have never been disturbed. She was a shrewd, careful business
woman of more than average ability. The family property and wealth were invested, in large
measure, under her personal care. Virginia's portion was, without any restriction, her own.
She had been trained by her father to understand the ways of the business world, and even the
grandmother had been compelled to acknowledge the girl's capacity for taking care of her own money.

Perhaps two persons could not be found anywhere less capable of understanding a girl like Virginia
than Madam Page and Rollin. Rachel, who had known the family since she was a girl playmate
of Virginia's, could not help thinking of what confronted Virginia in her own home when she
once decided on the course which she honestly believed Jesus would take. Today at lunch, as
she recalled Virginia's outbreak in the front room, she tried to picture the scene that would
at some time occur between Madam Page and her granddaughter.

"I understand that you are going on the stage, Miss Winslow. We shall all be delighted, I'm
sure," said Rollin during the conversation, which had not been very animated.

Rachel colored and felt annoyed. "Who told you?" she asked, while Virginia, who had been very
silent and reserved, suddenly roused herself and appeared ready to join in the talk.

"Oh! we hear a thing or two on the street. Besides, every one saw Crandall the manager at church
two weeks ago. He doesn't go to church to hear the preaching. In fact, I know other people
who don't either, not when there's something better to hear."

Rachel did not color this time, but she answered quietly, "You're mistaken. I'm not going on
the stage."

"It's a great pity. You'd make a hit. Everybody is talking about your singing."

This time Rachel flushed with genuine anger. Before she could say anything, Virginia broke
in: "Whom do you mean by 'everybody?'"

"Whom? I mean all the people who hear Miss Winslow on Sundays. What other time do they hear
her? It's a great pity, I say, that the general public outside of Raymond cannot hear her voice."

"Let us talk about something else," said Rachel a little sharply. Madam Page glanced at her
and spoke with a gentle courtesy.

"My dear, Rollin never could pay an indirect compliment. He is like his father in that. But
we are all curious to know something of your plans. We claim the right from old acquaintance,
you know; and Virginia has already told us of your concert company offer."

"I supposed of course that was public property," said Virginia, smiling across the table. "I
was in the NEWS office day before yesterday."

"Yes, yes," replied Rachel hastily. "I understand that, Madam Page. Well, Virginia and I have
been talking about it. I have decided not to accept, and that is as far as I have gone at present."

Rachel was conscious of the fact that the conversation had, up to this point, been narrowing
her hesitation concerning the concert company's offer down to a decision that would absolutely
satisfy her own judgment of Jesus' probable action. It had been the last thing in the world,
however, that she had desired, to have her decision made in any way so public as this. Somehow
what Rollin Page had said and his manner in saying it had hastened her decision in the matter.

"Would you mind telling us, Rachel, your reasons for refusing the offer? It looks like a great
opportunity for a young girl like you. Don't you think the general public ought to hear you?
I feel like Rollin about that. A voice like yours belongs to a larger audience than Raymond
and the First Church."

Rachel Winslow was naturally a girl of great reserve. She shrank from making her plans or her
thoughts public. But with all her repression there was possible in her an occasional sudden
breaking out that was simply an impulsive, thoroughly frank, truthful expression of her most
inner personal feeling. She spoke now in reply to Madam Page in one of those rare moments of
unreserve that added to the attractiveness of her whole character.

"I have no other reason than a conviction that Jesus Christ would do the same thing," she said,
looking into Madam Page's eyes with a clear, earnest gaze.

Madam Page turned red and Rollin stared. Before her grandmother could say anything, Virginia
spoke. Her rising color showed how she was stirred. Virginia's pale, clear complexion was that
of health, but it was generally in marked contrast with Rachel's tropical type of beauty.

"Grandmother, you know we promised to make that the standard of our conduct for a year. Mr.
Maxwell's proposition was plain to all who heard it. We have not been able to arrive at our
decisions very rapidly. The difficulty in knowing what Jesus would do has perplexed Rachel
and me a good deal."

Madam Page looked sharply at Virginia before she said anything.

"Of course I understand Mr. Maxwell's statement. It is perfectly impracticable to put it into
practice. I felt confident at the time that those who promised would find it out after a trial
and abandon it as visionary and absurd. I have nothing to say about Miss Winslow's affairs,
but," she paused and continued with a sharpness that was new to Rachel, "I hope you have no
foolish notions in this matter, Virginia."

"I have a great many notions," replied Virginia quietly. "Whether they are foolish or not depends
upon my right understanding of what He would do. As soon as I find out I shall do it."

"Excuse me, ladies," said Rollin, rising from the table. "The conversation is getting beyond
my depth. I shall retire to the library for a cigar."

He went out of the dining-room and there was silence for a moment. Madam Page waited until
the servant had brought in something and then asked her to go out. She was angry and her anger
was formidable, although checked in some measure by the presence of Rachel.

"I am older by several years than you, young ladies," she said, and her traditional type of
bearing seemed to Rachel to rise up like a great frozen wall between her and every conception
of Jesus as a sacrifice. "What you have promised, in a spirit of false emotion I presume, is
impossible of performance."

"Do you mean, grandmother, that we cannot possibly act as our Lord would? or do you mean that,
if we try to, we shall offend the customs and prejudices of society?" asked Virginia.

"It is not required! It is not necessary! Besides how can you act with any--" Madam Page paused,
broke off her sentence, and then turned to Rachel. "What will your mother say to your decision?
My dear, is it not foolish? What do you expect to do with your voice anyway?"

"I don't know what mother will say yet," Rachel answered, with a great shrinking from trying
to give her mother's probable answer. If there was a woman in all Raymond with great ambitions
for her daughter's success as a singer, Mrs. Winslow was that woman.

"Oh! you will see it in a different light after wiser thought of it. My dear," continued Madam
Page rising from the table, "you will live to regret it if you do not accept the concert company's
offer or something like it."

Chapter Seven

RACHEL was glad to escape and be by herself. A plan was slowly forming in her mind, and she
wanted to be alone and think it out carefully. But before she had walked two blocks she was
annoyed to find Rollin Page walking beside her.

"Sorry to disturb your thoughts, Miss Winslow, but I happened to be going your way and had
an idea you might not object. In fact, I've been walking here for a whole block and you haven't
objected."

"I did not see you," said Rachel briefly.

"I wouldn't mind that if you only thought of me once in a while," said Rollin suddenly. He
took one last nervous puff on his cigar, tossed it into the street and walked along with a
pale look on his face.

Rachel was surprised, but not startled. She had known Rollin as a boy, and there had been a
time when they had used each other's first name familiarly. Lately, however, something in Rachel's
manner had put an end to that. She was used to his direct attempts at compliments and was sometimes
amused by them. Today she honestly wished him anywhere else.

"Do you ever think of me, Miss Winslow?" asked Rollin after a pause.

"Oh, yes, quite often!" said Rachel with a smile.

"Are you thinking of me now?"

"Yes. That is--yes--I am."

"What?"

"Do you want me to be absolutely truthful?"

"Of course."

"Then I was thinking that I wished you were not here." Rollin bit his lip and looked gloomy.

"Now look here, Rachel--oh, I know that's forbidden, but I've got to speak some time!--you
know how I feel. What makes you treat me so? You used to like me a little, you know."

"Did I? Of course we used to get on very well as boy and girl. But we are older now."

Rachel still spoke in the light, easy way she had used since her first annoyance at seeing
him. She was still somewhat preoccupied with her plan which had been disturbed by Rollin's
sudden appearance.

They walked along in silence a little way. The avenue was full of people. Among the persons
passing was Jasper Chase. He saw Rachel and Rollin and bowed as they went by. Rollin was watching
Rachel closely.

"I wish I was Jasper Chase. Maybe I would stand some chance then," he said moodily.

Rachel colored in spite of herself. She did not say anything and quickened her pace a little.
Rollin seemed determined to say something, and Rachel seemed helpless to prevent him. After
all, she thought, he might as well know the truth one time as another.

"You know well enough, Rachel, how I feel toward you. Isn't there any hope? I could make you
happy. I've loved you a good many years--"

"Why, how old do you think I am?" broke in Rachel with a nervous laugh. She was shaken out
of her usual poise of manner.

"You know what I mean," went on Rollin doggedly. "And you have no right to laugh at me just
because I want you to marry me."

"I'm not! But it is useless for you to speak, Rollin," said Rachel after a little hesitation,
and then using his name in such a frank, simple way that he could attach no meaning to it beyond
the familiarity of the old family acquaintance. "It is impossible." She was still a little
agitated by the fact of receiving a proposal of marriage on the avenue. But the noise on the
street and sidewalk made the conversation as private as if they were in the house.

"Would that is--do you think--if you gave me time I would."

"No!" said Rachel. She spoke firmly; perhaps, she thought afterward, although she did not mean
to, she spoke harshly.

They walked on for some time without a word. They were nearing Rachel's home and she was anxious
to end the scene.

As they turned off the avenue into one of the quieter streets Rollin spoke suddenly and with
more manliness than he had yet shown. There was a distinct note of dignity in his voice that
was new to Rachel.

"Miss Winslow, I ask you to be my wife. Is there any hope for me that you will ever consent?"

"None in the least." Rachel spoke decidedly.

"Will you tell me why?" He asked the question as if he had a right to a truthful answer.

"Because I do not feel toward you as a woman ought to feel toward the man she marries."

"In other words, you do not love me?"

"I do not and I cannot."

"Why?" That was another question, and Rachel was a little surprised that he should ask it.

"Because--" she hesitated for fear she might say too much in an attempt to speak the exact truth.

"Tell me just why. You can't hurt me more than you have already."

"Well, I do not and I cannot love you because you have no purpose in life. What do you ever
do to make the world better? You spend your time in club life, in amusements, in travel, in
luxury. What is there in such a life to attract a woman?"

"Not much, I guess," said Rollin with a bitter laugh. "Still, I don't know that I'm any worse
than the rest of the men around me. I'm not so bad as some. I'm glad to know your reasons."

He suddenly stopped, took off his hat, bowed gravely and turned back. Rachel went on home and
hurried into her room, disturbed in many ways by the event which had so unexpectedly thrust
itself into her experience.

When she had time to think it all over she found herself condemned by the very judgment she
had passed on Rollin Page. What purpose had she in life? She had been abroad and studied music
with one of the famous teachers of Europe. She had come home to Raymond and had been singing
in the First Church choir now for a year. She was well paid. Up to that Sunday two weeks ago
she had been quite satisfied with herself and with her position. She had shared her mother's
ambition, and anticipated growing triumphs in the musical world. What possible career was before
her except the regular career of every singer?

She asked the question again and, in the light of her recent reply to Rollin, asked again,
if she had any very great purpose in life herself. What would Jesus do? There was a fortune
in her voice. She knew it, not necessarily as a matter of personal pride or professional egotism,
but simply as a fact. And she was obliged to acknowledge that until two weeks ago she had purposed
to use her voice to make money and win admiration and applause. Was that a much higher purpose,
after all, than Rollin Page lived for?

She sat in her room a long time and finally went downstairs, resolved to have a frank talk
with her mother about the concert company's offer and the new plan which was gradually shaping
in her mind. She had already had one talk with her mother and knew that she expected Rachel
to accept the offer and enter on a successful career as a public singer.

"Mother," Rachel said, coming at once to the point, much as she dreaded the interview, "I have
decided not to go out with the company. I have a good reason for it."

Mrs. Winslow was a large, handsome woman, fond of much company, ambitious for distinction in
society and devoted, according to her definitions of success, to the success of her children.
Her youngest boy, Louis, two years younger than Rachel, was ready to graduate from a military
academy in the summer. Meanwhile she and Rachel were at home together. Rachel's father, like
Virginia's, had died while the family was abroad. Like Virginia she found herself, under her
present rule of conduct, in complete antagonism with her own immediate home circle. Mrs. Winslow
waited for Rachel to go on.

"You know the promise I made two weeks ago, mother?"

"Mr. Maxwell's promise?"

"No, mine. You know what it was, do you not, mother?"

"I suppose I do. Of course all the church members mean to imitate Christ and follow Him, as
far as is consistent with our present day surroundings. But what has that to do with your decision
in the concert company matter?"

"It has everything to do with it. After asking, 'What would Jesus do?' and going to the source
of authority for wisdom, I have been obliged to say that I do not believe He would, in my case,
make that use of my voice."

"Why? Is there anything wrong about such a career?"

"No, I don't know that I can say there is."

"Do you presume to sit in judgment on other people who go out to sing in this way? Do you presume
to say they are doing what Christ would not do?"

"Mother, I wish you to understand me. I judge no one else; I condemn no other professional
singer. I simply decide my own course. As I look at it, I have a conviction that Jesus would
do something else."

"What else?" Mrs. Winslow had not yet lost her temper. She did not understand the situation
nor Rachel in the midst of it, but she was anxious that her daughter's course should be as
distinguished as her natural gifts promised. And she felt confident that when the present unusual
religious excitement in the First Church had passed away Rachel would go on with her public
life according to the wishes of the family. She was totally unprepared for Rachel's next remark.

"What? Something that will serve mankind where it most needs the service of song. Mother, I
have made up my mind to use my voice in some way so as to satisfy my own soul that I am doing
something better than pleasing fashionable audiences, or making money, or even gratifying my
own love of singing. I am going to do something that will satisfy me when I ask: 'What would
Jesus do?' I am not satisfied, and cannot be, when I think of myself as singing myself into
the career of a concert company performer."

Rachel spoke with a vigor and earnestness that surprised her mother. But Mrs. Winslow was angry
now; and she never tried to conceal her feelings.

"It is simply absurd! Rachel, you are a fanatic! What can you do?"

"The world has been served by men and women who have given it other things that were gifts.
Why should I, because I am blessed with a natural gift, at once proceed to put a market price
on it and make all the money I can out of it? You know, mother, that you have taught me to
think of a musical career always in the light of financial and social success. I have been
unable, since I made my promise two weeks ago, to imagine Jesus joining a concert company to
do what I should do and live the life I should have to live if I joined it."

Mrs. Winslow rose and then sat down again. With a great effort she composed herself.

"What do you intend to do then? You have not answered my question."

"I shall continue to sing for the time being in the church. I am pledged to sing there through
the spring. During the week I am going to sing at the White Cross meetings, down in the Rectangle."

"What! Rachel Winslow! Do you know what you are saying? Do you know what sort of people those
are down there?"

Rachel almost quailed before her mother. For a moment she shrank back and was silent. Then
she spoke firmly: "I know very well. That is the reason I am going. Mr. and Mrs. Gray have
been working there several weeks. I learned only this morning that they want singers from the
churches to help them in their meetings. They use a tent. It is in a part of the city where
Christian work is most needed. I shall offer them my help. Mother!" Rachel cried out with the
first passionate utterance she had yet used, "I want to do something that will cost me something
in the way of sacrifice. I know you will not understand me. But I am hungry to suffer for something.
What have we done all our lives for the suffering, sinning side of Raymond? How much have we
denied ourselves or given of our personal ease and pleasure to bless the place in which we
live or imitate the life of the Savior of the world? Are we always to go on doing as society
selfishly dictates, moving on its little narrow round of pleasures and entertainments, and
never knowing the pain of things that cost?"

"Are you preaching at me?" asked Mrs. Winslow slowly. Rachel rose, and understood her mother's
words.

"No. I am preaching at myself," she replied gently. She paused a moment as if she thought her
mother would say something more, and then went out of the room. When she reached her own room
she felt that so far as her own mother was concerned she could expect no sympathy, nor even
a fair understanding from her.

She kneeled. It is safe to say that within the two weeks since Henry Maxwell's church had faced
that shabby figure with the faded hat more members of his parish had been driven to their knees
in prayer than during all the previous term of his pastorate.

She rose, and her face was wet with tears. She sat thoughtfully a little while and then wrote
a note to Virginia Page. She sent it to her by a messenger and then went downstairs and told
her mother that she and Virginia were going down to the Rectangle that evening to see Mr. and
Mrs. Gray, the evangelists.

"Virginia's uncle, Dr. West, will go with us, if she goes. I have asked her to call him up
by telephone and go with us. The Doctor is a friend of the Grays, and attended some of their
meetings last winter."

Mrs. Winslow did not say anything. Her manner showed her complete disapproval of Rachel's course,
and Rachel felt her unspoken bitterness.

About seven o'clock the Doctor and Virginia appeared, and together the three started for the
scene of the White Cross meetings.

The Rectangle was the most notorious district in Raymond. It was on the territory close by
the railroad shops and the packing houses. The great slum and tenement district of Raymond
congested its worst and most wretched elements about the Rectangle. This was a barren field
used in the summer by circus companies and wandering showmen. It was shut in by rows of saloons,
gambling hells and cheap, dirty boarding and lodging houses.

The First Church of Raymond had never touched the Rectangle problem. It was too dirty, too
coarse, too sinful, too awful for close contact. Let us be honest. There had been an attempt
to cleanse this sore spot by sending down an occasional committee of singers or Sunday-school
teachers or gospel visitors from various churches. But the First Church of Raymond, as an institution,
had never really done anything to make the Rectangle any less a stronghold of the devil as
the years went by.

Into this heart of the coarse part of the sin of Raymond the traveling evangelist and his brave
little wife had pitched a good-sized tent and begun meetings. It was the spring of the year
and the evenings were beginning to be pleasant. The evangelists had asked for the help of Christian
people, and had received more than the usual amount of encouragement. But they felt a great
need of more and better music. During the meetings on the Sunday just gone the assistant at
the organ had been taken ill. The volunteers from the city were few and the voices were of
ordinary quality.

"There will be a small meeting tonight, John," said his wife, as they entered the tent a little
after seven o'clock and began to arrange the chairs and light up.

"Yes, I fear so." Mr. Gray was a small, energetic man, with a pleasant voice and the courage
of a high-born fighter. He had already made friends in the neighborhood and one of his converts,
a heavy-faced man who had just come in, began to help in the arranging of seats.

It was after eight o'clock when Alexander Powers opened the door of his office and started
for home. He was going to take a car at the corner of the Rectangle. But he was roused by a
voice coming from the tent.

It was the voice of Rachel Winslow. It struck through his consciousness of struggle over his
own question that had sent him into the Divine Presence for an answer. He had not yet reached
a conclusion. He was tortured with uncertainty. His whole previous course of action as a railroad
man was the poorest possible preparation for anything sacrificial. And he could not yet say
what he would do in the matter.

Hark! What was she singing? How did Rachel Winslow happen to be down here? Several windows
near by went up. Some men quarreling near a saloon stopped and listened. Other figures were
walking rapidly in the direction of the Rectangle and the tent. Surely Rachel Winslow had never
sung like that in the First Church. It was a marvelous voice. What was it she was singing?
Again Alexander Powers, Superintendent of the machine shops, paused and listened,

    "Where He leads me I will follow,
     Where He leads me I will follow,
     Where He leads me I will follow,
     I'll go with Him, with Him.
     All the way!"

The brutal, coarse, impure life of the Rectangle stirred itself into new life as the song,
as pure as the surroundings were vile, floated out and into saloon and den and foul lodging.
Some one stumbled hastily by Alexander Powers and said in answer to a question: "De tent's
beginning to run over tonight. That's what the talent calls music, eh?"

Chapter Eight

"If any man would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross daily and follow me."

HENRY MAXWELL paced his study back and forth. It was Wednesday and he had started to think
out the subject of his evening service which fell upon that night. Out of one of his study
windows he could see the tall chimney of the railroad shops. The top of the evangelist's tent
just showed over the buildings around the Rectangle. He looked out of his window every time
he turned in his walk. After a while he sat down at his desk and drew a large piece of paper
toward him. After thinking several moments he wrote in large letters the following:

A NUMBER OF THINGS THAT JESUS WOULD PROBABLY DO IN THIS PARISH

Live in a simple, plain manner, without needless luxury on the one hand or undue asceticism
on the other. Preach fearlessly to the hypocrites in the church, no matter what their social
importance or wealth. Show in some practical form His sympathy and love for the common people
as well as for the well-to-do, educated, refined people who make up the majority of the parish.
Identify Himself with the great causes of humanity in some personal way that would call for
self-denial and suffering. Preach against the saloon in Raymond. Become known as a friend and
companion of the sinful people in the Rectangle. Give up the summer trip to Europe this year.
(I have been abroad twice and cannot claim any special need of rest. I am well, and could forego
this pleasure, using the money for some one who needs a vacation more than I do. There are
probably plenty of such people in the city.)

He was conscious, with a humility that was once a stranger to him, that his outline of Jesus'
probable action was painfully lacking in depth and power, but he was seeking carefully for
concrete shapes into which he might cast his thought of Jesus' conduct. Nearly every point
he had put down, meant, for him, a complete overturning of the custom and habit of years in
the ministry. In spite of that, he still searched deeper for sources of the Christ-like spirit.
He did not attempt to write any more, but sat at his desk absorbed in his effort to catch more
and more the spirit of Jesus in his own life. He had forgotten the particular subject for his
prayer meeting with which he had begun his morning study.

He was so absorbed over his thought that he did not hear the bell ring; he was roused by the
servant who announced a caller. He had sent up his name, Mr. Gray.

Maxwell stepped to the head of the stairs and asked Gray to come up. So Gray came up and stated
the reason for his call.

"I want your help, Mr. Maxwell. Of course you have heard what a wonderful meeting we had Monday
night and last night. Miss Winslow has done more with her voice than I could do, and the tent
won't hold the people."

"I've heard of that. It is the first time the people there have heard her. It is no wonder
they are attracted."

"It has been a wonderful revelation to us, and a most encouraging event in our work. But I
came to ask if you could not come down tonight and preach. I am suffering from a severe cold.
I do not dare trust my voice again. I know it is asking a good deal from such a busy man. But,
if you can't come, say so frankly, and I'll try somewhere else."

"I'm sorry, but it's my regular prayer meeting night," began Henry Maxwell. Then he flushed
and added, "I shall be able to arrange it in some way so as to come down. You can count on me."

Gray thanked him earnestly and rose to go.

"Won't you stay a minute, Gray, and let us have a prayer together?"

"Yes," said Gray simply.

So the two men kneeled together in the study. Henry Maxwell prayed like a child. Gray was touched
to tears as he knelt there. There was something almost pitiful in the way this man who had
lived his ministerial life in such a narrow limit of exercise now begged for wisdom and strength
to speak a message to the people in the Rectangle.

Gray rose and held out his hand. "God bless you, Mr. Maxwell. I'm sure the Spirit will give
you power tonight."

Henry Maxwell made no answer. He did not even trust himself to say that he hoped so. But he
thought of his promise and it brought him a certain peace that was refreshing to his heart
and mind alike.

So that is how it came about that when the First Church audience came into the lecture room
that evening it met with another surprise. There was an unusually large number present. The
prayer meetings ever since that remarkable Sunday morning had been attended as never before
in the history of the First Church. Mr. Maxwell came at once to the point.

"I feel that I am called to go down to the Rectangle tonight, and I will leave it with you
to say whether you will go on with this meeting here. I think perhaps the best plan would be
for a few volunteers to go down to the Rectangle with me prepared to help in the after-meeting,
if necessary, and the rest to remain here and pray that the Spirit power may go with us."

So half a dozen of the men went with the pastor, and the rest of the audience stayed in the
lecture room. Maxwell could not escape the thought as he left the room that probably in his
entire church membership there might not be found a score of disciples who were capable of
doing work that would successfully lead needy, sinful men into the knowledge of Christ. The
thought did not linger in his mind to vex him as he went his way, but it was simply a part
of his whole new conception of the meaning of Christian discipleship.

When he and his little company of volunteers reached the Rectangle, the tent was already crowded.
They had difficulty in getting to the platform. Rachel was there with Virginia and Jasper Chase
who had come instead of the Doctor tonight.

When the meeting began with a song in which Rachel sang the solo and the people were asked
to join in the chorus, not a foot of standing room was left in the tent. The night was mild
and the sides of the tent were up and a great border of faces stretched around, looking in
and forming part of the audience. After the singing, and a prayer by one of the city pastors
who was present, Gray stated the reason for his inability to speak, and in his simple manner
turned the service over to "Brother Maxwell of the First Church."

"Who's de bloke?" asked a hoarse voice near the outside of the tent.

"De Fust Church parson. We've got de whole high-tone swell outfit tonight."

"Did you say Fust Church? I know him. My landlord's got a front pew up there," said another
voice, and there was a laugh, for the speaker was a saloon keeper.

"Trow out de life line 'cross de dark wave!" began a drunken man near by, singing in such an
unconscious imitation of a local traveling singer's nasal tone that roars of laughter and jeers
of approval rose around him. The people in the tent turned in the direction of the disturbance.
There were shouts of "Put him out!" "Give the Fust Church a chance!" "Song! Song! Give us another
song!"

Henry Maxwell stood up, and a great wave of actual terror went over him. This was not like
preaching to the well-dressed, respectable, good-mannered people up on the boulevard. He began
to speak, but the confusion increased. Gray went down into the crowd, but did not seem able
to quiet it. Maxwell raised his arm and his voice. The crowd in the tent began to pay some
attention, but the noise on the outside increased. In a few minutes the audience was beyond
his control. He turned to Rachel with a sad smile.

"Sing something, Miss Winslow. They will listen to you," he said, and then sat down and covered
his face with his hands.

It was Rachel's opportunity, and she was fully equal to it. Virginia was at the organ and Rachel
asked her to play a few notes of the hymn.

    "Savior, I follow on,
     Guided by Thee,
     Seeing not yet the hand
     That leadeth me.
     Hushed be my heart and still
     Fear I no farther ill,
     Only to meet Thy will,
     My will shall be."

Rachel had not sung the first line before the people in the tent were all turned toward her,
hushed and reverent. Before she had finished the verse the Rectangle was subdued and tamed.
It lay like some wild beast at her feet, and she sang it into harmlessness. Ah! What were the
flippant, perfumed, critical audiences in concert halls compared with this dirty, drunken,
impure, besotted mass of humanity that trembled and wept and grew strangely, sadly thoughtful
under the touch of this divine ministry of this beautiful young woman! Mr. Maxwell, as he raised
his head and saw the transformed mob, had a glimpse of something that Jesus would probably
do with a voice like Rachel Winslow's. Jasper Chase sat with his eyes on the singer, and his
greatest longing as an ambitious author was swallowed up in his thought of what Rachel Winslow's
love might sometimes mean to him. And over in the shadow outside stood the last person any
one might have expected to see at a gospel tent service--Rollin Page, who, jostled on every
side by rough men and women who stared at the swell in fine clothes, seemed careless of his
surroundings and at the same time evidently swayed by the power that Rachel possessed. He had
just come over from the club. Neither Rachel nor Virginia saw him that night.

The song was over. Maxwell rose again. This time he felt calmer. What would Jesus do? He spoke
as he thought once he never could speak. Who were these people? They were immortal souls. What
was Christianity? A calling of sinners, not the righteous, to repentance. How would Jesus speak?
What would He say? He could not tell all that His message would include, but he felt sure of
a part of it. And in that certainty he spoke on. Never before had he felt "compassion for the
multitude." What had the multitude been to him during his ten years in the First Church but
a vague, dangerous, dirty, troublesome factor in society, outside of the church and of his
reach, an element that caused him occasionally an unpleasant twinge of conscience, a factor
in Raymond that was talked about at associations as the "masses," in papers written by the
brethren in attempts to show why the "masses" were not being reached. But tonight as he faced
the masses he asked himself whether, after all, this was not just about such a multitude as
Jesus faced oftenest, and he felt the genuine emotion of love for a crowd which is one of the
best indications a preacher ever has that he is living close to the heart of the world's eternal
Life. It is easy to love an individual sinner, especially if he is personally picturesque or
interesting. To love a multitude of sinners is distinctively a Christ-like quality.

When the meeting closed, there was no special interest shown. No one stayed to the after-meeting.
The people rapidly melted away from the tent, and the saloons, which had been experiencing
a dull season while the meetings progressed, again drove a thriving trade. The Rectangle, as
if to make up for lost time, started in with vigor on its usual night debauch. Maxwell and
his little party, including Virginia, Rachel and Jasper Chase, walked down past the row of
saloons and dens until they reached the corner where the cars passed.

"This is a terrible spot," said the minister as he stood waiting for their car. "I never realized
that Raymond had such a festering sore. It does not seem possible that this is a city full
of Christian disciples."

"Do you think any one can ever remove this great curse of drink?" asked Jasper Chase.

"I have thought lately as never before of what Christian people might do to remove the curse
of the saloon. Why don't we all act together against it? Why don't the Christian pastors and
the church members of Raymond move as one man against the traffic? What would Jesus do? Would
He keep silent? Would He vote to license these causes of crime and death?"

He was talking to himself more than to the others. He remembered that he had always voted for
license, and so had nearly all his church members. What would Jesus do? Could he answer that
question? Would the Master preach and act against the saloon if He lived today? How would He
preach and act? Suppose it was not popular to preach against license? Suppose the Christian
people thought it was all that could be done to license the evil and so get revenue from the
necessary sin? Or suppose the church members themselves owned the property where the saloons
stood--what then? He knew that those were the facts in Raymond. What would Jesus do?

He went up into his study the next morning with that question only partly answered. He thought
of it all day. He was still thinking of it and reaching certain real conclusions when the EVENING
NEWS came. His wife brought it up and sat down a few minutes while he read to her.

The EVENING NEWS was at present the most sensational paper in Raymond. That is to say, it was
being edited in such a remarkable fashion that its subscribers had never been so excited over
a newspaper before. First they had noticed the absence of the prize fight, and gradually it
began to dawn upon them that the NEWS no longer printed accounts of crime with detailed descriptions,
or scandals in private life. Then they noticed that the advertisements of liquor and tobacco
were dropped, together with certain others of a questionable character. The discontinuance
of the Sunday paper caused the greatest comment of all, and now the character of the editorials
was creating the greatest excitement. A quotation from the Monday paper of this week will show
what Edward Norman was doing to keep his promise. The editorial was headed:

THE MORAL SIDE OF POLITICAL QUESTIONS

The editor of the News has always advocated the principles of the great political party at
present in power, and has heretofore discussed all political questions from the standpoint
of expediency, or of belief in the party as opposed to other political organizations. After dey had
beat my muma all dey wanted another overseer. Lord, Lord, I hate white people and de flood waters
gwine drown some mo. Well honey dis man would bathe her in salt and water. Don't you kno'
dem places was a hurtin'. Um, um.

I asked mother what she done fer 'en to beat and do her so? She said, nothin', tother than
she refused to be wife to dis man.

An' muma say, if he didn't treat her dis way a dozen times, it wasn't nary one.

Mind you, now muma's marster didn't know dis wuz going on. You know, if slaves would tell, why dem
overseers would kill 'em.

An' she sed dat dey use to have meetings an' sing and pray an' th' ol' paddy rollers would hear
dem, so to keep th' sound from goin' out, slaves would put a great big iron pot at the door, an'
you know some times dey would fer git to put ol' pot dar an' the
paddy rollers would come an' horse whip every las' one of 'em, jes
cause poor souls were praying to God to free 'em from dat awful bondage.

Ha!

ha! ha! dar wuz one ol' brudder who studied fer 'em one day an' tol all de slaves how to git even
wid 'em.

He tol' 'em to tie grape vines an' other vines across th' road, den when de Paddy rollers come
galantin' wid their horses runnin' so fast you see dem vines would tangle 'em up an' cause th' horses
to stumble and fall. An' lots of times, badly dey would break dere legs and horses too; one interval
one ol' poor devil got tangled so an' de horse kept a carryin' him,
'til he fell off horse and next day a sucker was found in road whar
dem vines wuz wind aroun' his neck so many times yes had choked him,
dey said, "He totely dead."

Serve him right 'cause dem ol' white folks treated us so mean.

Well, sometimes, you know dey would, the others of 'em, keep going 'til dey fin' whar dis meeting
wuz gwine on. Dey would come in and start whippin' an' beatin' the slaves unmerciful. All dis wuz
done to keep yo' from servin' God, an' do you know some of dem devils
wuz mean an' sinful 'nough to say, "Ef I ketch you here agin servin'
God I'll beat you.

You haven't time to serve God. We bought you to serve us." Um, um.

God's gwine 'rod dem wicket marsters. Ef hit 'taint 'em whut gits
hit, hits gonna fall on deir chillun.

In dem back days child, meetings wuz carried on jes like we do today,
somewhatly. Only difference is the slave dat knowed th' most 'bout
de Bible would tell and explain what God had told him in a vision
(yo' young folks say, "dream") dat dis freedom would come to pass;
an' den dey prayed fer dis vision to come to pass, an' dars whar de
paddy rollers would whip 'em ag'in.

Lord! Lord dey, pew! pew! pew!
Baby, I jes kno' I could if I knowed how to write, an' had a little
learning I could put off a book on dis here situation. He was reading something
with the utmost interest. "Listen to this, Mary," he said, after a moment while his lip trembled:

"This morning Alexander Powers, Superintendent of the L. and T. R. R. shops in this city, handed
in his resignation to the road, and gave as his reason the fact that certain proofs had fallen
into his hands of the violation of the Interstate Commerce Law, and also of the state law which
has recently been framed to prevent and punish railroad pooling for the benefit of certain
favored shippers. Mr. Powers states in his resignation that he can no longer consistently withhold
the information he possesses against the road. He will be a witness against it. He has placed
his evidence against the company in the hands of the Commission and it is now for them to take
action upon it.

The News wishes to express itself on this action of Mr. Powers. In the first place he has nothing
to gain by it. He has lost a very valuable place voluntarily, when by keeping silent he might
have retained it. In the second place, we believe his action ought to receive the approval
of all thoughtful, honest citizens who believe in seeing law obeyed and lawbreakers brought
to justice. In a case like this, where evidence against a railroad company is generally understood
to be almost impossible to obtain, it is the general belief that the officers of the road are
often in possession of criminating facts but do not consider it to be any of their business
to inform the authorities that the law is being defied. The entire result of this evasion of
responsibility on the part of those who are responsible is demoralizing to every young man
connected with the road. The editor of the News recalls the statement made by a prominent railroad
official in this city a little while ago, that nearly every clerk in a certain department of
the road understood that large sums of money were made by shrewd violations of the Interstate
Commerce Law, was ready to admire the shrewdness with which it was done, and declared that
they would all do the same thing if they were high enough in railroad circles to attempt it."

Chapter Nine

HENRY MAXWELL finished reading and dropped the paper.

"I must go and see Powers. This is the result of his promise."

He rose, and as he was going out, his wife said: "Do you think, Henry, that Jesus would have
done that?"

Maxwell paused a moment. Then he answered slowly, "Yes, I think He would. At any rate, Powers
has decided so and each one of us who made the promise understands that he is not deciding
Jesus' conduct for any one else, only for himself."

"How about his family? How will Mrs. Powers and Celia be likely to take it?"

"Very hard, I've no doubt. That will be Powers' cross in this matter. They will not understand
his motive."

Maxwell went out and walked over to the next block where Superintendent Powers lived. To his
relief, Powers himself came to the door.

The two men shook hands silently. They instantly understood each other without words. There
had never before been such a bond of union between the minister and his parishioner.

"What are you going to do?" Henry Maxwell asked after they had talked over the facts in the case.

"You mean another position? I have no plans yet. I can go back to my old work as a telegraph
operator. My family will not suffer, except in a social way."

Powers spoke calmly and sadly. Henry Maxwell did not need to ask him how the wife and daughter
felt. He knew well enough that the superintendent had suffered deepest at that point.

"There is one matter I wish you would see to," said Powers after awhile, "and that is, the
work begun at the shops. So far as I know, the company will not object to that going on. It
is one of the contradictions of the railroad world that Y. M. C. A.'s and other Christian influences
are encouraged by the roads, while all the time the most un-Christian and lawless acts may
be committed in the official management of the roads themselves. Of course it is well understood
that it pays a railroad to have in its employ men who are temperate, honest and Christian.
So I have no doubt the master mechanic will have the same courtesy shown him in the use of
the room. But what I want you to do, Mr. Maxwell, is to see that my plan is carried out. Will
you? You understand what it was in general. You made a very favorable impression on the men.
Go down there as often as you can. Get Milton Wright interested to provide something for the
furnishing and expense of the coffee plant and reading tables. Will you do it?"

"Yes," replied Henry Maxwell. He stayed a little longer. Before he went away, he and the superintendent
had a prayer together, and they parted with that silent hand grasp that seemed to them like
a new token of their Christian discipleship and fellowship.

The pastor of the First Church went home stirred deeply by the events of the week. Gradually
the truth was growing upon him that the pledge to do as Jesus would was working out a revolution
in his parish and throughout the city. Every day added to the serious results of obedience
to that pledge. Maxwell did not pretend to see the end. He was, in fact, only now at the very
beginning of events that were destined to change the history of hundreds of families not only
in Raymond but throughout the entire country. As he thought of Edward Norman and Rachel and
Mr. Powers, and of the results that had already come from their actions, he could not help
a feeling of intense interest in the probable effect if all the persons in the First Church
who had made the pledge, faithfully kept it. Would they all keep it, or would some of them
turn back when the cross became too heavy?

He was asking this question the next morning as he sat in his study when the President of the
Endeavor Society of his church called to see him.

"I suppose I ought not to trouble you with my case," said young Morris coming at once to his
errand, "but I thought, Mr. Maxwell, that you might advise me a little."

"I'm glad you came. Go on, Fred." He had known the young man ever since his first year in the
pastorate, and loved and honored him for his consistent, faithful service in the church.

"Well, the fact is, I am out of a job. You know I've been doing reporter work on the morning
SENTINEL since I graduated last year. Well, last Saturday Mr. Burr asked me to go down the
road Sunday morning and get the details of that train robbery at the Junction, and write the
thing up for the extra edition that came out Monday morning, just to get the start of the NEWS.
I refused to go, and Burr gave me my dismissal. He was in a bad temper, or I think perhaps
he would not have done it. He has always treated me well before. Now, do you think Jesus would
have done as I did? I ask because the other fellows say I was a fool not to do the work. I
want to feel that a Christian acts from motives that may seem strange to others sometimes,
but not foolish. What do you think?"

"I think you kept your promise, Fred. I cannot believe Jesus would do newspaper reporting on
Sunday as you were asked to do it."

"Thank you, Mr. Maxwell. I felt a little troubled over it, but the longer I think it over the
better I feel."

Morris rose to go, and his pastor rose and laid a loving hand on the young man's shoulder.
"What are you going to do, Fred?"

"I don't know yet. I have thought some of going to Chicago or some large city ."

"Why don't you try the NEWS?"

"They are all supplied. I have not thought of applying there."

Maxwell thought a moment. "Come down to the NEWS office with me, and let us see Norman about it."

So a few minutes later Edward Norman received into his room the minister and young Morris,
and Maxwell briefly told the cause of the errand.

"I can give you a place on the NEWS," said Norman with his keen look softened by a smile that
made it winsome. "I want reporters who won't work Sundays. And what is more, I am making plans
for a special kind of reporting which I believe you can develop because you are in sympathy
with what Jesus would do."

He assigned Morris a definite task, and Maxwell started back to his study, feeling that kind
of satisfaction (and it is a very deep kind) which a man feels when he has been even partly
instrumental in finding an unemployed person a remunerative position.

He had intended to go right to his study, but on his way home he passed by one of Milton Wright's
stores. He thought he would simply step in and shake hands with his parishioner and bid him
God-speed in what he had heard he was doing to put Christ into his business. But when he went
into the office, Wright insisted on detaining him to talk over some of his new plans. Maxwell
asked himself if this was the Milton Wright he used to know, eminently practical, business-like,
according to the regular code of the business world, and viewing every thing first and foremost
from the standpoint of, "Will it pay?"

"There is no use to disguise the fact, Mr. Maxwell, that I have been compelled to revolutionize
the entire method of my business since I made that promise. I have been doing a great many
things during the last twenty years in this store that I know Jesus would not do. But that
is a small item compared with the number of things I begin to believe Jesus would do. My sins
of commission have not been as many as those of omission in business relations."

"What was the first change you made?" He felt as if his sermon could wait for him in his study.
As the interview with Milton Wright continued, he was not so sure but that he had found material
for a sermon without going back to his study.

"I think the first change I had to make was in my thought of my employees. I came down here
Monday morning after that Sunday and asked myself, 'What would Jesus do in His relation to
these clerks, bookkeepers, office-boys, draymen, salesmen? Would He try to establish some sort
of personal relation to them different from that which I have sustained all these years?' I
soon answered this by saying, 'Yes.' Then came the question of what that relation would be
and what it would lead me to do. I did not see how I could answer it to my satisfaction without
getting all my employees together and having a talk with them. So I sent invitations to all
of them, and we had a meeting out there in the warehouse Tuesday night. A good many things
came out of that meeting. I can't tell you all. I tried to talk with the men as I imagined
Jesus might. It was hard work, for I have not been in the habit of it, and must have made some
mistakes. But I can hardly make you believe, Mr. Maxwell, the effect of that meeting on some
of the men. Before it closed I saw more than a dozen of them with tears on their faces. I kept
asking, 'What would Jesus do?' and the more I asked it the farther along it pushed me into
the most intimate and loving relations with the men who have worked for me all these years.
Every day something new is coming up and I am right now in the midst of a reconstruction of
the entire business so far as its motive for being conducted is concerned. I am so practically
ignorant of all plans for co-operation and its application to business that I am trying to
get information from every possible source. I have lately made a special study of the life
of Titus Salt, the great mill-owner of Bradford, England, who afterward built that model town
on the banks of the Aire. There is a good deal in his plans that will help me. But I have not
yet reached definite conclusions in regard to all the details. I am not enough used to Jesus'
methods. But see here."

Wright eagerly reached up into one of the pigeon holes of his desk and took out a paper.

"I have sketched out what seems to me like a program such as Jesus might go by in a business
like mine. I want you to tell me what you think of it:

"WHAT JESUS WOULD PROBABLY DO IN MILTON WRIGHT'S PLACE AS A BUSINESS MAN"

He would engage in the business first of all for the purpose of glorifying God, and not for
the primary purpose of making money. All money that might be made he would never regard as
his own, but as trust funds to be used for the good of humanity. His relations with all the
persons in his employ would be the most loving and helpful. He could not help thinking of all
of them in the light of souls to be saved. This thought would always be greater than his thought
of making money in the business. He would never do a single dishonest or questionable thing
or try in any remotest way to get the advantage of any one else in the same business. The principle
of unselfishness and helpfulness in the business would direct all its details. Upon this principle
he would shape the entire plan of his relations to his employees, to the people who were his
customers and to the general business world with which he was connected.

Henry Maxwell read this over slowly. It reminded him of his own attempts the day before to
put into a concrete form his thought of Jesus' probable action. He was very thoughtful as he
looked up and met Wright's eager gaze.

"Do you believe you can continue to make your business pay on these lines?"

"I do. Intelligent unselfishness ought to be wiser than intelligent selfishness, don't you
think? If the men who work as employees begin to feel a personal share in the profits of the
business and, more than that, a personal love for themselves on the part of the firm, won't
the result be more care, less waste, more diligence, more faithfulness?"

"Yes, I think so. A good many other business men don't, do they? I mean as a general thing.
How about your relations to the selfish world that is not trying to make money on Christian
principles?"

"That complicates my action, of course."

"Does your plan contemplate what is coming to be known as co-operation?"

"Yes, as far as I have gone, it does. As I told you, I am studying out my details carefully.
I am absolutely convinced that Jesus in my place would be absolutely unselfish. He would love
all these men in His employ. He would consider the main purpose of all the business to be a
mutual helpfulness, and would conduct it all so that God's kingdom would be evidently the first
object sought. On those general principles, as I say, I am working. I must have time to complete
the details."

When Maxwell finally left he was profoundly impressed with the revolution that was being wrought
already in the business. As he passed out of the store he caught something of the new spirit
of the place. There was no mistaking the fact that Milton Wright's new relations to his employees
were beginning even so soon, after less than two weeks, to transform the entire business. This
was apparent in the conduct and faces of the clerks.

"If he keeps on he will be one of the most influential preachers in Raymond," said Maxwell
to himself when he reached his study. The question rose as to his continuance in this course
when he began to lose money by it, as was possible. He prayed that the Holy Spirit, who had
shown Himself with growing power in the company of First Church disciples, might abide long
with them all. And with that prayer on his lips and in his heart he began the preparation of
a sermon in which he was going to present to his people on Sunday the subject of the saloon
in Raymond, as he now believed Jesus would do. He had never preached against the saloon in
this way before. He knew that the things he should say would lead to serious results. Nevertheless,
he went on with his work, and every sentence he wrote or shaped was preceded with the question,
"Would Jesus say that?" Once in the course of his study, he went down on his knees. No one
except himself could know what that meant to him. When had he done that in his preparation
of sermons, before the change that had come into his thought of discipleship? As he viewed
his ministry now, he did not dare preach without praying long for wisdom. He no longer thought
of his dramatic delivery and its effect on his audience. The great question with him now was,
"What would Jesus do?"

Saturday night at the Rectangle witnessed some of the most remarkable scenes that Mr. Gray
and his wife had ever known. The meetings had intensified with each night of Rachel's singing.
A stranger passing through the Rectangle in the day-time might have heard a good deal about
the meetings in one way and another. It cannot be said that up to that Saturday night there
was any appreciable lack of oaths and impurity and heavy drinking. The Rectangle would not
have acknowledged that it was growing any better or that even the singing had softened its
outward manner. It had too much local pride in being "tough." But in spite of itself there
was a yielding to a power it had never measured and did not know we enough to resist beforehand.

Gray had recovered his voice so that by Saturday he was able to speak. The fact that he was
obliged to use his voice carefully made it necessary for the people to be very quiet if they
wanted to hear. Lord! Lord! I can see dem gals now on dat flo'; jes skippin' an' a trottin'.
An' honey, dar wuz no white folks to set down an' eat 'fo yo'.

WAR

Now, Miss Sue, take up. I jes' like to talk to you, honey 'bout dem
days ob slavery; 'cause you look like you wan'ta hear all 'bout 'em.
All 'bout de ol' rebels; an' dem niggers who left wid de Yankees an'
were sat free, but, poor things, dey had no place to go after dey
got freed. Baby, all us wuz helpless an' ain't had nothin'.

I wuz
free a long time 'fo' I knew it.

And Rachel her singing was the best, most wonderful, that Virginia or Jasper Chase had ever
known. They came together again tonight, this time with Dr. West, who had spent all his spare
time that week in the Rectangle with some charity cases.

Gray hardly said a word. He stretched out his hand with a gesture of invitation. And down the
two aisles of the tent, broken, sinful creatures, men and women, stumbled towards the platform.
One woman out of the street was near the organ. Virginia caught the look of her face, and for
the first time in the life of the rich girl the thought of what Jesus was to the sinful woman
came with a suddenness and power that was like nothing but a new birth. Virginia left the organ,
went to her, looked into her face and caught her hands in her own. The other girl trembled,
then fell on her knees sobbing, with her head down upon the back of the rude bench in front
of her, still clinging to Virginia. And Virginia, after a moment's hesitation, kneeled down
by her and the two heads were bowed close together.

But when the people had crowded in a double row all about the platform, most of them kneeling
and crying, a man in evening dress, different from the others, pushed through the seats and
came and kneeled down by the side of the drunken man who had disturbed the meeting when Maxwell
spoke. He kneeled within a few feet of Rachel Winslow, who was still singing softly. And as
she turned for a moment and looked in his direction, she was amazed to see the face of Rollin
Page! For a moment her voice faltered.

Chapter Ten

"If any man serve me, let him follow me."

IT was nearly midnight before the services at the Rectangle closed. Gray stayed up long into
Sunday morning, praying and talking with a little group of converts who in the great experiences
of their new life, clung to the evangelist with a personal helplessness that made it as impossible
for him to leave them as if they had been depending upon him to save them from physical death.
Among these converts was Rollin Page.

Virginia and her uncle had gone home about eleven o'clock, and Rachel and Jasper Chase had
gone with them as far as the avenue where Virginia lived. Dr. West had walked on a little way
with them to his own home, and Rachel and Jasper had then gone on together to her mother's.

That was a little after eleven. It was now striking midnight, and Jasper Chase sat in his room
staring at the papers on his desk and going over the last half hour with painful persistence.

He had told Rachel Winslow of his love for her, and she had not given him her love in return.
It would be difficult to know what was most powerful in the impulse that had moved him to speak
to her tonight. He had yielded to his feelings without any special thought of results to himself,
because he had felt so certain that Rachel would respond to his love. He tried to recall the
impression she made on him when he first spoke to her.

Never had her beauty and her strength influenced him as tonight. While she was singing he saw
and heard no one else. The tent swarmed with a confused crowd of faces and he knew he was sitting
there hemmed in by a mob of people, but they had no meaning to him. He felt powerless to avoid
speaking to her. He knew he should speak when they were alone.

Now that he had spoken, he felt that he had misjudged either Rachel or the opportunity. He
knew, or thought he knew, that she had begun to care something for him. It was no secret between
them that the heroine of Jasper's first novel had been his own ideal of Rachel, and the hero
in the story was himself and they had loved each other in the book, and Rachel had not objected.
No one else knew. The names and characters had been drawn with a subtle skill that revealed
to Rachel, when she received a copy of the book from Jasper, the fact of his love for her,
and she had not been offended. That was nearly a year ago.

Tonight he recalled the scene between them with every inflection and movement unerased from
his memory. He even recalled the fact that he began to speak just at that point on the avenue
where, a few days before, he had met Rachel walking with Rollin Page. He had wondered at the
time what Rollin was saying.

"Rachel," Jasper had said, and it was the first time he had ever spoken her first name, "I
never knew till tonight how much I loved you. Why should I try to conceal any longer what you
have seen me look? You know I love you as my life. I can no longer hide it from you if I would."

The first intimation he had of a repulse was the trembling of Rachel's arm in his. She had
allowed him to speak and had neither turned her face toward him nor away from him. She had
looked straight on and her voice was sad but firm and quiet when she spoke.

"Why do you speak to me now? I cannot bear it--after what we have seen tonight."

"Why--what--" he had stammered and then was silent.

Rachel withdrew her arm from his but still walked near him. Then he had cried out with the
anguish of one who begins to see a great loss facing him where he expected a great joy.

"Rachel! Do you not love me? Is not my love for you as sacred as anything in all of life itself?"

She had walked silent for a few steps after that. They passed a street lamp. Her face was pale
and beautiful. He had made a movement to clutch her arm and she had moved a little farther
from him.

"No," she had replied. "There was a time I--cannot answer for that you--should not have spoken
to me--now."

He had seen in these words his answer. He was extremely sensitive. Nothing short of a joyous
response to his own love would ever have satisfied him. He could not think of pleading with her.

"Some time--when I am more worthy?" he had asked in a low voice, but she did not seem to hear,
and they had parted at her home, and he recalled vividly the fact that no good-night had been said.

Now as he went over the brief but significant scene he lashed himself for his foolish precipitancy.
He had not reckoned on Rachel's tense, passionate absorption of all her feeling in the scenes
at the tent which were so new in her mind. But he did not know her well enough even yet to
understand the meaning of her refusal. When the clock in the First Church struck one he was
still sitting at his desk staring at the last page of manuscript of his unfinished novel.

Rachel went up to her room and faced her evening's experience with conflicting emotions. Had
she ever loved Jasper Chase? Yes. No. One moment she felt that her life's happiness was at
stake over the result of her action. Another, she had a strange feeling of relief that she
had spoken as she had. There was one great, overmastering feeling in her. The response of the
wretched creatures in the tent to her singing, the swift, powerful, awesome presence of the
Holy Spirit had affected her as never in all her life before. The moment Jasper had spoken
her name and she realized that he was telling her of his love she had felt a sudden revulsion
for him, as if he should have respected the supernatural events they had just witnessed. She
felt as if it was not the time to be absorbed in anything less than the divine glory of those
conversions. The thought that all the time she was singing, with the one passion of her soul
to touch the conscience of that tent full of sin, Jasper Chase had been unmoved by it except
to love her for herself, gave her a shock as of irreverence on her part as well as on his.
She could not tell why she felt as she did, only she knew that if he had not told her tonight
she would still have felt the same toward him as she always had. What was that feeling? What
had he been to her? Had she made a mistake? She went to her book case and took out the novel
which Jasper had given her. Her face deepened in color as she turned to certain passages which
she had read often and which she knew Jasper had written for her. She read them again. Somehow
they failed to touch her strongly. She closed the book and let it lie on the table. She gradually
felt that her thought was busy with the sights she had witnessed in the tent. Those faces,
men and women, touched for the first time with the Spirit's glory--what a wonderful thing life
was after all! The complete regeneration revealed in the sight of drunken, vile, debauched
humanity kneeling down to give itself to a life of purity and Christlikeness--oh, it was surely
a witness to the superhuman in the world! And the face of Rollin Page by the side of that miserable
wreck out of the gutter! She could recall as if she now saw it, Virginia crying with her arms
about her brother just before she left the tent, and Mr. Gray kneeling close by, and the girl
Virginia had taken into her heart while she whispered something to her before she went out.
All these pictures drawn by the Holy Spirit in the human tragedies brought to a climax there
in the most abandoned spot in all Raymond, stood out in Rachel's memory now, a memory so recent
that her room seemed for the time being to contain all the actors and their movements.

"No! No!" she said aloud. "He had no right to speak after all that! He should have respected
the place where our thoughts should have been. I am sure I do not love him--not enough to give
him my life!"

And after she had thus spoken, the evening's experience at the tent came crowding in again,
thrusting out all other things. It is perhaps the most striking evidence of the tremendous
spiritual factor which had now entered the Rectangle that Rachel felt, even when the great
love of a strong man had come very near to her, that the spiritual manifestation moved her
with an agitation far greater than anything Jasper had felt for her personally or she for him.

The people of Raymond awoke Sunday morning to a growing knowledge of events which were beginning
to revolutionize many of the regular, customary habits of the town. Alexander Powers' action
in the matter of the railroad frauds had created a sensation not only in Raymond but throughout
the country. Edward Norman's daily changes of policy in the conduct of his paper had startled
the community and caused more comment than any recent political event. Rachel Winslow's singing
at the Rectangle meetings had made a stir in society and excited the wonder of all her friends.

Virginia's conduct, her presence every night with Rachel, her absence from the usual circle
of her wealthy, fashionable acquaintances, had furnished a great deal of material for gossip
and question. In addition to these events which centered about these persons who were so well
known, there had been all through the city in very many homes and in business and social circles
strange happenings. Nearly one hundred persons in Henry Maxwell's church had made the pledge
to do everything after asking: "What would Jesus do?" and the result had been, in many cases,
unheard-of actions. The city was stirred as it had never been before. As a climax to the week's
events had come the spiritual manifestation at the Rectangle, and the announcement which came
to most people before church time of the actual conversion at the tent of nearly fifty of the
worst characters in that neighborhood, together with the con version of Rollin Page, the well-known
society and club man.

It is no wonder that under the pressure of all this the First Church of Raymond came to the
morning service in a condition that made it quickly sensitive to any large truth. Perhaps nothing
had astonished the people more than the great change that had come over the minister, since
he had proposed to them the imitation of Jesus in conduct. The dramatic delivery of his sermons
no longer impressed them. The self-satisfied, contented, easy attitude of the fine figure and
refined face in the pulpit had been displaced by a manner that could not be compared with the
old style of his delivery. The sermon had become a message. It was no longer delivered. It
was brought to them with a love, an earnestness, a passion, a desire, a humility that poured
its enthusiasm about the truth and made the speaker no more prominent than he had to be as
the living voice of God. His prayers were unlike any the people had heard before. They were
often broken, even once or twice they had been actually ungrammatical in a phrase or two. When
had Henry Maxwell so far forgotten himself in a prayer as to make a mistake of that sort? He
knew that he had often taken as much pride in the diction and delivery of his prayers as of
his sermons. Was it possible he now so abhorred the elegant refinement of a formal public petition
that he purposely chose to rebuke himself for his previous precise manner of prayer? It is
more likely that he had no thought of all that. His great longing to voice the needs and wants
of his people made him unmindful of an occasional mistake. It is certain that he had never
prayed so effectively as he did now.

There are times when a sermon has a value and power due to conditions in the audience rather
than to anything new or startling or eloquent in the words said or arguments presented. Such
conditions faced Henry Maxwell this morning as he preached against the saloon, according to
his purpose determined on the week before. He had no new statements to make about the evil
influence of the saloon in Raymond. What new facts were there? He had no startling illustrations
of the power of the saloon in business or politics. What could he say that had not been said
by temperance orators a great many times? The effect of his message this morning owed its power
to the unusual fact of his preaching about the saloon at all, together with the events that
had stirred the people. He had never in the course of his ten years' pastorate mentioned the
saloon as something to be regarded in the light of an enemy, not only to the poor and tempted,
but to the business life of the place and the church itself. He spoke now with a freedom that
seemed to measure his complete sense of conviction that Jesus would speak so. At the close
he pleaded with the people to remember the new life that had begun at the Rectangle. The regular
election of city officers was near at hand. The question of license would be an issue in the
election. What of the poor creatures surrounded by the hell of drink while just beginning to
feel the joy of deliverance from sin? Who could tell what depended on their environment? Was
there one word to be said by the Christian disciple, business man, citizen, in favor of continuing
the license to crime and shame-producing institutions? Was not the most Christian thing they
could do to act as citizens in the matter, fight the saloon at the polls, elect good men to
the city offices, and clean the municipality? How much had prayers helped to make Raymond better
while votes and actions had really been on the side of the enemies of Jesus? Would not Jesus
do this? What disciple could imagine Him refusing to suffer or to take up His cross in this
matter? How much had the members of the First Church ever suffered in an attempt to imitate
Jesus? Was Christian discipleship a thing of conscience simply, of custom, of tradition? Where
did the suffering come in? Was it necessary in order to follow Jesus' steps to go up Calvary
as well as the Mount of Transfiguration?

His appeal was stronger at this point than he knew. It is not too much to say that the spiritual
tension of the people reached its highest point right there. The imitation of Jesus which had
begun with the volunteers in the church was working like leaven in the organization, and Henry
Maxwell would even thus early in his life have been amazed if he could have measured the extent
of desire on the part of his people to take up the cross. While he was speaking this morning,
before he closed with a loving appeal to the discipleship of two thousand years' knowledge
of the Master, many a man and woman in the church was saying as Rachel had said so passionately
to her mother: "I want to do something that will cost me something in the way of sacrifice."
"I am hungry to suffer something." Truly, Mazzini was right when he said that no appeal is
quite so powerful in the end as the call: "Come and suffer."

The service was over, the great audience had gone, and Maxwell again faced the company gathered
in the lecture room as on the two previous Sundays. He had asked all to remain who had made
the pledge of discipleship, and any others who wished to be included. The after service seemed
now to be a necessity. As he went in and faced the people there his heart trembled. There were
at least one hundred present. The Holy Spirit was never before so manifest. He missed Jasper
Chase. But all the others were present. He asked Milton Wright to pray. The very air was charged
with divine possibilities. What could resist such a baptism of power? How had they lived all
these years without it?

Chapter Eleven

DONALD MARSH, President of Lincoln College, walked home with Mr. Maxwell.

"I have reached one conclusion, Maxwell," said Marsh, speaking slowly. "I have found my cross
and it is a heavy one, but I shall never be satisfied until I take it up and carry it." Maxwell
was silent and the President went on.

"Your sermon today made clear to me what I have long been feeling I ought to do. 'What would
Jesus do in my place?' I have asked the question repeatedly since I made my promise. The chance
guest is no longer welcome to the family table; we are ashamed of our daily routine, or we
have an idea that our fare is not worthy of being shared. Whatever it is, unconscious as it
often is, it is a canker in the family life of to-day. It leads to selfishness, to a laxness
in home manners very demoralizing. It is doubtless one of the great factors in the distinct
deterioration of children's public manners.

Because the house is held to be the visible evidence of social standing, because its location,
style of architecture, fittings and furniture may be made to proclaim
the pretensions of its inhabitants, it is often dishonest and one
of the sources of the prevalent untruth in other things, since dishonesty
in housing has been not infrequently one of the first signs of dishonesty
in business. We have lived in a little world of literature and scholarly seclusion, doing
work we have enjoyed and shrinking from the disagreeable duties that belong to the life of
the citizen. I confess with shame that I have purposely avoided the responsibility that I owe
to this city personally. I understand that our city officials are a corrupt, unprincipled set
of men, controlled in large part by the whiskey element and thoroughly selfish so far as the
affairs of city government are concerned. Yet all these years I, with nearly every teacher
in the college, have been satisfied to let other men run the municipality and have lived in
a little world of my own, out of touch and sympathy with the real world of the people. 'What
would Jesus do?' I have even tried to avoid an honest answer. I can no longer do so. My plain
duty is to take a personal part in this coming election, go to the primaries, throw the weight
of my influence, whatever it is, toward the nomination and election of good men, and plunge
into the very depths of the entire horrible whirlpool of deceit, bribery, political trickery
and saloonism as it exists in Raymond today. I would sooner walk up to the mouth of a cannon
any time than do this. I dread it because I hate the touch of the whole matter. I would give
almost any thing to be able to say, 'I do not believe Jesus would do anything of the sort.'
But I am more and more persuaded that He would. This is where the suffering comes for me. It
would not hurt me half so much to lose my position or my home. I loathe the contact with this
municipal problem. I would so much prefer to remain quietly in my scholastic life with my classes
in Ethics and Philosophy. But the call has come to me so plainly that I cannot escape. 'Donald
Marsh, follow me. Do your duty as a citizen of Raymond at the point where your citizenship
will cost you something. Help to cleanse this municipal stable, even if you do have to soil
your aristocratic feelings a little.' Maxwell, this is my cross, I must take it up or deny
my Lord."

"You have spoken for me also," replied Maxwell with a sad smile. "Why should I, simply because
I am a minister, shelter myself behind my refined, sensitive feelings, and like a coward refuse
to touch, except in a sermon possibly, the duty of citizenship? I am unused to the ways of
the political life of the city. I have never taken an active part in any nomination of good
men. There are hundreds of ministers like me. As a class we do not practice in the municipal
life the duties and privileges we preach from the pulpit. 'What would Jesus do?' I am now at
a point where, like you, I am driven to answer the question one way. My duty is plain. I must
suffer. All my parish work, all my little trials or self-sacrifices are as nothing to me compared
with the breaking into my scholarly, intellectual, self-contained habits, of this open, coarse,
public fight for a clean city life. I could go and live at the Rectangle the rest of my life
and work in the slums for a bare living, and I could enjoy it more than the thought of plunging
into a fight for the reform of this whiskey-ridden city. It would cost me less. But, like you,
I have been unable to shake off my responsibility. The answer to the question 'What would Jesus
do?' in this case leaves me no peace except when I say, Jesus would have me act the part of
a Christian citizen. Marsh, as you say, we professional men, ministers, professors, artists,
literary men, scholars, have almost invariably been political cowards. We have avoided the
sacred duties of citizenship either ignorantly or selfishly. Certainly Jesus in our age would
not do that. We can do no less than take up this cross, and follow Him."

The two men walked on in silence for a while. Finally President Marsh said: "We do not need
to act alone in this matter. With all the men who have made the promise we certainly can have
companionship, and strength even, of numbers. Let us organize the Christian forces of Raymond
for the battle against rum and corruption. We certainly ought to enter the primaries with a
force that will be able to do more than enter a protest. It is a fact that the saloon element
is cowardly and easily frightened in spite of its lawlessness and corruption. Let us plan a
campaign that will mean something because it is organized righteousness. Jesus would use great
wisdom in this matter. He would employ means. He would make large plans. Let us do so. If we
bear this cross let us do it bravely, like men."

They talked over the matter a long time and met again the next day in Maxwell's study to develop
plans. The city primaries were called for Friday. Rumors of strange and unknown events to the
average citizen were current that week in political circles throughout Raymond. The Crawford
system of balloting for nominations was not in use in the state, and the primary was called
for a public meeting at the court house.

The citizens of Raymond will never forget that meeting. It was so unlike any political meeting
ever held in Raymond before, that there was no attempt at comparison. The special officers
to be nominated were mayor, city council, chief of police, city clerk and city treasurer.

The evening NEWS in its Saturday edition gave a full account of the primaries, and in the editorial
columns Edward Norman spoke with a directness and conviction that the Christian people of Raymond
were learning to respect deeply, because it was so evidently sincere and unselfish. A part
of that editorial is also a part of this history. We quote the following:

"It is safe to say that never before in the history of Raymond was there a primary like the
one in the court house last night. It was, first of all, a complete surprise to the city politicians
who have been in the habit of carrying on the affairs of the city as if they owned them, and
every one else was simply a tool or a cipher. The overwhelming surprise of the wire pullers
last night consisted in the fact that a large number of the citizens of Raymond who have heretofore
taken no part in the city's affairs, entered the primary and controlled it, nominating some
of the best men for all the offices to be filled at the coming election.

"It was a tremendous lesson in good citizenship. President Marsh of Lincoln College, who never
before entered a city primary, and whose face was not even known to the ward politicians, made
one of the best speeches ever made in Raymond. It was almost ludicrous to see the faces of
the men who for years have done as they pleased, when President Marsh rose to speak. Many of
them asked, 'Who is he?' The consternation deepened as the primary proceeded and it became
evident that the oldtime ring of city rulers was outnumbered. Rev. Henry Maxwell of the First
Church, Milton Wright, Alexander Powers, Professors Brown, Willard and Park of Lincoln College,
Dr. West, Rev. George Main of the Pilgrim Church, Dean Ward of the Holy Trinity, and scores
of well-known business men and professional men, most of them church members, were present,
and it did not take long to see that they had all come with the one direct and definite purpose
of nominating the best men possible. Most of those men had never before been seen in a primary.
They were complete strangers to the politicians. But they had evidently profited by the politician's
methods and were able by organized and united effort to nominate the entire ticket.

"As soon as it became plain that the primary was out of their control the regular ring withdrew
in disgust and nominated another ticket. The NEWS simply calls the attention of all decent
citizens to the fact that this last ticket contains the names of whiskey men, and the line
is sharply and distinctly drawn between the saloon and corrupt management such as we have known
for years, and a clean, honest, capable, business-like city administration, such as every good
citizen ought to want. It is not necessary to remind the people of Raymond that the question
of local option comes up at the election. That will be the most important question on the ticket.
The crisis of our city affairs has been reached. The issue is squarely before us. Shall we
continue the rule of rum and boodle and shameless incompetency, or shall we, as President Marsh
said in his noble speech, rise as good citizens and begin a new order of things, cleansing
our city of the worst enemy known to municipal honesty, and doing what lies in our power to
do with the ballot to purify our civic life?

"The NEWS is positively and without reservation on the side of the new movement. We shall henceforth
do all in our power to drive out the saloon and destroy its political strength. We shall advocate
the election of the men nominated by the majority of citizens met in the first primary and
we call upon all Christians, church members, lovers of right, purity, temperance, and the home,
to stand by President Marsh and the rest of the citizens who have thus begun a long-needed
reform in our city."

President Marsh read this editorial and thanked God for Edward Norman. At the same time he
understood well enough that every other paper in Raymond was on the other side. He did not
underestimate the importance and seriousness of the fight which was only just begun. It was
no secret that the NEWS had lost enormously since it had been governed by the standard of "What
would Jesus do?" And the question was, Would the Christian people of Raymond stand by it? Would
they make it possible for Norman to conduct a daily Christian paper? Or would the desire for
what is called news in the way of crime, scandal, political partisanship of the regular sort,
and a dislike to champion so remarkable a reform in journalism, influence them to drop the
paper and refuse to give it their financial support? That was, in fact, the question Edward
Norman was asking even while he wrote that Saturday editorial. He knew well enough that his
actions expressed in that editorial would cost him very heavily from the hands of many business
men in Raymond. And still, as he drove his pen over the paper, he asked another question, "What
would Jesus do?" That question had become a part of this whole life now. It was greater than
any other.

But for the first time in its history Raymond had seen the professional men, the teachers,
the college professors, the doctors, the ministers, take political action and put themselves
definitely and sharply in public antagonism to the evil forces that had so long controlled
the machine of municipal government. The fact itself was astounding. President Marsh acknowledged
to himself with a feeling of humiliation, that never before had he known what civic righteousness
could accomplish. From that Friday night's work he dated for himself and his college a new
definition of the worn phrase "the scholar in politics." Education for him and those who were
under his influence ever after meant some element of suffering. Sacrifice must now enter into
the factor of development.

At the Rectangle that week the tide of spiritual life rose high, and as yet showed no signs
of flowing back. Rachel and Virginia went every night. Virginia was rapidly reaching a conclusion
with respect to a large part of her money. She had talked it over with Rachel and they had
been able to agree that if Jesus had a vast amount of money at His disposal He might do with
some of it as Virginia planned. At any rate they felt that whatever He might do in such case
would have as large an element of variety in it as the differences in persons and circumstances.
There could be no one fixed Christian way of using money. The rule that regulated its use was
unselfish utility.

But meanwhile the glory of the Spirit's power possessed all their best thought. Night after
night that week witnessed miracles as great as walking on the sea or feeding the multitude
with a few loaves and fishes. For what greater miracle is there than a regenerate humanity?
The transformation of these coarse, brutal, sottish lives into praying, rapturous lovers of
Christ, struck Rachel and Virginia every time with the feeling that people may have had when
they saw Lazarus walk out of the tomb. It was an experience full of profound excitement for them.

Rollin Page came to all the meetings. There was no doubt of the change that had come over him.
Rachel had not yet spoken much with him. He was wonderfully quiet. It seemed as if he was thinking
all the time. Certainly he was not the same person. He talked more with Gray than with any
one else. He did not avoid Rachel, but he seemed to shrink from any appearance of seeming to
renew the acquaintance with her. Rachel found it even difficult to express to him her pleasure
at the new life he had begun to know. He seemed to be waiting to adjust himself to his previous
relations before this new life began. He had not forgotten those relations. But he was not
yet able to fit his consciousness into new ones.

The end of the week found the Rectangle struggling hard between two mighty opposing forces.
The Holy Spirit was battling with all His supernatural strength against the saloon devil which
had so long held a jealous grasp on its slaves. If the Christian people of Raymond once could
realize what the contest meant to the souls newly awakened to a purer life it did not seem
possible that the election could result in the old system of license. But that remained yet
to be seen. The horror of the daily surroundings of many of the converts was slowly burning
its way into the knowledge of Virginia and Rachel, and every night as they went uptown to their
luxurious homes they carried heavy hearts.

"A good many of these poor creatures will go back again," Gray would say with sadness too deep
for tears. "The environment does have a good deal to do with the character. It does not stand
to reason that these people can always resist the sight and smell of the devilish drink about
them. O Lord, how long shall Christian people continue to support by their silence and their
ballots the greatest form of slavery known in America?"

He asked the question, and did not have much hope of an immediate answer. There was a ray of
hope in the action of Friday night's primary, but what the result would be he did not dare
to anticipate. The whiskey forces were organized, alert, aggressive, roused into unusual hatred
by the events of the last week at the tent and in the city. Would the Christian forces act
as a unit against the saloon? Or would they be divided on account of their business interests
or because they were not in the habit of acting all together as the whiskey power always did?
That remained to be seen. Meanwhile the saloon reared itself about the Rectangle like some
deadly viper hissing and coiling, ready to strike its poison into any unguarded part.

Saturday afternoon as Virginia was just stepping out of her house to go and see Rachel to talk
over her new plans, a carriage drove up containing three of her fashionable friends. Virginia
went out to the drive-way and stood there talking with them. They had not come to make a formal
call but wanted Virginia to go driving with them up on the boulevard. There was a band concert
in the park. The day was too pleasant to be spent indoors.

"Where have you been all this time, Virginia?" asked one of the girls, tapping her playfully
on the shoulder with a red silk parasol. "We hear that you have gone into the show business.
Tell us about it."

Virginia colored, but after a moment's hesitation she frankly told something of her experience
at the Rectangle. The girls in the carriage began to be really interested.

"I tell you, girls, let's go 'slumming' with Virginia this afternoon instead of going to the
band concert. I've never been down to the Rectangle. I've heard it's an awful wicked place
and lots to see. Virginia will act as guide, and it would be"--"real fun" she was going to
say, but Virginia's look made her substitute the word "interesting."

Virginia was angry. At first thought she said to herself she would never go under such circumstances.
The other girls seemed to be of the same mind with the speaker. They chimed in with earnestness
and asked Virginia to take them down there.

Suddenly she saw in the idle curiosity of the girls an opportunity. They had never seen the
sin and misery of Raymond. Why should they not see it, even if their motive in going down there
was simply to pass away an afternoon.

"HADN'T we better take a policeman along?" said one of the girls with a nervous laugh. "It
really isn't safe down there, you know."

"There's no danger," said Virginia briefly.

"Is it true that your brother Rollin has been converted?" asked the first speaker, looking
at Virginia curiously. It impressed her during the drive to the Rectangle that all three of
her friends were regarding her with close attention as if she were peculiar.

"Yes, he certainly is."

"I understand he is going around to the clubs talking with his old friends there, trying to
preach to them. Doesn't that seem funny?" said the girl with the red silk parasol.

Virginia did not answer, and the other girls were beginning to feel sober as the carriage turned
into a street leading to the Rectangle. As they neared the district they grew more and more
nervous. The sights and smells and sounds which had become familiar to Virginia struck the
senses of these refined, delicate society girls as something horrible. As they entered farther
into the district, the Rectangle seemed to stare as with one great, bleary, beer-soaked countenance
at this fine carriage with its load of fashionably dressed young women. "Slumming" had never
been a fad with Raymond society, and this was perhaps the first time that the two had come
together in this way. The girls felt that instead of seeing the Rectangle they were being made
the objects of curiosity. They were frightened and disgusted.

"Let's go back. I've seen enough," said the girl who was sitting with Virginia.

They were at that moment just opposite a notorious saloon and gambling house. The street was
narrow and the sidewalk crowded. Suddenly, out of the door of this saloon a young woman reeled.
She was singing in a broken, drunken sob that seemed to indicate that she partly realized her
awful condition, "Just as I am, without one plea"--and as the carriage rolled past she leered
at it, raising her face so that Virginia saw it very close to her own. It was the face of the
girl who had kneeled sobbing, that night with Virginia kneeling beside her and praying for her.

"Stop!" cried Virginia, motioning to the driver who was looking around. The carriage stopped,
and in a moment she was out and had gone up to the girl and taken her by the arm. "Loreen!"
she said, and that was all. The girl looked into her face, and her own changed into a look
of utter horror. The girls in the carriage were smitten into helpless astonishment. The saloon-keeper
had come to the door of the saloon and was standing there looking on with his hands on his
hips. And the Rectangle from its windows, its saloon steps, its filthy sidewalk, gutter and
roadway, paused, and with undisguised wonder stared at the two girls. Over the scene the warm
sun of spring poured its mellow light. A faint breath of music from the band-stand in the park
floated into the Rectangle. The concert had begun, and the fashion and wealth of Raymond were
displaying themselves up town on the boulevard.

When Virginia left the carriage and went up to Loreen she had no definite idea as to what she
would do or what the result of her action would be. She simply saw a soul that had tasted of
the joy of a better life slipping back again into its old hell of shame and death. And before
she had touched the drunken girl's arm she had asked only one question, "What would Jesus do?"
That question was becoming with her, as with many others, a habit of life.

She looked around now as she stood close by Loreen, and the whole scene was cruelly vivid to
her. She thought first of the girls in the carriage.

"Drive on; don't wait for me. I am going to see my friend home," she said calmly enough.

The girl with the red parasol seemed to gasp at the word "friend," when Virginia spoke it. Anal.
137, 53. we have a similar epithet:--

"hwealfum lindum=vaulted (arched
concave) shields."

We should remember that Somner has ge-lær, void, empty, vacuus; and
Lye, with a reference to the Herbarium, lær-nesse, vacuitas.

In the Teuthonista we have lær, vacuus, concavus.

In Heiland, 3, 4. "larea stodun thar stenuatu sehsi=empty stood there
stone-vats six."

I need not call to your mind the O.H.G. lári.

I think, therefore, we cannot doubt that what is intended to be expressed
by the A.-S. lærig is empty, hollow, concave.

But if we wanted further confirmation, leer, leery, leary are still
in use in Devonshire, Dorsetshire, and perhaps elsewhere, for empty,
hollow, as the provincial Glossaries will show.


For the first time it flashed across her that the immortal being who was flung like wreckage
upon the shore of this early hell called the saloon, had no place that could be called home.
The girl suddenly wrenched her arm from Virginia's grasp. In doing so she nearly threw Virginia
down.

"You shall not touch me! Leave me! Let me go to hell! That's where I belong! The devil is waiting
for me. See him!" she exclaimed hoarsely. She turned and pointed with a shaking finger at the
saloon-keeper. The crowd laughed. Virginia stepped up to her and put her arm about her.

"Loreen," she said firmly, "come with me. You do not belong to hell. You belong to Jesus and
He will save you. Come."

The girl suddenly burst into tears. She was only partly sobered by the shock of meeting Virginia.

Virginia looked around again. "Where does Mr. Gray live?" she asked. She knew that the evangelist
boarded somewhere near the tent. A number of voices gave the direction.

"Come, Loreen, I want you to go with me to Mr. Gray's," she said, still keeping her hold of
the swaying, trembling creature who moaned and sobbed and now clung to her as firmly as before
she had repulsed her.

So the two moved on through the Rectangle toward the evangelist's lodging place. The sight
seemed to impress the Rectangle seriously. It never took itself seriously when it was drunk,
but this was different. The fact that one of the richest, most beautifully-dressed girls in
all Raymond was taking care of one of the Rectangle's most noted characters, who reeled along
under the influence of liquor, was a fact astounding enough to throw more or less dignity and
importance about Loreen herself. The event of Loreen's stumbling through the gutter dead-drunk
always made the Rectangle laugh and jest. But Loreen staggering along with a young lady from
the society circles uptown supporting her, was another thing. The Rectangle viewed it with
soberness and more or less wondering admiration.

When they finally reached Mr. Gray's lodging place the woman who answered Virginia's knock
said that both Mr. and Mrs. Gray were out somewhere and would not be back until six o'clock.

Virginia had not planned anything farther than a possible appeal to the Grays, either to take
charge of Loreen for a while or find some safe place for her until she was sober. She stood
now at the door after the woman had spoken, and she was really at a loss to know what to do.
Loreen sank down stupidly on the steps and buried her face in her arms. Virginia eyed the miserable
figure of the girl with a feeling that she was afraid would grow into disgust.

Finally a thought possessed her that she could not escape. What was to hinder her from taking
Loreen home with her? Why should not this homeless, wretched creature, reeking with the fumes
of liquor, be cared for in Virginia's own home instead of being consigned to strangers in some
hospital or house of charity? Virginia really knew very little about any such places of refuge.
As a matter of fact, there were two or three such institutions in Raymond, but it is doubtful
if any of them would have taken a person like Loreen in her present condition. But that was
not the question with Virginia just now. "What would Jesus do with Loreen?" That was what Virginia
faced, and she finally answered it by touching the girl again.

"Loreen, come. You are going home with me. We will take the car here at the corner."

Loreen staggered to her feet and, to Virginia's surprise, made no trouble. She had expected
resistance or a stubborn refusal to move. When they reached the corner and took the car it
was nearly full of people going uptown. Virginia was painfully conscious of the stare that
greeted her and her companion as they entered. But her thought was directed more and more to
the approaching scene with her grandmother. What would Madam Page say?

Loreen was nearly sober now. But she was lapsing into a state of stupor. Virginia was obliged
to hold fast to her arm. Several times the girl lurched heavily against her, and as the two
went up the avenue a curious crowd of so-called civilized people turned and gazed at them.
When she mounted the steps of her handsome house Virginia breathed a sigh of relief, even in
the face of the interview with the grandmother, and when the door shut and she was in the wide
hall with her homeless outcast, she felt equal to anything that might now come.

Madam Page was in the library. Hearing Virginia come in, she came into the hall. Virginia stood
there supporting Loreen, who stared stupidly at the rich magnificence of the furnishings around
her.

"Grandmother," Virginia spoke without hesitation and very clearly, "I have brought one of my
friends from the Rectangle. She is in trouble and has no home. I am going to care for her here
a little while."

Madam Page glanced from her granddaughter to Loreen in astonishment.

"Did you say she is one of your friends?" she asked in a cold, sneering voice that hurt Virginia
more than anything she had yet felt.

"Yes, I said so." Virginia's face flushed, but she seemed to recall a verse that Mr. Gray had
used for one of his recent sermons, "A friend of publicans and sinners." Surely, Jesus would
do this that she was doing.

"Do you know what this girl is?" asked Madam Page, in an angry whisper, stepping near Virginia.

"I know very well. She is an outcast. You need not tell me, grandmother. I know it even better
than you do. She is drunk at this minute. But she is also a child of God. I have seen her on
her knees, repentant. And I have seen hell reach out its horrible fingers after her again.
And by the grace of Christ I feel that the least that I can do is to rescue her from such peril.
Grandmother, we call ourselves Christians. Here is a poor, lost human creature without a home,
slipping back into a life of misery and possibly eternal loss, and we have more than enough.
I have brought her here, and I shall keep her."

Madam Page glared at Virginia and clenched her hands. All this was contrary to her social code
of conduct. How could society excuse familiarity with the scum of the streets? What would Virginia's
action cost the family in the way of criticism and loss of standing, and all that long list
of necessary relations which people of wealth and position must sustain to the leaders of society?
To Madam Page society represented more than the church or any other institution. It was a power
to be feared and obeyed. The loss of its good-will was a loss more to be dreaded than anything
except the loss of wealth itself.

She stood erect and stern and confronted Virginia, fully roused and determined. Virginia placed
her arm about Loreen and calmly looked her grandmother in the face.

"You shall not do this, Virginia! You can send her to the asylum for helpless women. We can
pay all the expenses. We cannot afford for the sake of our reputations to shelter such a person."

"Grandmother, I do not wish to do anything that is displeasing to you, but I must keep Loreen
here tonight, and longer if it seems best."

"Then you can answer for the consequences! I do not stay in the same house with a miserable--"
Madam Page lost her self-control. Virginia stopped her before she could speak the next word.

"Grandmother, this house is mine. It is your home with me as long as you choose to remain.
But in this matter I must act as I fully believe Jesus would in my place. I am willing to bear
all that society may say or do. Society is not my God. By the side of this poor soul I do not
count the verdict of society as of any value."

"I shall not stay here, then!" said Madam Page. She turned suddenly and walked to the end of
the hall. She then came back, and going up to Virginia said, with an emphasis that revealed
her intensive excitement of passion: "You can always remember that you have driven your grandmother
out of your house in favor of a drunken woman;" then, without waiting for Virginia to reply,
she turned again and went upstairs. Virginia called a servant and soon had Loreen cared for.
She was fast lapsing into a wretched condition. During the brief scene in the hall she had
clung to Virginia so hard that her arm was sore from the clutch of the girl's fingers. 

Mr. Thorpe, in his Analecta A.-S. (1st edit.

Gloss), says, "The meaning of this word is uncertain: it occurs again in Cædmon;" and in his translation
of Cædmon he thus renders the passage:--"Ofer linde lærig=over the linden shields."
 He brought word that his grandmother had taken the evening train for the South. He
had been at the station to see some friends off, and had by chance met his grandmother as he
was coming out. She had told him her reason for going.

Virginia and Rollin comforted each other at the tea table, looking at each other with earnest,
sad faces.

"Rollin," said Virginia, and for the first time, almost, since his conversion she realized
what a wonderful thing her brother's changed life meant to her, "do you blame me? Am I wrong?"

"No, dear, I cannot believe you are. This is very painful for us. But if you think this poor
creature owes her safety and salvation to your personal care, it was the only thing for you
to do. O Virginia, to think that we have all these years enjoyed our beautiful home and all
these luxuries selfishly, forgetful of the multitudes like this woman! Surely Jesus in our
places would do what you have done."

And so Rollin comforted Virginia and counseled with her that evening. And of all the wonderful
changes that she henceforth was to know on account of her great pledge, nothing affected her
so powerfully as the thought of Rollin's change of life. Truly, this man in Christ was a new
creature. Old things were passed away. Behold, all things in him had become new.

Dr. West came that evening at Virginia's summons and did everything necessary for the outcast.
She had drunk herself almost into delirium. The best that could be done for her now was quiet
nursing and careful watching and personal love. So, in a beautiful room, with a picture of
Christ walking by the sea hanging on the wall, where her bewildered eyes caught daily something
more of its hidden meaning, Loreen lay, tossed she hardly knew how into this haven, and Virginia
crept nearer the Master than she had ever been, as her heart went out towards this wreck which
had thus been flung torn and beaten at her feet.

Meanwhile the Rectangle awaited the issue of the election with more than usual interest; and
Mr. Gray and his wife wept over the poor, pitiful creatures who, after a struggle with surroundings
that daily tempted them, too often wearied of the struggle and, like Loreen, threw up their
arms and went whirling over the cataract into the boiling abyss of their previous condition.

The after-meeting at the First Church was now eagerly established. Henry Maxwell went into
the lecture-room on the Sunday succeeding the week of the primary, and was greeted with an
enthusiasm that made him tremble at first for its reality. He noted again the absence of Jasper
Chase, but all the others were present, and they seemed drawn very close together by a bond
of common fellowship that demanded and enjoyed mutual confidences. It was the general feeling
that the spirit of Jesus was the spirit of very open, frank confession of experience. It seemed
the most natural thing in the world, therefore, for Edward Norman to be telling all the rest
of the company about the details of his newspaper.

"The fact is, I have lost a great deal of money during the last three weeks. I cannot tell
just how much. I am losing a great many subscribers every day."

"What do the subscribers give as their reason for dropping the paper?" asked Mr. Maxwell. All
the rest were listening eagerly.

"There are a good many different reasons. Some say they want a paper that prints all the news;
meaning, by that, the crime details, sensations like prize fights, scandals and horrors of
various kinds. Others object to the discontinuance of the Sunday edition. Can any of your readers
inform me whether there is such a book? I possess Mr. Singer's valuable editions of Cavendish,
More, and Hall's Satires, and would wish to place this volume on the same shelf.
J. MILNER BARRY.

Totnes, Feb. 21. 1850. My greatest loss has come from a falling off in advertisements, and
from the attitude I have felt obliged to take on political questions. The last action has really
cost me more than any other. The bulk of my subscribers are intensely partisan. I may as well
tell you all frankly that if I continue to pursue the plan which I honestly believe Jesus would
pursue in the matter of political issues and their treatment from a non-partisan and moral
standpoint, the NEWS will not be able to pay its operating expenses unless one factor in Raymond
can be depended on."

He paused a moment and the room was very quiet. Virginia seemed specially interested. Her face
glowed with interest. It was like the interest of a person who had been thinking hard of the
same thing which Norman went on to mention.

"That one factor is the Christian element in Raymond. Say the NEWS has lost heavily from the
dropping off of people who do not care for a Christian daily, and from others who simply look
upon a newspaper as a purveyor of all sorts of material to amuse or interest them, are there
enough genuine Christian people in Raymond who will rally to the support of a paper such as
Jesus would probably edit? or are the habits of the church people so firmly established in
their demand for the regular type of journalism that they will not take a paper unless it is
stripped largely of the Christian and moral purpose? I may say in this fellowship gathering
that owing to recent complications in my business affairs outside of my paper I have been obliged
to lose a large part of my fortune. I had to apply the same rule of Jesus' probable conduct
to certain transactions with other men who did not apply it to their conduct, and the result
has been the loss of a great deal of money. As I understand the promise we made, we were not
to ask any question about 'Will it pay?' but all our action was to be based on the one question,
'What would Jesus do?' Acting on that rule of conduct, I have been obliged to lose nearly all
the money I have accumulated in my paper. It is not necessary for me to go into details. There
is no question with me now, after the three weeks' experience I have had, that a great many
men would lose vast sums of money under the present system of business if this rule of Jesus
was honestly applied. I mention my loss here because I have the fullest faith in the final
success of a daily paper conducted on the lines I have recently laid down, and I had planned
to put into it my entire fortune in order to win final success. As it is now, unless, as I
said, the Christian people of Raymond, the church members and professing disciples, will support
the paper with subscriptions and advertisements, I cannot continue its publication on the present
basis."

Virginia asked a question. She had followed Mr. Norman's confession with the most intense eagerness.

"Do you mean that a Christian daily ought to be endowed with a large sum like a Christian college
in order to make it pay?"

"That is exactly what I mean. I had laid out plans for putting into the NEWS such a variety
of material in such a strong and truly interesting way that it would more than make up for
whatever was absent from its columns in the way of un-Christian matter. But my plans called
for a very large output of money. I am very confident that a Christian daily such as Jesus
would approve, containing only what He would print, can be made to succeed financially if it
is planned on the right lines. But it will take a large sum of money to work out the plans."

"How much, do you think?" asked Virginia quietly.

Edward Norman looked at her keenly, and his face flushed a moment as an idea of her purpose
crossed his mind. He had known her when she was a little girl in the Sunday-school, and he
had been on intimate business relations with her father.

