5. Morning. (Patrick has this moment brought me letters from the Bishop of Clogher and Parvisol;
my heart was at my mouth for fear of one from MD; what a disgrace would it be to have two of
yours to answer together! But, faith, this shall go to-night, for fear; and then come when
it will, I defy it.) No, you are not naughty at all, write when you are disposed. And so the
Dean told you the story of Mr. Harley from the Archbishop; I warrant it never spoiled your
supper, or broke off your game. Nor yet, have not you the box? I wish Mrs. Edgworth had the
-----. But you have it now, I suppose; and is the chocolate good, or has the tobacco spoilt
it? Leigh stays till Sterne has done his business, no longer; and when that will be, God knows:
I befriend him as much as I can, but Harley's accident stops that as well as all things else.
You guess, Madam Dingley, that I shall stay a round twelvemonth; as hope saved, I would come
over, if I could, this minute; but we will talk of that by and by. Your affair of Vedeau I
have told you of already; now to the next, turn over the leaf. Mrs. Dobbins lies, I have no
more provision here or in Ireland than I had. I am pleased that Stella the conjurer approves
what I did with Mr. Harley;(23) but your generosity makes me mad; I know you repine inwardly
at Presto's absence; you think he has broken his word of coming in three months, and that this
is always his trick; and now Stella says she does not see possibly how I can come away in haste,
and that MD is satisfied, etc. An't you a rogue to overpower me thus? I did not expect to find
such friends as I have done. They may indeed deceive me too. But there are important reasons
(Pox on this grease, this candle tallow!) why they should not.(24) I have been used barbarously
by the late Ministry; I am a little piqued in honour to let people see I am not to be despised.
The assurances they give me, without any scruple or provocation, are such as are usually believed
in the world; they may come to nothing, but the first opportunity that offers, and is neglected,
I shall depend no more, but come away. I could say a thousand things on this head, if I were
with you. I am thinking why Stella should not go to the Bath, if she be told it will do her
good. I will make Parvisol get up fifty pounds, and pay it you; and you may be good housewives,
and live cheap there some months, and return in autumn, or visit London, as you please: pray
think of it. I writ to Bernage, directed to Curry's; I wish he had the letter. I will send
the bohea tea, if I can. The Bishop of Kilmore,(25) I don't keep such company; an old dying
fool whom I never was with in my life. So I am no godfather;(26) all the better. Pray, Stella,
explain those two words of yours to me, what you mean by VILLIAN and DAINGER;(27) and you,
Madam Dingley, what is CHRISTIANING?--Lay your letter THIS WAY, THIS WAY, and the devil a bit
of difference between this way and the other way. No; I will show you, lay them THIS WAY, THIS
WAY, and not THAT WAY, THAT WAY.(28)--You shall have your aprons; and I will put all your commissions
as they come, in a paper together, and do not think I will forget MD's orders, because they
are friends; I will be as careful as if they were strangers. I knew not what to do about this
Clements.(29) Walls will not let me say anything as if Mr. Pratt was against him; and now the
Bishop of Clogher has written to me in his behalf. This thing does not rightly fall in my way,
and that people never consider: I always give my good offices where they are proper, and that
I am judge of; however, I will do what I can. But, if he has the name of a Whig, it will be
hard, considering my Lord Anglesea and Hyde(30) are very much otherwise, and you know they
have the employment of Deputy Treasurer. If the frolic should take you of going to the Bath,
I here send you a note on Parvisol; if not, you may tear it, and there's an end. Farewell.

If you have an imagination that the Bath will do you good, I say again, I would have you go;
if not, or it be inconvenient, burn this note. Or, if you would go, and not take so much money,
take thirty pounds, and I will return you twenty from hence. Do as you please, sirrahs. I suppose
it will not be too late for the first season; if it be, I would have you resolve however to
go the second season, if the doctors say it will do you good, and you fancy so.

LETTER 20.

LONDON, April 5, 1711.

I put my nineteenth in the post-office just now myself, as I came out of the City, where I dined.

6. Mr. Secretary desired I would see him this morning; said he had several things to say to
me, and said not one; and the Duke of Ormond sent to desire I would meet him at Mr. Southwell's
by ten this morning too, which I did, thinking it was some particular matter. All the Irish
in town were there, to consult upon preventing a Bill for laying a duty on Irish yarn; so we
talked a while, and then all went to the lobby of the House of Commons, to solicit our friends,
and the Duke came among the rest; and Lord Anglesea solicited admirably, and I did wonders.
But, after all, the matter was put off till Monday, and then we are to be at it again. I dined
with Lord Mountjoy, and looked over him at chess, which put me in mind of Stella and Griffyth.(2)
I came home, and that dog Patrick was not within; so I fretted, and fretted, and what good
did that do me?

     And so get you gone to your deans,
     You couple of queans.

I cannot find rhyme to Walls and Stoyte.--Yes, yes,

     You expect Mrs. Walls,
     Be dressed when she calls,
     To carry you to Stoyte,
     Or else HONI SOIT.

Henley told me that the Tories were insup-port-able people, because they are for bringing in
French claret, and will not SUP-PORT. Mr. Harley will hardly get abroad this week or ten days
yet. I reckon, when I send away this letter, he will be just got into the House of Commons.
My last letter went in twelve days, and so perhaps may this. No it won't, for those letters
that go under a fortnight are answers to one of yours, otherwise you must take the days as
they happen, some dry, some wet, some barren, some fruitful, some merry, some insipid; some,
etc.--I will write you word exactly the first day I see young gooseberries, and pray observe
how much later you are. We have not had five fine days this five weeks, but rain or wind. 'Tis
a late spring they say here.--Go to bed, you two dear saucy brats, and don't keep me up all night.

7. Ford has been at Epsom, to avoid Good Friday and Easter Sunday. He forced me to-day to dine
with him; and tells me there are letters from Ireland, giving an account of a great indiscretion
in the Archbishop of Dublin, who applied a story out of Tacitus very reflectingly on Mr. Harley,
and that twenty people have written of it; I do not believe it yet.(3) I called this evening
to see Mr. Secretary, who has been very ill with the gravel and pain in his back, by burgundy
and champagne, added to the sitting up all night at business; I found him drinking tea while
the rest were at champagne, and was very glad of it. I have chid him so severely that I hardly
knew whether he would take it well: then I went and sat an hour with Mrs. St. John, who is
growing a great favourite of mine; she goes to the Bath on Wednesday, for she is much out of
health, and has begged me to take care of the Secretary.

