The English parliament had rarely shown much consideration for Irish feelings or Irish rights.
Its attitude towards the Irish Houses of Legislation had been high-handed and even dictatorial;
so that constitutional struggles were not at all infrequent towards the end of the seventeenth
and during the first quarter of the eighteenth century. The efforts of Sir Constantine Phipps
towards a non-parliamentary government,[3] and the reversal by the English House of Lords of
the decision given by the Irish House of Lords in the famous Annesley case, had prepared the
Irish people for a revolt against any further attempts to dictate to its properly elected representatives
assembled in parliament. Moreover, the wretched material condition of the people, as it largely
had been brought about by a selfish, persecuting legislation that practically isolated Ireland
commercially in prohibiting the exportation of its industrial products, was a danger and a
menace to the governing country. The two nations were facing each other threateningly. When,
therefore, Wood began to import his coin, suspicion was immediately aroused.

[Footnote 3: See Lecky's "History of Ireland," vol. i., p. 446, etc.]

The masses took little notice of it at first; but the commissioners of revenue in Dublin took
action in a letter they addressed to the Right Hon. Edward Hopkins, secretary to the Lord Lieutenant.
This letter, dated August 7th, 1722, began by expressing surprise at the patent granted to
Mr. Wood, and asked the secretary "to lay before the Lord Lieutenant a memorial, presented
by their agent to the Lords of the Treasury, concerning this patent, and also a report of some
former Commissioners of the revenue on the like occasion, and to acquaint his Grace, that they
concurred in all the objections in those papers, and were of opinion, that such a patent would
be highly prejudicial to the trade, and welfare of this kingdom, and more particularly to his
Majesty's revenue, which they had formerly found to have suffered very much, by too great a
quantity of such base coin."[4] No reply was received to this letter.

[Footnote 4: "A Defence of the Conduct of the People of Ireland," etc., p. 6.]

Fears began to be generally felt, and the early murmurs of an agitation to be heard when, on
September 19th, 1722, the Commissioners addressed a second letter, this time to the Lords Commissioners
of His Majesty's Treasury. The letter assured their Lordships "that they had been applied to
by many persons of rank and fortune, and by the merchants and traders in Ireland, to represent
the ill effects of Mr. Wood's patent, and that they could from former experience assure their
Lordships, it would be particularly detrimental to his Majesty's revenue. They represented
that this matter had made a great noise here, and that there did not appear the least want
of such small species of coin for change, and hoped that the importance of the occasion would
excuse their making this representation of a matter that had not been referred to them."[5]

[Footnote 5: Ibid, pp. 6-7.]

To this letter also no reply was vouchsafed. In the meantime, Wood kept sending in his coins,
landing them at most of the ports of the kingdom.

"Then everyone that was not interested in the success of this coinage," writes the author of
the pamphlet already quoted, "by having contracted for a great quantity of his halfpence at
a large discount, or biassed by the hopes of immoderate gain to be made out of the ruins of
their country, expressed their apprehensions of the pernicious consequences of this copper
money; and resolved to make use of the right they had by law to refuse the same".[6]

[Footnote 6: Ibid, p. 7.]

The Lord Lieutenant, the Duke of Grafton, had arrived in August, 1723, and parliament sat early
in September. Its first attention was paid to the Wood patent. After the early excitement had
subsided, they resolved to appeal to the King. During the early stages of the discussion, however,
the Commons addressed the Lord Lieutenant, asking that a copy of the patent and other papers
relating to it, be laid before them. This was on September 13th. On the following day Mr. Hopkins
informed the House that the Lord Lieutenant had no such copy, nor any papers. The House then
unanimously resolved to inquire into the matter on its own account, and issued orders for several
persons to appear before it to give evidence, fixing the day for examination for September
16th. On that day, however, Mr. Hopkins appeared before the members with a copy of the patent,
and informed them that the Lord Lieutenant had received it since his last communication with
them. This incident served but to arouse further ridicule. A broadside, published at the time
with the title "A Creed of an Irish Commoner," amusingly reveals the lameness of the excuse
for this non-production of the exemplification. Coxe says that the cause for the delay was
due to the fact that the copy of the patent had been delivered to the Lord Lieutenant's servant,
instead of to his private secretary; but this excuse is probably no more happily founded than
the one offered.

On Friday, September 20th, the House resolved itself into a committee "to take into consideration
the state of the nation, particularly in relation to the importing and uttering of copper halfpence
and farthings in this kingdom." After three days' debate, and after examining competent witnesses
under oath, it passed resolutions to the following effect

(1) That Wood's patent is highly prejudicial to his Majesty's revenue, and is destructive of
trade and commerce, and most dangerous to the rights and properties of the subject.

(2) That for the purpose of obtaining the patent Wood had notoriously misrepresented the state
of the nation.

(3) That great quantities of the coin had been imported of different impressions and of much
less weight than the patent called for.

(4) That the loss to the nation by the uttering of this coin would amount to 150 per cent.

(5) That in coining the halfpence Wood was guilty of a notorious fraud.

(6) "That it is the opinion of this Committee, that it hath been always highly prejudicial
to this kingdom to grant the power or privilege of coining money to private persons; and that
it will, at all times, be of dangerous consequence to grant any such power to any body politic,
or corporate, or any private person or persons whatsoever."[7]

[Footnote 7: "Comm. Journals," vol. iii., pp. 317-325.]

Addresses to his Majesty in conformity with these resolutions were voted on September 27th.

The House of Lords passed similar resolutions on September 26th, and voted addresses embodying
them on September 28th.[8]

[Footnote 8: "Lords' Journals," vol. ii., pp. 745-751.]

