She had just been expatiating on the flowers as she sat with Clara under the fir trees one
evening, and had been telling her again of the wonderful light from the evening sun, when such
an irrepressible longing came over her to see it all once more that she jumped up and ran to
her grandfather, who was in the shed, calling out almost before she was inside,--

"Grandfather, will you take us out with the goats to-morrow? Oh, it is so lovely up there now!"

"Very well," he answered, "but if I do, the little daughter must do something to please me:
she must try her best again this evening to stand on her feet."

Heidi ran back with the good news to Clara, and the latter promised to try her very best as
the grandfather wished, for she looked forward immensely to the next day's excursion. Heidi
was so pleased and excited that she called out to Peter as soon as she caught sight of him
that evening,--

"Peter, Peter, we are all coming out with you to-morrow and are going to stay up there the
whole day."

Peter, cross as a bear, grumbled some reply, and lifted his stick to give Greenfinch a blow
for no reason in particular, but Greenfinch saw the movement, and with a leap over Snowflake's
back she got out of the way, and the stick only hit the air.

Clara and Heidi got into their two fine beds that night full of delightful anticipation of
the morrow; they were so full of their plans that they agreed to keep awake all night and talk
over them until they might venture to get up. But their heads had no sooner touched their soft
pillows than the conversation suddenly ceased, and Clara fell into a dream of an immense field,
which looked the color of the sky, so thickly inlaid was it with blue bell-shaped flowers;
and Heidi heard the great bird of prey calling to her from the heights above, "Come! come! come!"

CHAPTER XXII. SOMETHING UNEXPECTED HAPPENS

Uncle went out early the next morning to see what kind of a day it was going to be. There was
a reddish gold light over the higher peaks; a light breeze springing up and the branches of
the fir trees moved gently to and fro the sun was on its way.

The old man stood and watched the green slopes under the higher peaks gradually growing brighter
with the coming day and the dark shadows lifting from the valley, until at first a rosy light
filled its hollows, and then the morning gold flooded every height and depth--the sun had risen.

Uncle wheeled the chair out of the shed ready for the coming journey, and then went in to call
the children and tell them what a lovely sunrise it was.

Peter came up at this moment. The goats did not gather round him so trustfully as usual, but
seemed to avoid him timidly, for Peter had reached a high pitch of anger and bitterness, and
was laying about him with his stick very unnecessarily, and where it fell the blow was no light
one. For weeks now he had not had Heidi all to himself as formerly. When he came up in the
morning the invalid child was always already in her chair and Heidi fully occupied with her.
And it was the same thing over again when he came down in the evening. She had not come out
with the goats once this summer, and now to-day she was only coming in company with her friend
and the chair, and would stick by the latter's side the whole time. It was the thought of this
which was making him particularly cross this morning. There stood the chair on its high wheels;
Peter seemed to see something proud and disdainful about it, and he glared at it as at an enemy
that had done him harm and was likely to do him more still to-day. He glanced round--there
was no sound anywhere, no one to see him. He sprang forward like a wild creature, caught hold
of it, and gave it a violent and angry push in the direction of the slope. The chair rolled
swiftly forward and in another minute had disappeared.

Peter now sped up the mountain as if on wings, not pausing till he was well in shelter of a
large blackberry bush, for he had no wish to be seen by Uncle. But he was anxious to see what
had become of the chair, and his bush was well placed for that. Himself hidden, he could watch
what happened below and see what Uncle did without being discovered himself. So he looked,
and there he saw his enemy running faster and faster down hill, then it turned head over heels
several times, and finally, after one great bound, rolled over and over to its complete destruction.
The pieces flew in every direction--feet, arms, and torn fragments of the padded seat and bolster--and
Peter experienced a feeling of such unbounded delight at the sight that he leapt in the air,
laughing aloud and stamping for joy; then he took a run round, jumping over bushes on the way,
only to return to the same spot and fall into fresh fits of laughter. He was beside himself
with satisfaction, for he could see only good results for himself in this disaster to his enemy.
Now Heidi's friend would be obliged to go away, for she would have no means of going about,
and when Heidi was alone again she would come out with him as in the old days, and everything
would go on in the proper way again. But Peter did not consider, or did not know, that when
we do a wrong thing trouble is sure to follow.

Heidi now came running out of the hut and round to the shed. Grandfather was behind with Clara
in his arms. The shed stood wide open, the two loose planks having been taken down, and it
was quite light inside. Heidi looked into every corner and ran from one end to the other, and
then stood still wondering what could have happened to the chair. Grandfather now came up.

"How is this, have you wheeled the chair away, Heidi?"

"I have been looking everywhere for it, grandfather; you said it was standing ready outside,"
and she again searched each corner of the shed with her eyes.

At that moment the wind, which had risen suddenly, blew open the shed door and sent it banging
back against the wall.

"It must have been the wind, grandfather," exclaimed Heidi, and her eyes grew anxious at this
sudden discovery. "Oh! if it has blown the chair all the way down to Dorfli we shall not get
it back in time, and shall not be able to go."

"If it has rolled as far as that it will never come back, for it is in a hundred pieces by
now," said the grandfather, going round the corner and looking down. "But it's a curious thing
to have happened!" he added as he thought over the matter, for the chair would have had to
turn a corner before starting down hill.

"Oh, I am sorry," lamented Clara, "for we shall not be able to go to-day, or perhaps any other
day. I shall have to go home, I suppose, if I have no chair. Oh, I am so sorry, I am so sorry!"

But Heidi looked towards her grandfather with her usual expression of confidence.

"Grandfather, you will be able to do something, won't you, so that it need not be as Clara
says, and so that she is not obliged to go home?"

"Well, for the present we will go up the mountain as we had arranged, and then later on we
will see what can be done," he answered, much to the children's delight.

He went indoors, fetched out a pile of shawls, and laying them on the sunniest spot he could
find set Clara down upon them. Then he fetched the children's morning milk and had out his
two goats.

"Why is Peter not here yet?" thought Uncle to himself, for Peter's whistle had not been sounded
that morning. The grandfather now took Clara up on one arm, and the shawls on the other.

"Now then we will start," he said; "the goats can come with us."

Heidi was pleased at this and walked on after her grandfather with an arm over either of the
goats' necks, and the animals were so overjoyed to have her again that they nearly squeezed
her flat between them out of sheer affection. When they reached the spot where the goats usually
pastured they were surprised to find them already feeding there, climbing about the rocks,
and Peter with them, lying his full length on the ground.

"I'll teach you another time to go by like that, you lazy rascal! What do you mean by it?"
Uncle called to him.

Peter, recognising the voice, jumped up like a shot. "No one was up," he answered.

"Have you seen anything of the chair?" asked the grandfather.

"Of what chair?" called Peter back in answer in a morose tone of voice.

Uncle said no more. He spread the shawls on the sunny slope, and setting Clara upon them asked
if she was comfortable.

"As comfortable as in my chair," she said, thanking him, "and this seems the most beautiful
spot. O Heidi, it is lovely, it is lovely!" she cried, looking round her with delight.

The grandfather prepared to leave them. They would now be safe and happy together, he said,
and when it was time for dinner Heidi was to go and fetch the bag from the shady hollow where
he had put it; Peter was to bring them as much milk as they wanted, but Heidi was to see that
it was Little Swan's milk. He would come and fetch them towards evening; he must now be off
to see after the chair and ascertain what had become of it.

The sky was dark blue, and not a single cloud was to be seen from one horizon to the other.
The great snow-field overhead sparkled as if set with thousands and thousands of gold and silver
stars. The two grey mountains peaks lifted their lofty heads against the sky and looked solemnly
down upon the valley as of old; the great bird was poised aloft in the clear blue air, and
the mountain wind came over the heights and blew refreshingly around the children as they sat
on the sunlit slope. It was all indescribably enjoyable to Clara and Heidi. Now and again a
young goat came and lay down beside them; Snowflake came oftenest, putting her little head
down near Heidi, and only moving because another goat came and drove her away. Clara had learned
to know them all so well that she never mistook one for the other now, for each had an expression
and ways of its own. And the goats had also grown familiar with Clara and would rub their heads
against her shoulder, which was always a sign of acquaintanceship and goodwill.

Some hours went by, and Heidi began to think that she might just go over to the spot where
all the flowers grew to see if they were fully blown and looking as lovely as the year before.
Clara could not go until grandfather came back that evening, when the flowers probably would
be already closed. The longing to go became stronger and stronger, till she felt she could
not resist it. 

***

No more hotels in London, says Sir ALFRED MOND, are to be taken over at present by the Government,
which since the War began has commandeered nearly three hundred buildings.

We understand, however, that a really spectacular offensive is being prepared for the Spring.

***

Several
parties of Germans who escaped from internment camps have been recaptured with comparative
ease. It is supposed that their gentle natures could no longer bear the spectacle of the sacrifices
that the simple Briton is enduring in order that they may be well fed.

***

The Globe has just published an article entitled "The End of the World." Our rosy contemporary is
far too pessimistic, we feel. Mr. CHURCHILL'S appointment as Minister of the Air has not yet
been officially announced.

***

The Vossische Zeitung reports that the KAISER refuses to accept the resignation of Admiral
VON CAPELLE. The career of Germany's Naval chief seems to be dogged by persistent bad luck.

***

Another scoop for The Daily Telegraph. "On October 14, 1066, at nine A.M.," said a recent issue,
"the Battle of Hastings commenced."

***

We fear that our allotment-holders are losing their dash. The pumpkin grown at Burwash Place,
which measured six feet in circumference, is still a pumpkin and not a potato.

***

The Grimsby magistrates have decided not to birch boys in the future,
but to fine their parents.

Several soft-hearted boys have already indicated that it will hurt them more than their parents.

***

A
female defendant at a London police court last week was given the choice of prison or marriage,
and preferred to get married. How like a woman!

***

A correspondent protests against the high prices paid for old postage-stamps
at a recent sale, and points out that stamps can be obtained at one
penny each at most post-offices, all ready for use.

***

A North of England lady last week climbed to the top of the chimney-stack
of a large munition works and affixed a silver coin in the masonry.

The lady is thought to be nervous of pickpockets.

***

A contemporary wit declares that nothing gives him more pleasure
than to see golfers at dinner. He loves to watch them doing the soup
course, using one iron all the way round.

***

There is no truth
in the rumour that during a recent air-raid a man was caught on the
roof of a certain Government building in Whitehall signalling to the
Germans where not to drop their bombs.

***

The Home Office announces
that while it has not definitely decided upon the method of giving
warnings at night it will probably be by gun fire. To distinguish
this fire from the regular barrage it is ingeniously suggested that
the guns employed for the latter purpose shall be painted blue, or
some other distinctive colour.

***

It is reported that Sinn Fein's
second-best war-cry, "Up the KAISER," is causing some irritation in
the Wilhelmstrasse, where it is freely admitted that the KAISER is
already far higher up than the circumstances justify.

***

The Lambeth
magistrate recently referred to the case of a boy of fifteen who is
paying income-tax. Friends of the youth have since been heard to say
that there is such a thing as carrying the spirit of reckless bravado
too far.

***

"Farm work is proceeding slowly," says a Midland correspondent
of the Food Production Department. Those who recall the impetuous
abandon of the pre-war agriculturist may well ask whether Boloism
has not been work at again.

***

It is announced that promotion in
the U.S. services will be based solely on fitness, without regard
to seniority. These are the sort of revolutionists who would cover
up grave defects in army organisation by the meretricious expedient
of winning the War.

***

Inquiries, says The Pall Mall Gazette, disclose
a wide-spread habit among customers of bribing the assistants in grocery
shops. The custom among profiteers of giving them their cast-off motor
cars probably acted as the thin end of the wedge.

***

A dear old
lady writes that she is no longer nervous about air-raids, now that
her neighbourhood has been provided with an anticraft airgun. He had done something
wicked which he wanted no one to know about, and so far he had thought himself safe. But now
Heidi spoke exactly as if she knew everything, and whatever she did know she would tell her
grandfather, and there was no one he feared so much as this latter person. Supposing he were
to suspect what had happened about the chair! Peter's anguish of mind grew more acute. He stood
up and went down to where Heidi was awaiting him.

"I am coming and you won't do what you said."

Peter appeared now so submissive with fear that Heidi felt quite sorry for him and answered
assuringly, "No, no, of course not; come along with me, there is nothing to be afraid of in
what I want you to do."

As soon as they got to Clara, Heidi gave her orders: Peter was to take hold of her under the
arms on one side and she on the other, and together they were to lift her up. This first movement
was successfully carried through, but then came the difficulty. As Clara could not even stand,
how were they to support her and get her along? Heidi was too small for her arm to serve Clara
to lean upon.

"You must put one arm well around my neck so, and put the other through Peter's and lean firmly
upon it, then we shall be able to carry you."

Peter, however, had never given his arm to any one in his life. Clara put hers in his, but
he kept his own hanging down straight beside him like a stick.

"That's not the way, Peter," said Heidi in an authoritative voice. "You must put your arm out
in the shape of a ring, and Clara must put hers through it and lean her weight upon you, and
whatever you do, don't let your arm give way; like that. I am sure we shall be able to manage."

Peter did as he was told, but still they did not get on very well. Clara was not such a light
weight, and the team did not match very well in size; it was up one side and down the other,
so that the supports were rather wobbly.

Clara tried to use her own feet a little, but each time drew them quickly back.

"Put your foot down firmly once," suggested Heidi, "I am sure it will hurt you less after that."

"Do you think so?" said Clara hesitatingly, but she followed Heidi's advice and ventured one
firm step on the ground and then another; she called out a little as she did it; then she lifted
her foot again and went on, "Oh, that was less painful already," she exclaimed joyfully.

"Try again," said Heidi encouragingly.

And Clara went on putting one foot out after another until all at once she called out, "I can
do it, Heidi! look! look! I can make proper steps!" And Heidi cried out with even greater delight,
"Can you really make steps, can you really walk? really walk by yourself? Oh, if only grandfather
were here!" and she continued gleefully to exclaim, "You can walk now, Clara, you can walk!"

Clara still held on firmly to her supports, but with every step she felt safer on her feet,
as all three became aware, and Heidi was beside herself with joy.

"Now we shall be able to come up here together every day, and go just where we like; and you
will be able all your life to walk about as I do, and not have to be pushed in a chair, and
you will get quite strong and well. It is the greatest happiness we could have had!"

And Clara heartily agreed, for she could think of no greater joy in the world than to be strong
and able to go about like other people, and no longer to have to lie from day to day in her
invalid chair.

They had not far to go to reach the field of flowers, and could already catch sight of the
cistus flowers glowing gold in the sun. As they came to the bushes of the blue bell flowers,
with sunny, inviting patches of warm ground between them, Clara said, "Mightn't we sit down
here for a while?"

This was just what Heidi enjoyed, and so the children sat down in the midst of the flowers,
Clara for the first time on the dry, warm mountain grass, and she found it indescribably delightful.
Around her were the blue flowers softly waving to and fro, and beyond the gleaming patches
of the cistus flowers and the red centaury, while the sweet scent of the brown blossoms and
of the fragrant prunella enveloped her as she sat. Everything was so lovely! so lovely! And
Heidi, who was beside her, thought she had never seen it so perfectly beautiful up here before,
and she did not know herself why she felt so glad at heart that she longed to shout for joy.
Then she suddenly remembered that Clara was cured; that was the crowning delight of all that
made life so delightful in the midst of all this surrounding beauty. Clara sat silent, overcome
with the enchantment of all that her eye rested upon, and with the anticipation of all the
happiness that was now before her. There seemed hardly room in her heart for all her joyful
emotions, and these and the ecstasy aroused by the sunlight and the scent of the flowers, held
her dumb.

Peter also lay among the flowers without moving or speaking, for he was fast asleep. The breeze
came blowing softly and caressingly from behind the sheltering rocks, and passed whisperingly
through the bushes overhead. Heidi got up now and then to run about, for the flowers waving
in the warm wind seemed to smell sweeter and to grow more thickly whichever way she went, and
she felt she must sit down at each fresh spot to enjoy the sight and scent. So the hours went by.

It was long past noon when a small troop of goats advanced solemnly towards the plain of flowers.
It was not a feeding place of theirs, for they did not care to graze on flowers. They looked
like an embassy arriving, with Greenfinch as their leader. They had evidently come in search
of their companions who had left them in the lurch, and who had, contrary to all custom, remained
away so long, for the goats could tell the time without mistake. As soon as Greenfinch caught
sight of the three missing friends amid the flowers she set up an extra loud bleat, whereupon
all the others joined in a chorus of bleats, and the whole company came trotting towards the
children. Peter woke up, rubbing his eyes, for he had been dreaming that he saw the chair again
with its beautiful red padding standing whole and uninjured before the grandfather's door,
and indeed just as he awoke he thought he was looking at the brass-headed nails that studded
it all round, but it was only the bright yellow flowers beside him. He experienced again a
dreadful fear of mind that he had lost in this dream of the uninjured chair. Even though Heidi
had promised not to do anything, there still remained the lively dread that his deed might
be found out in some other way. He allowed Heidi to do what she liked with him, for he was
reduced to such a state of low spirits and meekness that he was ready to give his help to Clara
without murmur or resistance.

When all three had got back to their old quarters Heidi ran and brought forward the bag, and
proceeded to fulfil her promise, for her threat of the morning had been concerned with Peter's
dinner. She had seen her grandfather putting in all sorts of good things, and had been pleased
to think of Peter having a large share of them, and she had meant him to understand when he
refused at first to help her that he would get nothing for his dinner, but Peter's conscience
had put another interpretation upon her words. Heidi took the food out of the bag and divided
it into three portions, and each was of such a goodly size that she thought to herself, "There
will be plenty of ours left for him to have more still."

She gave the other two their dinners and sat down with her own beside Clara, and they all three
ate with a good appetite after their great exertions.

It ended as Heidi had expected, and Peter got as much food again as his own share with what
Clara and Heidi had over from theirs after they had both eaten as much as they wanted. Peter
ate up every bit of food to the last crumb, but there was something wanting to his usual enjoyment
of a good dinner, for every mouthful he swallowed seemed to choke him, and he felt something
gnawing inside him.

They were so late at their dinner that they had not long to wait after they had finished before
grandfather came up to fetch them. Heidi rushed forward to meet him as soon as he appeared,
as she wanted to be the first to tell him the good news. She was so excited that she could
hardly get her words out when she did get up to him, but he soon understood, and a look of
extreme pleasure came into his face. He hastened up to where Clara was sitting and said with
a cheerful smile, "So we've made the effort, have we, and won the day!"

Then he lifted her up, and putting his left arm behind her and giving her his right to lean
upon, made her walk a little way, which she did with less trembling and hesitation than before
now that she had such a strong arm round her.

Heidi skipped along beside her in triumphant glee, and the grandfather looked too as if some
happiness had befallen him. But now he took Clara up in his arms. "We must not overdo it,"
he said, "and it is high time we went home," and he started off down the mountain path, for
he was anxious to get her indoors that she might rest after her unusual fatigue.

When Peter got to Dorfli that evening he found a large group of people collected round a certain
spot, pushing one another and looking over each other's shoulders in their eagerness to catch
sight of something lying on the ground. Peter thought he should like to see too, and poked
and elbowed till he made his way through.

There it lay, the thing he had wanted to see. Scattered about the grass were the remains of
Clara's chair; part of the back and the middle bit, and enough of the red padding and the bright
nails to show how magnificent the chair had been when it was entire.

"I was here when the men passed carrying it up," said the baker who was standing near Peter.
"I'll bet any one that it was worth twenty-five pounds at least. I cannot think how such an
accident could have happened."

"Uncle said the wind might perhaps have done it," remarked one of the women, who could not
sufficiently admire the red upholstery.

"It's a good job that no one but the wind did it," said the baker again, "or he might smart
for it! No doubt the gentleman in Frankfurt when he hears what has happened will make all inquiries
about it. I am glad for myself that I have not been seen up the mountain for a good two years,
as suspicion is likely to fall on any one who was about up there at the time."

Many more opinions were passed on the matter, but Peter had heard enough. He crept quietly
away out of the crowd and then took to his heels and ran up home as fast as he could, as if
he thought some one was after him. The baker's words had filled him with fear and trembling.
He was sure now that any day a constable might come over from Frankfurt and inquire about the
destruction of the chair, and then everything would come out, and he would be seized and carried
off to Frankfurt and there put in prison. The whole picture of what was coming was clear before
him, and his hair stood on end with terror.

He reached home in this disturbed state of mind. He would not open his mouth in reply to anything
that was said to him; he would not eat his potatoes; all he did was to creep off to bed as
quickly as possible and hide under the bedclothes and groan.

"Peter has been eating sorrel again, and is evidently in pain by the way he is groaning," said
Brigitta.

"You must give him a little more bread to take with him; give him a bit of mine to-morrow,"
said the grandmother sympathisingly.

As the children lay that night in bed looking out at the stars Heidi said, "I have been thinking
all day what a happy thing it is that God does not give us what we ask for, even when we pray
and pray and pray, if He knows there is something better for us; have you felt like that?"

"Why do you ask me that to-night all of a sudden?" asked Clara.

"Because I prayed so hard when I was in Frankfurt that I might go home at once, and because
I was not allowed to I thought God had forgotten me. And now you see, if I had come away at
first when I wanted to, you would never have come here, and would never have got well."

Clara had in her turn become thoughtful. "But, Heidi," she began again, "in that case we ought
never to pray for anything, as God always intends something better for us than we know or wish
for."

"You must not think it is like that, Clara," replied Heidi eagerly. "We must go on praying
for everything, for everything, so that God may know we do not forget that it all comes from
Him. If we forget God, then He lets us go our own way and we get into trouble; grandmamma told
me so. And if He does not give us what we ask for we must not think that He has not heard us
and leave off praying, but we must still pray and say, I am sure, dear God, that Thou art keeping
something better for me, and I will not be unhappy, for I know that Thou wilt make everything
right in the end."

"How did you learn all that?" asked Clara.

"Grandmamma explained it to me first of all, and then when it all happened just as she said,
I knew it myself, and I think, Clara," she went on, as she sat up in bed, "we ought certainly
to thank God to-night that you can walk now, and that He has made us so happy."

"Yes, Heidi, I am sure you are right, and I am glad you reminded me; I almost forgot my prayers
for very joy."

Both children said their prayers, and each thanked God in her own way for the blessing He had
bestowed on Clara, who had for so long lain weak and ill.

The next morning the grandfather suggested that they should now write to the grandmamma and
ask her if she would not come and pay them a visit, as they had something new to show her.
But the children had another plan in their heads, for they wanted to prepare a great surprise
for grandmamma. Clara was first to have more practice in walking so that she might be able
to go a little way by herself; above all things grandmamma was not to have a hint of it. They
asked the grandfather how long he thought this would take, and when he told them about a week
or less, they immediately sat down and wrote a pressing invitation to grandmamma, asking her
to come soon, but no word was said about there being anything new to see.

The following days were some of the most joyous that Clara had spent on the mountain. She awoke
each morning with a happy voice within her crying, "I am well now! I am well now! I shan't
have to go about in a chair, I can walk by myself like other people."

Then came the walking, and every day she found it easier and was able to go a longer distance.
The movement gave her such an appetite that the grandfather cut his bread and butter a little
thicker each day, and was well pleased to see it disappear. He now brought out with it a large
jugful of the foaming milk and filled her little bowl over and over again. And so another week
went by and the day came which was to bring grandmamma up the mountain for her second visit.

CHAPTER XXIII. "GOOD-BYE TILL WE MEET AGAIN"

Grandmamma wrote the day before her arrival to let the children know that they might expect
her without fail. Peter brought up the letter early the following morning. Grandfather and
the children were already outside and the goats were awaiting him, shaking their heads frolicsomely
in the fresh morning air, while the children stroked them and wished them a pleasant journey
up the mountain. Uncle stood near, looking now at the fresh faces of the children, now at his
well-kept goats, with a smile on his face, evidently well pleased with the sight of both.

As Peter neared the group his steps slackened, and the instant he had handed the letter to
Uncle he turned quickly away as if frightened, and as he went he gave a hasty glance behind
him, as if the thing he feared was pursuing him, and then he gave a leap and ran off up the
mountain.

"Grandfather," said Heidi, who had been watching him with astonished eyes, "why does Peter
always behave now like the Great Turk when he thinks somebody is after him with a stick; he
turns and shakes his head and goes off with a bound just like that?"

"Perhaps Peter fancies he sees the stick which he so well deserves coming after him," answered
grandfather.

Peter ran up the first slope without a pause; when he was well out of sight, however, he stood
still and looked suspiciously about him. Suddenly he gave a jump and looked behind him with
a terrified expression, as if some one had caught hold of him by the nape of the neck; for
Peter expected every minute that the police-constable from Frankfurt would leap out upon him
from behind some bush or hedge. The longer his suspense lasted, the more frightened and miserable
he became; he did not know a moment's peace.

Heidi now set about tidying the hut, as grandmamma must find everything clean and in good order
when she arrived.

Clara looked on amused and interested to watch the busy Heidi at her work.

So the morning soon went by, and grandmamma might now be expected at any minute. The children
dressed themselves and went and sat together outside on the seat ready to receive her.

Grandfather joined them, that they might see the splendid bunch of blue gentians which he had
been up the mountain to gather, and the children exclaimed with delight at the beauty of the
flowers as they shone in the morning sun. The grandfather then carried them indoors. Heidi
jumped up from time to time to see if there was any sign of grandmamma's approach.

At last she saw the procession winding up the mountain just in the order she had expected. MRS.
MANGOLD'S COMPLEXION.

"At one of these dances at Yorick Castle Mrs. Mangold, afterwards
Lady Rootham, was staying with us.

She was a very handsome woman, with a wonderful complexion, so brilliant, indeed, that some
sceptics believed it to be artificial. A plot was accordingly hatched to solve the problem,
and during a set of Kitchen Lancers a syphon of soda-water was cleverly squirted full in her face,
but the colour remained fast. Mrs. Mangold, I am sorry to say, failed to see the point of
the joke, and fled to her room, pursued as far as the staircase by a score or more of cheering sportsmen."

THE
ORDEAL OF LADY VERBENA SOPER.

"Mr. GOSCHEN, as he then was, was entertaining a large party to dinner at Whitehall. He was at
the time First Lord of the Admiralty, and an awkward waiter upset an ice-pudding down the back
of Lady Verbena Soper, sister of Lady 'Loofah' Soper and daughter
of the Earl of Latherham, The poor lady cried out, 'I'm scalded!'
but our host, with great presence of mind, dashed out, returning with
a bundle of blankets and a can of hot water, which he promptly poured
on to the ice-pudding.

The sufferer was then wrapped up in the blankets and carried off to bed; The waiter was of course
sacked on the spot, but was saved from prosecution at the express request of his victim and
assisted to emigrate to America, where I believe he did well on an orange farm in Florida."

*
* * * *

IN A GOOD CAUSE.

There is no War-charity known to Mr. Punch that does better work or more quietly than that
which is administered by the Children's Aid Committee, who provide
homes in country cottages and farm-houses for children, most of them
motherless, of our soldiers and sailors, visit them from time to time
and watch over their needs.

Here in these homes their fathers, who are kept informed of their
children's welfare during their absence, come to see them when on
leave from the Front, and find them gently cared for.

Since the War began homes have been provided for over two thousand four hundred children. A certain
grant in aid is allowed by the London War Pensions Committee, who
have learned to depend upon the Children's Aid Committee in their
difficulties about children, but for the most part this work relies
upon voluntary help, and without advertisement.

Of the money that came into the Committee's hands last year only about two per cent. was paid
away for salaries and office expenses.

More than a year ago Mr. Punch appealed on behalf of this labour of love, and now he begs his
readers to renew the generous response which they made at that time. Gifts of money and clothing,
and offers of hospitality, will be gratefully acknowledged by Miss
MAXWELL LYTE, Hon. Treasurer of the Children's Aid Committee, 50,
South Molton Street, London, W.

* * * * *

]

* * * * *

STRONGER
THAN HERSELF.

In an assortment of nieces, totalling nine in all--but two of them, being still, in Sir WALTER'S
phrase, composed of "that species of pink dough which is called a
fine infant" do not count--I think that my favourites are Enid and
Hannah.

Enid being the daughter of a brother of mine, and Hannah of a sister, they are cousins. They
are also collaborators in literature and joint editors of a magazine for family consumption entitled
The Attic Salt-Cellar. The word "Attic" refers to the situation of the editorial office, which
is up a very perilous ladder, and "salt-cellar" was a suggestion of my own, which, though adopted,
is not yet understood.


Peter went off with the paper in his hand, feeling some relief of mind for the present, for
as Uncle had not whistled for him in order to give him up it was evident that no policeman
had yet arrived.

So now they could all sit down in peace to their dinner round the table in front of the hut,
and grandmamma was given a detailed account of all that had taken place. How grandfather had
made Clara try first to stand and then to move her feet a little every day, and how they had
settled for the day's excursion up the mountain and the chair had been blown away. How Clara's
desire to see the flowers had induced her to take the first walk, and so by degrees one thing
had led to another. The recital took some time, for grandmamma continually interrupted it with
fresh exclamations of surprise and thankfulness: "It hardly seems possible! I can scarcely
believe it is not all a dream! Are we really awake, and are all sitting here by the mountain
hut, and is that round-faced, healthy-looking child my poor little, white, sickly Clara?"

And Clara and Heidi could not get over their delight at the success of the surprise they had
so carefully arranged for grandmamma and at the latter's continued astonishment.

Meanwhile Herr Sesemann, who had finished his business in Paris, had also been preparing a
surprise. Without saying a word to his mother he got into the train one sunny morning and travelled
that day to Basle; the next morning he continued his journey, for a great longing had seized
him to see his little daughter from whom he had been separated the whole summer. He arrived
at Ragatz a few hours after his mother had left. When he heard that she had that very day started
for the mountain, he immediately hired a carriage and drove off to Mayenfeld; here he found
that he could if he liked drive on as far as Dorfli, which he did, as he thought the walk up
from that place would be as long as he cared for.

Herr Sesemann found he was right, for the climb up the mountain, as it was, proved long and
fatiguing to him. He went on and on, but still no hut came in sight, and yet he knew there
was one where Peter lived half way up, for the path had been described to him over and over again.

There were traces of climbers to be seen on all sides; the narrow footpaths seemed to run in
every direction, and Herr Sesemann began to wonder if he was on the right one, and whether
the hut lay perhaps on the other side of the mountain. He looked round to see if any one was
in sight of whom he could ask the way; but far and wide there was not a soul to be seen or
a sound to be heard. Only at moments the mountain wind whistled through the air, and the insects
hummed in the sunshine or a happy bird sang out from the branches of a solitary larch tree.
Herr Sesemann stood still for a while to let the cool Alpine wind blow on his hot face. But
now some one came running down the mountain- side--it was Peter with the telegram in his hand.
He ran straight down the steep slope, not following the path on which Herr Sesemann was standing.
As soon as the latter caught sight of him he beckoned to him to come. Peter advanced towards
him slowly and timidly, with a sort of sidelong movement, as if he could only move one leg
properly and had to drag the other after him. "Hurry up, lad," called Herr Sesemann, and when
Peter was near enough, "Tell me," he said, "is this the way to the hut where the old man and
the child Heidi live, and where the visitors from Frankfurt are staying?"

A low sound of fear was the only answer he received, as Peter turned to run away in such precipitous
haste that he fell head over heels several times, and went rolling and bumping down the slope
in involuntary bounds, just in the same way as the chair, only that Peter fortunately did not
fall to pieces as that had done. Only the telegram came to grief, and that was torn into fragments
and flew away.

"How extraordinarily timid these mountain dwellers are!" thought Herr Sesemann to himself,
for he quite believed that it was the sight of a stranger that had made such an impression
on this unsophisticated child of the mountains.

After watching Peter's violent descent towards the valley for a few minutes he continued his
journey.

Peter, meanwhile, with all his efforts, could not stop himself, but went rolling on, and still
tumbling head over heels at intervals in a most remarkable manner.

But this was not the most terrible part of his sufferings at the moment, for far worse was
the fear and horror that possessed him, feeling sure, as he did now, that the policeman had
really come over for him from Frankfurt. He had no doubt at all that the stranger who had asked
him the way was the very man himself. Just as he had rolled to the edge of that last high slope
above Dorfli he was caught in a bush, and at last able to keep himself from falling any farther.
He lay still for a second or two to recover himself, and to think over matters.

"Well done! another of you come bumping along like this!" said a voice close to Peter, "and
which of you to-morrow is the wind going to send rolling down like a badly-sewn sack of potatoes?"
It was the baker, who stood there laughing. He had been strolling out to refresh himself after
his hot day's work, and had watched with amusement as he saw Peter come rolling over and over
in much the same way as the chair.

Peter was on his feet in a moment. He had received a fresh shock. Without once looking behind
him he began hurrying up the slope again. He would have liked best to go home and creep into
bed, so as to hide himself, for he felt safest when there. But he had left the goats up above,
and Uncle had given him strict injunctions to make haste back so that they might not be left
too long alone. And he stood more in awe of Uncle than any one, and would not have dared to
disobey him on any account. There was no help for it, he had to go back, and Peter went on
groaning and limping. He could run no more, for the anguish of mind he had been through, and
the bumping and shaking he had received, were beginning to tell upon him. And so with lagging
steps and groans he slowly made his way up the mountain.

Shortly after meeting Peter, Herr Sesemann passed the first hut, and so was satisfied that
he was on the right path. He continued his climb with renewed courage, and at last, after a
long and exhausting walk, he came in sight of his goal. There, only a little distance farther
up, stood the grandfather's home, with the dark tops of the fir trees waving above its roof.

Herr Sesemann was delighted to have come to the last steep bit of his journey, in another minute
or two he would be with his little daughter, and he pleased himself with the thought of her
surprise. But the company above had seen his approaching figure and recognized who it was,
and they were preparing something he little expected as a surprise on their part.

As he stepped on to the space in front of the hut two figures came towards him. One a tall
girl with fair hair and pink cheeks, leaning on Heidi, whose dark eyes were dancing with joy.
Herr Sesemann suddenly stopped, staring at the two children, and all at once the tears started
to his eyes. What memories arose in his heart! Just so had Clara's mother looked, the fair-haired
girl with the delicate pink-and-white complexion. Herr Sesemann did not know if he was awake
or dreaming.

"Don't you know me, papa?" called Clara to him, her face beaming with happiness. "Am I so altered
since you saw me?"

Then Herr Sesemann ran to his child and clasped her in his arms.

"Yes, you are indeed altered! How is it possible? Is it true what I see?" And the delighted
father stepped back to look full at her again, and to make sure that the picture would not
vanish before his eyes.

"Are you my little Clara, really my little Clara?" he kept on saying, then he clasped her in
his arms again, and again put her away from him that he might look and make sure it was she
who stood before him.

And now grandmamma came up, anxious for a sight of her son's happy face.

"Well, what do you say now, dear son?" she exclaimed. "You have given us a pleasant surprise,
but it is nothing in comparison to what we have prepared for you, you must confess," and she
gave her son an affectionate kiss as she spoke. "But now," she went on, "you must come and
pay your respects to Uncle, who is our chief benefactor."

"Yes, indeed, and with the little inmate of our own house, our little Heidi, too," said Herr
Sesemann, shaking Heidi by the hand. "Well? are you still well and happy in your mountain home?
but I need not ask, no Alpine rose could look more blooming. I am glad, child, it is a pleasure
to me to see you so."

And Heidi looked up with equal pleasure into Herr Sesemann's kind face. How good he had always
been to her! And that he should find such happiness awaiting him up here on the mountain made
her heart beat with gladness.

Grandmamma now led her son to introduce him to Uncle, and while the two men were shaking hands
and Herr Sesemann was expressing his heartfelt thanks and boundless astonishment to the old
man, grandmamma wandered round to the back to see the old fir trees again.

Here another unexpected sight met her gaze, for there, under the trees where the long branches
had left a clear space on the ground, stood a great bush of the most wonderful dark blue gentians,
as fresh and shining as if they were growing on the spot. She clasped her hands, enraptured
with their beauty.

"How exquisite! what a lovely sight!" she exclaimed. "Heidi, dearest child, come here! Is it
you who have prepared this pleasure for me? It is perfectly wonderful!"

The children ran up.

"No, no, I did not put them there," said Heidi, "but I know who did."

"They grow just like that on the mountain, grandmamma, only if anything they look more beautiful
still," Clara put in; "but guess who brought those down to-day," and as she spoke she gave
such a pleased smile that the grandmother thought for a moment the child herself must have
gathered them. But that was hardly possible.

At this moment a slight rustling was heard behind the fir trees. It was Peter, who had just
arrived. He had made a long round, having seen from the distance who it was standing beside
Uncle in front of the hut, and he was trying to slip by unobserved. But grandmamma had seen
and recognized him, and suddenly the thought struck her that it might be Peter who had brought
the flowers and that he was now trying to get away unseen, feeling shy about it; but she could
not let him go off like that, he must have some little reward.

"Come along, boy; come here, do not be afraid," she called to him.

Peter stood still, petrified with fear. After all he had gone through that day he felt he had
no longer any power of resistance left. All he could think was, "It's all up with me now."
Every hair of his head stood on end, and he stepped forth from behind the fir trees, his face
pale and distorted with terror.

"Courage, boy," said grandmamma in her effort to dispel his shyness, "tell me now straight
out without hesitation, was it you who did it?"

Peter did not lift his eyes and therefore did not see at what grandmamma was pointing. But
he knew that Uncle was standing at the corner of the hut, fixing him with his grey eyes, while
beside him stood the most terrible person that Peter could conceive--the police-constable from
Frankfurt. Quaking in every limb, and with trembling lips he muttered a low, "Yes."

"Well, and what is there dreadful about that?" said grandmamma.

"Because--because--it is all broken to pieces and no one can put it together again." Peter
brought out his words with difficulty, and his knees knocked together so that he could hardly
stand.

Grandmamma went up to Uncle. "Is that poor boy a little out of his mind?" she asked sympathisingly.

"Not in the least," Uncle assured her, "it is only that he was the wind that sent the chair
rolling down the slope, and he is expecting his well-deserved punishment."

Grandmamma found this hard to believe, for in her opinion Peter did not look an entirely bad
boy, nor could he have any reason for destroying such a necessary thing as the chair. But Uncle
had only given expression to the suspicion that he had from the moment the accident happened.
The angry looks which Peter had from the beginning cast at Clara, and the other signs of his
dislike to what had been taking place on the mountain, had not escaped Uncle's eye. Putting
two and two together he had come to the right conclusion as to the cause of the disaster, and
he therefore spoke without hesitation when he accused Peter. The lady broke into lively expostulations
on hearing this.

"No, no, dear Uncle, we will not punish the poor boy any further. One must be fair to him.
Here are all these strangers from Frankfurt who come and carry away Heidi, his one sole possession,
and a possession well worth having too, and he is left to sit alone day after day for weeks,
with nothing to do but brood over his wrongs. No, no, let us be fair to him; his anger got
the upper hand and drove him an act of revenge--a foolish one, I own, but then we all behave
foolishly when we are angry." And saying this she went back to Peter, who still stood frightened
and trembling. She sat down on the seat under the fir trees and called him to her kindly,--

"Come here, boy, and stand in front of me, for I have something to say to you. Leave off shaking
and trembling, for I want you to listen to me. You sent the chair rolling down the mountain
so that it was broken to pieces. That was a very wrong thing to do, as you yourself knew very
well at the time, and you also knew that you deserved to be punished for it, and in order to
escape this you have been doing all you can to hide the truth from everybody. But be sure of
this, Peter: that those who do wrong make a mistake when they think no one knows anything about
it. For God sees and hears everything, and when the wicked doer tries to hide what he has done,
then God wakes up a little watchman that He places inside us all when we are born and who sleeps
on quietly till we do something wrong. And the little watchman has a small goad in his hand,
And when he wakes up he keeps on pricking us with it, so that we have not a moment's peace.
And the watchman torments us still further, for he keeps on calling out, 'Now you will be found
out! Now they will drag you off to punishment!' And so we pass our life in fear and trouble,
and never know a moment's happiness or peace. Have you not felt something like that lately, Peter?"

Peter gave a contrite nod of the head, as one who knew all about it, for grandmamma had described
his own feelings exactly.

"And you calculated wrongly also in another way," continued grandmamma, "for you see the harm
you intended has turned out for the best for those you wished to hurt. As Clara had no chair
to go in and yet wanted so much to see the flowers, she made the effort to walk, and every
day since she has been walking better and better, and if she remains up here she will in time
be able to go up the mountain every day, much oftener than she would have done in her chair.
So you see, Peter, God is able to bring good out of evil for those whom you meant to injure,
and you who did the evil were left to suffer the unhappy consequences of it. Do you thoroughly
understand all I have said to you, Peter? If so, do not forget my words, and whenever you feel
inclined to do anything wrong, think of the little watchman inside you with his goad and his
disagreeable voice. Will you remember all this?"

"Yes, I will," answered Peter, still very subdued, for he did not yet know how the matter was
going to end, as the police constable was still standing with the Uncle.

"That's right, and now the thing is over and done for," said grandmamma. "But I should like
you to have something for a pleasant reminder of the visitors from Frankfurt. Can you tell
me anything that you have wished very much to have? What would you like best as a present?"

Peter lifted his head at this, and stared open-eyed at grandmamma. Up to the last minute he
had been expecting something dreadful to happen, and now he might have anything that he wanted.
His mind seemed all of a whirl.

"I mean what I say," went on grandmamma. "You shall choose what you would like to have as a
remembrance from the Frankfurt visitors, and as a token that they will not think any more of
the wrong thing you did. Now do you understand me, boy?"

The fact began at last to dawn upon Peter's mind that he had no further punishment to fear,
and that the kind lady sitting in front of him had delivered him from the police constable.
He suddenly felt as if the weight of a mountain had fallen off him. He had also by this time
awakened to the further conviction that it was better to make a full confession at once of
anything he had done wrong or had left undone, and so he said, "And I lost the paper, too."

Grandmamma had to consider a moment what he meant, but soon recalled his connection with her
telegram, and answered kindly,--

"You are a good boy to tell me! Never conceal anything you have done wrong, and then all will
come right again. And now what would you like me to give you?"

Peter grew almost giddy with the thought that he could have anything in the world that he wished
for. He had a vision of the yearly fair at Mayenfeld with the glittering stalls and all the
lovely things that he had stood gazing at for hours, without a hope of ever possessing one
of them, for Peter's purse never held more than a halfpenny, and all these fascinating objects
cost double that amount. There were the pretty little red whistles that he could use to call
his goats, and the splendid knives with rounded handles, known as toad-strikers, with which
one could do such famous work among the hazel bushes.

Peter remained pondering; he was trying to think which of these two desirable objects he should
best like to have, and he found it difficult to decide. Then a bright thought occurred to him;
he would then be able to think over the matter between now and next year's fair.

"A penny," answered Peter, who was no longer in doubt.

Grandmamma could not help laughing. "That is not an extravagant request. Come here then!" and
she pulled out her purse and put four bright round shillings in his hand and, then laid some
pennies on top of it. "We will settle our accounts at once," she continued, "and I will explain
them to you. I have given you as many pennies as there are weeks in the year, and so every
Sunday throughout the year you can take out a penny to spend."

"As long as I live?" said Peter quite innocently.

Grandmamma laughed more still at this, and the men hearing her, paused in their talk to listen
to what was going on.

"Yes, boy, you shall have it all your life--I will put it down in my will. Do you hear, my
son? and you are to put it down in yours as well: a penny a week to Peter as long as he lives."

Herr Sesemann nodded his assent and joined in the laughter.

Peter looked again at the present in his hand to make sure he was not dreaming, and then said,
"Thank God!"

And he went off running and leaping with more even than his usual agility, and this time managed
to keep his feet, for it was not fear, but joy such as he had never known before in his life,
that now sent him flying up the mountain. All trouble and trembling had disappeared, and he
was to have a penny every week for life.

As later, after dinner, the party were sitting together chatting, Clara drew her father a little
aside, and said with an eagerness that had been unknown to the little tired invalid,--

"O papa, if you only knew all that grandfather has done for me from day to day! I cannot reckon
his kindnesses, but I shall never forget them as long as I live! And I keep on thinking what
I could do for him, or what present I could make him that would give him half as much pleasure
as he has given me."

"That is just what I wish most myself, Clara," replied her father, whose face grew happier
each time he looked at his little daughter. "I have been also thinking how we can best show
our gratitude to our good benefactor."

Herr Sesemann now went over to where Uncle and grandmamma were engaged in lively conversation.
Uncle stood up as he approached, and Herr Sesemann, taking him by the hand said,--

"Dear friend, let us exchange a few words with one another. You will believe me when I tell
you that I have known no real happiness for years past. What worth to me were money and property
when they were unable to make my poor child well and happy? With the help of God you have made
her whole and strong, and you have given new life not only to her but to me. Tell me now, in
what way can I show my gratitude to you? I can never repay all you have done, but whatever
is in my power to do is at your service. Speak, friend, and tell me what I can do?"

Uncle had listened to him quietly, with a smile of pleasure on his face as he looked at the
happy father.

"Herr Sesemann," he replied in his dignified way, "believe me that I too have my share in the
joy of your daughter's recovery, and my trouble is well repaid by it. I thank you heartily
for all you have said, but I have need of nothing; I have enough for myself and the child as
long as I live. One wish alone I have, and if that could be satisfied I should have no further
care in life."

"Speak, dear friend, and tell me what it is," said Herr Sesemann entreatingly.

"I am growing old," Uncle went on, "and shall not be here much longer. I have nothing to leave
the child when I die, and she has no relations, except one person who will always like to make
what profit out of her she can. If you could promise me that Heidi shall never have to go and
earn her living among strangers, then you would richly reward me for all I have done for your
child."

"There could never be any question of such a thing as that, my dear friend," said Herr Sesemann
quickly. "I look upon the child as our own. Ask my mother, my daughter; you may be sure that
they will never allow the child to be left in any one else's care! But if it will make you
happier I give you here my hand upon it. I promise you: Heidi shall never have to go and earn
her living among strangers; I will make provision against this both during my life and after.
But now I have something else to say. Independent of her circumstances, the child is totally
unfitted to live a life away from home; we found out that when she was with us. But she has
made friends, and among them I know one who is at this moment in Frankfurt; he is winding up
his affairs there, that he may be free to go where he likes and take his rest. I am speaking
of my friend, the doctor, who came over here in the autumn and who, having well considered
your advice, intends to settle in this neighborhood, for he has never felt so well and happy
anywhere as in the company of you and Heidi. So you see the child will henceforth have two
protectors near her-- and may they both live long to share the task!"

"God grant it indeed may be so!" added grandmamma, shaking Uncle's hand warmly as she spoke,
to show how sincerely she echoed her son's wish. Then putting her arm round Heidi, who was
standing near, she drew the child to her.

"And I have a question to ask you too, dear Heidi. Tell me if there is anything you particularly
wish for."

"Yes, there is," answered Heidi promptly, looking up delightedly at grandmamma.

"Then tell me at once, dear, what it is."

"I want to have the bed I slept in at Frankfurt with the high pillows and the thick coverlid,
and then grandmother will not have to lie with her head down hill and hardly able to breathe,
and she will be warm enough under the coverlid not to have to wear her shawl in bed to prevent
her freezing to death."

In her eagerness to obtain what she had set her heart upon Heidi hardly gave herself time to
get out all she had to say, and did not pause for breath till she reached the end of her sentence.

"Dearest child," answered grandmamma, moved by Heidi's speech, "what is this you tell me of
grandmother! You are right to remind me. In the midst of our own happiness we forget too often
that which we ought to remember before all things. When God has shown us some special mercy
we should think at once of those who are denied so many things. I will telegraph to Frankfurt
at once! Fraulein Rottenmeier shall pack up the bed this very day, and it will be here in two
days' time. God willing, grandmother shall soon be sleeping comfortably upon it."

Heidi skipped round grandmamma in her glee, and then stopping all of a sudden, said quickly,
"I must make haste down and tell grandmother, and she will be in trouble too at my not having
been to see her for such a long time." For she felt she could not wait another moment before
carrying the good news down to grandmother, and, moreover, the recollection came to her of
the distress the old woman was in when she last saw her.

"No, no, Heidi, what can you be thinking of," said her grandfather reprovingly. "You can't
be running backwards and forwards like that when you have visitors."

But grandmamma interfered on Heidi's behalf. "The child is not so far wrong, Uncle," she said,
"and poor grandmother has too long been deprived of Heidi for our sakes. Let us all go down
to her together. I believe my horse is waiting for me and I can ride down from there, and as
soon as I get to Dorfli the message shall be sent off. What do you think of my plan, son?"

Herr Sesemann had not yet had time to speak of his travelling plans, so he begged his mother
to wait a few moments that he might tell her what he proposed doing.

Herr Sesemann had been arranging that he and his mother should make a little tour in Switzerland,
first ascertaining if Clara was in a fit state to go some part of the way with them. But now
he would have the full enjoyment of his daughter's company, and that being so he did not want
to miss any of these beautiful days of later summer, but to start at once on the journey that
he now looked forward to with such additional pleasure. And so he proposed that they should
spend the night in Dorfli and that next day he should come and fetch Clara, then they would
all three go down to Ragatz and make that their starting point.

Clara was rather upset at first at the thought of saying good- bye like this to the mountain;
she could not help being pleased, however, at the prospect of the journey, and no time was
allowed her to give way to lamentation.

Grandmamma had already taken Heidi by the hand, preparatory to leading the way, when she suddenly
turned. "But what is to become of Clara?" she asked, remembering all at once that the child
could not yet take so long a walk. She gave a nod of satisfaction as she saw that Uncle had
already taken Clara up in his arms and was following her with sturdy strides. Herr Sesemann
brought up the rear, and so they all started down the mountain.

Heidi kept jumping for joy as she and grandmamma walked along side by side, and grandmamma
asked all about grandmother, how she lived, and what she did, especially in the winter when
it was so cold. And Heidi gave her a minute account of everything, for she knew all that went
on at grandmother's, and told her how grandmother sat crouching in her corner and trembling
with cold. During the search for pseudonyms for the staff--the pseudonym is an essential in home
journalism, and the easiest way of securing it is to turn one's name round--we came upon the astonishing
discovery that Hannah is exactly the same whether you spell it backwards or forwards. Hannah
therefore calls herself, again at my suggestion, "Pal," which is short for "palindrome." We also
discovered, to her intense delight, that Enid, when reversed, makes
"Dine"--a pleasant word but a poor pseudonym.

She therefore calls herself after her pet flower, "Marigold."

Between them Pal and Marigold do all the work. There is room for an epigram if you happen to have
one about you, or even an ode, but they can get along without outside contributions. Enid does
most of the writing and Hannah copies it out.

So much for prelude to the story of Enid's serial. Having observed that all the most popular periodicals
have serial stories she decided that she must write one too. It was called "The Prairie Lily,"
and begun splendidly. I give the list of characters at the head of the first instalment:--

The
Duke of Week, an angry father and member of the House of Lords.

The Duchess of Week, his wife, once famous for her beauty.

Lady Lily, their daughter, aged nineteen and very lovely.

Mr. Ploot, an American millionaire who loves the Lady Lily.

Lord Eustace Vavasour, the Lady Lily's cousin, who loves her.

Jack Crawley, a young farmer and the one that the Lady Lily loves.

Fanny Starlight, a poor relation and the Lady Lily's very closest friend.

Webb, the Lady Lily's maid.

Such were the characters when the story began, and at the end of the first instalment the author,
with very great ingenuity--or perhaps with only a light-hearted disregard of probability--got
the whole bunch of them on a liner going to America.

The last sentence described the vessel gliding away from the dock, with the characters leaning over
the side waving good-bye. Even Jack Crawley, the young farmer, was there; but he was not waving
with the others, because he did not want anyone to know that he knew the Lady Lily, or was
on board at all. Lord Eustace was on one side of the Lady Lily as she waved, and Mr. Ploot on
the other, and they were, of course, consumed with jealousy of each
other.

Having read the first instalment, with the author's eye fixed
embarrassingly upon me, and the author giggling as she watched, I
said that it was very interesting; as indeed it was. I went on to
ask what part of America they were all going to, and how it would
end, and so on; and Enid sketched the probable course of events, which
included a duel for Lord Eustace and Mr. Ploot (who turned out to
be not a millionaire at all, but a gentleman thief) and a very exciting
time for the Lady Lily on a ranche in Texas, whither she had followed
Jack Crawley, who was to become famous throughout the States as "The
Cowboy King." I forget about the Duke and Duchess, but a lover was
to be found on the ranche for Fanny Starlight; and Red Indians were
to carry off Webb, who was to be rescued by the Cowboy King; and so
on. There were, in short, signs that Enid had not only read the feuilletons
in the picture papers but had been to the Movies too.

But grandmother would not let her off even then without more words of gratitude, and without
calling down on her benefactress and all belonging to her every blessing that God had to bestow.

At last Herr Sesemann and his mother were able to continue their journey downwards, while Uncle
carried Clara back home, with Heidi beside him, so full of joy of what was coming for grandmother
that every step was a jump.

But there were many tears shed the following morning by the departing Clara, who wept to say
good-bye to the beautiful mountain home where she had been happier than ever in her life before.
Heidi did her best to comfort her. "Summer will be here again in no time," she said, "and then
you will come again, and it will be nicer still, for you will be able to walk about from the
beginning. We can then go out every day with the goats up to where the flowers grow, and enjoy
ourselves from the moment you arrive."

Herr Sesemann had come as arranged to fetch his little daughter away, and was just now standing
and talking with Uncle, for they had much to say to one another. Clara felt somewhat consoled
by Heidi's words, and wiped away her tears.

"Be sure you say good-bye for me to Peter and the goats, and especially to Little Swan. I wish
I could give Little Swan a present, for she has helped so much to make me strong." 

VOL. 153.

October 31, 1917.

CHARIVARIA.

The Ministry of Food has informed
the Twickenham Food Control Committee that a doughnut is not a bun.
Local unrest has been almost completely allayed by this prompt and
fearless decision. "Oh, then I shall send a hundred pounds of salt from Frankfurt,
for I want her to have something as a remembrance of me."

Herr Sesemann now beckoned to the children as it was time to be off. Grandmamma's white horse
had been brought up for Clara, as she was no longer obliged to be carried in a chair.

Heidi ran to the far edge of the slope and continued to wave her hand to Clara until the last
glimpse of horse and rider had disappeared.

And now the bed has arrived, and grandmother is sleeping so soundly all night that she is sure
to grow stronger.

Grandmamma, moreover, has not forgotten how cold the winter is on the mountain. She has sent
a large parcel of warm clothing of every description, so that grandmother can wrap herself
round and round, and will certainly not tremble with cold now as she sits in her corner. 

PRACTICAL JOKING AT OXFORD IN THE "SIXTIES."
"Jimmy Greene, afterwards Lord Havering, whose rooms were just below
mine, suffered a good deal from practical jokers. One day I was chatting
with Reggie Wragge when we heard loud cries for help just below us. His friends have advised him to buy the old house that
Uncle and Heidi live in during the winter, which had evidently, judging from the height of
the rooms and the magnificent stove with its artistically-painted tiles, been a fine gentleman's
place at one time. The doctor is having this part of the old house rebuilt for himself, the
other part being repaired for Uncle and Heidi, for the doctor is aware that Uncle is a man
of independent spirit, who likes to have a house to himself. Quite at the back a warm and well-walled
stall is being put up for the two goats, and there they will pass their winter in comfort.

The doctor and Uncle are becoming better friends every day, and as they walk about the new
buildings to see how they are getting on, their thoughts continually turn to Heidi, for the
chief pleasure to each in connection with the house is that they will have the light-hearted
little child with them there.

"Dear friend," said the doctor on one of these occasions as they were standing together, "you
will see this matter in the same light as I do, I am sure. I share your happiness in the child
as if, next to you, I was the one to whom she most closely belonged, but I wish also to share
all responsibilities, concerning her and to do my best for the child. I shall then feel I have
my rights in her, and shall look forward to her being with me and caring for me in my old age,
which is the one great wish of my heart. She will have the same claims upon me as if she were
my own child, and I shall provide for her as such, and so we shall be able to leave her without
anxiety when the day comes that you and I must go."

Uncle did not speak, but he clasped the doctor's hand in his, and his good friend could read
in the old man's eyes how greatly moved he was and how glad and grateful he felt. 

(SPECIAL REVIEW.)

Lord Yorick's Reminiscences, just published by the house of Hussell,
abound in genial anecdote, in which the "personal note" is lightly
and gracefully struck, in welcome contrast to the stodgy political
memoirs with which we have been surfeited of late.

And how much there was to tell of all the events that had taken place that last summer, for
they had not had many opportunities of meeting since then.

And it was difficult to say which of the three looked the happiest at being together again,
and at the recollection of all the wonderful things that had happened. Mother Brigitta's face
was perhaps the happiest of all, as now, with the help of explanation she was able to understand
for the first time the history of Peter's weekly penny for life.

Then at last the grandmother spoke, "Heidi, read me one of the hymns! I can feel I can do nothing
for the remainder of my life but thank the Father in Heaven for all the mercies he has shown us!"