'It will be remembered that at the time alluded to, now five years past, we had occasion to
remark on the state of a charity at Barchester called Hiram's Hospital. We thought that it
was maladministered, and that the very estimable and reverend gentleman who held the office
of warden was somewhat too highly paid for duties which were somewhat too easily performed.
This gentleman--and we say it in all sincerity and with no touch of sarcasm--had never looked
on the matter in this light before. We do not wish to take praise to ourselves whether praise
is due or not. But the consequence of our remark was, that the warden did look into the matter,
and finding on doing so that he himself could come to no other opinion than that expressed
by us, he very creditably threw up the appointment. The then bishop then as creditably declined
to fill the vacancy till the affair was put on a better footing. Parliament then took it up;
and we have now the satisfaction of informing our readers that Hiram's Hospital will be immediately
re-opened under new auspices. Heretofore, provision was made for the maintenance of twelve
old men. This will now be extended to the fair sex, and twelve elderly women if any such can
be found in Barchester, will be added to the establishment. There will be a matron; there will,
it is hoped, be schools attached for the poorest of the children of the poor, and there will
be a steward. The warden, for there will still be a warden, will receive an income more in
keeping with the extent of the charity than that heretofore paid. The stipend we believe will
be L 450. We may add that the excellent house which the former warden inhabited will still
be attached to the situation.

'Barchester hospital cannot perhaps boast a world-wide reputation; but as we advertised to
its state of decadence, we think it right also to advert to its renaissance. May it go up and
prosper. Whether the salutary reform which has been introduced within its walls has been carried
as far as could have been desired, may be doubtful. The important question of the school appears
to be somewhat left to the discretion of the new warden. This might have been made the most
important part of the establishment, and the new warden, whom we trust we shall not offend
by the freedom of our remarks, might have been selected with some view to his fitness as schoolmaster.
But we will not now look a gift horse in the mouth. May the hospital go on and prosper! The
situation of warden has of course been offered to the gentleman who so honourable vacated it
five years since; but we are given to understand that he has declined it. Whether the ladies
who have been introduced, be in his estimation too much for his powers of control, whether
it be that the diminished income does not offer to him sufficient temptation to resume the
old place, or that he has in the meantime assumed other clerical duties, we do not know. We
are, however, informed that he has refused the offer, and that the situation has been accepted
by Mr Quiverful, the vicar of Puddingdale.

'So much we think is due to Hiram redivivus. But while we are on the subject of Barchester,
we will venture with all respectful humility to express our opinion on another matter, connected
with the ecclesiastical polity of that ancient city. Dr Trefoil, the dean, died yesterday.
A short record of his death, giving his age, and the various pieces of preferment which he
has at different times held, will be found in another column in this paper. The only fault
we knew in him was his age, and as that is a crime of which we may all hope to be guilty, we
will not bear heavily on it. May he rest in peace! But though the great age of an expiring
dean cannot be made matter of reproach, we are not inclined to look on such a fault as at all
pardonable in a dean just brought to the birth. We do hope the days of sexagenarian appointments
are past. If we want deans, we must want them for some purpose. That purpose will necessarily
be better fulfilled by a man of forty than by a man of sixty. If we are to pay deans at all,
we are to pay them for some sort of work. That work, be it what it may, will be best performed
by a workman in the prime of life. Dr Trefoil, we see, was eighty when he died. As we have
as yet completed no plan for positioning superannuated clergymen, we do not wish to get rid
of any existing deans of that age. But we prefer having as few such as possible. If a man of
seventy be now appointed, we beg to point out to Lord--that he will be past all use in a year
or two, if indeed he is not so at the present moment. His lordship will allow us to remind
him that all men are not evergreens like himself.

'We hear that Mr Slope's name has been mentioned for this preferment. Mr Slope is at present
chaplain to the bishop. A better man could hardly be selected. He is a man of talent, young,
active, and conversant with the affairs of the cathedral; he is moreover, we conscientiously
believe, a truly pious clergyman. We know that his services in the city of Barchester have
been highly appreciated. He is an eloquent preacher and a ripe scholar. Such a selection as
this would go far to raise the confidence of the public in the present administration of church
patronage, and would teach men to believe that from henceforth the establishment of our church
will not afford easy couches to worn-out clerical voluptuaries.'

Standing at a reading-desk in the Barchester news-room, Mr Slope digested this article with
considerable satisfaction. What was therein said as the hospital was now comparatively matter
of indifference to him. He was certainly glad that he had not succeeded in restoring to the
place the father of that virago who had so audaciously outraged all decency in his person;
and was so far satisfied. But Mrs Proudie's nominee was appointed, and he was so far dissatisfied.
His mind, however, was now soaring above Mrs Bold or Mrs Proudie.

He was sufficiently conversant with the tactics of the Jupiter to know that the pith of the
article would lie in the last paragraph. The place of honour was given to him, and it was indeed
as honourable as even he could have wished. He was very grateful to his friend Mr Towers, and
with full heart looked forward to the day when he might entertain him in princely style at
his own full-spread board in the deanery dining-room.

It had been well for Mr Slope that Dr Trefoil had died in the autumn. Those caterers for our
morning repast, the staff of the Jupiter, had been sorely put to it for the last month to find
a sufficiency of proper pabulum. Just then there was no talk of a new American president. No
wonderful tragedies had occurred on railway trains in Georgia, or elsewhere. There was a dearth
of broken banks, and a dead dean with the necessity for a live one was a godsend. Had Dr Trefoil
died in June, Mr Towers would probably not have known so much about the piety of Mr Slope.

And here we will leave Mr Slope for a while in his triumph; explaining, however, that his feelings
were not altogether of a triumphant nature. His rejection by the widow, or rather the method
of his rejection, galled him terribly. For days to come he positively felt the sting upon his
cheek, whenever he thought of what had been done to him. He could not refrain from calling
her by harsh names, speaking to himself as he walked through the streets of Barchester. When
he said his prayers, he could not bring himself to forgive her. When he strove to do so, his
mind recoiled from the attempt, and in lieu of forgiving, ran off in a double spirit of vindictiveness,
dwelling on the extent of the injury he had received. And so his prayers dropped senseless
from his lips.

And then the signora; what would he not have given to be able to hate her also? As it was,
he worshipped the very sofa on which she was ever lying. And thus it was not all rose colour
with Mr Slope, although his hopes ran high.

CHAPTER XLIV

MRS BOLD AT HOME

Poor Mrs Bold, when she got home from Ullathorne on the evening of Miss Thorne's party, was
very unhappy, and moreover very tired. Nothing fatigues the body so much as weariness of spirit,
and Eleanor's spirit was indeed weary.

Dr Stanhope had civilly but not very cordially asked her in to tea, and her manner of refusal
convinced the worthy doctor that he need not repeat the invitation. He had not exactly made
himself a party to the intrigue which was to convert the late Mr Bold's patrimony into an income
for his hopeful son, but he had been well aware what was going on. And he was thus well aware
also, when he perceived that Bertie declined accompanying them home in the carriage, that the
affair had gone off.

Eleanor was very much afraid that Charlotte would have darted out upon her, as the prebendary
got out at his own door, but Bertie thoughtfully saved her from this, by causing the carriage
to go round by her house. This also Dr Stanhope understood, and allowed to pass by without remark.

When she got home, she found Mary Bold in the drawing-room with the child in her lap. She rushed
forward, and, throwing herself on her knees, kissed the little fellow till she almost frightened
him.

'Oh, Mary, I am so glad you did not go. It was an odious party.'

Now the question of Mary's going had been one greatly mooted between them. Mrs Bold, when invited,
had been the guest of the Grantlys, and Miss Thorne, who had chiefly known Eleanor at the hospital
or at Plumstead rectory, had forgotten all about Mary Bold. Her sister-in-law had implored
her to go under her wing, and had offered to write to Miss Thorne, or to call on her. But Miss
Bold had declined. In fact, Mr Bold had not been very popular with such people as the Thornes,
and his sister would not go among them unless she were specially asked to do so.

'Well then,' said Mary cheerfully, 'I have the less to regret.'

'You have nothing to regret; but oh! Mary, I have--so much--so much;'--and then she began kissing
her boy, whom her caresses had aroused from his slumbers. When she raised her head, Mary saw
that the tears were running down her cheeks.

'Good heavens, Eleanor, what is the matter? What has happened to you?--Eleanor, dearest Eleanor--what
is the matter?' and Mary got up with the boy still in her arms.

'Give him to me--give him to me,' said the young mother. 'Give him to me, Mary,'and she almost
tore the child out of her sister's arms. The poor little fellow murmured somewhat at the disturbance,
but nevertheless nestled himself close into his mother's bosom.

'Here, Mary, take the cloak from me. My own, own darling, darling, darling jewel. You are not
false to me. Everybody else is false; everybody else is cruel. Mamma will care for nobody,
nobody, nobody, but her own, own, own, little man;' and she again kissed and pressed the baby,
and cried till the tears ran down over the child's face.

'Who has been cruel to you, Eleanor?' said Mary. 'I hope I have not.'

Now, in this matter, Eleanor had great cause for uneasiness.

She could not certainly accuse her loving sister-in-law of cruelty; but she had to do that
which was more galling; she had to accuse herself of an imprudence against which her sister-in-law
had warned her. Miss Bold had never encouraged Eleanor's acquaintance with Mr Slope, and she
had positively discouraged the friendship of the Stanhopes as far as her usual gentle mode
of speaking had permitted. Eleanor had only laughed at her, however, when she said that she
disapproved of married women who lived apart from their husbands, and suggested that Charlotte
Stanhope never went to church. Now, however, Eleanor must either hold her tongue, which was
quite impossible, or confess herself to have been utterly wrong, which was nearly equally so.
So she staved off the evil day by more tears, and consoled herself by inducing little Johnny
to rouse himself sufficiently to return her caresses.

'He is a darling--as true as gold. What would mamma do without him? Mamma would lie down and
die if she had not her own Johnny Bold to give her comfort.' This and much more she said of
the same kind, and for a time made no other answer to Mary's inquiries.

This kind of consolation from the world's deceit is very common.

Mothers obtain it from their children, and men from their dogs. Some men even do so from their
walking-sticks, which is just as rational. How is it that we can take joy to ourselves in that
we are not deceived by those who have not attained the art to deceive us? In a true man, if
such can be found, or a true woman, much consolation may indeed be taken.

In the caresses of her child, however, Eleanor did receive consolation; and may ill befall
the man who would begrudge it to her. The evil day, however, was only postponed. She had to
tell her disagreeable tale to Mary, and she had also to tell it to her father. Must it not,
indeed, be told to the whole circle of her acquaintance before she could be made to stand all
right with them? At the present moment there was no one to whom she could turn for comfort.
She hated Mr Slope; that was a matter of course, in that feeling she revelled. She hated and
despised the Stanhopes; but that feeling distressed her greatly. She had, as it were, separated
herself from her old friends to throw herself into the arms of this family; and then how had
they intended to use her? She could hardly reconcile herself to her own father, who had believed
ill of her. Mary Bold had turned Mentor. That she could have forgiven had the Mentor turned
out to be in the wrong; but Mentors in the right are not to be pardoned. She could not but
hate the archdeacon; and now she hated him even worse than ever, for she must in some sort
humble herself before him. She hated her sister, for she was part and parcel of the archdeacon.
And she would have hated Mr Arabin if she could. He had pretended to regard her, and yet before
her face he had hung over that Italian woman as though there had been no beauty in the world
but hers--no other woman worth a moment's attention. And Mr Arabin would have to learn all
this about Mr Slope! She told herself she hated him, and she knew that she was lying to herself
as she did so. She had no consolation but her baby, and of that she made the most. Mary, though
she could not surmise what it was that had so violently affected her sister-in-law, saw at
once her grief was too great to be kept under control, and waited patiently till the child
should be in his cradle.

'You'll have some tea, Eleanor,' she said.

'Oh, I don't care,' said she; though in fact she must have been very hungry, for she had eaten
nothing at Ullathorne.

Mary quietly made the tea, and buttered the bread, laid aside the cloak, and made things look
comfortable.

'He's fast asleep,' said she, 'you're very tired; let me take him up to bed.'

But Eleanor would not let her sister touch him. She looked wistfully at her baby's eyes, saw
that they were lost in the deepest slumber, and then made a sort of couch for him on the sofa.
She was determined that nothing should prevail upon her to let him out of her sight that night.

'Come, Nelly,' said Mary, 'don't be cross with me. I at least have done nothing to offend you.'

'I an't cross,' said Eleanor.

'Are you angry then? Surely you can't be angry with me.'

'No, I an't angry; at least not with you.'

'If you are not, drink the tea I have made for you. I am sure you must want it.'

Eleanor did drink it, and allowed herself to be persuaded. She ate and drank, and as the inner
woman was recruited she felt a little more charitable towards the world at large. At last she
found words to begin her story, and before she went to bed, she had made a clean breast of
it and told everything--everything, that is, as to the lovers she had rejected: of Mr Arabin
she said not a word.

'I know I was wrong,' said she, speaking of the blow she had given to Mr Slope; 'but I didn't
know what he might do, and I had to protect myself.'

'He richly deserved it,' said Mary.

'Deserved it!' said Eleanor, whose mind as regarded Mr Slope was almost bloodthirsty. 'Had
I stabbed him with a dagger, he would have deserved it. But what will they say about it at
Plumstead?'

'I don't think I should tell them,' said Mary. Eleanor began to think that she would not.

There could have been no kinder comforter than Mary Bold. There was not the slightest dash
of triumph about her when she heard of the Stanhope scheme, nor did she allude to her former
opinion when Eleanor called her late friend Charlotte a base, designing woman. She re-echoed
all the abuse that was heaped on Mr Slope's head, and never hinted that she had said as much
before. 'I told you so! I told you so!' is the croak of a true Job's comforter. But Mary, when
she found her friend lying in her sorrow and scraping herself with potsherds, forbore to argue
and to exult. Eleanor acknowledged the merit of the forbearance, and at length allowed herself
to be tranquillised.

On the next day she did not go out of the house. Barchester she thought would be crowded with
Stanhopes and Slopes; perhaps also with Arabins and Grantlys. Indeed there was hardly any one
among her friends whom she could have met, without some cause of uneasiness.

In the course of the afternoon she heard that the dean was dead; and she also heard that Mr
Quiverful had been finally appointed to the hospital.

In the evening her father came to her, and then the story, or as much of it as she could bring
herself to tell him, had to be repeated. He was not in truth much surprised at Mr Slope's effrontery;
but he was obliged to act as though he had been, to save his daughter's feelings. He was, however,
anything but skilful in his deceit, and she saw through it.

'I see,' said she, 'that you think it only the common course of things that Mr Slope should
have treated me in this way.'

She had said nothing to him about the embrace, nor yet of the way in which it had been met.

'I do not think it at all strange,' said he, 'that any one should admire my Eleanor.'

'It is strange to me,' said she, 'that any man should have so much audacity, without ever having
received the slightest encouragement.'

To this Mr Harding answered nothing. With the archdeacon it would have been the text for a
rejoinder, which would not have disgraced Bildad the Shuhite.

'But you'll tell the archdeacon,' asked Mr Harding.

'Tell him what?' said she sharply.

'Or Susan?' continued Mr Harding. 'You'll tell Susan; you'll let them know that they wronged
you in supposing that this man's addresses would be agreeable to you.'

'They may find out their own way,' said she; 'I shall not ever willingly mention Mr Slope's
name to either of them.'

'But I may.'

'I have no right to hinder you from doing anything that may be necessary to your own comfort,
but pray do not do it for my sake. Dr Grantly never thought well of me, and never will. I don't
know now that I an even anxious that he should do so.'

And then they went to the affair of the hospital. 'But is it true, papa?'

'What, my dear,' said he. 'About the dean? Yes, I fear quite true. Indeed, I know there is
no doubt about it.'

'Poor Miss Trefoil. I am so sorry for her. But I did not mean that,' said Eleanor. 'But about
the hospital, papa?

'Yes, my dear. I believe it is true that Mr Quiverful is to have it.'

'Oh, what a shame!'

'No, my dear, not at all, not at all a shame: I am sure I hope it will suit him.'

'But, papa, you know it is a shame. After all your hopes, all your expectations to get back
your old house, to see it given away in this way to a perfect stranger!'

'My dear, the bishop had a right to give it to whom he pleased.'

'I deny that, papa. He had no such right. It is not as though you were a candidate for a new
piece of preferment. If the bishop has a grain of justice--'

'The bishop offered it to me on his terms, and as I did not like the terms, I refused it. After
that, I cannot complain.'

'Terms! He had not right to make terms.'

'I don't know about that; but it seems he had the power. But to tell you the truth, Nelly,
I am as well satisfied as it is. When the affair became the subject of angry discussion, I
thoroughly wished to be rid of it altogether.'

'But you did want to go back to the old house, papa. You told me so yourself.'

'Yes, my child, I did. For a short time I did wish it. And I was foolish in doing so. I am
getting old now; and my chief worldly wish is for peace and rest. Had I gone back to the hospital,
I should have had the endless contentions with the bishop, contentions with his chaplain, and
contentions with the archdeacon. I am not up to this now, I am not able to meet such troubles;
and therefore I am not ill-pleased to find myself left to the little church of St Cuthbert's.
I shall never starve,' added he, laughing 'as long as you are here.'

'But if you will come and live with me, papa?' she said earnestly, taking him by both his hands.
'If you will do that, if you will promise that, I will own that you are right.'

'I will dine with you to-day, at any rate.'

'No, but live here altogether. Give up that close, odious little room in High Street.'

'My dear, it's a very nice little room; and you are really quite uncivil.'

'Oh, papa, don't joke. It's not a nice place for you. You say you are growing old, though I
am sure you are not.'

'Am I not, my dear?'

'No, papa, not old--not to say old. But you are quite old enough to feel the want of a decent
room to sit in. You know how lonely Mary and I are here. You know nobody ever sleeps in the
big front bed-room. It is really unkind of you to remain there alone, when you are so much
wanted here.'

'Thank you, Nelly--thank you. But, my dear--'

'If you had been living here, papa, with us, as I really think you ought to have done, considering
how lonely we are, there would have been none of all this dreadful affair about Mr Slope.'

Mr Harding, however, did not allow himself to be talked over into giving up his own and only
little pied a terre in the High Street. He promised to come and dine with his daughter, and
stay with her, and visit her, and do everything but absolutely live with her. It did not suit
the peculiar feelings of the man to tell his daughter that though she had rejected Mr Slope,
and been ready to reject Mr Stanhope, some other more favoured suitor would probably soon appear;
and that on the appearance of such a suitor the big front bed-room might perhaps be more frequently
in requisition than at present. But doubtless such an idea crossed his mind, and added its
weight to the other reasons which made him decide on still keeping the close, odious little
room in High Street.

The evening passed over quietly and in comfort. Eleanor was always happier with her father
than with any one else. He had not, perhaps, any natural taste for baby-worship, but he was
always ready to sacrifice himself, and therefore made an excellent third in a trio with his
daughter and Mary Bold in singing the praises of the wonderful child.

They were standing together over their music in the evening, the baby having again been put
to bed upon the sofa, when the servant brought in a very small note in a beautiful pink envelope.
It quite filled the room with perfume as it lay upon the small salver. Mary Bold and Mrs Bold
were both at the piano, and Mr Harding was sitting close to them, with the violoncello between
his legs; so that the elegance of the epistle was visible to them all.

'Please, ma'am, Dr Stanhope's coachman says he is to wait for an answer,' said the servant.

Eleanor got very red in the face as she took the note in her hand. She had never seen the writing
before. Charlotte's epistles, to which she was well accustomed, were of a very different style
and kind. She generally wrote on large note-paper; she twisted up her letter into the shape
and sometimes into the size of cocked hats; she addressed them in a sprawling manly hand, and
not unusually added a blot or a smudge, as though such were her own peculiar sign-manual. The
address of this note was written in a beautiful female hand, and the gummed wafer bore on it
an impress of a gilt coronet. Though Eleanor had never seen such a one before, she guessed
that it came from the signora. Such epistles were very numerously sent out from any house in
which the signora might happen to be dwelling, but they were rarely addressed to ladies. When
the coachman was told by the lady's maid to take the letter to Mrs Bold, he openly expressed
his opinion that there was some mistake about it. Whereupon the lady's maid boxed the coachman's
ears. Had Mr Slope seen in how meek a spirit the coachman took the rebuke, he might have learnt
a useful lesson, both in philosophy and religion.

The note was as follows. It may be taken as a faithful promise that no further letter whatever
shall be transcribed at length in these pages.

'My dear Mrs Bold--May I ask you, as a great favour, to call on me to-morrow? You can say what
hour will best suit you; but quite early, if you can. I need hardly say that if I could call
upon you I should not take this liberty with you.

'I partly know what occurred the other day, and I promise you that you shall meet with no annoyance
if you will come to me. My brother leaves us for London to-day; from thence he goes to Italy.

'It will probably occur to you that I should not thus intrude on you, unless I had that to
say to you which may be of considerable moment. Pray therefore excuse me, even if you do not
grant my request, and believe me, 'Very sincerely yours, M.VESEY NERONI

The three of them sat in consultation on this epistle for some ten or fifteen minutes, and
then decided that Eleanor should write a line saying that she would see the signora the next
morning, at twelve o'clock.

CHAPTER XLV

THE STANHOPES AT HOME

We must now return to the Stanhopes, and see how they behaved themselves on their return from
Ullathorne.

Charlotte, who came back in the first homeward journey with her sister, waited in palpitating
expectation till the carriage drove up to the door a second time. She did not run down or stand
at the window, or show in any outward manner that she looked for anything wonderful to occur;
but, when she heard the carriage-wheels, she stood up with erect ears, listening for Eleanor's
footfall on the pavement or the cheery sound of Bertie's voice welcoming her in. Had she heard
either, she would have felt that all was right; but neither sound was there for her to hear.
She heard only her father's slow step, as he ponderously let himself down from the carriage,
and slowly walked along the hall, till he got into his own private room on the ground floor.
'Send Miss Stanhope to me,' he said to the servant.

'There's something wrong now,' said Madeline, who was lying on her sofa in the back drawing-room.

'It's all up with Bertie,' replied Charlotte. 'I know, I know,' she said to the servant, as
he brought up the message. 'Tell my father I will be with him immediately.'

'Bertie's wooing gone astray,' said Madeline. 'I knew it would.'

'It has been his own fault then. She was ready enough. I am quite sure,' said Charlotte, with
that sort of ill-nature which is not uncommon when one woman speaks of another.

'What will you say to him now?' By 'him' the signora meant their father.

'That will be as I find him. He was ready to pay two hundred pounds for Bertie, to stave off
the worst of his creditors, if this marriage had gone on. Bertie must now have the money instead,
and go and take his chances.'

'Where is he now?'

'Heaven knows! Smoking at the bottom of Mr Thorne's ha-ha, or philandering with some of those
Miss Chadwicks. Nothing will ever make an impression on him. But he'll be furious if I don't
go down.'

'No; nothing ever will. But don't be long, Charlotte, for I want my tea.'

And so Charlotte went down to her father. There was a very black cloud on the old man's brow;
blacker than his daughter could ever remember to have seen there. He was sitting in his own
arm-chair, not comfortably over the fire, but in the middle of the room, waiting till she should
come and listen to him.

'What has become of your brother?' he said, as soon as the door was shut.

'I should rather ask you,' said Charlotte. 'I left you both at Ullathorne, when I came away.
What have you done with Mrs Bold?'

'Mrs Bold! nonsense. The woman has gone home as she ought to do. And heartily glad I am that
she should not be sacrificed to so heartless a reprobate.'

'Oh, papa!'

'A heartless reprobate! Tell me now where he is, and what he is going to do. I have allowed
myself to be fooled between you. Marriage indeed! Who on earth that has money, or credit, or
respect in the world to lose, would marry him?'

'It is no use your scolding me, papa. I have done the best I could for him and you.'

'And Madeline is nearly as bad,' said the prebendary, who was in truth, very, very angry.

'Oh, I suppose we are all bad,' replied Charlotte.

The old man emitted a huge leonine sigh. If they were all bad, who had made them so? If they
were unprincipled, selfish, and disreputable, who was to be blamed for the education which
had had so injurious an effect.

'I know you'll ruin me among you,' said he.

'Why, papa, what nonsense that is. You are living within your income this minute, and if there
are any new debts, I don't know of them. I am sure there ought to be none, for we are dull
enough here.'

'Are those bills of Madeline's paid?'

'No, they are not. Who was to pay them?'

'Her husband may pay them.'

'Her husband! Would you wish me to tell her you say so? Do you wish to turn her out of your home?'

'I wish she would know how to behave herself.'

'Why, what on earth has she done now? Poor Madeline! To-day is only the second time she has
gone out since we came to this vile town.'

He then sat silent for a time, thinking in what shape he would declare his resolve. 'Well,
papa,' said Charlotte, 'shall I stay here, or may I go up-stairs and give mamma her tea?'

'You are in your brother's confidence. Tell me what he is going to do?'

'Nothing, that I am aware of.'

'Nothing--nothing! Nothing but eat and drink, and spend every shilling of my money he can lay
his hands upon. I have made up my mind, Charlotte. He shall eat and drink no more in this house.'

'Very well. Then I suppose he must go back to Italy.'

'He may go where he pleases.'

'That's easily said, papa; but what does it mean? You can't let him live--'

'It means this,' said the doctor, speaking more loudly than was his wont, and with wrath flashing
from his eyes; 'that as sure as God rules in heaven, I will not maintain him any longer in
idleness.'

'Oh, ruling in heaven!' said Charlotte. 'It is no use talking about that. You must rule him
here on earth; and the question is, how you can do it. You can't turn him out of the house
penniless, to beg about the street.'

'He may beg where he likes.'

'He must go back to Carrara. That is the cheapest place he can live at, and nobody there will
give him credit for above two or three hundred pauls. But you must let him have the means of
going.'

'As sure as--'

'Oh papa, don't swear. You know you must do it. You were ready to pay two hundred pounds for
him if the marriage came off. Half that will start him to Carrara.'

'What? Give him a hundred pounds!'

'You know we are all in the dark, papa,' said she, thinking it expedient to change the conversation.
'For anything we know, he may be at this moment engaged to Mrs Bold.'

'Fiddlestick,' said the father, who had seen the way in which Mrs Bold had got into the carriage,
while his son stood apart without even offering her his hand.

'Well, then, he must go to Carrara.' said Charlotte.

Just at this moment the lock of the front door was heard, and Charlotte's quick care detected
her brother's cat-like step in the hall. She said nothing, feeling that for the present Bertie
had better keep out of her father's way. But Dr Stanhope also heard the sound of the lock.

'Who's that?' he demanded. Charlotte made no reply, and he asked again. 'Who is that that has
just come in? Open the door. Who is it?'

'I suppose it is Bertie.'

'Bid him to come here,' said the father. But Bertie, who was close to the door and heard the
call, required no further bidding, but walked in with a perfectly unconcerned and cheerful
air. It was this peculiar insouciance which angered Dr Stanhope, even more than his son's extravagance.

'Well, sir,' said the doctor.

'And how did you get home, sir, with your fair companion?' said Bertie. 'I suppose she is not
up-stairs, Charlotte?'

'Bertie,' said Charlotte, 'papa is in no humour for joking. He is very angry with you.'

'Angry!' said Bertie, raising his eyebrows, as though he had never yet given his parent cause
for a single moment's uneasiness.

'Sit down, if you please, sir,' said Dr Stanhope very sternly, but not now very loudly. 'And
I'll trouble you to sit down, too, Charlotte. Your mother can wait for her tea a few minutes.'

Charlotte sat down on the chair nearest the door, in somewhat of a perverse sort of manner;
as much as though she would say--Well, here I am; you shan't say I don't do as I am bid; but
I'll be whipped if I give way to you. And she was determined not to give way. She too was angry
with Bertie; but she was not the less ready on that account to defend him from his father.
Bertie also sat down. He drew his chair close to the library table, upon which he put his elbow,
and then resting his face comfortably on one hand, he began drawing little pictures on a sheet
of paper with the other. Before the scene was over had had completed admirable figures of Miss
Thorne, Mrs Proudie, and Lady De Courcy, and began a family piece to comprise the whole set
of Lookalofts.

'Would it suit you, sir,' said the father, 'to give me some idea as to what your present intentions
are?--what way of living you propose to yourself?'

'I'll do anything you suggest, sir,' said Bertie.

'No, I shall suggest nothing further. My time for suggesting has gone by. I have only one order
to give, and that is, that you leave my house.'

'To-night?' said Bertie; and the simple tone of the question left the doctor without any adequately
dignified method of reply.

'Papa does not quite mean to-night,' said Charlotte, 'at least I suppose not.'

'To-morrow perhaps,' suggested Bertie.

'Yes sir, to-morrow,' said the doctor. 'You shall leave this to-morrow.'

'Very well, sir. Will the 4.30 P.M. train be soon enough?' said Bertie, as he asked, put the
finishing touch to Miss Thorne's high-heeled boots.

'You may go how and when and where you please, so that you leave my house to-morrow. You have
disgraced me, sir; you have disgraced yourself, and me, and your sisters.'

'I am glad at least sir, that I have not disgraced my mother,' said Bertie.

Charlotte could hardly keep her countenance; but the doctor's brow grew still blacker than
ever. Bertie was executing his chef d'ouvre in the delineation of Mrs Proudie's nose and mouth.

'You are a heartless reprobate, sir; a heartless, thankless, good-for-nothing reprobate. I
have done with you. You are my son--that I cannot help; but you shall have no more part or
parcel in me as my child, nor I in you as your father.'

'Oh, papa, papa! You must not, shall not say so,' said Charlotte.

'I will say so, and do say so,' said the father, rising from his chair. 'And now leave the
room, sir.'

'Stop, stop,' said Charlotte; 'why don't you speak, Bertie? Why don't you look up and speak?
It is your manner that makes him so angry.'

'He is perfectly indifferent to all decency, to all propriety,' said the doctor; and then he
shouted out, 'Leave the room, sir! Do you hear what I say?'

'Papa, papa, I will not let you part so. I know you will be sorry for it.' And then she added,
getting up and whispering into his ear. 'Is he only to blame? Think of that. We have made our
own bed, and, such as it is, we must lie on it. It is no use for us to quarrel among ourselves,'
and as she finished her whisper, Bertie finished off the countess's bustle, which was so well
done that it absolutely seemed to be swaying to and fro on the paper with its usual lateral motion.

'My father is angry at the present time,' said Bertie, looking up for a moment from his sketches,
'because I am not going to marry Mrs Bold. What can I say on the matter? It is true that I
am not going to marry her. In the first place--'

'That is not true, sir,' said Dr Stanhope; 'but I will not argue with you.'

'You were angry just this moment because I would not speak,' said Bertie, going on with a young
Lookaloft.

'Give over drawing,' said Charlotte, going up to him and taking the paper from under his hand.
The caricature, however, she preserved, and showed them afterwards to the friends of the Thornes,
the Proudies, and De Courcys. Bertie, deprived of his occupation, threw himself back in his
chair and waited further orders.

'I think it will certainly be for the best that Bertie should leave this at once, perhaps to-morrow,'
said Charlotte; 'but pray, papa, let us arrange some scheme together.'

'If he will leave to-morrow, I will give him L 10, and he shall be paid L 5 a month by the
banker at Carrara as long as he stays permanently in that place.'

'Well, sir! it won't be long,' said Bertie; 'for I shall be starved to death in about three
months.'

'He must have marble to work with,' said Charlotte.

'I have plenty there in the studio to last me three months,' said Bertie. 'It will be no use
attempting anything large in so limited a time; unless I do my own tombstone.'

Terms, however, were ultimately come to, somewhat more liberal than those proposed, and the
doctor was induced to shake hands with his son, and bid him good-night. Dr Stanhope would not
go up to tea, but had it brought to him in his study by his daughter.

But Bertie went up-stairs and spent a pleasant evening. He finished the Lookalofts, greatly
to the delight of his sisters, though the manner of portraying their decollete dresses was
not the most refined. Finding how matters were going, he by degrees allowed it to escape from
him that he had not pressed his suit upon the widow in a very urgent way.

'I suppose, in point of fact, you never proposed at all?' said Charlotte.

'Oh, she understood that she might have me if she wished,' said he.

'And she didn't wish,' said the signora.

'You have thrown me over in the most shameful manner,' said Charlotte. 'I suppose you told
her all about my little plan?'

'Well, it came out somehow; at least the most of it.'

'There's an end of that alliance,' said Charlotte; 'but it doesn't matter much. I suppose we
shall all be back in Como soon.'

'I am sure I hope so,' said the signora; 'I'm sick of the sight of black coats. If that Mr
Slope comes here any more, he'll be the death of me.'

'You've been the ruin of him, I think,' said Charlotte.

'And as for a second black-coated lover of mine, I am going to make a present to him of another
lady with most singular disinterestedness.'

The next day, true to his promise, Bertie packed up and went of by the 4.30 P.M. train, with
L 20 in his pocket, bound for the marble quarries of Carrara. And so he disappears from our scene.

At twelve o'clock on the day following that on which Bertie went, Mrs Bold, true also to her
word, knocked at Dr Stanhope's door with a timid hand and palpitating heart. She was at once
shown up to the back drawing-room, the folding doors of which were closed, so that in visiting
the signora, Eleanor was not necessarily thrown into any communication with those in the front
room. As she went up the stairs, she none of the family, and was so far saved much of the annoyance
which she had dreaded.

'This is very kind of you, Mrs Bold; very kind, after what has happened,' said the lady on
the sofa with her sweetest smile.

'You wrote in such a strain that I could not but come to you.'

'I did, I did; I wanted to force you to see me.'

'Well, signora; I am here.'

'How cold you are to me. But I suppose I must put up with that. I know you think you have reason
to be displeased with us all. Poor Bertie! if you knew all, you would not be angry with him.'

'I am not angry with your brother--not in the least. But I hope you did not send for me to
talk about him.'

'If you are angry with Charlotte, that is worse; for you have no warmer friend in all Barchester.
But I did not send for you to talk about this--pray bring your chair nearer, Mrs Bold, so that
I may look at you. It is so unnatural to see you keeping so far off from me.'

Eleanor did as she was bid, and brought her chair closer to the sofa.

'And now, Mrs Bold, I am going to tell you something which you may think indelicate; but yet
I know that I am right in doing so.'

Hereupon Mrs Bold said nothing, but felt inclined to shake in her chair. The signora, she knew,
was not very particular, and that which to her appeared to be indelicate might to Mrs Bold
appear to be extremely indecent.

'I believe you know Mr Arabin?'

Mrs Bold would have given the world not to blush, but her blood was not at her own command.
She did blush up to her forehead, and the signora, who had made her sit in a special light
in order that she might watch her, saw that she did so.

'Yes--I am acquainted with him. That is, slightly. He is an intimate friend of Dr Grantly,
and Dr Grantly is my brother-in-law.'

'Well; if you know Mr Arabin, I am sure you must like him. I know and like him much. Everybody
that knows him must like him.'

Mrs Bold felt it quite impossible to say anything in reply to this. Her blood was rushing about
her body she knew not how or why. She felt as though she were swinging in her chair; and she
knew that she was not only red in the face, but also almost suffocated with heat. However,
she sat still and said nothing.

'How stiff you are with me, Mrs Bold,' said the signora; 'and I the while am doing for you
all that one woman can do to serve another.'

A kind of thought came over the widow's mind that perhaps the signora's friendship was real;
and that at any rate it could not hurt her; and another kind of thought, a glimmering of a
thought, came to her also,--that Mr Arabin was to precious to be lost. She despised the signora;
but might she not stoop to conquer? It should be but the smallest fraction of a stoop!

'I don't want to be stiff,' she said, 'but your questions are so very singular.'

'Well, then, I will ask you one more singular still,' said Madeline Neroni, raising herself
on her elbow and turning her own face full upon her companion's. 'Do you love him, love him
with all your heart and soul, with all the love your bosom can feel? For I can tell you that
he loves you, worships you, thinks of you and nothing else, is now thinking of you as he attempts
to write his sermon for next Sunday's preaching. What would I not give to be loved in such
a way by such a man, that is, if I were an object for any man to love!'

Mrs Bold got up from her seat and stood speechless before the woman who was now addressing
her in this impassioned way. When the signora thus alluded to herself, the widow's heart was
softened, and she put her own hand, as though caressingly, on that of her companion which was
resting on the table. The signora grasped it and went on speaking.

'What I tell you is God's own truth; and it is for you to use it as may be best for your own
happiness. But you must not betray me. He knows nothing of this. He knows nothing of my knowing
his inmost heart. He is simple as a child in these matters. He told me his secret in a thousand
ways because he could not dissemble; but he does not dream that has told it. You know it now,
and I advise you to use it.'

Eleanor returned the pressure of the other's hand with an infinitesimal soupcon of a squeeze.

'And remember,' said the signora, 'he is not like other men.
 You must not expect him to come to you with vows and oaths and
pretty presents, to kneel at your feet, and kiss your shoe-strings.
If you want that, there are plenty to do it; but he won't be one of
them.' Eleanor's bosom nearly burst with a sigh; but Madeline, not
heeding her, went on. 'With him, yea will stand for yea, and nay
for nay. Though his heart should break for it, the woman who shall
reject him once, will have rejected him once and for all. Remember
that. And now, Mrs Bold, I will not keep you, for you are
flattered. I partly guess what use you will make of what I have
said to you. If ever you are a happy wife in that man's house, we
shall be far away; but I shall expect you to write me one line to
say that you have forgiven the sins of the family.'

Eleanor half whispered that she would, and then without uttering another word, crept out of
the room, and down the stairs, opened the front door for herself without hearing or seeing
any one, and found herself in the close.

It would be difficult to analyse Eleanor's feelings as she walked home. She was nearly stupefied
by the things that had been said to her. She felt sore that her heart should have been so searched
and riddled by a comparative stranger, by a woman whom she had never liked and never could
like. She was mortified that the man whom she owned to herself that she loved should have concealed
his love from her and shown it to another. There was much to vex her proud spirit. But there
was, nevertheless, an under-stratum of joy in all this which buoyed her up wondrously. She
tried if she could disbelieve what Madame Neroni had said to her; but she found that she could
not. It was true; it must be true. She could not, would not, did not doubt it.

On one point she fully resolved to follow the advice given her. If it should ever please Mr
Arabin to put such a question to her as suggested, her 'yea' should be 'yea'. Would not all
her miseries be at an end, if she could talk of them to him openly, with her hand resting on
his shoulder?

CHAPTER XLVI

MR SLOPE'S PARTING INTERVIEW WITH THE SIGNORA

On the following day the signora was in her pride. She was dressed in her brightest of morning
dresses, and had quite a levee round her couch. It was a beautifully bright October afternoon;
all the gentlemen of the neighbourhood were in Barchester, and those who had the entry of Dr
Stanhope's house were in the signora's back drawing-room. Charlotte and Mrs Stanhope were in
the front room, and such of the lady's squires as could not for the moment get near the centre
of attraction had to waste their fragrance on the mother and sister.

The first who came and the last to leave was Mr Arabin. This was the second visit he had paid
to Madame Neroni since he had met her at Ullathorne. He came he knew not why, to talk about
he knew not what. But, in truth, the feelings which now troubled him were new to him, and he
could not analyse them. It may seem strange that he should thus come dangling about Madame
Neroni because he was in love with Mrs Bold; but it was nevertheless the fact; and though he
could not understand why he did so, Madame Neroni understood it well enough.

She had been gentle and kind to him, and had encouraged his staying. Therefore he stayed on.
She pressed his hand when he first greeted her; and whispered to him little nothings. And then
her eye, brilliant and bright, now mirthful, now melancholy, and invincible in either way!
What man with warm feelings, blood unchilled, and a heat not guarded by a triple steel of experience
could have withstood those eyes! The lady, it is true, intended to do no mortal injury; she
merely chose to inhale a slight breath of incense before she handed the casket over to another.
Whether Mrs Bold would willingly have spared even so much is another question.

And then came Mr Slope. All the world now knew that Mr Slope was a candidate for the deanery,
and that he was generally considered to be the favourite. Mr Slope, therefore, walked rather
largely upon the earth. He gave to himself a portly air, such as might become a dean, spoke
but little to other clergymen, and shunned the bishop as much as possible. How the meagre little
prebendary, and the burly chancellor, and all the minor canons and vicars choral, ay, and all
the choristers too, cowered and shook and walked about with long faces when they read or heard
of that article of the Jupiter. Now were coming the days when nothing would avail to keep the
impure spirit from the cathedral pulpit. That pulpit would indeed be his own. Precentors, vicars,
and choristers might hang up their harps on the willows. Ichabod! Ichabod! The glory of their
house was departing from them.

Mr Slope, great as he was with embryo grandeur, still came to see the signora. Indeed, he could
not keep himself away. He dreamed of that soft hand which had kissed so often, and of the imperial
brow which his lips had once pressed, and he then dreamed also of further favours.

And Mr Thorne was there also. It was the first visit he had ever paid to the signora, and he
made it not without due preparation. Mr Thorne was a gentleman usually precise in his dress,
and prone to make the most of himself in an unpretending way. The grey hairs in his whiskers
were eliminated perhaps once a month; those on his head were softened by a mixture which we
will not call a dye; it was only a wash. His tailor lived in St James's Street, and his bootmaker
at the corner of that street and Piccadilly. He was particular in the article of gloves, and
the getting up of his shirts was a matter not lightly thought of in the Ullathorne laundry.
On the occasion of the present visit he had rather overdone his usual efforts, and caused some
little uneasiness to his sister, who had not hitherto received very cordially the proposition
for a lengthened visit from the signora at Ullathorne.

There were others also there--young men about the city who had not much to do, and who were
induced by the lady's charms to neglect that little; but all gave way to Mr Thorne, who was
somewhat of a grand signor, as a country gentleman always is in a provincial city.

'Oh, Mr Thorne, this is so kind of you!' said the signora. 'You promised to come; but I really
did not expect it. I thought you country gentlemen never kept your pledges.'

'Oh, yea, sometimes,' said Mr Thorne, looking rather sheepish, and making salutations a little
too much in the style of the last century.

'You deceive none but your consti-stit-stit; what do you call the people that carry you about
in chairs and pelt you with eggs and apples when they make you a member of parliament?'

'One another also, sometimes, signora,' said Mr Slope, with a deanish sort of smirk on his
face. 'Country gentlemen do deceive one another sometimes, don't they, Mr Thorne?'

Mr Thorne gave him a look which undressed him completely for the moment; but he soon remembered
his high hopes, and recovering himself quickly, sustained his probable coming dignity by a
laugh at Mr Thorne's expense.

'I never deceive a lady, at any rate,' said Mr Thorne; 'especially when the gratification of
my own wishes is so strong an inducement to keep me true, as it now is.'

Mr Thorne went on thus awhile, with antediluvian grimaces and compliments which he had picked
up from Sir Charles Grandison, and the signora at every grimace and at every bow smiled a little
smile and bowed a little bow. Mr Thorne, however, was kept standing at the foot of the couch,
for the new dean sat in the seat of honour near the table. Mr Arabin the while was standing
with his back to the fire, his coat tails under his arms, gazing at her with all his eyes--not
quite in vain, for every now and again a glance came up at him, bright as a meteor out of heaven.

'Oh, Mr Thorne, you promised to let me introduce my little girl to you. Can you spare a moment?--will
you see her now?'

Mr Thorne assured her that he could, and would see the young lady with the greatest pleasure
in life. 'Mr Slope, might I trouble you to ring the bell?' said she; and when Mr Slope got
up she looked at Mr Thorne and pointed to the chair. Mr Thorne, however, was much too slow
to understand her, and Mr Slope would have recovered his seat had not the signora, who never
chose to be unsuccessful, somewhat summarily ordered him out of it.

'Oh, Mr Slope, I must ask you to let Mr Thorne sit here just for a moment or two. I am sure
you will pardon me. We can take a liberty with you this week. Next week, you know, when you
move into the dean's house, we shall all be afraid of you.'

Mr Slope, with an air of much indifference, rose from his seat, and, walking into the next
room, became greatly interested in Mrs Stanhope's worsted work.

And then the child was brought in. She was a little girl, about eight years of age, like her
mother, only that her enormous eyes were black, and her hair quite jet. Her complexion too
was very dark, and bespoke her foreign blood. She was dressed in the most outlandish and extravagant
way in which clothes could be put on a child's back. She had great bracelets on her naked little
arms, a crimson fillet braided with gold round her head, and scarlet shoes with high heels.
Her dress was all flounces, and stuck out from her as though the object were to make it lie
off horizontally from her little hips. It did not nearly cover her knees; but this was atoned
for by a loose pair of drawers which seemed made throughout of lace; then she had on pink silk
stockings. It was thus that the last of the Neros was habitually dressed at the hour when visitors
were wont to call.

'Julia, my love,' said the mother,--Julia was ever a favourite name with the ladies of the
family, 'Julia, my love, come here. I was telling you about the beautiful party poor mamma
went to. This is Mr Thorne; will you give him a kiss, dearest?'

Julia put up her face to be kissed, as she did to all her mother's visitors; and then Mr Thorne
found that he had got her, and, which was much more terrible to him, all her finery, into his
arms. The lace and starch crumpled against his waistcoat and trousers, the greasy black curls
hung upon his cheek, and one of the bracelet clasps scratched his ear. He did not at all know
how to hold her. However, he had on other occasions been compelled to fondle little nieces
and nephews, and now set about the task in the mode he always used.

'Diddle, diddle, diddle, diddle,' said he, putting the child on one knee, and working away
with it as though he were turning a knife-grinder's wheel with his foot.

'Mamma, mamma,' said Julia, crossly. 'I don't want to be diddle diddled. Let me go, you naughty
old man, you.'

Poor Mr Thorne put the child down quietly on the ground, and drew back his chair; Mr Slope,
who had returned to the pole star that attracted him, laughed aloud; Mr Arabin winced and shut
his eyes; and the signora pretended not to hear her daughter.

'Go to Aunt Charlotte, lovey,' said the mamma, 'and ask her it if is not time for you to go out.'

But little Julia, though she had not exactly liked the nature of Mr Thorne's attention, was
accustomed to be played with by gentlemen, and did not relish the idea of being sent so soon
to her aunt.

'Julia, go when I tell you, my dear.' But Julia still went pouting about the room. 'Charlotte,
do come and take her,' said the signora. 'She must go out; and the days get so short now.'
And thus ended the much-talked of interview between Mr Thorne and the last of the Neros.

Mr Thorne recovered from the child's crossness sooner than from Mr Slope's laughter. He could
put up with being called an old man by an infant, but he did not like to be laughed at by the
bishop's chaplain, even though that chaplain was about to become a dean. He said nothing, but
he showed plainly enough that he was angry.

The signora was ready enough to avenge him. 'Mr Slope,' said she, 'I hear that you are triumphing
on all sides.'

'How so,' said he smiling. He did not dislike being talked to about the deanery, though, of
course, he strongly denied the imputation.

'You carry the day both in love and war.' Mr Slope hereupon did not look quite so satisfied
as he had done.

'Mr Arabin,' continued the signora, 'don't you think Mr Slope is a very lucky man?'

'Not more than he deserves, I am sure,' said Mr Arabin.

'Only think, Mr Thorne, he is to be our new dean; of course we all know that.'

'Indeed, signora,' said Mr Slope, 'we all know nothing about it. I can assure you I myself--'

'He is to be the new dean--there is no manner of doubt of it, Mr Thorne.'

'Hum,' said Mr Thorne.

'Passing over the heads of old men like my father and Archdeacon Grantly--'

'Oh--oh!' said Mr Slope.

'The archdeacon would not accept it,' said Mr Arabin; whereupon Mr Slope smiled abominably,
and said, as plainly as a look could speak, that the grapes were sour.

'Going over all our heads,' continued the signora; 'for, of course, I consider myself one of
the chapter.'

'If I am ever dean,' said Mr Slope--'that is, were I ever to become so, I should glory in such
a canoness.'

'Oh, Mr Slope, stop; I haven't half done. There is another canoness for you to glory in. Mr
Slope is not only to have the deanery, but a wife to put in it.'

Mr Slope again looked disconcerted.

'A wife with a large fortune, too. It never rains but it pours, does it Mr Thorne?'

'No, never,' said Mr Thorne, who did not quite relish talking about Mr Slope and his affairs.

'When will it be, Mr Slope?'

'When will what be?' said he.

'Oh! we know when the affair of the dean will be: a week will settle that. The new hat, I have
no doubt, has already been ordered. But when will the marriage come off?'

'Do you mean mine or Mr Arabin's,' said he, striving to be facetious.

'Well, just then I meant yours, though perhaps, after all, Mr Arabin's may be first. But we
know nothing of him. He is too close for any of us. Now all is open and above board with you;
which, by the bye, Mr Arabin, I beg to tell you I like much the best. He who runs can read
that Mr Slope is a favoured lover. Come, Mr Slope, when is the widow to be made Mrs Dean?'

To Mr Arabin this badinage was peculiarly painful; and yet he could not tear himself away and
leave it. He believed, still believed with that sort of belief which the fear of a thing engenders,
that Mrs Bold would probably become the wife of Mr Slope. Of Mr Slope's little adventure in
the garden he knew nothing. For aught he knew, Mr Slope might have had an adventure of quite
a different character. He might have thrown himself at the widow's feet, been accepted, and
then returned to town a jolly, thriving wooer. The signora's jokes were bitter enough to Mr
Slope, but they were quite as bitter to Mr Arabin. He still stood leaning against the fire-place,
fumbling with his hands in his trouser's pockets.

'Come, come, Mr Slope, don't be so bashful,' continued the signora. 'We all know that you proposed
to the lady the other day at Ullathorne. Tell us with what words she accepted you. Was it with
a simple "yes", or with two "no, no's", which makes an affirmative? or did silence give consent:
or did she speak out with that spirit which so well becomes a widow, and say openly, "By my
troth, sir, you shall make me Mrs Slope as soon as it is your pleasure to do so"?'

Mr Slope had seldom in his life felt himself less at his case. There sat Mr Thorne, laughing
silently. There stood his old antagonist, Mr Arabin, gazing at him with all his eyes. There
round the door between the two rooms were clustered a little group of people, including Miss
Stanhope and the Rev. Messrs. Gray and Green, all listening to his discomfiture. He knew that
it depended solely on his own wit whether or no he could throw the joke back upon the lady.
He knew that it stood him to do so if he possibly could; but he said not a word. ''Tis conscience
that makes cowards of us all.' He felt on his cheek the sharp points of Eleanor's fingers,
and did not know who might have seen the blow, who might have told the tale to this pestilent
woman who took such delight in jeering him. He stood there, therefore, red as a carbuncle and
mute as a fish; grinning just sufficiently to show his teeth; an object of pity.

But the signora had no pity; she knew nothing of mercy. Her present object was to put Mr Slope
down, and she was determined to do it thoroughly, now that she had him in her power.

'What, Mr Slope, no answer? Why it can't possibly be that this woman has been fool enough to
refuse you? She surely can't be looking out after a bishop. But I see how it is, Mr Slope.
Widows are proverbially cautious. You should have let her alone till the new hat was on your
head; till you could show her the key of the deanery.'

'Signora,' said he at last, trying to speak in a tone of dignified reproach, 'you really permit
yourself to talk on such solemn subjects in a very improper way.'

'Solemn subjects--what solemn subjects? Surely a dean's hat is not such a solemn subject.'

'I have no aspirations such as those you impute to me. Perhaps you will drop the subject.'

'Oh, certainly, Mr Slope; but one word first. Go to her again with the prime minister's letter
in your pocket. I'll wager my shawl to your shovel she does not refuse you then.'

'I must say, signora, that I think you are speaking of the lady in a very unjustifiable manner.'

'And one other piece of advice, Mr Slope; I'll only offer you one other;' and then she commenced
singing--

'It's gude to be merry and wise, Mr Slope, It's gude to be honest and true; It's gude to be
off with the old love, Mr Slope, Before you are on with the new--

'Ha, ha, ha!'

And the signora, throwing herself back on her sofa, laughed merrily. She little recked how
those who heard her would, in their own imagination, fill up the little history of Mr Slope's
first love. She little cared that some among them might attribute to her the honour of his
earlier admiration. She was tired of Mr Slope and wanted to get rid of him; she had ground
for anger with him, and she chose to be revenged.

How Mr Slope got out of that room he never himself knew. He did succeed ultimately, and probably
with some assistance, in getting him his had and escaping into the air. At last his love for
the signora was cured. Whenever he again thought of her in his dreams, it was not as of an
angel with azure wings. He connected her rather with fire and brimstone, and though he could
still believe her to be a spirit, he banished her entirely out of heaven, and found a place
for her among the infernal gods. When he weighed in the balance, as he not seldom did, the
two women to whom he had attached himself in Barchester, the pre-eminent place in his soul's
hatred was usually allotted to the signora.

CHAPTER XLVII

THE DEAN ELECT

During the entire next week Barchester was ignorant who was to be its new dean on Sunday morning.
Mr Slope was decidedly the favourite; but he did not show himself in the cathedral, and then
he sank a point or two in the betting. On Monday, he got a scolding from the bishop in the
hearing of the servants, and down he went till nobody would have him at any price; but on Tuesday
he received a letter, in an official cover, marked private, by which he fully recovered his
place in the public favour. On Wednesday, he was said to be ill, and that did not look well;
but on Thursday morning he went down to the railway station, with a very jaunty air; and when
it was ascertained that he had taken a first-class ticket for London, there was no longer any
room for doubt on the matter.

While matters were in this state of ferment at Barchester, there was not much mental comfort
at Plumstead. Our friend the archdeacon had many grounds for inward grief. He was much displeased
at the result of Dr Gwynne's diplomatic mission to the palace, and did not even scruple to
say to his wife that had he gone himself he would have managed the affair much better. His
wife did not agree with him, but that did not mend the matter.

Mr Quiverful's appointment to the hospital was, however, a fait accompli, and Mr Harding's
acquiescence in that appointment was not less so. Nothing would induce Mr Harding to make a
public appeal against the bishop; and the Master of Lazarus quite approved of his not doing so.

'I don't know what has come to the Master,' said the archdeacon over and over again. 'He used
to be ready enough to stand up for his order.'

'My dear archdeacon,' Mrs Grantly would say in reply, 'what is the use of always fighting?
I really think the Master is right.' The Master, however, had taken steps of his own, of which
neither the archdeacon nor his wife knew anything.

'Then Mr Slope's successes were henbane to Dr Grantly; and Mrs Bold's improprieties were as
bad. What would be all the world to Archdeacon Grantly if Mr Slope should become the Dean of
Barchester and marry his wife's sister! He talked of it, and talked of it till he was nearly
ill. Mrs Grantly almost wished that the marriage was done and over, so that she might hear
no more about it.

And there was yet another ground of misery which cut him to the quick, nearly as closely as
either of the two others. That paragon of a clergyman, whom he had bestowed upon St Ewold's,
that college friend of whom he had boasted so loudly, that ecclesiastical knight before whose
lance Mr Slope was to fall and bite the dust, that worthy bulwark of the church as it should
be, that honoured representative of Oxford's best spirit, was--so at least his wife had told
him half a dozen times--misconducting himself!

Nothing had been seen of Mr Arabin at Plumstead for the last week,
but a good deal had, unfortunately, been heard of him.
 As soon as Mrs Grantly had found herself alone with the
archdeacon, on the evening of the Ullathorne party, she had
expressed herself very forcibly as to Mr Arabin's conduct on that
occasion. He had, she declared, looked and acted and talked very
unlike a decent parish clergyman. At first the archdeacon had
laughed at this, and assured her that she need not trouble herself;
that Mr Arabin would be found to be quite safe. But by degrees he
began to find out that his wife's eyes had been sharper than his
own. Other people coupled the signora's name with that of Mr
Arabin. The meagre little prebendary who lived in the close, told
him to a nicety how often Mr Arabin had visited at Dr Stanhope's,
and how long he had remained on the occasion of each visit. He had
asked after Mr Arabin at the cathedral library, and an officious
little vicar choral had offered to go and see whether he could be
found at Dr Stanhope's. Rumour, when she has contrived to sound the
first note on her trumpet, soon makes a loud peal audible enough.
It was too clear that Mr Arabin had succumbed to the Italian woman,
and that the archdeacon's credit would suffer fearfully if
something were not done to rescue the brand from the burning.
Besides, to give the archdeacon his due, he was really attached to
Mr Arabin, and grieved greatly at his backsliding.

They were sitting talking over their sorrows, in the drawing-room before dinner on that day
after Mr Slope's departure for London; and on this occasion Mrs Grantly spoke her mind freely.
She had opinions of her own about parish clergymen, and now thought it right to give vent to them.

'It you would have been led by me, archdeacon, you would never have put a bachelor into St
Ewold's.'

'But, my dear, you don't mean to say that all bachelor clergymen misbehave themselves.'

'I don't know that clergymen are so much better than other men,' said Mrs Grantly. 'It's all
very well with a curate whom you have under your own eye, and whom you can get rid of if he
persists in improprieties.'

'But Mr Arabin was a fellow, and couldn't have had a wife.'

'Then I would have found some one who could.'

'But, my dear, are fellows never to get livings?'

'Yes, to be sure they are, when they got engaged. I never would put a young man into a living
unless he were married, or engaged to be married. Now here is Mr Arabin. The whole responsibility
lies upon you.'

'There is not at this moment a clergyman in all Oxford more respected for morals and conduct
than Arabin.'

'Oh, Oxford!' said the lady, with a sneer. 'What men choose to do at Oxford, nobody ever hears
of. A man may do very well at Oxford who would bring disgrace on a parish; and, to tell you
the truth, it seems to me that Mr Arabin is just such a man.'

The archdeacon groaned deeply, but he had no further answer to make.

'You really must speak to him, archdeacon. Only think what the Thornes will say if they hear
that their parish clergyman spends his whole time philandering with this woman.'

The archdeacon groaned again. He was a courageous man, and knew well enough how to rebuke the
younger clergymen of the diocese when necessary. But there was that about Mr Arabin which made
the doctor feel that it would be very difficult to rebuke him with good effect.

'You can advise him to find a wife for himself, and he will understand well enough what that
means,' said Mrs Grantly.

The archdeacon had nothing for it but groaning. There was Mr Slope; he was going to be made
dean; he was going to take a wife; he was bout to achieve respectability and wealth; and excellent
family mansion, and a family carriage; he would soon be among the comfortable elite of the
ecclesiastical world of Barchester; whereas his own protege, the true scion of the true church,
by whom he had sworn, would still be a poor vicar, and that with a very indifferent character
for moral conduct! It might be all very well recommending Mr Arabin to marry, but how would
Mr Arabin when married support a wife?

Things were ordering themselves thus at Plumstead drawing-room when Dr and Mrs Grantly were
disturbed in their sweet discourse by the quick rattle of a carriage and a pair of horses on
the gravel sweep. The sound was not that of visitors, whose private carriages are generally
brought up to country-house doors with demure propriety, but belonged rather to some person
or persons who were in a hurry to reach the house, and had not intention of immediately leaving
it. Guests invited to stay a week, and who were conscious of arriving after the first dinner
bell, would probably approach in such a manner. So might arrive an attorney with the news of
a granduncle's death, or a son from college with all the fresh honours of a double first. No
one would have had himself driven to the door of a country house in such a manner who had the
slightest doubt of his own right to force an entry.

'Who is it?' said Mrs Grantly, looking at her husband.

'Who on earth can it be?' said the archdeacon to his wife. He then quietly got up and stood
with the drawing-room door open in his hand. 'Why, it is your father!'

It was indeed Mr Harding, and Mr Harding alone. He had come by himself in a post-chaise with
a couple of horses from Barchester, arriving almost after dark, and evidently full of news.
His visits had usually been made in the quietest manner; he had rarely presumed to come without
notice, and had always been driven up in a modest old green fly, with one horse, that hardly
made itself heard as it crawled up to the hall door.

'Good gracious, Warden, is it you?' said the archdeacon, forgetting in his surprise the events
of the last few years. 'But come in; nothing is the matter, I hope?'

'We are very glad you are come, papa,' said his daughter. 'I'll go and get your room ready
at once.'

'I an't warden, archdeacon,' said Mr Harding. 'Mr Quiverful is warden.'

Oh, I know, I know,' said the archdeacon, petulantly. 'I forgot all about it at the moment.
Is anything the matter?'

'Don't go at the moment, Susan,' said Mr Harding; 'I have something to tell you.'

'The dinner bell will ring in five minutes,' said she.

'Will it?' said Mr Harding. 'Then, perhaps I had better wait.' he was big with news which he
had come to tell, but which he knew could not be told without much discussion. He had hurried
away to Plumstead as fast as two horses could bring him, and now, finding himself there, he
was willing to accept the reprieve which dinner would give him.

'If you have anything of moment to tell us, said the archdeacon, 'pray let us hear it at once.
Has Eleanor gone off?'

'No, she has not,' said Mr Harding, with a look of great disclosure.

'Has Slope been made dean?'

'No, he has not; but--'

'But what?' said the archdeacon, who was becoming very impatient.

'They have--'

'They have what?' said the archdeacon.

'They have offered it to me,' said Mr Harding, with a modesty which almost prevented his speaking.

'Good heavens!' said the archdeacon, and sank back exhausted in an easy-chair.

'My dear, dear, father,' said Mrs Grantly, and threw her arms around his neck.

'So I thought I had better come out and consult with you at once,' said Mr Harding.

'Consult!' shouted the archdeacon. 'But, my dear Harding, I congratulate you with my whole
heart--with my whole heart. I do indeed. I never heard anything in my life that gave me so
much pleasure;' and he got hold of both his father-in-law's hands, and shook them as though
he were going to shake them off, and walked round and round the room, twirling a copy of the
Jupiter over his head, to show his extreme exultation.

'But--' began Mr Harding.

'But me no buts,' said the archdeacon. 'I never was so happy in my life. It was just the proper
thing to do. Upon my honour, I'll never say another word against Lord--the longest day I have
to live.'

'That's Dr Gwynne's doing, you may be sure,' said Mrs Grantly, who greatly liked the master
of Lazarus, he being an orderly married man with a large family.

'I suppose it is,' said the archdeacon.

'Oh, papa, I am so truly delighted,' said Mrs Grantly, getting up and kissing her father.

'But, my dear,' said Mr Harding. It was all in vain that he strove to speak; nobody would listen
to him.

'Well, Mr Dean,' said the archdeacon, triumphing; 'the deanery gardens will be some consolation
for the hospital elms. Well, poor Quiverful! I won't begrudge him his good fortune any longer.'

No, indeed,' said Mrs Grantly. 'Poor woman, she has fourteen children. I am sure I am very
glad they have got it.'

'So am I,' said Mr Harding.

'I would give twenty pounds,' said the archdeacon, 'to see how Mr Slope will look when he hears
it.' The idea of Mr Slope's discomfiture formed no small part of the archdeacon's pleasure.

At last Mr Harding was allowed to go up-stairs and wash his hands, having, in fact, said very
little of all that he had come out to Plumstead on purpose to say. Nor could anything more
be said till the servants were gone after dinner. The joy of Dr Grantly was so uncontrollable
that he could not refrain from calling his father-in-law Mr Dean before the men; and therefore,
it was soon matter for discussion in the lower regions how Mr Harding, instead of his daughter's
future husband, was to be the new dean, and various were the opinions on the matter. The cook
and butler, who were advanced in years, thought that it was just as it should be; but the footman
and lady's maid, who were younger, thought it was a great shame that Mr Slope should lose his
chance.

'He's a mean chap all the same,' said the footman; 'and it an't along of him that I says so.
But I always did admire the missus's sister; and she'd well become the situation.'

While these were the ideas down-stairs, a very great difference of opinion existed above. As
soon as the cloth was drawn and the wine on the table, Mr Harding made for himself the opportunity
of speaking. It was, however, with much troubling that he said--

'It's very kind of Lord--very kind, and I feel it deeply, most deeply. I am, I must confess,
gratified by the offer--'

'I should think so,' said the archdeacon.

'But, all the same, I am afraid that I can't accept it.'

The decanter almost fell from the archdeacon's had upon the table; and the start he made was
so great as to make his wife jump from her chair. Not accept the deanship! If it really ended
in this, there would be no longer any doubt that his father-in-law was demented. The question
now was whether a clergyman with low rank, and preferment amounting to less than 200 pounds
a year, should accept high rank, 1200 pounds a year, and one of the most desirable positions
which his profession had to afford!

'What!' said the archdeacon, gasping for breath, and staring at his guest as though the violence
of his emotion had almost thrown him into a fit.

'What!'

'I do not find myself fit for new duties,' urged Mr Harding.

'New duties! what duties?' said the archdeacon, with unintended sarcasm.

'Oh, papa,' said Mrs Grantly, 'nothing can be easier that what a dean has to do. Surely you
are more active than Dr Trefoil.'

'He won't have half as much to do as at present,' said Dr Grantly.

'Did you see what the Jupiter said the other day about young men?'

'Yes; and I saw that the Jupiter said all that it could to induce the appointment of Mr Slope.
Perhaps you would wish to see Mr Slope made dean.'

Mr Harding made no reply to this rebuke, though he felt it strongly. He had not come over to
Plumstead to have further contention with his son-in-law about Mr Slope, so he allowed it to
pass by.

'I know I cannot make you understand my feeling,' he said, 'for we have been cast in different
moulds. I may wish that I had your spirit and energy and power of combatting; but I have not.
Every day that is added to my life increases my wish for peace and rest.'

'And where on earth can a man have peace and rest if not in a deanery?' said the archdeacon.

'People will say I am too old for it.'

'Good heavens! What people? What need you care for any people?'

'But I think myself I am too old for any new place.'

'Dear papa,' said Mrs Grantly, 'men ten years older than you have been appointed to new situations
day after day.'

'My dear,' said he, 'it is impossible that I should make you understand my feelings, nor do
I pretend to any great virtue in the matter. The truth is, I want the force of character which
might enable me to stand against the spirit of the times. The call on all sides now is for
young men, and I have not the nerve to put myself in opposition to the demand. Were the Jupiter,
when it hears of my appointment, to write article after article, setting forth my incompetency,
I am sure it would cost me my reason. I ought to be able to bear with such things, you will
say. Well, my dear, I own that I ought. But I feel my weakness and I know that I can't. And,
to tell you the truth, I know no more than a child what the dean has to do.'

'Pshaw!' exclaimed the archdeacon.

'Don't be angry with me, archdeacon; don't let us quarrel about it, Susan. If you knew how
keenly I feel the necessity of having to disoblige you in this matter, you would not be angry
with me.'

This was a dreadful blow to Dr Grantly. Nothing could possibly have suited him better than
having Mr Harding in the deanery. Though he had never looked down on Mr Harding on account
of his great poverty, he did fully recognise the satisfaction of having those belonging to
him in comfortable positions. It would be much more suitable that Mr Harding should be dean
of Barchester than vicar of St Cuthbert's and precentor to boot. And then the great discomfiture
of that arch enemy of all that was respectable in Barchester, of that new low church clerical
parvenu that had fallen amongst them, that alone would be worth more, almost than the situation
itself. It was frightful to think that such unhoped for good fortune should be marred by the
absurd crotchets and unwholesome hallucinations by which Mr Harding allowed himself to be led
astray. To have the cup so near his lips and then to lose the drinking of it, was more than
Dr Grantly could endure.

And yet it appears as though he would have to endure it. In vain he threatened and in vain
he coaxed. Mr Harding did not indeed speak with perfect decision of refusing the proffered
glory, but he would not speak with anything like decision of accepting it. When pressed again
and again, he would again and again allege that he was wholly unfitted to new duties. It was
in vain that the archdeacon tried to insinuate, though he could not plainly declare, that there
were no new duties to perform. It was in vain he hinted that in all cases of difficulty he,
the archdeacon, was willing and able to guide a weak-minded dean. Mr Harding seemed to have
a foolish idea, not only that there were new duties to do, and that no one should accept the
place who was not himself prepared to do them.

The conference ended in an understanding that Mr Harding should at once acknowledge the letter
he had received from the minister's private secretary, and should beg that he might be allowed
two days to make up his mind; and that during those two days the matter should be considered.

On the following morning the archdeacon was to drive Mr Harding back to Barchester.

CHAPTER XLVIII

MISS THORNE SHOWS HER TALENT FOR MATCH-MAKING

On Mr Harding's return to Barchester from Plumstead, which was effected by him in due course
in company with the archdeacon, some tidings of a surprising nature met him. He was, during
the journey, subjected to such a weight of unanswerable argument, all of which went to prove
that it was his bounden duty not to interfere with the paternal government that was so anxious
to make him a dean, that when he arrived at the chemist's door in High Street, he barely knew
which way to turn himself in the matter. But, perplexed as he was, he was doomed to further
perplexity. He found a note there from his daughter, begging him to most urgently to come to
her immediately. But we must again go back a little in our story.

Miss Thorne had not been slow to hear the rumours respecting Mr Arabin, which had so much disturbed
the happiness of Mrs Grantly. And she, also, was unhappy to think that her parish clergyman
should be accused of worshipping a strange goddess. She, also, was of opinion, that rectors
and vicars should all be married, and with that good-natured energy which was characteristic
of her, she put her wits to work to find a fitting match for Mr Arabin. Mrs Grantly, in this
difficulty, could think of no better remedy than a lecture from the archdeacon. Miss Thorne
thought that a young lady, marriageable, and with a dowry, might be of more efficacy. In looking
through the catalogue of her unmarried friends, who might possibly be in want of a husband,
and might also be fit for such a promotion as a country parsonage affords, she could think
of no one more eligible than Mrs Bold; and, consequently, losing no time, she went into Barchester
on the day of Mr Slope's discomfiture, the same day that her brother, had had his interesting
interview with the last of the Neros, and invited Mrs Bold to bring her nurse and baby to Ullathorne
and make a protracted visit.

Miss Thorne suggested a month or two, intending to use her influence afterwards in prolonging
it so as to last out the winter, in order that Mr Arabin might have an opportunity of becoming
fairly intimate with his intended bride. 'We'll have Mr Arabin too,' said Miss Thorne to herself;
'and before the spring they'll know each other; and in twelve or eighteen months' time, if
all goes well, Mrs Bold will be domiciled at St Ewold's'; and then the kind-hearted lady gave
herself some not undeserved praise for her matching genius.

Eleanor was taken a little by surprise, but the matter ended in her promising to go to Ullathorne,
for at any rate a week or two; and on the day previous to that on which her father drove out
to Plumstead, she had had herself driven out to Ullathorne.

Miss Thorne would not perplex her with her embryo lord on that same evening, thinking that
she would allow her a few hours to make herself at home; but on the following morning Mr Arabin
arrived. 'And now,' said Miss Thorne to herself,' I must contrive to throw them in each other's
way.' That same day, after dinner, Eleanor, with an assumed air of dignity which she could
no maintain, with tears that she could not suppress, with a flutter which she could not conquer,
and a joy which she could not hide, told Miss Thorne that she was engaged to marry Mr Arabin,
and that it behoved her to get back home to Barchester as quick as she could.

To say simply that Miss Thorne was rejoiced at the success of the schemed, would give a very
faint idea of her feelings on the occasion. My readers may probably have dreamt before now
that they have had before them some terrible long walk to accomplish, some journey of twenty
or thirty miles, an amount of labour frightful to anticipate, and that immediately on starting
they have ingeniously found some accommodating short cut which have brought them without fatigue
to their work's end in five minutes. Miss Thorne's waking feelings were somewhat of the same
nature. My readers may perhaps have had to do with children, and may on some occasion have
promised to their young charges some great gratification intended to come off, perhaps at the
end of the winter, or at the beginning of summer. The impatient juveniles, however, will not
wait, and clamorously demand their treat before they go to bed. Miss Thorne had a sort of feeling
that an inexperienced gunner, who has ill calculated the length of the train that he has laid.
The gunpowder exploded much too soon and poor Miss Thorne felt that she was blown up by the
strength of her own petard.

Miss Thorne had had lovers of her own, but they had been gentlemen of old-fashioned and deliberate
habits. Miss Thorne's heart also had not always been hard, though she was still a virgin spinster;
but it had never yielded in this way at the first assault. She had intended to bring together
a middle-aged studious clergyman, and a discreet matron who might possibly be induced to marry
again; and in doing she had thrown fire among tinder. Well, it was all as it should be, but
she did feel perhaps a little put out by the precipitancy of her own success; and perhaps a
little vexed at the readiness of Mrs Bold to be wooed.

She said, however, nothing about it to any one, and ascribed it all to the altered manners
of the new age. Their mothers and grandmothers were perhaps a little more deliberate; but,
it was admitted on all sides that things were conducted very differently now that in former
times. For aught Miss Thorne knew of the matter, a couple of hours might be quite sufficient
under the new regime to complete that for which she in her ignorance had allotted twelve months.

But we must not pass over the wooing so cavalierly. It has been told, with perhaps tedious
accuracy, how Eleanor disposed of two of her lovers at Ullathorne; and it must also be told
with equal accuracy, and if possible with less tedium, how she encountered Mr Arabin.

It cannot be denied that when Eleanor accepted Miss Thorne's invitation, she remembered that
Ullathorne was in the parish of St Ewold's. Since her interview with the signora she had done
little else than think about Mr Arabin, and the appeal that had been made to her. She could
not bring herself to believe or try to bring herself to believe, that what she had been told
was untrue. Think of it how she would, she could not but accept it as a fact that Mr Arabin
was fond of her; and then when she went further, and asked herself the question, she could
not but accept it as a fact also that she was fond of him. If it were destined for her to be
the partner of his hopes and sorrows, to whom she could she look for friendship so properly
as to Miss Thorne? This invitation was like an ordained step towards the fulfilment of her
destiny, and when she also heard that Mr Arabin was expected to be at Ullathorne on the following
day, it seemed as though all the world was conspiring in her favour. Well, did she not deserve
it? In that affair of Mr Slope, had not all the world conspired against her?

She could not, however, make herself easy and at home. When in the evening after dinner Miss
Thorne expatiated on the excellence of Mr Arabin's qualities, she hinted that any little rumour
which might be ill-naturedly spread abroad concerning him really meant nothing, Mrs Bold found
herself unable to answer. When Miss Thorne went a little further and declared that she did
not know a prettier vicarage-house in the country than St Ewold's, Mrs Bold remembering the
projected bow-window and the projected priestess still held her tongue; though her ears tingled
with the conviction that all the world would know that she was in love with Mr Arabin. Well;
what could that matter if they could only meet and tell each other what each now longed to tell?

And they did meet. Mr Arabin came early in the day, and found the two ladies together at work
in the drawing-room. Miss Thorne, who had she known all the truth would have vanished into
air at once, had no conception that her immediate absence would be a blessing, and remained
chatting with them till luncheon-time. Mr Arabin could talk about nothing but the Signora Neroni's
beauty, would discuss no people but the Stanhopes. This was very distressing to Eleanor, and
not very satisfactory to Miss Thorne. But yet there was evidence of innocence in his open avowal
of admiration.

And then they had lunch, and then Mr Arabin went out on parish duty; and Eleanor and Miss Thorne
were left to take a walk together.

'Do you think the Signora Neroni is so lovely as people say?' Eleanor asked as they were coming
home.

'She is very beautiful certainly, very beautiful,' Miss Thorne answered; 'but I do not know
that any one considers her lovely. She is a woman all men would like to look at; but few I
imagine would be glad to take her to their hearths, even were she unmarried and not afflicted
as she is.'

There was some comfort in this. Eleanor made the most of it till she got back to the house.
She was then left alone in the drawing-room, and just as it was getting dark Mr Arabin came in.

It was a beautiful afternoon in the beginning of October, and Eleanor was sitting in the window
to get the advantage of the last daylight for her novel. There was a fire in the comfortable
room, but the weather was not cold enough to make it attractive; and as she could see the sun
set from where she sat, she was not very attentive to her book.

Mr Arabin when he entered stood awhile with his back to the fire in his usual way, merely uttering
a few commonplace remarks about the beauty of the weather, while he plucked up courage for
the more interesting converse. It cannot probably be said that he had resolved then and there
to make an offer to Eleanor. Men we believe seldom make such resolve. Mr Slope and Mr Stanhope
had done so, it is true; but gentlemen generally propose without any absolutely defined determination
as to their doing so. Such was now the case with Mr Arabin.

'It is a lovely sunset,' said Eleanor, answering him on the dreadfully trite subject which
he had chosen.

Mr Arabin could not see the sunset from the hearth-rug, as he had to go close to her.

'Very lovely,' said he, standing modestly so far away from her s to avoid touching the flounces
of her dress. Then it appeared that he had nothing further to say; so after gazing for a moment
in silence at the brightness of the setting sun, he returned to the fire.

Eleanor found that it was quite impossible for herself to commence a conversation. In the first
place she could find nothing to say; words, which were generally plenty enough with her, would
not come to her relief. And, moreover, do what she could, she could hardly prevent herself
from crying.

'Do you like Ullathorne?' said Mr Arabin, speaking from the safely distant position which he
had assumed on the hearth-rug.

'Yes, indeed, very much!'

'I don't mean Mr and Miss Thorne. I know you like them; but the style of the house. There is
something about old-fashioned mansions, built as this is, and old-fashioned gardens, that to
me is especially delightful.'

'I like everything old-fashioned,' said Eleanor; 'old-fashioned things are so much the honestest.'

'I don't know about that,' said Mr Arabin, gently laughing. 'That is an opinion on which very
much may be said on either side. It is strange how widely the world is divided on a subject
which so nearly concerns us all, and which is so close beneath our eyes. Some think that we
are quickly progressing towards perfection, while others imagine that virtue is disappearing
from the earth.'

'And you, Mr Arabin, what do you think?' said Eleanor. She felt somewhat surprised at the tone
which this conversation was taking, and yet she was quite relieved at his saying something
which enabled herself to speak without showing any emotion.

'What do I think, Mrs Bold?' and then he rumbled his money with his hand in his trousers pockets,
and looked and spoke very little like a thriving lover. 'It is the bane of my life that on
important subjects I acquire no fixed opinion. I think, and think, and go on thinking; and
yet my thoughts are running over in different directions. I hardly know whether or no we do
lead more confidently than our fathers did on those high hopes to which we profess to aspire.'

'I think the world grows more worldly every day,' said Eleanor.

'That is because you see more of it than when you were younger. But we should hardly judge
by what we see,--we see so very very little.' There was then a pause for a while, during which
Mr Arabin continued to turn over his shillings and half-crowns. 'If we believe in Scripture,
we can hardly think that mankind in general will now be allowed to retrograde.'

Eleanor, whose mind was certainly engaged otherwise than on the general state of mankind, made
no answer to this. She felt thoroughly dissatisfied with herself. She could not force her thoughts
away from the topic on which the signora had spoken to her in so strange a way, and yet she
knew that she could not converse with Mr Arabin in an unrestrained natural tone till she did
so. She was most anxious not to show to him any special emotion, and yet she felt that if he
looked at her he would at once see that she was not at ease.

But he did not look at her. Instead of doing so, he left the fire-place and began walking up
and down the room. Eleanor took up her book resolutely; but she could not read, for there was
a tear in her eye, and do what she would it fell on her cheek. When Mr Arabin's back was turned
to her she wiped it away; but another was soon coming down her face in its place. They would
come; not a deluge of tears that would have betrayed her at once, but one by one, single monitors.
Mr Arabin did not observe her closely, and they passed unseen.

Mr Arabin, thus passing up and down the room, took four of five turns before he spoke another
word, and Eleanor sat equally silent with her face bent over her book. She was afraid that
her tears would get the better of her, and was preparing for an escape from the room, when
Mr Arabin in his walk stood opposite to her. He did not come close up, but stood exactly on
the spot to which his course brought him, and then, with his hands under his coat tails, thus
made a confession.

'Mrs Bold,' said he, 'I owe you retribution for a great offence of which I have been guilty
towards you.' Eleanor's heart beat so that she could not trust herself to say that he had never
been guilty of any offence. So Mr Arabin then went on.

'I have thought much of it since, and I am now aware that I was wholly unwarranted in putting
to you a question which I once asked you. It was indelicate on my part, and perhaps unmanly.
No intimacy which may exist between myself and your connection, Dr Grantly, could justify it.
Nor could the acquaintance which existed between ourselves.' The word acquaintance struck cold
on Eleanor's heart. Was this to her doom after all? 'I therefore think it right to beg your
pardon in a humble spirit, and I now do so.'

What was Eleanor to say to this? She could not say much, because she was crying, and yet she
must say something. She was most anxious to say that something graciously, kindly, and yet
not in such a manner as to betray herself. She had never felt herself so much at a loss for words.

'Indeed I took no offence, Mr Arabin.'

'Oh, but you did! And had you not done so, you would not have been yourself. You were as right
to be offended, as I was wrong to so offend you. I have not forgiven myself, but I hope to
hear that you forgive me.'

She was now past speaking calmly, though she still continued to hide her tears, and Mr Arabin,
after pausing a moment in vain for her reply, was walking off towards the door. She felt that
she could not allow him to go unanswered without grievously sinning against all charity; so,
rising from her seat, she gently touched his arm and said: 'Oh, Mr Arabin, do not go till I
speak to you! I do forgive you. You know that I forgive you.'

He took the hand that had so gently touched his arm, and then gazed into her face as if he
would peruse there, as though written in a book, the whole future destiny of his life; and
as he did so, there was a sober and seriousness in his own countenance, which Eleanor found
herself unable to sustain. She could only look down upon the carpet, let her tears trickle
as they would, and leave her hand within his.

It was but for a minute that they stood so, but the duration of that minute was sufficient
to make it ever memorable to both. Eleanor was sure now that she was loved. No words, be their
eloquence what it might, could be more impressive than that eager, melancholy gaze.

Why did he look into her eyes? Why did he not speak to her?
 Could it be that he looked for her to make the first sign?

And he, though he knew little of women, even he knew that he was loved. He had only to ask
and it would be all his own, that inexpressible loveliness, those ever speaking but yet now
mute eyes, that feminine brightness and eager loving spirit which had so attracted him since
first he had encountered it at St Ewold's. It might, must all be his own now. On no other supposition
was it possible that she should allow her hand to remain thus clasped within his own. He had
only to ask. Ah! but that was the difficulty. Did a minute suffice for all this? Nay, perhaps
it might be more than a minute.

'Mrs Bold--' at last he said, and then stopped himself.

If he could not speak, how was she to do so? He had called her by her name, the same name that
any merest stranger would have used! She withdrew her hand from his, and moved as though to
return to her seat. 'Eleanor!' he then said, in his softest tone, as though the courage were
still afraid of giving offence, by the freedom which he took. She looked slowly, gently, almost
piteously up into his face. There was at any rate no anger there to deter him.

'Eleanor!' he again exclaimed; and in a moment he had her clasped to his bosom. How this was
done, whether the doing was with him, or her, whether she had flown thither conquered by the
tenderness of his voice, or he with a violence not likely to give offence had drawn her to
his breast, neither of them knew; nor can I declare. There was now that sympathy between them
which hardly admitted of individual motion. They were one and the same,--one flesh,--one spirit,--one
life.

'Eleanor, my own Eleanor, my own, my wife!' She ventured to look at him through her tears,
and he, bowing his face down over hers, pressed his lips upon her brow; his virgin lips, which
since a beard first grew upon his chin, had never yet tasted the luxury of a woman's cheek.

She had been told that her yea must be yea, or her nay, nay; but she was called on for neither
the one nor the other. She told Miss Thorne that she was engaged to Mr Arabin, but no such
words had passed between them, no promises had been asked or given.

'Oh, let me go,' said she; 'let me go now. I am too happy to remain,--let me go, that I may
be alone.' He did not try to hinder her; he did not repeat his kiss; he did not press another
on her lips. He might have done so, had he been so minded. She was now all his own. He took
his arm from round her waist, his arm that was trembling with a new delight, and let her go.
She fled like a roe to her own chamber, and then, having turned the bolt, she enjoyed the full
luxury of her love. She idolised, almost worshipped this man who had so meekly begged her pardon.
And he was now her own. Oh, how she wept and cried and laughed, as the hopes and fears and
miseries of the last few weeks passed in remembrance through her mind.

Mr Slope! That any one should have dared to think that she who had been chosen by him could
possibly have mated herself with Mr Slope! That they should have dared to tell him, also, and
subject her bright happiness to such a needless risk! And then she smiled with joy as she thought
of all the comforts that she could give him; not that he cared for comforts, but that it would
be so delicious for her to give.

She got up and rang for her maid that she might tell her little boy of his new father; and
in her own way she did tell him. She desired her maid to leave her, in order that she might
be alone with her child; and there, while he lay sprawling on the bed, she poured forth the
praises, so unmeaning to him, of the man she had selected to guard his infancy.

She could not be happy, however, till she had made Mr Arabin take the child to himself, and
thus, as it were, adopt him as his own. The moment the idea struck her she took the baby in
her arms, and, opening her door, ran quickly down to the drawing-room. She at once found, by
the step still pacing on the floor, that he was there; and a glance within the room told her
that he was alone. She hesitated a moment, and then hurried in with her precious charge.

Mr Arabin met her in the middle of the room. 'There,' said she, breathless with her haste;
'there, take him--take him and love him.'

Mr Arabin took the little fellow from her, and kissing him again and again, prayed God to bless
him. 'He shall be all as my own-- all as my own,' said he. Eleanor, as she stooped to take
back her child, kissed the hand that held him, and then rushed back with her treasure to her
chamber.

It was then that Mr Harding's younger daughter was won for the second time. At dinner neither
she nor Mr Arabin were very bright, but their silence occasioned no remark. In the drawing-room,
as we have before said, she told Miss Thorne what had occurred. The next morning she returned
to Barchester, and Mr Arabin went over with his budget of news to the archdeacon. As Dr Grantly
was not there, he could only satisfy himself by telling Mrs Grantly how that he intended himself
the honour of becoming her brother-in-law. In the ecstasy of her joy at hearing such tidings,
Mrs Grantly vouchsafed him a warmer welcome than any he had yet received from Eleanor.

'Good heavens!' she exclaimed--it was the general exclamation of the rectory. 'Poor Eleanor!
Dear Eleanor. What monstrous injustice has been done her!--Well, it shall all be made up now.'
And then she thought of the signora. 'What lies people tell,' she said to herself.

But people in this matter had told no lies at all.

CHAPTER XLIX

THE BEELZEBUB COLT

When Miss Thorne left the dining-room, Eleanor had formed no intention of revealing to her
what had occurred; but when she was seated beside her hostess on the sofa the secret dropped
from her almost unawares. Eleanor was but a bad hypocrite, and she found herself quite unable
to continue talking about Mr Arabin, as though he was a stranger, while her heart was full
of him. When Miss Thorne, pursuing her own scheme with discreet zeal, asked the young widow
whether, in her opinion, it would not be a good thing for Mr Arabin to get married, she had
nothing for it but to confess the truth. 'I suppose it would,' said Eleanor, rather sheepishly.
Whereupon Miss Thorne amplified on the idea. 'Oh, Miss Thorne,' said Eleanor, 'he is going
to be married. I am engaged to him.'

Now Miss Thorne knew very well that there had been no such engagement when she had been walking
with Mrs Bold in the morning. She had also heard enough to be tolerably sure that there had
been no preliminaries to such an engagement. She was, therefore, as we have before described,
taken a little by surprise. But, nevertheless, she embraced her guest, and cordially congratulated
her.

Eleanor had no opportunity of speaking another word to Mr Arabin that evening, except such
words as all the world might hear; and these, as may be supposed, were few enough. Miss Thorne
did her best to leave them in privacy; but Mr Thorne, who knew nothing of what had occurred,
and another guest, a friend of his, entirely interfered with her good intentions. So poor Eleanor
had to go to bed without one sign of affection. Her state, nevertheless, was not to be pitied.

The next morning she was up early. It was probable, she thought, that by going down a little
before the usual hour of breakfast, she might find Mr Arabin alone in the dining-room. Might
it not be that she would calculate that an interview would thus be possible? Thus thinking,
Eleanor was dressed a full hour before the time fixed at the Ullathorne household for morning
prayers. She did not at once go down. She was afraid to seem to be too anxious to meet her
lover; though, heaven knows, her anxiety was intense enough. She therefore sat herself down
at her window, and repeatedly looking at her watch, nursed her child till she thought she might
venture forth.

When she found herself at the dining-room door, she stood a moment, hesitating to turn the
handle; but when she heard Mr Thorne's voice inside she hesitated no longer. Her object was
defeated, and she might now go in as soon as she liked without the slightest imputation on
her delicacy. Mr Thorne and Mr Arabin were standing on the hearth-rug, discussing the merits
of the Beelzebub colt; or rather, Mr Thorne was discussing, and Mr Arabin was listening. That
interesting animal had rubbed the stump of his tail against the wall of his stable, and occasioned
much uneasiness to the Ullathorne master of the horse. Had Eleanor but waited another minute,
Mr Thorne would have been in the stable.

Mr Thorne, when he saw his lady guest, repressed his anxiety. The Beelzebub colt must do without
him. And so the three stood, saying little or nothing to each other, till at last the master
of the house, finding that he could no longer bear the present state of suspense respecting
his favourite young steed, made an elaborate apology to Mrs Bold, and escaped. As he shut the
door behind him, Eleanor almost wished that he had remained. It was not that she was afraid
of Mr Arabin, but she hardly yet knew how to address him.

He, however, soon relieved her from her embarrassment. He came up to her, and taking bother
her hands in his, he said, 'So, Eleanor, you and I are to be man and wife. Is it so?'

She looked up into his face, and her lips formed themselves into a single syllable. She uttered
no sound, but he could read the affirmative plainly in her face.

'It is a great trust,' said he, 'a very great trust.'

'It is--it is,' said Eleanor, not exactly taking what he had said in the sense that he had
meant. 'It is a very great trust, and I will do my utmost to deserve it.'

'And I also will do my utmost to deserve it,' said Mr Arabin very solemnly. And then, winding
his arm round her waist, he stood there gazing at the fire, and she with her head leaning in
his shoulder, stood by him, well satisfied with her position. They neither of them spoke, or
found any want of speaking. All that was needful for them to say had been said. The yea, yea,
had been spoken by Eleanor in her own way--and that way had been perfectly satisfactory to
Mr Arabin.

And now it remained to them each to enjoy the assurance of the other's love. And how great
that luxury is! How far it surpasses any other pleasure which God has allowed to his creatures!
And to a woman's heart how doubly delightful!

When the ivy has found its tower, when the delicate creeper has found its strong wall, we know
how the parasite plants grow and prosper. They were not created to stretch forth their branches
alone, and endure without protection the summer's sun and the winter's storm. Alone they but
spread themselves on the ground, and cower unseen in the dingy shade. But when they have found
their firm supporters, how wonderful is their beauty; how all pervading and victorious!

What is the turret without its ivy, or the high garden wall without the jasmine which gives
it its beauty and fragrance? The hedge without the honeysuckle is but a hedge.

There is s feeling still half existing, but now half conquered by the force of human nature,
that a woman should be ashamed of her love till the husband's right to her compels her to acknowledge
it. We would fain preach a different doctrine. A woman should glory in her love; but on that
account let her take the more care that it be such as to justify her glory.

Eleanor did glory in hers, and she felt, and had cause to feel, that it deserved to be held
as glorious. She could have stood there for hours with his arm around her, had fate and Mr
Thorne permitted it. Each moment she crept nearer to his bosom, and felt more and more certain
that there was her home. What now to her was the archdeacon's arrogance, her sister's coldness,
or her dear father's weakness? What need she care for the duplicity of such friends as Charlotte
Stanhope? She had found the strong shield that should guard her from all wrongs, the trusty
pilot that should henceforward guide her through the shoals and rocks. She would give up the
heavy burden of her independence, and once more assume the position of a woman, and the duties
of a trusting and loving wife.

And he, too, stood there fully satisfied with his place. They were both looking intently on
the fire, as though they could read there their future fate, till at last Eleanor turned her
face towards his. 'How sad you are,' she said, smiling; and indeed his face was, if not sad,
at least serious. 'How sad you are, love!'

'Sad,' said he, looking down at her; 'no, certainly not sad.' Her sweet loving eyes were turned
towards him, and she smiled softly as he answered her. The temptation was too strong even for
the demure propriety of Mr Arabin, and, bending over her, he pressed his lips to hers.

Immediately after this, Mr Thorne appeared, and they were both delighted to hear that the tail
of the Beelzebub colt was not materially injured.

It had been Mr Harding's intention to hurry over to Ullathorne as soon as possible after his
return to Barchester, in order to secure the support of his daughter in his meditated revolt
against the archdeacon as touching the deanery; but he was spared the additional journey by
hearing that Mrs Bold had returned unexpectedly home. As soon as he had read her note he started
off, and found her waiting for him in her own house.

How much each of them had to tell the other, and how certain each was that the story which
he or she had to tell would astonish the other!

'My dear, I am so anxious to see you,' said Mr Harding, kissing his daughter.

'Oh, papa, I have so much to tell you!' said the daughter, returning his embrace.

'My dear, they have offered me the deanery!' said Mr Harding, anticipating by the suddenness
of the revelation the tidings which Eleanor had to give him.

'Oh, papa,' said she, forgetting her own love and happiness in her joy at the surprising news;
'oh, papa, can it be possible? Dear, papa, how thoroughly, thoroughly happy that makes me!'

'But, my dear, I think it best to refuse it.'

'Oh, papa!'

'I am sure you will agree with me, Eleanor, when I explain it to you. You know, my dear how
old I am. If I live, I--'

'But, papa, I must tell you about myself.'

'Well, my dear.'

'I do wonder how you will take it.'

'Take what?'

'If you don't rejoice at it, if it doesn't make you happy, if you don't encourage me, I shall
break my heart.'

'If that be the case, Nelly, I certainly will encourage you.'

'But I fear you won't. I do so fear you won't. And yet you can't but think I am the most fortunate
woman living on God's earth.'

'Are you, dearest? Then I certainly will rejoice with you. Come, Nelly, come to me, and tell
me what it is.'

'I am going--'

He led her to the sofa, and seating himself beside her, with both
her hands in his. 'You are going to be married, Nelly.
 Is not that it?'

'Yes,' she said, faintly. 'That is if you will approve;' and then she blushed as she remembered
the promise which she had so lately volunteered to him, and which she had so utterly forgotten
in making her engagement with Mr Arabin.

Mr Harding thought for a moment who the man could be whom he was to be called upon to welcome
as his son-in-law. A week since he would have had no doubt whom to name. In that case he would
have been prepared to give his sanction, although he would have done so with a heavy heart.
Now he knew that at any rate it would not be Mr Slope, though he was perfectly at a loss to
guess who could possibly have filled his place. For a moment he thought that the man might
be Bertie Stanhope, and his very soul sank within him.

'Well, Nelly?'

'Oh, papa, promise me that, for my sake, you will love him.'

'Come, Nelly, come; tell me who it is.'

'But you will love him, papa?'

'Dearest, I must love any one that you love.' Then she turned he face to his, and whispered
into his ear the name of Mr Arabin.

No man that she could have named could have more surprised or more delighted him. Had he looked
round the world for a son-in-law to his taste, he could have selected no one whom he would
have preferred to Mr Arabin. He was a clergyman; he held a living in the neighbourhood; he
was of a set to which all Mr Harding's own partialities most closely adhered; he was the great
friend of Dr Grantly; and he was, moreover, a man of whom Mr Harding knew nothing but what
he approved. Nevertheless his surprise was so great as to prevent the immediate expression
of his joy. He had never thought of Mr Arabin in connection with his daughter; he had never
imagined that they had any feeling in common. He had feared that his daughter had been made
hostile to clergymen of Mr Arabin's stamp by her intolerance of the archdeacon's pretensions.
Had he been put to wish, he might have wished for Mr Arabin for a son-in-law; but had he been
put to guess, the name would never have occurred to him.

'Mr Arabin!' he exclaimed; 'impossible!'

'Oh, papa, for heaven's sake don't say anything against him!
 If you do love me, don't say anything against him. Oh, papa, it's
done, and mustn't be undone--oh, papa!'

Fickle Eleanor! Where was the promise that she would make no choice for herself without her
father's approval? She had chosen, and now demanded his acquiescence. 'Oh, papa, isn't he good?
isn't he noble? isn't he religious, high-minded, everything that a good man possibly can be?'
and she clung to her father, beseeching him for his consent.

'My Nelly, my child, my own daughter! He is; he is noble and good and high-minded; he is all
that a woman can love and admire. He shall be my son, my own son. He shall be as close to my
heart as you are. My Nelly, my child, my happy, happy child!'

We need not pursue the interview any further. By degrees they returned to the subject of the
new promotion. Eleanor tried to prove to him, as the Grantlys had done, that his age could
be no bar to his being a very excellent dean; but those arguments had now even less weight
than before. He said little or nothing, but sat meditative. Every now and then he would kiss
his daughter, and say, 'yes,' or 'no,' or 'very true,' or 'well, my dear, I can't quite agree
with you there,' but he could not be got to enter sharply into the question of 'to be or not
to be' dean of Barchester. Of her and her happiness, of Mr Arabin and his virtues, he would
talk as much as Eleanor desired; and, to tell the truth, that was not a little; but about the
deanery he would now say nothing further. He had got a new idea into his head--Why should not
Mr Arabin be the new dean?

CHAPTER L

THE ARCHDEACON IS SATISFIED WITH THE STATE OF AFFAIRS

The archdeacon, in his journey into Barchester, had been assured by Mr Harding that all their
prognostications about Mr Slope and Eleanor were groundless. Mr Harding, however, had found
it very difficult to shake his son-in-law's faith in his own acuteness. The matter had, to
Dr Grantly, been so plainly corroborated by such patent evidence, borne out by such endless
circumstances, that he at first refused to take as true the positive statement which Mr Harding
made to him of Eleanor's own disavowal of the impeachment. But at last he yielded in a qualified
way. He brought himself to admit that he would at the present regard his past convictions as
a mistake; but in doing this he so guarded himself, that if, at any future time, Eleanor should
come forth to the world as Mrs Slope, he might still be able to say: 'There, I told you so.
Remember what you said and what I said; and remember also for coming years, that I was right
in this matter--as in all others.'

He carried, however, his concession so far as to bring himself to undertake to call at Eleanor's
house, and he did call accordingly, while the father and the daughter were yet in the middle
of their conference. Mr Harding had had so much to hear and to say that he had forgotten to
advertise Eleanor of the honour that awaited her, and she heard her brother-in-law's voice
in the hall, while she quite unprepared to see him.

'There's the archdeacon,' she said, springing up.

'Yes, my dear. He told me to tell you that he would come to see you; but, to tell the truth,
I had forgotten all about it.'

Eleanor fled away, regardless of all her father's entreaties. She could not now, in the first
hours of her joy, bring herself to bear all the archdeacon's retractions, apologies, and congratulations.
He would have so much to say, and would be so tedious in saying it; consequently, the archdeacon,
when he was shown into the drawing-room, found on one there but Mr Harding.'

'You must excuse Eleanor,' said Mr Harding.

'Is anything the matter?' asked the doctor, who at once anticipated that the whole truth about
Mr Slope had at last come out.

'Well, something is the matter. I wonder whether you will be much surprised?'

The archdeacon saw by his father-in-law's manner that after all he had nothing to tell him
about Mr Slope. 'No,' said he, 'certainly not--nothing will ever surprise me again.' Very many
men nowadays, besides the archdeacon, adopt or affect to adopt the nil admirari doctrine; but
nevertheless, to judge from their appearance, they are just as subject to sudden emotions as
their grandfathers and grandmothers were before them.

'What do you think Mr Arabin has done?'

'Mr Arabin! It's nothing about that daughter of Stanhope's, I hope?'

'No, not that woman,' said Mr Harding, enjoying his joke in his sleeve.

'Not that woman! Is he going to do anything about any woman? Why can't you speak out if yo
have anything to say? There is nothing I hate so much as these sort of mysteries.'

'There shall be no mystery with you, archdeacon; though, of course, it must go no further at
present.'

'Well.'

'Except Susan. You must promise me you'll tell no one else?'

'Nonsense!' exclaimed the archdeacon, who was becoming angry in his suspense. 'You can't have
any secret about Mr Arabin.'

'Only this--that he and Eleanor are engaged.'

It was quite clear to see by the archdeacon's face, that he did not believe a word of it. 'Mr
Arabin! It's impossible!'

'Eleanor, at any rate, has just told me so.'

'It's impossible,' repeated the archdeacon.

'Well, I can't say I think it is impossible. It certainly took me by surprise; but that does
not make it impossible.'

'She must be mistaken.'

Mr Harding assured him that there was no mistake; that he would find, on returning home, that
Mr Arabin had been at Plumstead with the express object of making to same declaration, that
even Miss Thorne knew all about it; and that, in fact, the thing was as clearly settled as
any such arrangement between a lady and a gentleman could be.

'Good heavens!' said the archdeacon, walking up and down Eleanor's drawing-room. 'Good heavens!
Good heavens!'

Now, these exclamations certainly betokened faith. Mr Harding properly gathered from it that,
at last, Dr Grantly did believe the fact. The first utterances clearly evinced a certain amount
of distaste at the information he had received; the second, simply indicated surprise; and
the tone of the third, Mr Harding fancied that he could catch a certain gleam of satisfaction.

The archdeacon had truly expressed the workings of his mind.
 He could not but be disgusted to find how utterly astray he had
been in all his anticipations. Had he only been lucky enough to
have suggested the marriage himself when he first brought Mr Arabin
into the country, his character for judgment and wisdom would have
received an addition which would have classed him at any rate next
to Solomon. And why had he not done so? Might he not have foreseen
that Mr Arabin would want a wife in the parsonage? He had foreseen
that Eleanor would want a husband; but should he not also have
perceived that Mr Arabin was a man much more likely to attract her
than Mr Slope? The archdeacon found that he had been at fault, and
of course could not immediately get over his discomfiture.

Then his surprise was intense. How sly the pair of young turtle doves had been with him. How
egregiously they had hoaxed him. He had preached at Eleanor against her fancied attachment
to Mr Slope, at the very time she was in love with his own protege, Mr Arabin; and had absolutely
taken that same Mr Arabin into his confidence with reference to the dread of Mr Slope's alliance.
It was very natural that the archdeacons should feel surprise.

But there was also great ground for satisfaction. Looking at the
match by itself, it was the very thing to help the doctor out of
his difficulties. In the first place, the assurance that he should
never have Mr Slope for his brother-in-law was in itself a great
comfort. Then Mr Arabin was, of all men, one with whom it would
best suit him to be utterly connected. But the crowning comfort was
the blow that this marriage would give to Mr Slope. He had now
certainly lost his wife; rumour was beginning to whisper that he
might possibly lose his position in the palace; and if Mr Harding
would only be true, the great danger of all would be surmounted. In
such case it might be expected that Mr Slope would own himself
vanquished, and take himself altogether away from Barchester.
 And so the archdeacon would again be able to breath the pure air.

'Well, well,' said he. 'Good heavens! Good heavens!' and the tone of the fifth exclamation
made Mr Harding fully aware that content was reigning in the archdeacon's bosom.

And then slowly, gradually, and craftily, Mr Harding propounded his own new scheme. Why should
not Mr Arabin be the new dean?

Slowly, gradually, thoughtfully, Dr Grantly fell into his father-in-law's views. Much as he
liked Mr Arabin, sincere as he was in his admiration for that gentleman's ecclesiastical abilities,
he would not have sanctioned a measure which would have robbed his father-in-law of his fairly-earned
promotion, were it at all practicable to induce his father-in-law to accept the promotion which
he had earned. But the archdeacon had, on a former occasion, received proof of the obstinacy
with which Mr Harding could adhere to his own views in opposition to the advice of all his
friends. He knew tolerably well that nothing would induce the meek, mild man before him to
take the high place offered to him, if he thought it wrong to do so. Knowing this, he also
said to himself more than once; 'Why should not Mr Arabin be dean of Barchester?' it was at
last arranged between them that they would together start to London by the earliest train on
the following morning, making a little detour to Oxford on their journey. Dr Gwynne's counsels,
they imagined, might perhaps be of assistance to them.

These matters settled, the archdeacon hurried off, that he might return to Plumstead and prepare
for his journey. The day was extremely fine, and he came into the city in an open gig. As he
was driving up the High Street he encountered Mr Slope at a crossing. Had he not pulled up
rather sharply, he would have run over him. The two had never spoken to each other since they
had met on a memorable occasion in the bishop's study. They did not speak now; but they looked
at each other full in the face, and Mr Slope's countenance was as impudent, as triumphant,
as defiant as ever. Had Dr Grantly not known to the contrary, he would have imagined that his
enemy had won the deanship, the wife, and all the rich honours, for which he had been striving.
As it was he had lost everything that he had in the world, and had just received his conge
from the bishop.

In leaving the town the archdeacon drove by the well-remembered entrance of Hiram's hospital.
There, at the gate, was a large, untidy, farmer's wagon, laden with untidy-looking furniture;
and there, inspecting the arrival, was good Mrs Quiverful--not dressed in her Sunday best--not
very clean in her apparel--not graceful as to her bonnet and shawl; or, indeed, with many feminine
charms as to her whole appearance. She was busy at domestic work in her new house, and had
just ventured out, expecting to see no one on the arrival of the family chattels. The archdeacon
was down upon her before she knew where she was.

Her acquaintance with Dr Grantly or his family were very slight indeed. The archdeacon, as
a matter of course, knew every clergyman in the archdeaconry; it may almost be said the diocese,
and had some acquaintance, more or less intimate, with their wives and families. With Mr Quiverful
he had been concerned on various matters of business; but of Mrs Q. he had seen very little.
Now, however, he was in too gracious a mood to pass her by unnoticed. The Quiverfuls, one and
all, had looked for the bitterest hostility from Dr Grantly; they knew his anxiety for Mr Harding
should return to his old home at the hospital, and they did not know that a new home had been
offered to him at the deanery. Mrs Quiverful was therefore not a little surprised and not a
little rejoiced also, at the tone at which she was addressed.

'How do you do, Mrs Quiverful?--how do you do?' said he, stretching
his left hand out of the gig, as he spoke to her.
 'I am very glad to see you employed in so pleasant and useful a
manner; very glad indeed.'

Mrs Quiverful thanked him, and shook hands with him, and looked into his face suspiciously.
She was not sure whether the congratulations and kindness were or were not ironical.

'Pray tell Mr Quiverful from me,' he continued, 'that I am rejoiced at his appointment. It
is a comfortable place, Mrs Quiverful, and a comfortable house, and I am very glad to see you
in it. Good-bye, good-bye.' And he drove on, leaving the lady well-pleased and astonished at
his good nature. On the whole things were going well with the archdeacon, and he could afford
to be charitable to Mrs Quiverful. He looked forth from his gig smilingly on all the world,
and forgave every one in Barchester their sins, excepting only Mrs Proudie and Mr Slope. Had
he seen the bishop, he would have felt inclined to pat even him kindly on the head.

He determined to go home by St Ewold's. This would take him some three miles out of his way;
but he felt that he could not leave Plumstead comfortably without saying one word of good fellowship
to Mr Arabin. When he reached the parsonage the vicar was still out; but, from what he had
heard, he did not doubt but that he would meet him on the road between their two houses. He
was right in this, for about halfway home, at a narrow turn, he came upon Mr Arabin, who was
on horseback.

'Well, well, well, well,' said the archdeacon loudly, joyously, and with supreme good humour;
'well, well, well, well; so, after all, we have no further cause to fear Mr Slope.'

'I hear from Mrs Grantly that they have offered the deanery to Mr Harding,' said the other.

'Mr Slope has lost more than the deanery, I find,' and then the archdeacon laughed jocosely.
'Come, come, Arabin, you have kept your secret well enough. I know all about it now.'

'I have had no secret, archdeacon,'said the other with a quiet smile. 'None at all--not for
a day. It was only yesterday that I knew my own good fortune, and to-day I went over to Plumstead
to ask your approval. From what Mrs Grantly has said to me, I am led to hope that I shall have it.'

'With all my heart, with all my heart,' said the archdeacon cordially, holding his friend by
the hand. 'It's just as I would have it. She is an excellent young woman; she will not come
to you empty-handed; and I think she will make you a good wife. If she does her duty by you
as her sister does by me, you'll be a happy man; that's all I can say.' And as he finished
speaking, a tear might have been observed in each of the doctor's eyes.'

Mr Arabin warmly returned the archdeacon's grasp, but he said little. His heart was too full
for speaking, and he could not express the gratitude which he felt. Dr Grantly understood him
as well as though he had spoken for an hour.

'And mind, Arabin,' said he, 'no one but myself shall tie the knot. We'll get Eleanor out to
Plumstead, and it shall come off there. I'll make Susan stir herself, and we'll do it in style.
I must be off to London to-morrow on special business. Harding goes with me. But I'll be back
before your bride has got her wedding-dress ready.' And so they parted.

On his journey home the archdeacon occupied his mind with preparations for the marriage festivities.
He made a great resolve that he would atone to Eleanor for all the injury he had done her by
the munificence of his future treatment. He would show her what was the difference in his eyes
between a Slope and an Arabin. On one other thing also he decided with a firm mind: if the
affair of the dean should not be settled in Mr Arabin's favour, nothing should prevent him
putting a new front and bow-window to the dining-room at St Ewold's parsonage.

'So we're sold after all, Sue,' said he to his wife, accosting her with a kiss as soon as he
entered his house. He did not call his wife Sue above twice or thrice in a year, and these
occasions were great high days.

'Eleanor has had more sense then we gave her credit for,' said Mrs Grantly.

And there was great content in Plumstead rectory that evening; and Mrs Grantly promised her
husband that she would now open her heart, and take Mr Arabin into it. Hitherto she had declined
to do so.

CHAPTER LI

MR SLOPE BIDS FAREWELL TO THE PALACE AND ITS INHABITANTS

We must now take leave of Mr Slope, and of the bishop, and of Mrs Proudie. These leave-takings
in novels are as disagreeable as they are in real life; not so sad, indeed, for they want the
reality of sadness; but quite as perplexing, and generally less satisfactory. What novelist,
what Fielding, what Scott, what George Sand, or Sue, or Duncan, can impart an interest to the
last chapter of his fictitious history? Promises of two children and superhuman happiness are
of no avail, nor assurance of extreme respectability carried to an age far exceeding that usually
allotted to mortals. The sorrows of our heroes and heroines, they are you delight, oh public!
their sorrows, or their sins, or their absurdities; not their virtues, good sense, and consequent
rewards. When we begin to tint our final pages with couleur de rose, as in accordance with
fixed rule we must do, we altogether extinguish our own powers of pleasing. When we become
dull we offend your intellect; and we must become dull or we should offend your taste. A late
writer, wishing to sustain his interest to the last page, hung his hear at the end of the third
volume. The consequence was, that no one should read his novel. And who can apportion out and
dovetail his incidents, dialogues, characters, and descriptive morsels, so as to fit them all
exactly into 439 pages, without either compressing them unnaturally, or extending them artificially
at the end of his labour? Do I not myself know that I am at this moment in want of a dozen
pages, and that I am sick with cudgelling my brains to find them? And then when everything
is done, the kindest-hearted critic of them all invariably twit us with the incompetency and
lameness of our conclusion. We have either become idle and neglected it, or tedious and over-laboured
it. It is insipid or unnatural, over-strained or imbecile. It means nothing, or attempts too
much. I, for one, will in future do my best to copy the example. Guided by my own lights only,
I despair of success.

For the last week or ten days, Mr Slope had seen nothing of Mrs
Proudie, and very little of the bishop. He still lived in the
palace, and still went through his usual routine work; but the
confidential doings of the diocese had passed into other hands. He
had seen this clearly, and marked it well; but it had not much
disturbed him. He had indulged in other hopes till the bishop's
affairs had become dull to him, and he was moreover aware that, as
regarded the diocese, Mrs Proudie had checkmated him. It has been
explained, in the beginning of these pages, how three or four were
contending together as to who, in fact, should be bishop of
Barchester.
 Each of them had now admitted to himself (or boasted to herself)
that Mrs Proudie was victorious in the struggle. They had gone
through a competitive examination of considerable severity, and she
had come forth the winner, facile princeps. Mr Slope had, for a
moment, run her hard, but it was only for a moment. It had become,
as it were, acknowledged that Hiram's hospital should be the
testing point between them, and now Mr Quiverful was already in the
hospital, the proof of Mrs Proudie's skill and courage.

All this did not break Mr Slope's spirit, because he had other
hopes. But, alas, at last there came to him a note from his friend
Sir Nicholas, informing him that the deanship was disposed of. Let
us give Mr Slope his due. He did not lie prostrate, under this
blow, or give himself to vain lamentations; he did not henceforward
despair of life, and call upon gods above and gods below to carry
him off. He sat himself down in his chair, counted out what monies
he had in hand, for present purposes, and what others were coming
to him, bethought himself as to the best sphere for his future
exertions, and at once wrote off a letter to a rich sugar-
refiner's wife in Baker Street, who, as he well knew, was much
given to the entertainment and encouragement of serious young
evangelical clergymen. He was again, he said, 'upon the world,
having found the air of a cathedral town, and the very nature of
cathedral services, uncongenial to his spirit'; and then he sat
awhile, making firm resolves as to his manner of parting from the
bishop, and also as to his future conduct. He rang the bell and desired the servant
to inform his master that if it suited his lordship, he, Mr Slope,
was ready to wait upon him. The servant, who well understood that
Mr Slope was no longer in the ascendant, brought back a message,
saying that, 'his lordship desired that Mr Slope would attend him
immediately in his study.' Mr Slope waited about ten minutes more
to prove his independence, and then went into the bishop's room.
 There, as had expected, he found Mrs Proudie, together with her
husband.

'Hum, ha--Mr Slope, please take a chair,' said the gentleman bishop.

'Pray be seated, Mr Slope,' said the lady bishop.

'Thank ye, thank ye,'said Mr Slope, and walking round to the fire, he threw himself into one
of the arm-chairs that graced the hearth-rug.

'Mr Slope,' said the bishop, 'it has become necessary that I should speak to you definitively
on a matter that has for some time been pressing itself on my attention.'

'May I ask whether the subject is in any way connected with myself?' said Mr Slope.

'It is so--certainly,--yes, it certainly is connected with yourself, Mr Slope.'

'Then, my lord, if I may be allowed to express a wish, I would prefer that no discussion on
the subject should take place between us in the presence of a third party.'

'Don't alarm yourself, Mr Slope,' said Mrs Proudie, 'no discussion is at all necessary. The
bishop merely intends to express his own wishes.'

'I merely intend, Mr Slope, to express my own wishes--no discussion will be at all necessary,'
said the bishop, reiterating his wife's words.

'That is more, my lord, than we any of us can be sure of,' said Mr Slope; 'I cannot, however,
force Mrs Proudie to leave the room; nor can I refuse to remain here, if it be your lordship's
wish that I should do so.'

'It is certainly his lordship's wish,'said Mrs Proudie.

'Mr Slope,' began the bishop, in a solemn, serious voice, 'it grieves me to have to find fault.
It grieves me much to find fault with a clergyman; but especially so with a clergyman in your
position.'

'Why, what have I done amiss, my lord?' demanded Mr Slope, loudly.

'What have you done amiss, Mr Slope?' said Mrs Proudie, standing erect before the culprit,
and raising that terrible forefinger. 'Do you dare to ask the bishop what you have done amiss?
does not your conscience--'

'Mrs Proudie, pray let it be understood, once for all, that I will have no words with you.'

'Ah, sire, but you will have words,' said she; 'you must have words. Why have you had so may
words with that Signora Neroni? Why have you disgraced yourself, you a clergyman, by constantly
consorting with such a woman as that--with a married woman--with one altogether unfit for a
clergyman's society?'

'At any rate, I was introduced to her in your drawing-room,' returned Mr Slope.

'And shamefully you behave there,' said Mrs Proudie, 'most shamefully. I was wrong to allow
you to remain in the house a day after what I then saw. I should have insisted on your instant
dismissal.'

'I have yet to learn, Mrs Proudie, that you have the power to insist either on my going from
hence or on my staying here.'

'What!' said the lady; 'I am not to have the privilege of saying who shall and who shall not
frequent my own drawing-room! I am not to save my servants and dependents from having their
morals corrupted by improper conduct! I am not to save my own daughters from impurity! I will
let you see, Mr Slope, whether I have the power or whether I have not. You will have the goodness
to understand that you no longer fill any situation about the bishop; and as your room will
be immediately wanted in the palace for another chaplain, I must ask you to provide yourself
with apartments as soon as may be convenient to you.'

'My lord,' said Mr Slope, appealing to the bishop, and so turning his back completely on the
lady, 'will you permit me to ask that I may have from your own lips and decision that you may
have come to on this matter?'

'Certainly, Mr Slope, certainly,' said the bishop; 'that is but reasonable. Well, my decision
is that you had better look for some other preferment. For the situation which you have lately
held I do not think you are well suited.'

'And what, my lord, has been my fault?'

'That Signora Neroni is one fault,' said Mrs Proudie; 'and a very abominable fault she is;
very abominable, and very disgraceful. Fie, Mr Slope, fie! You an evangelical clergyman indeed!'

'My lord, I desire to know for what fault I am turned out of your lordship's house.'

'You hear what Mrs Proudie says,' said the bishop.

'When I publish the history of this transaction, my lord, as I decidedly shall do in my own
vindication, I presume you will not wish me to state that you have discarded me at your wife's
bidding --because she has objected to my being acquainted with another lady, the daughter of
one of the prebendaries of the chapter?'

'You may publish as you please, sir,' said Mrs Proudie. 'But you will not be insane enough
to publish any of your doings in Barchester. Do you think I have not heard of your kneelings
at that creature's feet--that is if she has any feet--and of your constant slobbering over
her hand? I advise you to beware, Mr Slope, of what you do and say. Clergymen have been unfrocked
for less than what you have been guilty of.'

'My lord, if this goes on I shall be obliged to indict this woman-- Mrs Proudie I mean--for
defamation of character.'

'I think, Mr Slope, you had better now retire,' said the bishop. 'I will enclose to you a cheque
for any balance that may be due to you; and, under the present circumstances, it will of course
be better for all parties that you should leave the palace at the earliest possible moment.'

'If, however, you wish to remain in this neighbourhood,' said Mrs
Proudie, 'and will solemnly pledge yourself never again to see that
woman, and will promise also to be more circumspect in your
conduct, the bishop will mention your name to Mr Quiverful, who now
wants a curate at Puddingdale.
 The house is, I imagine, quite sufficient for your requirements:
and there will moreover by a stipend of fifty pounds a year.'

'May God forgive you, madam, for the manner in which you have treated me,' said Mr Slope, looking
at her with a very heavenly look; 'and remember this, madam, that you yourself may still have
a fall;' and he looked at her with a very worldly look. 'As to the bishop, I pity him!' And
so saying, Mr Slope left the room. Thus ended the intimacy of the Bishop of Barchester with
his confidential chaplain.

Mrs Proudie was right in this; namely, that Mr Slope was not insane enough to publish to the
world any of his doings in Barchester. He did not trouble his friend Mr Towers with any written
statement of the iniquity of Mrs Proudie, or the imbecility of her husband. He was aware that
it would be wise in him to drop for the future all allusions to his doings in the cathedral
city. Soon after the interview just recorded, he left Barchester, shaking the dust off his
feet as he entered the railway carriage; and he gave no longing lingering look after the cathedral
towers, as the train hurried him quickly out of their sight.

It is well known that the family of the Slopes never starve; they always fall on their feet
like cats, and let them fall where they will, they live on the fat of the land. Our Mr Slope
did so. On his return to town he found that the sugar-refiner had died, and that the widow
was inconsolable; or, in other words, in want of consolation. Mr Slope consoled her, and soon
found himself settled with much comfort in the house in Baker Street. He possessed himself,
also before long, of a church in the vicinity of the New Road, and become known to fame as
one of the most eloquent preachers and pious clergymen in that part of the metropolis. There
let us leave him.

Of the bishop and his wife very little further need be said. From that time forth nothing material
occurred to interrupt the even course of their domestic harmony. Very speedily, a further vacancy
on the bench of bishops gave Dr Proudie the seat in the House of Lords, which he at first so
anxiously longed for. But by this time, he had become a wiser man. He did certainly take his
seat, and occasionally registered a vote in favour of Government view on ecclesiastical matters.

But he had thoroughly learnt that his proper sphere of action lay in close contiguity with
Mrs Proudie's wardrobe. He never again aspired to disobey, or seemed even to wish for autocratic
diocesan authority. If ever he thought of freedom, he did so, as men think of the millennium,
as of a good time which may be coming, but which nobody expects to come in their day. Mrs Proudie
might be said still to bloom, and was, at any rate, strong; and the bishop had no reason to
apprehend that he would be speedily visited with the sorrows of a widower's life.

He is still bishop of Barchester. He has so graced that throne, that the Government has been
adverse to translate him, even to higher duties. There may he remain, under safe pupilage,
till the new-fangled manners of the age have discovered him to be superannuated, and bestowed
on him a pension. As for Mrs Proudie, our prayers for her are that she may live for ever.

CHAPTER LII

THE NEW DEAN TAKES POSSESSION OF THE DEANERY AND THE NEW WARDEN OF THE HOSPITAL

Mr Harding and the archdeacon together made their way to Oxford, and there, by dint of cunning
argument, they induced the Master of Lazarus also to ask himself this momentous question: 'Why
should not Mr Arabin be Dean of Barchester?' He of course, for a while tried his hand at persuading
Mr Harding that he was foolish, over-scrupulous, self-willed, and weak-minded; but he tried
in vain. If Mr Harding would not give way to Dr Grantly, it was not likely that he would give
way to Dr Gwynne; more especially now that so admirable a scheme as that of inducting Mr Arabin
into the deanery had been set on foot. When the master found that his eloquence was vain, and
heard also that Mr Arabin was about to become Mr Harding's son-in-law, he confessed that he
also would, under such circumstances, be glad to see his old friend and protege, the fellow
of his college, placed in the comfortable position that was going a-begging.

'It might be the means, you know, Master, of keeping Mr Slope out,' said the archdeacon with
grave caution.

'He has no more chance of it,' said the master, 'that our college chaplain. I know about it
than that.'

Mrs Grantly had been right in her surmise. It was the Master of Lazarus who had been instrumental
in representing in high places the claims of Mr Harding had from the Government; and he now
consented to use his best endeavours towards getting the offer transferred to Mr Arabin. The
three of them went on to London together, and there they remained a week, to the great disgust
of Mrs Grantly, and most probably also of Mrs Gwynne. The minister was out of town in one direction,
and his private secretary in another. The clerks who remained could do nothing in such a matter
as this, and all was difficulty and confusion. The two doctors seemed to have plenty to do;
they bustled here and they bustled there, and complained at their club in the evenings that
they had been driven off their legs; but Mr Harding had no occupation. Once or twice he suggested
that he might perhaps return to Barchester. His request, however, was peremptorily refused,
and had nothing for it but to while away his time in Westminster Abbey.

At length an answer from the great man came. The Master of Lazarus had made his proposition
through the Bishop of Belgravia. Now the bishop, tough but newly gifted with his diocesan honours,
was a man of much weight in the clerico-political world. He was, if not as pious, at any rate
as wise as St Paul, and had been with so much effect all things to all men, that though he
was great among the dons of Oxford, he had been selected for the most favourite seat on the
bench by a Whig Prime Minister. To him Dr Gwynne had made known his wishes and his arguments,
and the bishop had made them known to the Marquis of Kensington Gore. The marquis, who was
Lord High Steward of the Pantry Board, and who by most men was supposed to hold the highest
office out of the cabinet, trafficked much in affairs of this kind. He not only suggested the
arrangement to the minister over a cup of coffee, standing on a drawing-room rug in Windsor
Castle, but he also favourably mentioned Mr Arabin's name in the ear of a distinguished person.

And so the matter was arranged. The answer of the great man came, and Mr Arabin was made Dean
of Barchester. The three clergymen who had come up to town on this important mission dined
together with great glee on the day on which the news reached them. In a silent manner, they
toasted Mr Arabin with full bumpers of claret. The satisfaction of all of them was supreme.
The Master of Lazarus had been successful in his attempt, and success is dear to us all. The
archdeacon had trampled upon Mr Slope, and had lifted to high honours the young clergyman whom
he had induced to quit the retirement and comfort of the university. So at least the archdeacon
thought; though, to speak sooth, not he, but circumstances had trampled on Mr Slope. But the
satisfaction of Mr Harding was, of all perhaps, the most complete. He laid aside his usual
melancholy manner, and brought forth little quiet jokes from the utmost mirth of his heart;
he poked fun at the archdeacon about Mr Slope's marriage, and quizzed him for his improper
love for Mrs Proudie. On the following day they all returned to Barchester.

It was arranged that Mr Arabin should know nothing of what had been done till he received the
minister's letter from the hands of his embryo father-in-law. In order that no time be lost,
a message had been sent to him by the preceding night's post, begging him to be at the deanery
at the hour that the train from London arrived. There was nothing in this which surprised Mr
Arabin. It had somehow got about through all bah that Mr Harding was the new dean, and all
Barchester was prepared to welcome him with pealing bells and full hearts. Mr Slope had certainly
had a party; there had certainly been those in Barchester who were prepared to congratulate
him on his promotion with assumed sincerity, but even his own party were not broken-hearted
by his failure. The inhabitants of the city, even the high-souled ecstatic young ladies of
thirty-five, had begun to comprehend that their welfare and the welfare of the place, was connected
in some mysterious manner with the daily chants of the bi-weekly anthems. The expenditure of
the palace had not added greatly to the popularity of the bishop's side of the question; and,
on the whole, there was a strong reaction. When it became known to all the world that Mr Harding
was to be the new dean, all the world rejoiced heartily.

Mr Arabin, as we have said, was not surprised at the summons which called him to the deanery.
He had not as yet seen Mr Harding since Eleanor had accepted him, nor had he seen him since
he had learnt of his future father-in-law's preferment. There was nothing more natural, more
necessary, than that they should meet each other at the earliest possible moment.

Mr Arabin was waiting at the deanery parlour when Mr Harding and Dr Grantly were driven up
from the station.

There was some excitement in the bosoms of them all, as they met and shook hands; but far too
much to enable either of them to begin his story and tell it in a proper equable style of narrative.
Mr Harding was some minutes quite dumbfounded, and Mr Arabin could only talk in short, spasmodic
sentences about his love and good fortune. He slipped in, as best he could, some sort of congratulation
about the deanship, and then went on with his hopes and fears--hopes that he might be received
as a son, and fears that he hardly deserved such good fortune. Then he went back to the dean;
it was the most thoroughly satisfactory appointment, he said, of which he had ever heard.

'But! But! But--' said Mr Harding; and then failing to get any further, he looked imploringly
at the archdeacon.

'The truth is, Arabin,' said the doctor, 'that, after all you are not destined to be the son-in-law
to a dean. Nor am I either: more's the pity.'

Mr Arabin looked to him for explanation. 'Is not Mr Harding to be the new dean?'

'It appears not,' said the archdeacon. Mr Arabin's face fell a little, and he looked from one
to the other. It was plainly to be seen from them both that there was no cause for unhappiness
in the matter, at least not of an unhappiness to them; but there was as yet no clarification
of the mystery.

'Think how old I am,' said Mr Harding imploringly.

'Fiddlestick!' said the archdeacon.

'That's all very well, but it won't make a young man of me,' said Mr Harding.

'And who is to be the dean?' asked Mr Arabin.

'Yes, that is the question,' said the archdeacon. 'Come, Mr Precentor, since you obstinately
refuse to be anything else, let us know who is to be the man. He has got the nomination in
his pocket.'

With eyes brim full of tears, Mr Harding pulled out the letter and handed it to his future
son-in-law. He tried to make a little speech, but failed altogether. Having given up the document,
he turned round to the wall, feigning to blow his nose, and then sat himself down on the old
dean's dingy horse-hair sofa. And here we find it necessary to bring our account of the interview
to an end.

Nor can we pretend to describe the rapture with which Mr Harding was received by his daughter.
She wept with grief and with joy; with grief that her father should, in his old age, still
be without that rank and worldly position, which, according to her ideas, he had so well earned;
and with joy that he, her darling father, should have bestowed on that other dear one the good
things of which he himself would not open his hand to take possession. And her, Mr Harding
again showed his weakness. In the melee of the exposal of their loves and reciprocal affection,
he found himself unable to resist the entreaties of all parties that his lodgings in the High
Street should be given up. Eleanor would not live in the deanery, she said, unless her father
lived there also. Mr Arabin would not be dean, unless Mr Harding would be co-dean with him.
The archdeacon declared that his father-in-law should not have his own way in everything, and
Mrs Grantly carried him off to Plumstead, that he might remain there till Mr and Mrs Arabin
were in a state to receive him at their own mansion.

Pressed by such arguments as these, what could a weak man do but yield?

But there was yet another task which it behoved Mr Harding to do before he could allow himself
to be at rest. Little has been said in these pages of the state of those remaining old men
who had lived under his sway at the hospital. But not on this account must it be presumed that
he had forgotten them, or that in their state of anarchy and in their want of government he
had omitted to visit them. He visited them constantly, and had latterly given them to understand
that they would soon be required to subscribe their adherence to a new master. There were now
but five of them, one of them not having been but quite lately carried to his rest--but five
of the full number, which had hitherto been twelve, and which was now to be raised to twenty-four,
including women. Of these old Bunce, who for many years, had been the favourite of the late
warden, was one; and Abel Handy, who had been the humble means from driving that warden from
his home, was another.

