If you are wise, upon a river like the Tweed, where all the fishermen are men of experience
and skill, you will not only ask their advice, but take it in the main--say, when it suits
you.  You were pretty hopeful at the beginning of this final day, though Jamie and his colleague
were cautious in expressing an opinion.  No doubt Scotchmen are nothing if not cautious, and
the trifle of doubt they adventured when they surveyed the sky and studied the water might
be merely national caution asserting itself in the very nature of things.  Time passed, and
when at noon or thereabouts you sat down upon that very comfortable platform near the stern
of the boat, and wondered whether your back were as broken as it felt to be, a cold shiver
went through you as the horrible thought flashed into your mind.  "Good heavens! surely this
is not going to be another blank?"  The sun, at any rate, after shining brightly for a couple
of hours, retired behind the clouds now rolling up from south-west; wind, in meagre catspaws,
skirmished across the dub below, reserved for the afternoon, and you prayed that it would strengthen
to half a gale.

That grand water above--all streams of a model character--was fished fairly, perseveringly;
Wilkinson, Jock Scott, Silver Grey, Greenwell, and Stephenson were tried in succession, large
and medium.  The afternoon wore on apace without a sign.  Down under the high rocks, wooded
to the water's edge, you repeated the work of the forenoon, trying, in addition to the flies
already named, a harlequin-looking pattern which you had seen amongst Forrest's tempting collection,
a novelty named Tommy Adkins.  It did no effective service, however. With a levity pardonable
at that time you hummed, "Tommy, make room for your uncle," and put up a large Wilkinson, one
of the Kelso-tied double hooks, than which you cannot get better.  Down to the weir and back
again to the same old tune--nothing.  An angler from below came up for a chat and told you
that he had taken a grilse, and you envied him the possession of that measly little kipper.

By and by there was a pluck beneath the water, and you struck. Whatever else it was, it was
no fish; but you carefully winched up and brought in a black kitten not long drowned.  Fortune
was not content with smiting you, it derided.  As you blushingly remarked to the laughing but
unappreciative Jamie, this was nothing short of catastrophe.  Jamie beguiled the next drift
by reminiscences of Sir George Griffith (the angling father of an angling son), Alfred Denison,
Liddell, John Bright, George Rooper, and other anglers whom he had piloted to victory--a charming
method of rubbing the salt into your smarts.

The dogcart was to be at the head of the dub at five, and the rumble of its wheels had been
heard while we were yet about fifty yards from the landing place on the upward course, fishing
deep, and letting the long line work slowly round to its farthest limit in the wake.  There
were no more puns now; I freely admit that I was silent--ay, depressed. Jamie, too, was disappointed;
a couple of spectators on the bank were also practising the silence of sympathy.  The game
was up, and nothing need be said.

Ah! what a magnificent swirl.  Deep down went the fish, as up went the rod, and, backache and
despondency vanishing, I held him hard.  The first dash of the fish told me an unexpected and
alarming bit of news. The confounded winch would not run out with the salmon, and I had to
ease out line with the left hand and keep the big rod raised with the right.  Luckily the winch
worked after a fashion when reeled in, and if the single gut at the end of the twisted cast
would hold all might be well.  And behold it did hold.  The fish was heavy, as everyone saw
from the first, and it behaved fairly well.  One ugly rush, which was the critical point of
the battle, passed without accident, and the salmon was revealed--a silvery beauty that was
more than ever your heart's desire.  Easy and firm was the motto now.  The fish was at last
safe in Jamie's net, and if it was beaten so was I, thanks to the treacherous reel.  The prize
was a baggit of 22 lb., as bright as a spring fish, and perfectly shaped.

CHAPTER V

MUSINGS OF A BUSH RIDE

Here I am riding along the sandy track all alone in the Australian bush, flicking off a wattle
blossom singled out from the yellow mass with my hunting crop, fancying it is a fly rod, and
rehearsing the old trick of sending a fly into a particular leaf.  Ah! little mare Brownie,
what are you doing?  Did you never before see a charred stump that you should shy so?  Do you
fancy that you are a thoroughbred that you should bolt at such a gentle touch of the spur?
So you espy the half-way house, do you, and fancy that fifteen miles, up and down, in a trifle
under two hours, has earned you a spell, a bit of a feed, and something of a washing?  And
you are right.  Take charge, Mr. Blackfellow-ostler, and while you do your duty let me amuse
myself with my notebook.  After all, memory is even-handed.  It keeps us in remembrance of
many things we would fain never think of more; but it performs similar service for others that
are pleasant to ponder over. Out of the saddle bag I have taken a copy of the Gentleman's Magazine,
newly arrived by this morning's mail, and while the mare took her own time up the hills I have
been glancing through a "Red Spinner" article on "Angling in Queensland," with an author's
pardonable desire to see how it comes out in print.  That was why I took to making casts at
the leaves with the riding whip.  That is why, halting here for an hour on the crest of a hill,
overlooking scrub of glossy green, bright patches of young maize, and a river shimmering in
the valley, I am noting a few of the best-day memories which the easy paces of Brownie have
allowed me in the saddle.

What a day was that amongst the trout on the Chess!  I wrote for permission to spend one afternoon
only upon certain private waters, and the noble owner by return of post sent me an order for
two days.  It was June.  The meadows, hedgerows--ay! and even the prosaic railway embankments--were
decked with floral colouring, and at Rickmansworth I had to linger on the platform to take
another look at the foliage heavily shading the old churchyard, and at the distant woods to
the left.  When I came back to quarters, after dark, having fished the river for a few hours,
I began to think I might as well have stopped in London.  The fish would not rise that afternoon,
and there was but a beggarly brace in the basket.  Some wretch above had been mowing his lawn
and casting the contents of the machine into the stream at regular intervals.  He got rid of
his grass, certainly; but this was no gain to me, whose hooks perseveringly caught the fragments
floating by.  At last the grass pest ceased.  The mowing man had left his task at six o'clock,
no doubt, and the soft twilight would soon come on--time dear to anglers.  But the cattle had
an innings then.  During the most precious hour they waded into the river--higher up, of course--and
a pretty state of discolour they made of it.  In this way the first essay left me abundance
of room to hope for the morrow.

Fresh, sweet, and dewy it was at four o'clock on the next morning.  The keeper had told me
of a certain upper reach of quiet water where, during the Mayfly carnival a fortnight before,
Mr. Francis Francis had astonished the natives.  As a rule the fishing is not good until the
trout have got well over their Mayfly debauch, but I determined to work hard, nevertheless,
if haply I might experience that traditional exception by which the rule is proven.  The fish
in this part, which was in truth practically a millhead, seemed to be feeding close to the
bank.  The first cast secured something--but what was very uncertain. A trout would not wobble
and tug in that sullen, carthorse manner.  Lo! it was a pickerel.  A second time, lo! it was
a pickerel.  The next fish, however, was a trout--a big and somewhat lazy fellow, who allowed
me to bring him to the top of the water, and to wait (with him well in hand, however) to see
what his next movement would be.  As he appeared to be reticent about troubling me with an
orthodox tussle, I gave him no further grace, but winched him in and netted him out.  His colours
faded at once, and the dirty grey mottlings which broke out upon his sides proclaimed him a
degenerate.  One other big fellow--they were each 2 1/2 lb.--went to keep him company, and
then, the sun being now high in heaven, I returned to breakfast.

About three o'clock in the afternoon it was cloudy, and a gentle, melancholy, sighing west
wind wafted to my assistance in the lower meadows, where the stream is small and typical of
perpetual motion. The keeper and his boy strolled along towards five o'clock, and the game
was by this time so merry that they never left me so long as I could see to throw a fly.  Smooth
water or broken, deep or shallow, alike gave up its increase.  The fish were not particular
as to the fly, with the one exception of the black gnat, which they would not as much as look
at.  Replace it with a governor or coachman, and they came with a heartfelt eagerness most
charming to behold.  As day declined they rose short, and when the vapours began to distil
from the meadows they retired from business.

The keeper volunteered a statement.  He said he would not care to carry the basket half a dozen
miles; whereupon I offered a suggestion. Acting upon this, he turned the spoil out upon the
buttercups.  There were thirty trout, averaging 3/4 lb. each, and not reckoning the invalid,
which came out on the top of the heap, so mottled and dull that it bore no resemblance to its
beautiful associates.  The keeper that night received double largess.  I had to exercise much
self-control to keep myself from smiting him familiarly on the back and executing a Red Indian
war dance around the victims.  He said he hoped I would come again to those regions, turned
over the coin I gave him, and intimated that if the trout (which he was now packing neatly
into the creel) were not satisfied with the gentlemanly manner in which they were treated they
would be pleased at nothing.  And it was not for me to dissent or rebuke.

My best-day memory of grayling fishing up to my colonial interlude is of a wet, muggy November
day in Herefordshire.  It was late in the month, and as the previous week had been marked by
early frost, the sere leaves, having lost their grip, were rattling down on the water with
every gust, and, indeed, from the mere weight of the rain.  It was pretty practice, dropping
the flies so as to avoid these little impediments; but it wasted time and strained the temper,
for, according to custom in grayling land at that period, one had attached three or four flies
to the cast, and thereby increased the chances of fouling. Yet I finished the day with eighteen
grayling, to be placed to the contra account against a most complete soaking.  The better fish
were invariably found in the eye or tail of a moderate stream, the rest on gravelly or sandy
shelves where the water was about 2 ft. deep.  The former hooked themselves, taking the fly
fairly under water; the latter came direct to the surface, and demanded careful striking and
playing.

