     [Michel Ney, Styled by Napoleon the "bravest of the brave," was
     born 1769, at Sarre-Louis (now in Prussia), son of a cooper.
     Entered the army as a private 1787, adjutant-general 1794, general
     of brigade 1796, general of division 1799, marshal 1804, Duke of
     Elchingen 1805, Prince of Moskwa 1812, and commanded the rear-guard
     in the famous retreat from Russia.  On the return from Elba he went
     over to Napoleon; was at Waterloo.  Was afterwards taken, and in
     spite of the terms of the surrender of Paris was tried for treason,
     and shot in the gardens of the Luxembourg, Dec. 8, 1815.--TRANS.]

and the other M. de Broc.  All four were very young and charming, and few theaters in Paris
could show four actresses as pretty.  In addition to which, they showed much grace in their
acting, and played their parts with real talent; and were as natural on the stage as in the
saloon, where they bore themselves with exquisite grace and refinement.  At first the repertoire
contained little variety, though the pieces were generally well selected.  The first representation
which I attended was the "Barber of Seville "in which Isabey played the role of Figaro, and
Mademoiselle Hortense that of Rosine--and the "Spiteful Lover."  Another time I saw played
the "Unexpected Wager," and "False Consultations."  Hortense and Eugene played this last piece
perfectly; and I still recall that, in the role of Madame le Blanc, Hortense appeared prettier
than ever in the character of an old woman, Eugene representing Le Noir, and Lauriston the
charlatan.  The First Consul, as I have said, confined himself to the role of spectator; but
he seemed to take in these fireside plays, so to speak, the greatest pleasure, laughed and
applauded heartily, though sometimes he also criticised.

Madame Bonaparte was also highly entertained; and even if she could not always boast of the
successful acting of her children, "the chiefs of the troupe," it sufficed her that it was
an agreeable relaxation to her husband, and seemed to give him pleasure; for her constant study
was to contribute to the happiness of the great man who had united her destiny with his own.

When the day for the presentation of a play had been appointed, there was never any postponement,
but often a change of the play; not because of the indisposition, or fit of the blues, of an
actress (as often happens in the theaters of Paris), but for more serious reasons.  It sometimes
happened that M. d'Etieulette received orders to rejoin his regiment, or an important mission
was confided to Count Almaviva, though Figaro and Rosine always remained at their posts; and
the desire of pleasing the First Consul was, besides, so general among all those who surrounded
him, that the substitutes did their best in the absence of the principals, and the play never
failed for want of an actor.

     [Michau, of the Comedie Francaise, was the instructor of the
     troupe.  Wherever it happened that an actor was wanting in
     animation, Michau would exclaim.  "Warmth!  Warmth!  Warmth!"
     --Note by CONSTANT.]

CHAPTER III.

I had been only a very short time in the service of Madame Bonaparte when I made the acquaintance
of Charvet, the concierge of Malmaison, and in connection with this estimable man became each
day more and more intimate, till at last he gave me one of his daughters in marriage. I was
eager to learn from him all that he could tell me concerning Madame Bonaparte and the First
Consul prior to my entrance into the house; and in our frequent conversations he took the greatest
pleasure in satisfying my curiosity.  It is to him I owe the following details as to the mother
and daughter.

When General Bonaparte set out for Egypt, Madame Bonaparte accompanied him as far as Toulon,
and was extremely anxious to go with him to Egypt. When the general made objections, she observed
that having been born a Creole, the heat of the climate would be more favorable than dangerous
to her.  By a singular coincidence it was on 'La Pomone' that she wished to make the journey;
that is to say, on the very same vessel which in her early youth had brought her from Martinique
to France.  General Bonaparte, finally yielding to the wishes of his wife, promised to send
'La Pomone' for her, and bade her go in the meantime to take the waters at Plombieres.  The
matter being arranged between husband and wife, Madame Bonaparte was delighted to go to the
springs of Plombieres which she had desired to visit for a long time, knowing, like every one
else, the reputation these waters enjoyed for curing barrenness in women.

Madame Bonaparte had been only a short time at Plombieres, when one morning, while occupied
in hemming a turban and chatting with the ladies present, Madame de Cambis, who was on the
balcony, called to her to come and see a pretty little dog passing along the street.  All the
company hastened with Madame Bonaparte to the balcony, which caused it to fall with a frightful
crash.  By a most fortunate chance, no one was killed; though Madame de Cambis had her leg
broken, and Madame Bonaparte was most painfully bruised, without, however, receiving any fracture.
Charvet, who was in a room behind the saloon, heard the noise, and at once had a sheep killed
and skinned, and Madame Bonaparte wrapped in the skin.  It was a long while before she regained
her health, her arms and her hands especially being so bruised that she was for a long time
unable to use them; and it was necessary to cut up her food, feed her, and, in fact, perform
the same offices for her as for an infant. 

Like the rapidly-flitting scenes of some dioramic exhibition passed the crowding events of the next
half hour before the half-bewildered senses of our heroine. The sudden appearance of Woodburn
in the now deserted yard of her prison-house, whither, the moment the battle was won, he had
hastened, with the usual anxiety of the lover made intense by the distracting fear that she
might have been carried off by the escaping tories,--his eager inquiries for her presence and
safety,--her own involuntary but silent response to his calls, by rushing out to meet him, and placing
herself under his coveted protection,--the hurried congratulations that passed between them,--the
complimentary greetings of the gallant hero of the day, and other distinguished persons soon
gathering around her and her fair companion, as they stood shrinking from the admiration and applause
which the conduct of one, and the position of both, had called forth from the lips of all,--their
welcome escape from the embarrassing scene, in a carriage, under the guidance of Bart, to whom
they were given in charge by Woodburn, as he hastily departed, at the head of a chosen band of
followers, in pursuit of Peters, and a body of tories that were discovered to have escaped,--the
passage of the vehicle through the contested field, ploughed up by artillery, blackened by the
fire and smoke of battle, and strewed with the dying and the dead, among whom the busy groups
of the dismissed soldiery were every where scattered in pursuit of their different objects--here to
collect plunder from their slain enemies, and there to minister to the wounded, or search among
the fallen for missing comrades,--all these followed so rapidly upon a victory, the sudden
announcement of which had nearly overpowered her with joyful surprise, that it was not till
she and her companion had passed beyond the confines of the battle-field, and entered upon
the comparatively solitary road leading towards the village of Bennington,
to which they were now directing their course, that she could realize
her happy deliverance.

When mademoiselle arrived at Plombieres, her mother's health was almost restored; so that the
pupil of Madame Campan found there all the distractions which please and delight at the age
which the daughter of Madame Bonaparte had then attained.

There is truth in the saying that in all evil there is good, for had this accident not happened
to Madame Bonaparte, it is very probable she would have become a prisoner of the English; in
fact, she learned that 'La Pomone', the vessel on which she wished to make the voyage, had
fallen into the power of the enemies of France.  General Bonaparte, in all his letters, still
dissuaded his wife from the plan she had of rejoining him; and, consequently, she returned
to Paris.

On her arrival Josephine devoted her attention to executing a wish General Bonaparte had expressed
to her before leaving.  He had remarked to her that he should like, on his return, to have
a country seat; and he charged his brother to attend to this, which Joseph, however, failed
to do.  Madame Bonaparte, who, on the contrary, was always in search of what might please her
husband, charged several persons to make excursions in the environs of Paris, in order to ascertain
whether a suitable dwelling could be found.  After having vacillated long between Ris and Malmaison,
she decided on the latter, which she bought from M. Lecoulteux-Dumoley, for, I think, four
hundred thousand francs.  Such were the particulars which Charvet was kind enough to give me
when I first entered the service of Madame Bonaparte.  Every one in the house loved to speak
of her; and it was certainly not to speak evil, for never was woman more beloved by all who
surrounded her, and never has one deserved it more.  General Bonaparte was also an excellent
man in the retirement of private life.

After the return of the First Consul from his campaign in Egypt, several attempts against his
life had been made; and the police had warned him many times to be on his guard, and not to
risk himself alone in the environs of Malmaison.  The First Consul had been very careless up
to this period; but the discovery of the snares which were laid for him, even in the privacy
of his family circle, forced him to use precautions and prudence.  It has been stated since,
that these pretended plots were only fabrications of the police to render themselves necessary
to the First Consul, or, perhaps, of the First Consul himself, to redouble the interest which
attached to his person, through fear of the perils which menaced his life; and the absurdity
of these attempts is alleged as proof of this.  I could not pretend to elucidate such mysteries;
but it seems to me that in such matters absurdity proves nothing, or, at least, it does not
prove that such plots did not exist.  The conspirators of that period set no bounds to their
extravagance; for what could be more absurd, and at the same time more real, than the atrocious
folly of the infernal machine?

Be that as it may, I shall relate what passed under my own eyes during the first month of my
stay at Malmaison.  No one there, or, at least, no one in my presence, showed the least doubt
of the reality of these attempts.

In order to get rid of the First Consul, all means appeared good to his enemies: they noted
everything in their calculations, even his absence of mind.  The following occurrence is proof
of this:

There were repairs and ornamentations to be made to the mantel in the rooms of the First Consul
at Malmaison.  The contractor in charge of this work had sent marblecutters, amongst whom had
slipped in, it seems, a few miserable wretches employed by the conspirators.  The persons attached
to the First Consul were incessantly on the alert, and exercised the greatest watchfulness;
and it was observed that among these workmen there were men who pretended to work, but whose
air and manner contrasted strongly with their occupation.  These suspicions were unfortunately
only too well founded; for when the apartments had been made ready to receive the First Consul,
and just as he was on the eve of occupying them, some one making a final inspection found on
the desk at which he would first seat himself, a snuff-box, in every respect like one of those
which he constantly used.  It was thought at first that this box really belonged to him, and
that it had been forgotten and left there by his valet; but doubts inspired by the suspicious
manner of a few of the marble-cutters, leading to further investigation, the tobacco was examined
and analyzed. It was found to be poisoned.

The authors of this perfidy had, it is said, at this time, communication with other conspirators,
who engaged to attempt another means of ridding themselves of the First Consul.  They promised
to attack the guard of the chateau (Malmaison), and to carry off by force the chief of the
government.  With this intention, they had uniforms made like those of the consular guards,
who then stood sentinel, day and night, over the First Consul, and followed him on horseback
in his excursions.  In this costume, and by the aid of signals, with their accomplices (the
pretended marble-cutters) on the inside, they could easily have approached and mingled with
the guard, who were fed and quartered at the chateau.  They could even have reached the First
Consul, and carried him off.  However, this first project was abandoned as too uncertain; and
the conspirators flattered themselves that they would succeed in their undertaking more surely,
and with less danger, by taking advantage of the frequent journeys of the First Consul to Paris.
By means of their disguise they planned to distribute themselves on the road, among the guides
of the escort, and massacre them, their rallying-point being the quarries of Nanterre; but
their plots were for the second time foiled.  There was in the park at Malmaison a deep quarry;
and fears being entertained that they would profit by it to conceal themselves therein, and
exercise some violence against the First Consul on one of his solitary walks, it was decided
to secure it with an iron door.

On the 19th of February, at one in the afternoon, the First Consul went in state to the Tuileries,
which was then called the Government palace, to install himself there with all his household.
With him were his two colleagues; one of whom, the third consul,  was to occupy the same residence,
and be located in the Pavilion de Flore. What means that heavy firing which suddenly comes echoing
over the forest from the west? Does it portend only some skirmish on the line of the retreat, where
a portion of the foe have come to a stand to shield the rest, or
favor their escape?  The saber that the First Consul wore at this ceremony
was magnificent, and had also been presented to him by this monarch on the same occasion.

A remarkable thing in this formal change of residence was that the acclamations and enthusiasm
of the crowd, and even of the most distinguished spectators, who filled the windows of rue
Thionville and of the quai Voltaire, were addressed only to the First Consul, and to the young
warriors of his brilliant staff, who were yet bronzed by the sun of the Pyramids or of Italy.
At their head rode General Lannes and Murat; the first easy to recognize by his bold bearing
and soldierly manners; the second by the same qualities, and further by a striking elegance,
both of costume and equipments.  His new title of brother-in-law of the First Consul contributed,
also, greatly to fix upon him the attention of all.  As for myself, all my attention was absorbed
by the principal personage of the cortege, whom, like every one around me, I regarded with
something like a religious reverence; and by his stepson, the son of my excellent mistress,
himself once my master,--the brave, modest, good Prince Eugene, who at that time, however,
was not yet a prince.  On his arrival at the Tuileries, the First Consul took possession at
once of the apartments which he afterwards occupied, and which were formerly part of the royal
apartments.  These apartments consisted of a bed-chamber, a bathroom, a cabinet, and a saloon,
in which he gave audience in the forenoon; of a second saloon, in which were stationed his
aides-de-camp on duty, and which he used as a dining-room; and also a very large antechamber.
Madame Bonaparte had her separate apartments on the ground floor, the same which she afterwards
occupied as Empress.  Beneath the suite of rooms occupied by the First Consul was the room
of Bourrienne, his private secretary, which communicated with the apartments of the First Consul
by means of a private staircase.

Although at this period there were already courtiers, there was not, however, yet a court,
and the etiquette was exceedingly simple.  The First Consul, as I believe I have already said,
slept in the same bed with his wife; and they lived together, sometimes at the Tuileries, sometimes
at Malmaison. But closer and closer pressed the exulting and determined foe; and, although well
and bravely did his weakened and exhausted men repel the fierce charges of their assailants, yet it
soon became evident that they could not long withstand the repeated assaults of those heavy
and disciplined columns upon their unequal lines. Both the men and their officers began to
exchange doubtful and despairing glances; and even their bold and unyielding chief was seen
to look uneasily around him.  There were, beside these, fifteen
persons to discharge the ordinary duties of the household.  De Bourrienne superintended everything,
and regulated expenses, and, although very strict, won the esteem and affection of every one.

He was kind, obliging, and above all very just; and consequently at the time of his disgrace
the whole household was much distressed.  As for myself, I retain a sincerely respectful recollection
of him; and I believe that, though he has had the misfortune to find enemies among the great,
he found among his inferiors only grateful hearts and sincere regrets.

Some days after this installation, there was at the chateau a reception of the diplomatic corps.
It will be seen from the details, which I shall give, how very simple at that time was the
etiquette of what they already called the Court.

At eight o'clock in the evening, the apartments of Madame Bonaparte, situated, as I have just
said, on the ground floor adjoining the garden, were crowded with people.  There was an incredible
wealth of plumes, diamonds, and dazzling toilets.  The crowd was so great that it was found
necessary to throw open the bedroom of Madame Bonaparte, as the two saloons were so full there
was not room to move.

When, after much embarrassment and difficulty, every one had found a place as they could, Madame
Bonaparte was announced, and entered, leaning on the arm of Talleyrand.  She wore a dress of
white muslin with short sleeves, and a necklace of pearls.  Her head was uncovered; and the
beautiful braids of her hair, arranged with charming negligence, were held in place by a tortoise-shell
comb.  The flattering murmur which greeted her appearance was most grateful to her; and never,
I believe, did she display more grace and majesty.

Talleyrand,

