"Could not you tell her?" he had said to his mother, with very little of that manliness in
his face on which his mother now so prided herself.  But La Mere Bauche explained to him that
it was a part of the general agreement that Marie was to hear his decision from his own mouth.

"But you need not regard it," said the capitaine, with the most indifferent air in the world.
"The girl expects it.  Only she has some childish idea that she is bound till you yourself
release her. I don't think she will be troublesome."  Adolphe at that moment did feel that
he should have liked to kick the capitaine out of his mother's house.

And where should the meeting take place?  In the hall of the bath- house, suggested Madame
Bauche; because, as she observed, they could walk round and round, and nobody ever went there
at that time of day. But to this Adolphe objected; it would be so cold and dismal and melancholy.

The capitaine thought that Mere Bauche's little parlour was the place; but La Mere herself
did not like this.  They might be overheard, as she well knew; and she guessed that the meeting
would not conclude without some sobs that would certainly be bitter and might perhaps be loud.

"Send her up to the grotto, and I will follow her," said Adolphe.  On this therefore they agreed.
Now the grotto was a natural excavation in a high rock, which stood precipitously upright over
the establishment of the baths.  A steep zigzag path with almost never- ending steps had been
made along the face of the rock from a little flower garden attached to the house which lay
immediately under the mountain.  Close along the front of the hotel ran a little brawling river,
leaving barely room for a road between it and the door; over this there was a wooden bridge
leading to the garden, and some two or three hundred yards from the bridge began the steps
by which the ascent was made to the grotto.

When the season was full and the weather perfectly warm the place was much frequented.  There
was a green table in it, and four or five deal chairs; a green garden seat also was there,
which however had been removed into the innermost back corner of the excavation, as its hinder
legs were somewhat at fault.  A wall about two feet high ran along the face of it, guarding
its occupants from the precipice.  In fact it was no grotto, but a little chasm in the rock,
such as we often see up above our heads in rocky valleys, and which by means of these steep
steps had been turned into a source of exercise and amusement for the visitors at the hotel.

Standing at the wall one could look down into the garden, and down also upon the shining slate
roof of Madame Bauche's house; and to the left might be seen the sombre, silent, snow-capped
top of stern old Canigou, king of mountains among those Eastern Pyrenees.

And so Madame Bauche undertook to send Marie up to the grotto, and Adolphe undertook to follow
her thither.  It was now spring; and though the winds had fallen and the snow was no longer
lying on the lower peaks, still the air was fresh and cold, and there was no danger that any
of the few guests at the establishment would visit the place.

"Make her put on her cloak, Mere Bauche," said the capitaine, who did not wish that his bride
should have a cold in her head on their wedding-day.  La Mere Bauche pished and pshawed, as
though she were not minded to pay any attention to recommendations on such subjects from the
capitaine.  But nevertheless when Marie was seen slowly to creep across the little bridge about
fifteen minutes after this time, she had a handkerchief on her head, and was closely wrapped
in a dark brown cloak.

