'Why, father's ship's come in,' said her good-natured friend from the docks, coming forward
and wiping his lips, as if he had just finished a good meal.  'What makes you be doing only
middling?'

'Father didn't come home in the ship,' replied Meg, her voice faltering a little.

'Come in and tell us all about it,' he said.  'Hollo, Mrs Blossom! just step this way, if you
please.'

There was a little kitchen at the back of the shop, from which came a very savoury smell of
cooking, as the door opened, and a round, fat, rosy-cheeked woman, of about fifty years of
age, looked out inquiringly.  She came a step or two nearer the door, as Meg's friend beckoned
to her with a clasp-knife he held in his hand.

'These little 'uns look cold and hungry, don't they, Mrs Blossom?' he said.  'You smell something
as smells uncommon good, don't you?' he asked of Meg, who had sniffed a little, unconsciously.

'Yes, please, sir,' answered Meg.

'I've ate as much as ever I can eat for to-day,' said her friend, 'so you give 'em the rest,
Mrs Blossom, and I'll be off.  Only just tell me why father's not come home in his ship.'

'He was took bad on the other side of the world,' replied Meg, looking up tearfully into his
good-tempered face, 'and they was forced to leave him behind in a hospital.  That's why.'

'And what's mother doing?' he asked.

'Mother's dead,' she answered.

'Dead!' echoed her friend.  'And who's taking care of you young 'uns?'

'There's nobody to take care of us but God,' said Meg, simply and softly.

'Well, I never!' cried Mrs Blossom, seizing the baby out of Meg's, and clasping it in her own
arms.  'I never heard anything like that.'

'Nor me,' said the man, catching up Robin, and bearing him off into the warm little kitchen,
where a saucepan of hot tripe was simmering on the hob, and a round table, with two plates
upon it, was drawn up close to the fire.  He put Robin down on Mrs Blossom's seat, and lifted
Meg into a large arm-chair he had just quitted.

'I guess you could eat a morsel of tripe,' he said, ladling it out in overflowing spoonfuls
upon the plates.  'Mrs Blossom, some potatoes, if you please, and some bread; and do you feed
the baby whilst the little woman gets her dinner.  Now, I'm off.  Mrs Blossom, you settle about
'em coming here again.'

He was off, as he said, in an instant.  Meg sat in her large arm-chair, grasping a big knife
and fork in her small hands, but she could not swallow a morsel at first for watching Robin
and the baby, who was sucking in greedily spoonfuls of potatoes, soaked in the gravy.  Mrs
Blossom urged her to fall to, and she tried to obey; but her pale face quivered all over, and
letting fall her knife and fork, she hid it in her trembling hands.

'If you please, ma'am, I'm only so glad,' said little Meg as soon as she could command her
voice.  'Robbie and baby were so hungry, and I hadn't got anythink to give 'em.'

'I suppose you aint hungry yourself neither,' observed Mrs Blossom, a tear rolling down a little
channel between her round cheeks and her nose.

'Oh, but ain't I!' said Meg, recovering herself still more.  'I've had nothink since last night,
and then it were only a crust as Kitty give me.'

'Well, dear, fall to, and welcome,' answered Mrs Blossom.  'And who's Kitty?'

'It's a grown-up person as lives in the back attic,' answered Meg, after eating her first mouthful.
'She helps me all she can.  She's took all my things to the pawn-shop for me, because she can
get more money than me.  She's as good as can be to us.'

'Are all your things gone to pawn?' inquired Mrs Blossom.

'I've got baby's cloak and hood left,' she replied mournfully.  'He wouldn't give more than
a shilling for 'em, and I thought it wasn't worth while parting with 'em for that.  I tried
to keep Robbie's cap and pinafore, that were as good as new, but I were forced to let 'em go.
And our shoes, ma'am,' added Meg, taking Robin's bare and bleeding foot into her hand: 'see
what poor Robbie's done to himself.'

'Poor little dear!' said Mrs Blossom pityingly.  'I'll wash his poor little feet for him when
he's finished his dinner.  You get on with yours likewise, my love.'

Meg was silent for some minutes, busily feasting on the hot tripe, and basking in the agreeable
warmth of the cosy room.  It was a wonderfully bright little spot for that quarter of London,
but the brightness was all inside.  Outside, at about three feet from the window, rose a wall
so high as to shut out every glimpse of the sky; but within everything was so clean and shining,
even to the quarried floor, that it was difficult to believe in the mud and dirt of the streets
without.  Mrs Blossom herself looked fresh and comely, like a countrywoman; but there was a
sad expression on her round face, plain enough to be seen when she was not talking.

'My dear,' she said when Meg laid down her knife and fork, and assured her earnestly that she
could eat no more, 'what may you be thinking of doing?'

'I don't hardly know,' she answered.  'I expect father home every day. If I could only get
enough for the children, and a crust or two for me, we could get along.  But we can't do nothink
more, I know.'

'You'll be forced to go into the house,' said Mrs Blossom.

'Oh, no, no, no!' cried little Meg, drawing Robin to her, and with a great effort lifting him
on to her lap, where he almost eclipsed her. 'I couldn't ever do that.  We'll get along somehow
till father comes home.'

'Where is it you live?' inquired Mrs Blossom.

'Oh, it's not a nice place at all,' said Meg, who dreaded having any visitor.  'It's along
Rosemary Lane, and down a street, and then down another smaller street, and up a court.  That's
where it is.'

Mrs Blossom sat meditating a few minutes, with the baby on her lap, stretching itself lazily
and contentedly before the fire; while Meg, from behind Robin, watched her new friend's face
anxiously.

'Well,' she said, 'you come here again to-morrow, and I'll ask Mr George what's to be done.
That was Mr George as was here, and he's my lodger.  He took you in, and maybe he'll agree
to do something.'

'Thank you, ma'am,' said Meg gratefully.  'Please, have you any little children of your own?'

The tears ran faster now down Mrs Blossom's cheeks, and she was obliged to wipe them away before
she could answer.

'I'd a little girl like you,' she said, 'ten years ago.  Such a pretty little girl, so rosy,
and bright, and merry, as all the folks round took notice of.  She was like the apple of my
eye, she was.'

'What was she called?' asked Meg, with an eager interest.

'Why, the neighbours called her Posy because her name was Blossom,' said Mrs Blossom, smiling
amidst her tears. That his soul might afterwards occupy such a station as would be most suitable
to his character, it was sentenced to inhabit the body of that finical,
grinning, and mischievous little mimick with four legs, which you
now behold before you."
Posy they called her, and a real posy she was.'

Mrs Blossom paused, and looked sadly down upon the happy baby, shaking her head as if she was
sorely grieved at heart.

'And Posy died?' said Meg softly.

'No, no!' cried Mrs Blossom.  'It 'ud been a hundred times better if she'd died.  She grew
up bad.  I hope you'll never live to grow up bad, little girl.  And she ran away from home;
and I lost her, her own mother that had nursed her when she was a little baby like this.  I'd
ha' been thankful to ha' seen her lying dead afore my eyes in her coffin.'

'That's bad,' said little Meg, in a tone of trouble and tender pity.

'It's nigh upon three years ago,' continued Mrs Blossom, looking down still upon the baby,
as if she were telling her; 'and I gave up my shop to my son's wife, and come here, thinking
maybe she'd step in some day or other to buy a loaf of bread or something, because I knew she'd
come up to London.  But she's never so much as passed by the window--leastways when I've been
watching, and I'm always watching.  I can't do my duty by Mr George for staring out o' the window.'

'Watching for Posy?' said little Meg.

'Ay, watching for Posy,' repeated Mrs Blossom, 'and she never goes by.'

'Have you asked God to let her go by?' asked Meg.

'Ay, my dear,' said Mrs Blossom.  'I ask Him every blessed day o' my life.'

'Then she's sure to come some day,' said Meg joyfully.  'There's no mistake about that, because
Jesus says it in the Bible, and He knows all about God.  You've asked Him, and He'll do it.
It's like father coming.  I don't know whether he'll come to-day or to-morrow, or when it'll
be; but he will come.'

'God bless and love you!' cried Mrs Blossom, suddenly putting baby down in Meg's lap, and clasping
all three of them in her arms.  'I'll believe it, I will.  He's sent you to give me more heart.
God love you all!'

It was some while before Mrs Blossom regained her composure; but when she did, and it was time
for Meg and the children to go home before it was quite dark, she bound up Robin's foot in
some rags, and gave Meg a loaf to carry home with her, bidding her be sure to come again the
next day.  Meg looked back to the shop many times before turning the corner of the street,
and saw Mrs Blossom's round face, with its white cap border, still leaning over the door, looking
after them, and nodding pleasantly each time she caught Meg's backward glance.  At the corner
they all three turned round, Meg holding up baby as high as her arms could reach, and after
this last farewell they lost sight of their new friend.

CHAPTER X

Little Meg as Charwoman

Meg and her children did not fail to make their appearance the next morning at Mrs Blossom's
shop, where she welcomed them heartily, and made them comfortable again by the kitchen fire.
When they were well warmed, and had finished some bread, and some coffee which had been kept
hot for them, Mrs Blossom put on a serious business air.

'Mr George and me have talked you over,' she said, 'and he's agreed to something.  I can't
do my duty by him as I should wish, you know why; and I want a little maid to help me.'

'Oh, if you please,' faltered little Meg, 'I couldn't leave our attic. I promised mother I
wouldn't go away till father comes home.  Don't be angry, please.'

'I'm not angry, child,' continued Mrs Blossom.  'I only want a little maid to come mornings,
and go away nights, like a char-woman.'

'Mother used to go charing sometimes,' remarked Meg. 

To convince you that I have not misrepresented his character, I'll try the experiment immediately."
Accordingly, the good Bramin asked him before us all, if, upon the condition above-mentioned,
he would leave off his greedy and selfish behaviour.
Would that suit your views?'

'What could I do with Robbie and baby?' asked Meg, with an air of perplexed thought.

'Couldn't you leave 'em with a neighbour?' suggested Mrs Blossom.

Meg pondered deeply for a while.  Kitty had told her the night before that she had got some
sailors' shirts to sew, and would stay at home to make them.  She could trust Robin and the
baby with Kitty, and instead of lighting a fire in her own attic she could give her the coals,
and so save her fuel, as part payment for taking charge of the children. Yet Meg felt a little
sad at the idea of leaving them for so long a time, and seeing so little of them each day,
and she knew they would miss her sorely.  But nothing else could be done, and she accepted
Mrs Blossom's offer thankfully.

'You needn't be here afore nine o' the morning,' said Mrs Blossom; 'it's too early for Posy
to be passing by; and you can go away again as soon as it's dark in the evening.  You mustn't
get any breakfast, you know, because that's in our bargain; and I'd never grudge you a meal's
meat for the children either, bless 'em!  They shall come and have a good tea with us sometimes,
they shall--specially on Sundays, when Mr George is at home; and if you'd only got your clothes
out o' pawn, we'd all go to church together.  But we'll see, we'll see.'

Meg entered upon her new duties the next morning, after committing the children, with many
lingering kisses and last good-byes, into Kitty's charge, who promised faithfully to be as
kind to them as Meg herself. If it had not been for her anxiety with regard to them, she would
have enjoyed nothing better than being Mrs Blossom's little maid.  The good woman was so kindly
and motherly that she won Meg's whole heart; and to see her sit by the shop window, knitting
a very large long stocking for Mr George, but with her eyes scanning every woman's face that
went by, made her feel full of an intense and childish interest.  She began herself to watch
for Posy, as her mother described her; and whenever the form of a grown-up girl darkened the
doorway, she held her breath to listen if Mrs Blossom called her by that pet name.  Mr George
also was very good to Meg in his bluff way, and bought her a pair of nearly new shoes with
his first week's wages, over and above the threepence a day which he paid her.  With Mrs Blossom
she held many a conversation about the lost girl, who had grown up wicked, and was therefore
worse than dead; and before long Mr George observed that Meg had done her a world of good.

Christmas Day was a great treat to Meg; for though Mr George went down into the country to
see his old father, Mrs Blossom invited her and the children to come to dinner, and to stay
with her till it was the little ones' bedtime.  When they sat round the fire in the afternoon
she told them wonderful stories about the country--of its fields, and gardens, and lanes.

'I like gardens,' said Robin, 'but I don't like lanes.'

'Why don't you like lanes?' asked Mrs Blossom.

'I know lots of lanes,' he answered.  'There's Rosemary Lane, and it's not nice, nor none of
'em.  They ain't nice like Temple Gardens.'

'Rosemary Lane!' repeated Mrs Blossom.  'Why, the lanes in the country are nothing like the
lanes in London.  They're beautiful roads, with tall trees growing all along 'em, and meeting
one another overhead; and there are roses and honeysuckles all about the hedges, and birds
singing, and the sun shining.  Only you don't know anything about roses, and honeysuckles,
and birds.'

'Are there any angels there?' asked Robin, fastening his glistening eyes upon her intently.

'Well, no,' said Mrs Blossom, 'not as I know of.'

'Is the devil in the country?' pursued Robin.

'Yes,' answered Mrs Blossom, 'I suppose he's there pretty much the same as here.  Folks can
be wicked anywhere, or else my Posy wouldn't have grown up bad.'

Robin asked no more questions, and Mrs Blossom was glad to talk of something else.  It was
a very happy day altogether, but it came too quickly to an end.  Meg wrapped up her children
well before turning out into the cold streets, and Mrs Blossom gave them a farewell kiss each,
with two to Meg because she was such a comfort to her.

When they reached their own attic they heard Kitty call to them, and Meg opened her door. 
She was sitting without any fire, stitching away as for her life at a coarse striped shirt,
lighted only by a small farthing candle; but she laid down her task for a minute, and raised
her thin pale face, and her eyes half blinded with tears and hard work.

'Where have you been all day, little Meg?' she asked.

'Me and the children have been at Mrs Blossom's, answered Meg, 'because it's Christmas Day:
and I wish you'd been there as well, Kitty.  We'd such a good dinner and tea.  She gave me
a bit of cake to bring home, and you shall have some of it.'

'No, no,' said Kitty, 'it 'ud choke me.'

'Oh, it couldn't; it's as nice as nice can be,' said Meg.  'You must just have a taste of it.'

'Did you go talking about that Posy again?' asked Kitty, bending diligently over her work.

'We always talk about her,' answered Meg, 'every day.  Mrs Blossom's watching for her to go
by all day long, you know.'

'She'll never go by,' said Kitty shortly.

'Oh, she's certain sure to go by some day,' cried Meg.  'Mrs Blossom asks God to let her go
by, every day of her life; and He's positive to do it.'

'If she's grown up so wicked,' argued Kitty, 'she didn't ought to go back to her mother, and
her such a good woman.  God won't send her back to her mother, you'll see.'

'But if God sent her back, her mother 'ud never think of her being wicked, she loves her so,'
said little Meg.  'If Robbie were ever so naughty, I'd keep on loving him till he was good again.'

'Well, Posy'll never go home no more,' said Kitty; and hot tears fell fast upon her work.

'She will, she will,' cried Meg.  'I expect her every day, like father. Perhaps they'll both
come home to-morrow.  I wish you'd ask God to let Posy and father come home to-morrow.'

'I'm too bad to ask God for anything,' sobbed Kitty.

'Well, I don't know,' said Meg sorrowfully.  'You're not bad to me or the children.  But I
must go to bed now.  Let us kiss you afore we go. Mrs Blossom kissed me twice, and said I was
a comfort to her.'

Kitty threw down her work, and clasped Meg strongly in her arms, pressing down Meg's head upon
her breast, and crying, 'Oh, my dear little Meg!  My good little Meg!'  Then she put them all
three gently out of her room, and bade them good-night and God bless them, in a husky and tremulous
voice.

CHAPTER XI

Little Meg's Baby

The new year came, but Meg's father had not arrived.  Kitty was having a mad outburst, as if
she had so long controlled herself that now it was necessary to break out into extra wickedness.
She came home late every night, very drunk, and shouting loud snatches of songs, which wakened
up the inmates of the lower stories, and drew upon her a storm of oaths.  But she continued
always good-natured and kind to Meg, and insisted upon having the daily charge of Robin and
the baby, though Meg left them in her care with a very troubled and anxious spirit.  Things
were looking very dark to the poor little woman; but she kept up as brave a heart as she could,
waiting from day to day for that long-deferred coming of her father, in which she believed
so firmly.

It was a little later than usual one evening, for the days were creeping out since the new
year, when Meg climbed wearily upstairs to Kitty's attic, in search of her children, but found
that they were not there.  Mr Grigg told her that he had seen Kitty take them out with her
in the afternoon; and even while he was speaking, Meg saw her staggering and rolling into the
court, with the baby fast asleep in her drunken arms.  Meg took it from her without a word,
and led Robin away upstairs.  Robin's face was flushed, and his hand was very hot; but the
baby lay in her arms heavily, without any movement or sign of life, except that the breath
came through her parted lips, and her eyelids stirred a little.  Meg locked the door of her
attic, and laid her baby on the bed, while she lighted the fire and got their tea ready.  Robin
looked strange, but he chattered away without ceasing, while he watched her set the things
in readiness.  But the baby would not awake.  It lay quite still on Meg's lap, and she poured
a little warm tea into its mouth, but it did not swallow it, only slept there with heavy eyelids,
and moving neither finger nor foot, in a strange, profound slumber.  It was smaller and thinner
than when mother died, thought Meg; and she lifted up the lifeless little hand to her lips,
half hoping that its eyes would unclose a little more, and that sweet, loving smile, with which
it always welcomed her return, would brighten its languid face. But baby was too soundly asleep
to smile.

Little Meg sat up all night, with the baby lying on her lap, moaning a little now and then
as its slumbers grew more broken, but never lifting up its eyelids to look into her face and
know it.  When the morning dawned it was still the same.  Could the baby be ill? asked Meg
of herself.  It did not seem to be in any pain; yet she carried it to the door, and called
softly for Kitty to come and look at it; but there was no reply, only from below came up harsh
sounds of children screaming and angry women quarrelling.  Oaths and threats and shrieks were
all the answer Meg's feeble cry received.  She sat down again on her mother's low chair before
the fire, and made the baby comfortable on her lap; while Robin stood at her knee, looking
down pitifully at the tiny, haggard, sleeping face, which Meg's little hand could almost cover.
What was she to do? Poor foolish youth, if he had been less fond of his belly, and more attentive
to his book, and to the good advice of his parents, his soul would not have been confined as
it now is, in the body of that nasty, greedy, and noisy little animal
which you see before you.
At the thought that perhaps baby was going to die, two or three tears of extreme anguish rolled
down little Meg's cheeks, and fell upon baby's face; but she could not cry aloud, or weep many
tears. She felt herself falling into a stupor of grief and despair, when Robin laid his hand
upon her arm.

'Why don't you ask God to waken baby?' he asked.

'I don't know whether it 'ud be a good thing,' she answered.  'Mother said she'd ask Him over
and over again to let her take baby along with her, and that 'ud be better than staying here.
I wish we could all go to heaven; only I don't know whatever father 'ud do if he come home
and found us all dead.'

'Maybe God'll take me and baby,' said Robbie thoughtfully, 'and leave you to watch for father.'

'I only wish baby had called me Meg once afore she went,' cried little Meg.

The baby stirred a little upon her knees, and stretched out its feeble limbs, opening its blue
eyes wide and looking up into her face with its sweet smile of welcome.  Then the eyelids closed
again slowly, and the small features put on a look of heavenly calm and rest.  Meg and Robin
gazed at the change wonderingly without speaking; but when after a few minutes Meg laid her
hand gently upon the smooth little forehead, the same chill struck to her heart as when she
had touched her mother's dead face.

It did not seem possible to little Meg that baby could really be dead. She chafed its puny
limbs, as she had seen her mother do, and walked up and down the room singing to it, now loudly,
now softly; but no change came upon it, no warmth returned to its death-cold frame, no life
to its calm face.  She laid it down at length upon the bed, and crossed its thin wee arms upon
its breast, and then stretching herself beside it, with her face hidden from the light, little
Meg gave herself up to a passion of sorrow.

'If I'd only asked God, for Christ's sake,' she cried to herself, 'maybe He'd have let baby
wake, though I don't know whether it's a good thing.  But now she's gone to mother, and father'll
come home, and he'll find nobody but me and Robbie, and the money safe.  Oh!  I wish I'd asked
God.'

'Meg,' said Robin, after she had worn herself out with sobs and tears, and was lying silently
beside baby, 'I'm very poorly.  I think I'll go to live with the angels, where mother and baby
are gone.'

Meg started up, and gazed anxiously at Robin.  His bright eyes were dimmed, and his face was
flushed and heavy; he was stretched on the floor near the fire, in a listless attitude, and
did not care to move, when she knelt down beside him, and put her arm under his head.  It ached,
he said; and it felt burning hot to her touch.  Meg's heart stood still for a moment, and then
she dropped her tear-stained sorrowful face upon her hands.

'Pray God,' she cried, 'don't take Robbie away as well as baby.  Maybe it wasn't a good thing
for baby to stay, now mother's dead, though I've done everythink I could, and there's been
nobody to take care of us but You.  But, pray God, do let Robbie stay with me till father comes
home; for Jesus Christ's sake.  Amen.'

Meg rose from her knees, and lifted up Robin as gently as she could, soothing him, and talking
fondly to him as she took off his clothes. When that was finished she laid him on the same
bed where the baby was sleeping its last long sleep, with its tiny face still wearing an unspeakable
calm; for Robin's little mattress had been sold some time ago.  The day was just at an end,
that sorrowful day, and a lingering light from the west entered through the attic window, and
lit up the white, peaceful features with the flushed and drowsy face of Robin beside it.  Meg
felt as if her heart would surely break as she stooped over them, and kissed them both, her
lips growing cold as they touched baby's smiling mouth.  Then drawing her old shawl over her
head, she locked the attic door securely behind her, and ran as fast as her feet could carry
her to Mrs Blossom's house.

'Robbie's very ill,' gasped Meg, breathlessly, as she burst into the shop, the shutters of
which were already put up, though it was still early in the night, 'and I want a doctor for
him.  Where shall I find a doctor?'

Mrs Blossom had her bonnet and cloak on, and looked very pale and flurried.  When she answered
Meg she kept her hand pressed against her heart.

'I'm just a-going to one,' she said, 'the best at this end o' London, Dr Christie, and you'd
better come along with me.  He knows me well. Meg, I've seen somebody go by to-day as was like
Posy, only pale and thin; but when I ran out, she was gone like a shadow.  I'm a-going to tell
Dr Christie; he knows all about Posy and me.'

But Meg scarcely heard what Mrs Blossom said.  All her thoughts and interest centred in Robin,
and she felt impatient of the slow progress of her companion.  They seemed to her to be going
a long, long way, until they came to better streets and larger houses; and by-and-by they saw
a carriage standing before a door, and a gentleman came out and got into it hurriedly.

'Why, bless me!' exclaimed Mrs Blossom, 'there's Dr Christie.  Stop him, Meg, stop him!'

Meg needed no urging, but rushed blindly across the street.  There was all at once a strange
confusion about her, a trampling of horses' feet, and a rattling of wheels, with a sudden terror
and pain in herself; and then she knew no more.  All was as nothing to her--baby and Robin
alone in the attic, and Mrs Blossom and Posy--all were gone out of her mind and memory.  She
had thrown herself before the horses' heads, and they had trampled her down under their feet.

When little Meg came to herself again it was broad daylight, and she was lying in a room so
bright and cheerful that she could neither imagine where she was nor how she came there.  There
was a good fire crackling noisily in the low grate, with a brass guard before it, and over
the chimney-piece was a pretty picture of angels flying upwards with a child in their arms. But
the species of imitation in which he most delighted, was that which, in the vulgar style, is called
mocking; for he was not possessed of a sufficient stock of ingenuity to be (what he very frequently
attempted to be) a clever mimick. If any of his schoolmates happened to be afflicted with an
impediment in their speech, an accidental lameness, or the like; he had the mean barbarity to
endeavour to aggravate the misfortune by a coarse imitation, which
generally turned the whole ridicule upon himself.



'I'm vexed I don't,' answered Mrs Blossom.  'I've asked her more than once, and she's always
said it's down a street off Rosemary Lane, and along another street, and up a court.  But there's
a girl called Kitty living in the back attic, as takes care of the children when Meg's away.
She's sure to be taking care o' them now.'

In an instant memory came back to little Meg.  She recollected bending over Robin and the baby
to kiss them before she came away, and locking the door safely upon them.  Oh! what had become
of Robbie in the night? She raised herself up in bed, and uttered a very bitter cry, which
brought to her quickly Mrs Blossom and a strange lady.

'I want Robbie,' she cried.  'I must get up and go to him directly. It's my Robbie that's ill,
and baby's dead.  I'm not ill, but Robbie's ill, if he isn't dead, like baby, afore now.  Please
to let me get up.'

'Tell me all about it,' said Mrs Blossom, sitting down on the bed and taking Meg into her arms.
'We're in Dr Christie's house, and he'll go and see Robbie in a minute, he says.'

'Baby died yesterday morning,' answered Meg, with tearless eyes, for her trouble was too great
for tears; 'and then Robbie was took ill, and I put them both in bed, and kissed them, and
locked the door, and came away for a doctor, and there's been nobody to take care of 'em all
night, only God.'

Meg's eyes burned no longer, but filled with tears as she thought of God, and she laid her
head upon Mrs Blossom's shoulder, and wept aloud.

'God has taken care of them,' said Mrs Christie, but she could say no more.

'Where is it you live, deary?' asked Mrs Blossom.

'It's at Angel Court,' answered Meg.  'But there mustn't nobody go without me.  Please to let
me get up.  I'm not ill.'

'You're very much bruised and hurt, my poor child,' said Mrs Christie.

'I must go,' pleaded Meg urgently, 'I must get up, I promised mother I'd never let anybody
go into our room, and they mustn't go without me. They're my children, please.  If your little
children were ill, you'd go to 'em wouldn't you?  Let me get up this minute.'

It was impossible to withstand little Meg's earnestness.  Mrs Blossom dressed her tenderly,
though Meg could not quite keep back the groan which rose to her quivering lips when her bruised
arm was moved.  A cab was called, and then Mrs Blossom and Meg, with Dr Christie, got into
it, and drove away quickly to Angel Court.

CHAPTER XII

The End of Little Meg's Trouble

It was early in the evening after Meg had gone in search of a doctor, that Kitty came home,
more sober than she had been for several nights, and very much ashamed of her last outbreak.
She sat down on the top of the stairs, listening for little Meg to read aloud, but she heard
only the sobs and moanings of Robin, who called incessantly for Meg, without getting any answer.
Kitty waited for some time, hearkening for her voice, but after a while she knocked gently
at the door.  There was no reply, but after knocking again and again she heard Robin call out
in a frightened tone.

'What's that?' he cried.

'It's me, your own Kitty,' she said; 'where's little Meg?'

'I don't know,' said Robin, 'she's gone away, and there's nobody but me and baby; and baby's
asleep, and so cold.'

'What are you crying for, Robbie?' asked Kitty.

'I'm crying for everything,' said Robin.

'Don't you be frightened, Robbie,' she said soothingly; 'Kitty'll stay outside the door, and
sing pretty songs to you, till Meg comes home.'

She waited a long time, till the clocks struck twelve, and still Meg did not come.  From time
to time Kitty spoke some reassuring words to Robin, or sang him some little songs she remembered
from her own childhood; but his cries grew more and more distressing, and at length Kitty resolved
to break her promise, and unlock Meg's door once again to move the children into her own attic.

She lit a candle, and entered the dark room.  The fire was gone out, and Robin sat up on the
pillow, his face wet with tears and his black eyes large with terror.  The baby, which lay
beside him, seemed very still, with its wasted puny hands crossed upon its breast; so quiet
and still that Kitty looked more closely, and held the light nearer to its slumbering face.
What could ail it?  What had brought that awful smile upon its tiny face?  Kitty touched it
fearfully with the tip of her finger; and then she stood dumb and motionless before the terrible
little corpse.

She partly knew, and partly guessed, what had done this thing.  She recollected, but vaguely
enough, that one of her companions, who had grown weary of the little creature's pitiful cry,
had promised to quiet it for her, and how speedily it had fallen off into a profound, unbroken
slumber.  And there it lay, in the same slumber perhaps.  She touched it again; but no, the
sleep it slept now was even deeper than that--a sleep so sound that its eyelids would never
open again to this world's light, nor its sealed lips ever utter a word of this world's speech.
Kitty could scarcely believe it; but she could not bear to stay in that mute, gentle, uncomplaining
presence; and she lifted up Robin to carry him into her own room.  Oh that God had but called
her away when she was an innocent baby like that!

Robin's feverishness was almost gone; and now, wrapped in Kitty's gown and rocked to sleep
on her lap, he lay contented and restful, while she sat thinking in the dark, for the candle
soon burned itself out, until the solemn grey light of the morning dawned slowly in the east.
She had made up her mind now what she would do.  There was only one more sin lying before her.
She had grown up bad, and broken her mother's heart, and now she had brought this great overwhelming
sorrow upon poor little Meg.  There was but one end to a sinful life like hers, and the sooner
it came the better.  She would wait till Meg came home and give up Robin to her, for she would
not hurry on to that last crime before Meg was there to take care of him.  Then she saw herself
stealing along the streets, down to an old pier she knew of, where boats had ceased to ply,
and where no policeman would be near to hinder her, or any one about to rescue her; and then
she would fling herself, worthless and wretched as she was, into the rapid river, which had
borne so many worthless wretches like her upon its strong current into the land of darkness
and death, of which she did not dare to think.  That was what she would do, saying nothing
to any one; and if she could ask anything of God, it would be that her mother might never find
out what had become of her.

So Kitty sat with her dark thoughts long after Angel Court had awakened to its ordinary life,
its groans, and curses, and sobs; until the sun looked in cheerily upon her and Robin, as it
did upon Meg in Mrs Christie's nursery.  She did not care to put him down, for he looked very
pretty, and happy, and peaceful in his soft sleep, and whenever she moved he stirred a little,
and pouted his lips as if to reproach her.  Besides, it was the last time she would hold a
child in her arms; and though they ached somewhat, they folded round him fondly.  At last she
heard a man's step upon the ladder mounting to the attics, and Meg's voice speaking faintly.
Could it be that her father was come home at last?  Oh! what would their eyes see when they
opened that door?  Kitty held her breath to listen for the first sound of anguish and amazement;
but it was poor little Meg's voice which reached her before any other.

'Robbie! oh, Robbie!' she cried, in a tone of piercing terror, 'what has become of my little
Robbie?'

'He's safe, he's here, Meg,' answered Kitty, starting to her feet, and rushing with him to
Meg's attic.

