TOMATO CULTURE

  A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE TOMATO, ITS HISTORY,
  CHARACTERISTICS, PLANTING, FERTILIZATION,
  CULTIVATION IN FIELD, GARDEN, AND GREENHOUSE,
  HARVESTING, PACKING, STORING, MARKETING, INSECT
  ENEMIES AND DISEASES, WITH METHODS OF CONTROL AND
  REMEDIES, ETC., ETC.

                     By

                WILL W. TRACY

            Bureau of Plant Industry,
     United States Department of Agriculture

               ILLUSTRATED

                  NEW YORK

             ORANGE JUDD COMPANY

                    1907

                     To

              Dr. F. M. Hexamer

    IN HONOR OF HIS LIFELONG EFFORTS FOR THE
      BETTERMENT OF AMERICAN HORTICULTURAL
                   PRACTICE

             Copyright, 1907, by
             ORANGE JUDD COMPANY
            All rights reserved

PREFACE

This little book has been written in fulfilment of a promise made many years ago. Again and
again I have undertaken the work, only to lay it aside because I felt the need of greater experience
and wider knowledge. I do not now feel that this deficiency has been by any means fully supplied,
but in some directions it has been removed through the kindness of Dr. F. H. Chittenden of
the Bureau of Entomology, who wrote the chapter on insect enemies, and of W. A. Orton of the
Bureau of Plant Industry, United States Department of Agriculture, who wrote the chapter on
diseases of tomatoes.

I have made free use of, without special credit, and am largely indebted to, the writings of
Doctor Sturtevant and Professor Goff, Professor Munson of Maine, Professor Halsted of New Jersey,
Professor Corbett of Washington, Professor Rolfs of Florida, Professor Bailey of New York,
Professor Green of Ohio, and many others. I have also found a vast amount of valuable information
in the agricultural press of this country in general. "You will have half, Daniel," she said.

"As far as that goes, I do not want a doit of it,--not a penny-piece.

When they paid me what became my own by my father's will, I was rich
enough,--rich enough for you and me too, my girl, if that was all. They are grown not only
in gardens, but in large areas in every state from Maine to California and Washington to Florida,
and under very different conditions of climate, soil and cultural facilities, as well as of
requirements as to character of fruit. The methods which will give the best results under one
set of conditions are entirely unsuited to others.

I have tried to give the nature and requirements of the plant and the effect of conditions
as seen in my own experience, a knowledge of which may enable the reader to follow the methods
most suited to his own conditions and requirements, rather than to recommend the exact methods
which have given me the best results.

WILL W. TRACY.

Washington, April, 1907.

  CONTENTS

                                                    PAGE

  PREFACE                                             v

  CHAPTER I

    BOTANY OF THE TOMATO                              1

  CHAPTER II

    HISTORY                                          14

  CHAPTER III

    GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PLANT             20

  CHAPTER IV

    ESSENTIALS FOR DEVELOPMENT                       28

  CHAPTER V

    SELECTION OF SOIL FOR MAXIMUM CROP               33

  CHAPTER VI

    EXPOSURE AND LOCATION                            38

  CHAPTER VII

    FERTILIZERS                                      43

  CHAPTER VIII

    PREPARATION OF THE SOIL                          46

  CHAPTER IX

    HOTBEDS AND COLD-FRAMES                          51

  CHAPTER X

    STARTING PLANTS                                  59

  CHAPTER XI

    PROPER DISTANCE FOR PLANTING                     68

  CHAPTER XII

    CULTIVATION                                      76

  CHAPTER XIII

    STAKING, TRAINING AND PRUNING                    79

  CHAPTER XIV

    RIPENING, GATHERING, HANDLING AND MARKETING      90
    THE FRUIT

  CHAPTER XV

    ADAPTATION OF VARIETIES                          97

  CHAPTER XVI

    SEED BREEDING AND GROWING                       112

  CHAPTER XVII

    PRODUCTION FOR CANNING                          117

  CHAPTER XVIII

    COST OF PRODUCTION                              121

  CHAPTER XIX

    INSECTS INJURIOUS TO THE TOMATO                 123

  CHAPTER XX

    TOMATO DISEASES                                 131

  INDEX                                             148

ILLUSTRATIONS

  FIGURE                                            PAGE

   1. Where new varieties of tomatoes are developed
         and tested                             Frontispiece

   2. Tomato flowers                                  2

   3. Two-celled tomato                               3

   4. Three-celled tomato                             3

   5. Currant tomato and characteristic clusters      5

   6. Red cherry tomato                               6

   7. Pear-shaped tomato                              8

   8. Yellow plum tomato                              9

   9. One of the first illustrations of the tomato   11

  10. An early illustration of the tomato            12

  11. Typical bunch of modern tomatoes               27

  12. Tomatoes trained to stakes in the South        35

  13. Three-sash hotbed                              52

  14. Cross-section of hotbed                        53

  15. Cold-frames on hill-side                       54

  16. Transplanting tomatoes under cloth-covered
         frames                                      56

  17. Spotting-board for use in cold-frames          61

  18. Spotting-board for use on flat                 62

  19. Tomatoes sown and allowed to grow in hotbeds   69

  20. Planting tomatoes on a Delaware farm           75

  21. Training tomatoes in Florida to single stake   81

  22. Tomato plant trained to single stake           82

  23. Method of training to three stems in
         forcing-house and out of doors              83

  24. Training on line in greenhouse                 84

  25. Ready to transplant in greenhouse              85

  26. Training young tomatoes in greenhouse at New
         York experiment station                     86

  27. Tomatoes in greenhouse at the Ohio
         experiment station                          87

  28. Forcing tomatoes in greenhouse at New Hampshire
         experiment station                          88

  29. Florida tomatoes properly wrapped for long
         shipment                                    93

  30. Greenhouse tomatoes packed for market          95

  31. Buckeye State, showing long nodes and distance
         between fruit clusters                      98

  32. Stone, and characteristic foliage              99

  33. Atlantic Prize, and its normal foliage        101

  34. Dwarf Champion                                103

  35. A cutworm and parent moth                     124

  36. Flea-beetle                                   125

  37. Margined blister beetle                       125

  38. Tomato worm                                   126

  39. Tomato stalk-borer                            127

  40. Characteristic work of the tomato fruit worm  128

  41. Adult moth, or parent of tomato fruit worm    129

  42. Proper way to make Bordeaux                   137

  43. Point-rot disease of the tomato               140

TOMATO CULTURE

CHAPTER I

Botany of the Tomato

=The common tomato= of our gardens belongs to the natural order Solanaceae and the genus Lycopersicum.
The name from lykos, a wolf, and persica, a peach, is given it because of the supposed aphrodisiacal
qualities, and the beauty of the fruit. The genus comprises a few species of South American
annual or short-lived perennial, herbaceous, rank-smelling plants in which the many branches
are spreading, procumbent, or feebly ascendent and commonly 2 to 6 feet in length, though under
some conditions, particularly in the South and in California, they grow much longer. They are
covered with resinous viscid secretions and are round, soft, brittle and hairy, when young,
but become furrowed, angular, hard and almost woody with enlarged joints, when old. The leaves
are irregularly alternate, 5 to 15 inches long, petioled, odd pinnate, with seven to nine short-stemmed
leaflets, often with much smaller and stemless ones between them. The larger leaflets are sometimes
entire, but more generally notched, cut, or even divided, particularly at the base.

=The flowers= are pendant and borne in more or less branched clusters, located on the stem
on the opposite side and usually a little below the leaves; the first cluster on the sixth
to twelfth internode from the ground, with one on each second to sixth succeeding one. The
flowers (Fig. 2) are small, consisting of a yellow, deeply five-cleft, wheel-shaped corolla,
with a very short tube and broadly lanceolate, recurving petals. The calyx consists of five
long linear or lanceolate sepals, which are shorter than the petals at first, but are persistent,
and increase in size as the fruits mature. The stamens, five in number, are borne on the throat
of the corolla, and consist of long, large anthers, borne on short filaments, loosely joined
into a tube and opening by a longitudinal slit on the inside, and this is the chief botanical
distinction between this genus and Solanum to which the potato, pepper, night shade and tobacco
belong. The anthers in the latter genus open at the tip only. The two genera, however, are
closely related and plants belonging to them are readily united by grafting. The Physalis,
Husk tomato or Ground cherry is quite distinct, botanically. The pistils of the true tomato
are short at first, but the style elongates so as to push the capitate stigma through the tube
formed by the anthers, this usually occurring before the anthers open for the discharge of
the pollen. The fruit is a two to many-celled berry with central fleshy placenta and many small
kidney-shaped seeds which are densely covered with short, stiff hairs, as seen in Figs. 3 and 4.

It is comparatively easy to define the genus with which the tomato should be classed botanically,
but it is by no means so easy to classify our cultivated varieties into botanical species.
We have in cultivation varieties which are known to have originated in gardens and from the
same parentage, but which differ from each other so much in habit of growth, character of leaf
and fruit and other respects, that if they had been found growing wild they would unhesitatingly
be pronounced different species, and botanists are not agreed as to how our many and very different
garden varieties should be classified botanically. Some contend that all of our cultivated
sorts are varieties of but two distinct species, while others think they have originated from
several.

=Classification.=--The author suggests the following classification, differing somewhat from
that sometimes given, as he believes that the large, deep-sutured fruit of our cultivated varieties
and the distinct pear-shaped sorts come from original species rather than from variations of
Lycopersicum cerasiforme:

=Currant tomato, Grape tomato, German or Raisin tomato= (Lycopersicum pimpinellifolium, L.
racemiforme) (Fig. 5).--Universally regarded as a distinct species. Plant strong, growing with
many long, slender, weak branches which are not so hairy, viscid, or ill-smelling, and never
become so hard or woody as those of the other species. The numerous leaves are very bright
green in color, leaflets small, nearly entire, with many small stemless ones between the others.
Fruit produced continuously and in great quantity on long racemes like those of the currant,
though they are often branched. They continue to elongate and blossom until the fruit at the
upper end is fully ripened. He would, I am sorry to say, have won his bet; and yet I know that
the 'Essays by a Barrister,' though never widely circulated, have been highly valued by a small
circle of readers. The explanation of their fate is not, I think, hard to give.
 This species, when pure, has not varied under cultivation, but it readily crosses
with other species and with our garden varieties, and many of these owe their bright red color
to the influence of crosses with the above species.

=Cherry tomato= (L. cerasiforme) (Fig. 6).--Plant vigorous, with stout branches which are distinctly
trailing in habit. Leaves flat or but slightly curled. Fruit very abundant, borne in short,
branched clusters, globular, perfectly smooth, with no apparent sutures. From 1/2 to 3/4 inch
in diameter and either red or yellow in color, two-celled with numerous comparatively small,
kidney-shaped seeds. Many of our garden varieties show evidence of crosses with this species,
and by many it is regarded as the original wild form of all of our cultivated sorts. These,
when they escape from cultivation and become wild plants, as they often do, from New Jersey
southward, produce fruit which, in many respects, resembles that of this species in size and
form; but they are generally more flattened, globe-shaped, with more or less distinct sutures
on the upper side, and I have never seen any fruit of these wild plants which could not be
readily distinguished from that of the true Cherry tomato.

Prof. P. H. Rolfs, Director of the Florida experiment station, reports that among the millions
of volunteer, or wild, tomatoes he has seen growing in the abandoned tomato fields in Florida,
he has never seen a plant with fruit which could not be easily distinguished from that of the
true Cherry tomato. Again, one can, by selection and cultivation, easily develop from these
wild forms plants producing fruit as large and often practically identical with that of our
cultivated varieties, while I have given a true stock of Cherry tomato most careful cultivation
on the best of soil for 20 consecutive generations without any increase in size or change in
character of the fruit.

=Pear (not Plum) tomato= (L. pyriforme) (Fig. 7).--Plant exceptionally vigorous, with comparatively
few long, stout stems inclined to ascend. Leaves numerous, broad, flat, with a distinct bluish-green
color noticeable, even in the cotyledons. Fruit abundant, borne in short branched or straight
clusters of five to ten fruits. It is perfectly smooth, without sutures, and of the shape of
a long, slender-necked pear, not over an inch in transverse by 1-1/2 inches in longitudinal
diameter. When the stock is pure the fruit retains this form very persistently. The production
of egg-shaped or other forms is a sure indication of impure stock. They are bright red, dark
yellow, or light yellowish white in color, two-celled, with very distinct central placenta
and comparatively few and large seeds. The fruit is inclined to ripen unevenly, the neck remaining
green when the rest of the fruit is quite ripe. It is less juicy than that of most of our garden
sorts but of a mild and pleasant flavor. This is considered, by many, to be simply a garden
variety, but I am inclined to the belief that it is a distinct species and that the contrary
view comes from the study of the impure and crossed stocks resulting from crosses between the
true Pear tomato and garden sorts which are frequently sold by seedsmen as pear-shaped. Many
garden sorts--like the Plum (Fig. 8), the Egg, the Golden Nugget, Vick's Criterion, etc.--are
known to have originated from crosses of the Pear and I think that most, if not all, the garden
sorts in which the longitudinal diameter of the fruit is greater than its transverse diameter
owe this form to crosses with L. pyriforme.

=Cultivated varieties= (L. esculentum).--This is commonly used as the botanical name of our
cultivated varieties, rather than as the name of a distinct species. In western South America,
however, there is found growing a wild plant of Lycopersicum which differs from the other recognized
species in being more compact in growth, with fewer branches and larger leaves, and carrying
an immense burden of fruit borne in large clusters. The fruit is larger than that of the other
species but much smaller than that of our cultivated sorts; is very irregular in shape, always
with distinct sutures, and often deeply corrugated and bright red in color. The walls are thin;
the flesh is soft, with a distinct sharp, acid flavor much less agreeable than that of our
cultivated forms of garden tomatoes.

This has commonly been regarded by botanists as a degenerate form of our garden tomatoes, rather
than as an original species, but I find that, like L. cerasiforme and L. pyriforme, it is quite
fixed under cultivation, except as crossed with other species or with our garden varieties,
and I believe it to be the original species from which our cultured sorts have been developed,
by crossing and selection. Hitherto we have not got beyond an emphatic assertion of the necessity
of law and order. He writes his article while the decks are being
washed, and afterwards writes a 'bit of a letter,' takes his German
and Italian lessons, and then turns to his travelling library. 9
and 10) are far more like the fruit of this plant than that of L. cerasiforme, and the prints
of many of the earliest garden varieties and of some sorts which are still cultivated in southern
Europe, for use in soups, are like it not only in size and form, but in flavor. These facts
make it seem far more probable that our cultivated sorts have come, by crossing, between this
and other species rather than by simple development from L. cerasiforme.

Prof. E. S. Goff, of Wisconsin, who has made a most careful study of the tomato, expressed
the same opinion, writing that it seemed to him that our cultivated sorts must have come from
the crossing of a small, round, smooth, sutureless type, with a larger, deep-sutured, corrugated
fruit, like that of the Mammoth Chihuahua, but smaller. However this may be, I think that it
is wise to throw all of our cultivated garden sorts, except the Pear, the Cherry, and the Grape--which
I regard as distinct species--together under the name of L. esculentum, even when we know they
have originated by direct crosses with the other species; and it is well to classify the upright
growing sorts under the varietal names, L. validum, and the larger, heavier sorts, as L. grandifolium,
as has been done by Bailey. (Cyclopedia of Horticulture.)

CHAPTER II

History

The garden vegetable known in this country as tomato and generally as tomate in continental
Europe, is also known as Wolf-peach and Love Apple in England and America, and Liebesapfel
in Germany, Pomme d'Amour in France, Pomo d'oro in Italy, Pomidor in Poland.

=Origin of name.=--The name tomato is of South American origin, and is derived from the Aztec
word xitomate, or zitotomate, which is given the fruit of both the Common tomato and that of
the Husk or Strawberry tomato or Physalis. Both vegetables were highly prized and extensively
cultivated by the natives long before the discovery of the country by Europeans, and there
is little doubt that many of the plants first seen and described by Europeans as wild species
were really garden varieties originated with the native Americans by the variation or crossing
of the original wild species.

=Different types now common=, according to Sturtevant, have become known to, and been described
by Europeans in about the following order:

     1. Large yellow, described by Matthiolus in 1554 and called
        Golden apple.

     2. Large red, described by Matthiolus in 1554 and called Love
        apple.

     3. Purple red, described by D'el Obel in 1570.

     4. White-fleshed, described by Dodoens in 1586.

     5. Red cherry, described by Bauhin in 1620.

     6. Yellow cherry, described by Bauhin in 1620.

     7. Ochre yellow, described by Bauhin in 1651.

     8. Striped, blotched or visi-colored, described by Bauhin in
        1651.

     9. Pale red, described by Tournefort in 1700.

    10. Large smooth, or ribless red, described by Tournefort in
        1700.

    11. Bronzed-leaved, described by Blacknell in 1750.

    12. Deep orange, described by Bryant in 1783.

    13. Pear-shaped, described by Dunal in 1805.

    14. Tree tomato, described by Vilmorin in 1855.

    15. Broad-leaved, introduced about 1860.

The special description of No. 10 by Tournefort in 1700 would indicate that large smooth sorts,
like Livingston's Stone, were in existence fully 200 years ago, instead of being modern improvements,
as is sometimes claimed; and a careful study of old descriptions and cuts and comparing them
with the best examples of modern varieties led Doctor Sturtevant in 1889 to express the opinion
that they had fruit as large and smooth as those we now grow, before the tomato came into general
use in America, and possibly before the fruit was generally known to Europeans. Even the production
of fine fruit under glass is not so modern as many suppose. In transactions of the London Horticultural
Society for 1820, John Wilmot is reported to have cultivated under glass in 1818 some 600 plants
and gathered from his entire plantings under glass and in borders some 130 bushels of ripe
fruit. It is stated that the growth that year exceeded the demand, and that the fruit obtained
was of extraordinary size, some exceeding 12 inches in circumference and weighing 12 ounces
each. Thomas Meehan states in Gardeners' Monthly for February, 1880, that on January 8, of
that year, he saw growing in the greenhouses on Senator Cannon's place near Harrisburg, Pa.,
at least 1 bushel of ripe fruits, none of which were less than 10 inches in circumference,--a
showing which compares with the best to be seen to-day.

Throughout southern Europe the value of the fruit for use in soups and as a salad seems to
have been at once recognized, and it came into quite general use, especially in Spain and Italy,
during the 17th century; but in northern Europe and England, though the plant was grown in
botanical gardens and in a few private places as a curiosity and for the beauty of its fruit,
this was seldom eaten, being commonly regarded as unhealthy and even poisonous, and on this
account, and probably because of its supposed aphrodisiacal qualities, it did not come into
general use in those northern countries until early in the 19th century.

=First mention= in America, I find of its being grown for culinary use, was in Virginia in
1781. In 1788 a Frenchman in Philadelphia made most earnest efforts to get people to use the
fruit, but with little success, and similar efforts by an Italian in Salem, Mass., in 1802,
were no more successful. The first record I can find of the fruit being regularly quoted in
the market was in New Orleans in 1812, and the earliest records I have been able to find of
the seed being offered by seedsmen, as that of an edible vegetable, was by Gardener and Hipburn
in 1818, and by Landreth in 1820. Buist's "Kitchen Gardener" says: "In 1828-9 it (the tomato)
was almost detested and commonly considered poisonous. Ten years later every variety of pill
and panacea was 'extract of tomatoes,' and now (1847) almost as much ground is devoted to its
culture as to the cabbage." In 1834 Professor Dunglison, of the University of Virginia, said:
"The tomato may be looked upon as one of the most wholesome and valuable esculents of the garden."

Yet, though the fruit has always received similar commendation from medical men, there has
been constant recurring superstition that it is unhealthy. Only a few years ago there was in
general circulation a statement that an eminent physician had discovered that eating tomatoes
tended to develop cancer. This has been definitely traced to the playful question, asked as
a joke by Dr. Dio Lewis, "Didn't you know that eating bright red tomatoes caused cancer?" In
more recent years an equally unfounded claim has been made that tomato seeds were responsible
for many cases of appendicitis and that it was consequently dangerous to eat the fruit.

I give some quotations for tomatoes in Quincy Hall Market, Boston, with some for other vegetables,
for comparison. The records show that during the week ending July 22, 1835, tomatoes were quoted
at 50 cents per dozen, cabbage at 50 cents per dozen. For the week ending September 22, 1835,
tomatoes were quoted at 25 cents per peck, lima beans, 12-1/2 cents per quart shelled, with
comment that tomatoes are in much demand and a far greater quantity has been sold than in previous
years. During the week ending July 22, 1837, tomatoes were quoted at 25 and 50 cents per peck,
and the note that they are of good size and were well ripened and came from gardens in the
vicinity would indicate that they had at that time early maturing varieties and knew how to
grow them. From about 1835 till the present time the cultivation and use of tomatoes have constantly
increased both in this country and in Europe, so that now they are one of the most largely
grown of our garden vegetables. 

On the following morning, after an early breakfast, Lady Anna went to Great Russell Street,
and there she remained the greater part of the day. The people of the house understood that the
couple were to be married as soon as their lodger should be well, and had heard much of the magnificence
of the marriage. They were kind and good, and the tailor declared very often that this was
the happiest period of his existence. Of all the good turns ever done to him, he said, the
wound in his back had been the best. In addition to the canned tomato, between 200,000
and 250,000 barrels of catsup stock is put up annually, requiring the product of at least 20,000
acres.

It is probable that the area required to produce the fruit that is used fresh at least equals
that devoted to the production for preserving, which give us from 400,000 to 500,000 acres
devoted to this crop each year in America alone. The fruit is perhaps in more general use in
America than elsewhere, but its cultivation and use have increased rapidly in other countries,
particularly with the English speaking races. Large quantities are grown in Australia, and
immense and constantly increasing quantities are grown under glass in England and adjacent
islands, while The Gardeners' Chronicle states that in 1903 between 600,000 and 800,000 pounds
of fresh fruit were imported into England from other countries.

CHAPTER III

General Characteristics of the Plant

=In the native home= of the tomato, in South America, the conditions of the soil, both as regards
composition and mechanical condition, of the moisture both in soil and air, and those of temperature
and sunlight, are throughout the growing season not only very favorable for rapid growth, but
are uniformly and constantly so. Under such conditions there has been developed a plant which,
while vigorous, tenacious of life, capable of rapid growth and enormously productive, is not
at all hardy in the sense of ability to endure untoward conditions either in the character
of soil, of water supply, or of temperature. A check in the development because of any unfavorable
condition is never fully recovered from, but will inevitably affect the total quantity and
quality of the fruit produced, even if subsequent favorable conditions result in the rapid
and vigorous growth of the plant.

I know of an instance where two adjoining fields belonging to A and B were set with tomatoes,
using plants started in the same hotbed from the same lot of seed. The soil was of equal natural
fertility and each field received about the same quantity of manure, though that given A's
was all well decomposed and worked into the soil, while that given B's was fresh and raw and
simply plowed in. A's field was put into the best possible tilth before setting the plants,
and the management of the plants and their cultivation were such as to secure unchecked growth
from the time they were pricked out into cold-frames and set in the field until the crop was
matured. As long as the plants would permit, the soil was cultivated every few days and kept
in a state of perfect tilth.

B's field when the plants were set out was a mass of clods, as it had been plowed, when wet,
some time before and never harrowed but once. The plants had been crowded forward as rapidly
as possible in the cold-frame, and when set in the field were much higher than A's, but so
soft that they were badly checked in transplanting and a great many of them died and had to
be reset. The field received but one or two cultivations during the entire season. The growth
of the plants in B's field was irregular and uneven instead of steady and uniform as in A's,
and though some of the fruits were quite as large, they were not as uniform as A's while the
yield per acre was not more than half as much nor the fruit of as good general quality. B had
difficulty in disposing of his crop and often had to sell below the market, while A had no
trouble in disposing of his at the highest prices for the day. B's crop was a financial loss,
while A's returned a most satisfactory profit.

The key to the most successful culture of the tomato is the securing, from the start to finish,
of an unchecked uniform growth, though it need not necessarily be a rapid one. The failure
to do this is, in my opinion, the principal reason for the comparatively small yield usually
obtained, which is very much less than it would be with better cultural management. The tomato
under conditions which I have repeatedly found it practicable to secure, not only in small
plantings but in large fields, has proved capable of producing from 1,000 to 1,200 or even
more bushels to the acre, and the possible yield per plant is enormous.

As early as 1818 the Royal Horticultural Society of London reports the obtaining of over 40
pounds of fruit of marketable character from a single vine. An acre of such plants would give
a yield of over 1,800 bushels of fruit, and many similar yields, and even greater ones, have
been recorded for single plants. The yield commonly obtained, even in favorable locations,
and by men who have grown tomatoes all their lives, is more often less than 200 bushels to
the acre than more. The way to secure a better yield is to study carefully the nature and requirements
of the plants and the adaptation of our cultural practice to them.

=Life habit of the plant.=--The tomato could be described as a short-lived perennial, but its
span of life is somewhat variable. Under favorable conditions it will develop from starting
seed to first ripe fruit in from 85 to 120 days of full sunshine with a constant day temperature
of from 75 to 90° F., and with one from 15 to 20° F. lower at night. The plants will ordinarily
continue in full fruit for about 50 to 60 days, after which they generally become so exhausted
by excessive production of fruit and the effects of diseases to which they are usually subject
that their root action and sap circulation become weaker and weaker until they die from starvation.
From Philadelphia southward gardeners expect that spring set plants will thus exhaust themselves
and die by late summer, and they sow seed in late spring or early summer for plants on which
they depend for late summer and fall crops.

Under some conditions, particularly in the Gulf states and in California, tomato plants will
not only grow to a much greater size than normal, but will continue to thrive and bear fruit
for a longer time. Such a plant grown in Pasadena, Cal., was said to have been in constant
bearing for over 10 months. Again, sometimes plants that have produced a full crop of fruits
will start new sets of roots and leaves and produce a second and even a third crop, each, however,
being produced on new branches and as a result of a fresh set of roots, those which produced
the preceding crop having died and disappeared. The period of development, 85 to 120 days of
full sunshine at a temperature above 75° F., has been given. The full sunshine and high temperature
are essential to such rapid development, and in so far as there is a lack of sunshine from
clouds or shade, or the day temperature falls below 75° F. the period will be lengthened, so
that in the greater part of the United States the elapsed time between starting seed to ripened
fruit is usually as much as from 120 to 150 days and often even longer.

=Characteristics of the root.=--The roots of the tomato plant, while abundant in number, are
short and can only gather food and water from a limited area. A plant of garden bean, for instance,
is not more than half the size of one of the tomato, but its roots extend through the soil
to a greater distance, gather plant food from a greater bulk of soil, seem better able to search
out and gather the particular food element which the plant needs than do those of the tomato.
This characteristic of the latter plant makes the composition of the soil as to the proportion
of easily available food elements of great importance. Tomato roots are also exceedingly tender
and incapable of penetrating a hard and compact soil, so that the condition of the soil as
to tilth is of greater importance with regard to tomatoes than with most garden vegetables.

Another characteristic of the tomato roots is that the period of their active life is short.
When young they are capable of transmitting water and nutritive material very rapidly, but
they soon become clogged and inefficient to such an extent as to result in the starvation and
death of the plant. If the branches of such an exhausted plant be bent over and covered with
earth they will frequently start new roots and produce a fresh crop of fruit, or if plants
which have made a crop in the greenhouse be transplanted to the garden and cut back, a new
set of roots will often develop and the plant will produce a second crop of fruit which, in
amount, often equals or exceeds the first one. But such growths come only from new roots springing
from the stem--never from an extension of the old root system.

=Characteristics of the stem and leaves.=--The growth of the stem, and leaves of the young
tomato plant is very rapid and, the cellular structure coarse, loose and open. A young branch
is easily broken and when this is done it shows scarcely any fibrous structure--simply a mass
of coarse cellular matter which while capable, when young, of transmitting nutritive matter
rapidly, soon becomes dogged and inert. This structure not only makes the active life of the
leaves short, like that of the roots, but necessitates a fresh growth in order to continue
the fruitfulness of the plant and renders the leaves very susceptible to injury from bacterial
and fungous diseases. The rapid growth also necessitates an abundance of sunlight.

