When she was there St. George passed by, and when he saw the lady he demanded the lady what
she made there and she said: Go ye your way fair young man, that ye perish not also. Then said
he: Tell to me what have and why weep ye, and doubt ye of nothing. When she saw that he would
know, she said to him how she was delivered to the dragon. Then said St. George: Fair daughter,
doubt ye no thing hereof for I shall help thee in the name of Jesu Christ. She said: For God's
sake, good knight, go your way, and abide not with me, for ye may not deliver me. Thus as they
spake together the dragon appeared and came running to them, and St. George was upon his horse,
and drew out his sword and garnished him with the sign of the cross, and rode hardily against
the dragon which came toward him, and smote him with his spear and hurt him sore and threw
him to the ground. And after said to the maid: Deliver to me your girdle, and bind it about
the neck of the dragon and be not afeard. When she had done so the dragon followed her as it
had been a meek beast and debonair. Then she led him into the city, and the people fled by
mountains and valleys, and said: Alas! alas! we shall be all dead. Then St. George said to
them: Ne doubt ye no thing, without more, believe ye in God, Jesu Christ, and do ye to be baptized
and I shall slay the dragon. Then the king was baptized and all his people, and St. George
slew the dragon and smote off his head, and commanded that he should be thrown in the fields,
and they took four carts with oxen that drew him out of the city.

Then were there well fifteen thousand men baptized, without women and children, and the king
did do make a church there of our Lady and of St. George, in the which yet sourdeth a fountain
of living water, which healeth sick people that drink thereof. After this the king offered
to St. George as much money as there might be numbered, but he refused all and commanded that
it should be given to poor people for God's sake; and enjoined the king four things, that is,
that he should have charge of the churches, and that he should honor the priests and hear their
service diligently, and that he should have pity on the poor people, and after, kissed the
king and departed.

Now it happed that in the time of Diocletian and Maximian, which were emperors, was so great
persecution of Christian men that within a month were martyred well twenty-two thousand, and
therefore they had so great dread that some renied and forsook God and did sacrifice to the
idols. When St. George saw this, he left the habit of a knight and sold all that he had, and
gave it to the poor, and took the habit of a Christian man, and went into the middle of the
Paynims and began to cry: All the gods of the Paynims and Gentiles be devils, my God made the
heavens and is very God. Then said the provost to him: Of what presumption cometh this to thee,
that thou sayest that our gods be devils? And say to us what thou art and what is thy name.
He answered anon and said: I am named George, I am a gentleman, a knight of Cappadocia, and
have left all for to serve the God of heaven. Then the provost enforced himself to draw him
unto his faith by fair words, and when he might not bring him thereto he did do raise him on
a gibbet; and so must beat him with great staves and broches of iron, that his body was all
tobroken in pieces. And after he did do take brands of iron and join them to his sides, and
his bowels which then appeared he did do frot with salt, and so sent him into prison, but our
Lord appeared to him the same night with great light and comforted him much sweetly. And by
this great consolation he took to him so good heart that he doubted no torment that they might
make him suffer. Then, when Dacian the provost saw that he might not surmount him, he called
his enchanter and said to him: I see that these Christian people doubt not our torments. The
enchanter bound himself, upon his head to be smitten off, if he overcame not his crafts. Then
he did take strong venom and meddled it with wine, and made invocation of the names of his
false gods, and gave it to St. George to drink. St. George took it and made the sign of the
cross on it, and anon drank it without grieving him any thing. Then the enchanter made it more
stronger than it was tofore of venom, and gave it him to drink, and it grieved him nothing.
When the enchanter saw that, he kneeled down at the feet of St. George and prayed him that
he would make him Christian. And when Dacian knew that he was become Christian he made to smite
off his head. And after, on the morn, he made St. George to be set between two wheels, which
were full of swords, sharp and cutting on both sides, but anon the wheels were broken and St.
George escaped without hurt. And then commanded Dacian that they should put him in a caldron
full of molten lead, and when St. George entered therein, by the virtue of our Lord it seemed
that he was in a bath well at ease. Then Dacian seeing this began to assuage his ire, and to
flatter him by fair words, and said to him: George, the patience of our gods is over great
unto thee which hast blasphemed them, and done to them great despite, then fair, and right
sweet son, I pray thee that thou return to our law and make sacrifice to the idols, and leave
thy folly, and I shall enhance thee to great honor and worship. Then began St. George to smile,
and said to him: Wherefore saidst thou not to me thus at the beginning? I am ready to do as
thou sayest. Then was Dacian glad and made to cry over all the town that all the people should
assemble for to see George make sacrifice which so much had striven there against. Then was
the city arrayed and feast kept throughout all the town, and all came to the temple for to see him.

When St. George was on his knees, and they supposed that he would have worshipped the idols,
he prayed our Lord God of heaven that he would destroy the temple and the idol in the honor
of his name, for to make the people to be converted. And anon the fire descended from heaven
and burned the temple, and the idols, and their priests, and sith the earth opened and swallowed
all the cinders and ashes that were left. Then Dacian made him to be brought tofore him, and
said to him: What be the evil deeds that thou hast done, and also great untruth? Then said
to him St. George: Ah, sir, believe it not, but come with me and see how I shall sacrifice.
Then said Dacian to him: I see well thy fraud and thy barat, thou wilt make the earth to swallow
me, like as thou hast the temple and my gods. Then said St. George: O caitiff, tell me how
may thy gods help thee when they may not help themselves! Then was Dacian so angry that he
said to his wife: I shall die for anger if I may not surmount and overcome this man. Then said
she to him: Evil and cruel tyrant! ne seest thou not the great virtue of the Christian people?
I said to thee well that thou shouldst not do to them any harm, for their God fighteth for
them, and know thou well that I will become Christian. Then was Dacian much abashed and said
to her: Wilt thou be Christian? Then he took her by the hair, and did do beat her cruelly.
Then demanded she of St. George: What may I become because I am not christened? Then answered
the blessed George: Doubt thee nothing, fair daughter, for thou shalt be baptized in thy blood.
Then began she to worship our Lord Jesu Christ, and so she died and went to heaven. On the
morn Dacian gave his sentence that St. George should be drawn through all the city, and after,
his head should be smitten off. Then made he his prayer to our Lord that all they that desired
any boon might get it of our Lord God in his name, and a voice came from heaven which said
that it which he had desired was granted; and after he had made his orison his head was smitten
off, about the year of our Lord two hundred and eighty-seven. When Dacian went homeward from
the place where he was beheaded toward his palace, fire fell down from heaven upon him and
burned him and all his servants.

Gregory of Tours telleth that there were some that bare certain relics of St. George, and came
into a certain oratory in a hospital, and on the morning when they should depart they could
not move the door till they had left there part of their relics. It is also found in the history
of Antioch, that when the Christian men went oversea to conquer Jerusalem, that one, a right
fair young man, appeared to a priest of the host and counselled him that he should bear with
him a little of the relics of St. George, for he was conductor of the battle, and so he did
so much that he had some. And when it was so that they had assieged Jerusalem and durst not
mount ne go up on the walls for the quarrels and defence of the Saracens, they saw appertly
St. George which had white arms with a red cross, that went up tofore them on the walls, and
they followed him, and so was Jerusalem taken by his help. And between Jerusalem and port Jaffa,
by a town called Ramys, is a chapel of St. George which is now desolate and uncovered, and
therein dwell Christian Greeks. And in the said chapel lieth the body of St. George, but not
the head. And there lie his father and mother and his uncle, not in the chapel but under the
wall of the chapel; and the keepers will not suffer pilgrims to come therein, but if they pay
two ducats, and therefore come but few therein, but offer without the chapel at an altar. And
there is seven years and seven lents of pardon; and the body of St. George lieth in the middle
of the quire or choir of the said chapel, and in his tomb is an hole that a man may put in
his hand. And when a Saracen, being mad, is brought thither, and if he put his head in the
hole he shall anon be made perfectly whole, and have his wit again.

This blessed and holy martyr St. George is patron of the realm of England and the cry of men
of war. In the worship of whom is founded the noble order of the Garter, and also a noble college
in the castle of Windsor by kings of England, in which college is the heart of St. George,
which Sigismund, the emperor of Almayne, brought and gave for a great and a precious relic
to King Harry the Fifth.

THE LIFE OF ST. PATRICK

St. Patrick was born in Britain, which is called England, and was learned at Rome and there
flourished in virtues; and after departed out of the parts of Italy, where he had long dwelled,
and came home into his country in Wales named Pendyac, and entered into a fair and joyous country
called the valley Rosine. To whom the angel of God appeared and said: O Patrick, this see ne
bishopric God hath not provided to thee, but unto one not yet born, but shall thirty years
hereafter be born, and so he left that country and sailed over into Ireland. And as Higden
saith in Polycronicon the fourth book, the twenty-fourth chapter, that St. Patrick's father
was named Caprum, which was a priest and a deacon's son which was called Fodum. And St. Patrick's
mother was named Conchessa, Martin's sister of France. In his baptism he was named Sucate,
and St. Germain called him Magonius, and Celestinus the pope named him Patrick. That is as
much to say as father of the citizens.

St. Patrick on a day as he preached a sermon of the patience and sufferance of the passion
of our Lord Jesu Christ to the king of the country, he leaned upon his crook or cross, and
it happed by adventure that he set the end of the crook, or his staff, upon the king's foot,
and pierced his foot with the pike, which was sharp beneath. The king had supposed that St.
Patrick had done it wittingly, for to move him the sooner to patience and to the faith of God,
but when St. Patrick perceived it he was much abashed, and by his prayers he healed the king.
And furthermore he impetred and gat grace of our Lord that no venomous beast might live in
all the country, and yet unto this day is no venomous beast in all Ireland.

After it happed on a time that a man of that country stole a sheep, which belonged to his neighbor,
whereupon St. Patrick admonested the people that whomsoever had taken it should deliver it
again within seven days. When all the people were assembled within the church, and the man
which had stolen it made no semblant to render ne deliver again this sheep, then St. Patrick
commanded, by the virtue of God, that the sheep should bleat and cry in the belly of him that
had eaten it, and so happed it that, in the presence of all the people, the sheep cried and
bleated in the belly of him that had stolen it. And the man that was culpable repented him
of his trespass, and the others from then forthon kept them from stealing of sheep from any
other man.

Also St. Patrick was wont for to worship and do reverence unto all the crosses devoutly that
he might see, but on a time tofore the sepulchre of a Paynim stood a fair cross, which he passed
and went forth by as he had not seen it, and he was demanded of his fellows why he saw not
that cross. And then he prayed to God he said for to know whose it was, and he said he heard
a voice under the earth saying: Thou sawest it not because I am a Paynim that am buried here,
and am unworthy that the sign of the cross should stand there, wherefore he made the sign of
the cross to be taken thence. On a time as St. Patrick preached in Ireland the faith of Jesu
Christ, and did but little profit by his predication, for he could not convert the evil, rude
and wild people, he prayed to our Lord Jesu Christ that he would show them some sign openly,
fearful and ghastful, by which they might be converted and be repentant of their sins. Then,
by the commandment of God, St. Patrick made in the earth a great circle with his staff, and
anon the earth after the quantity of the circle opened and there appeared a great pit and a
deep, and St. Patrick by the revelation of God understood that there was a place of purgatory,
in to which whomsoever entered therein he should never have other penance ne feel none other
pain, and there was showed to him that many should enter which should never return ne come
again. And they that should return should abide but from one morn to another, and no more,
and many entered that came not again. As touching this pit or hole which is named St. Patrick's
purgatory, some hold opinion that the second Patrick, which was an abbot and no bishop, that
God showed to him this place of purgatory; but certainly such a place there is in Ireland wherein
many men have been, and yet daily go in and come again, and some have had there marvellous
visions and seen grisly and horrible pains, of whom there be books made as of Tundale and others.
Then this holy man St. Patrick, the bishop, lived till he was one hundred and twenty-two years
old, and was the first that was bishop in Ireland, and died in Aurelius Ambrose's time that
was king of Britain. In his time was the Abbot Columba, otherwise named Colinkillus, and St.
Bride whom St. Patrick professed and veiled, and she over-lived him forty years. All these
three holy saints were buried in Ulster, in the city of Dunence, as it were in a cave with
three chambers. Their bodies were found at the first coming of King John, King Harry the second's
son, into Ireland. Upon whose tombs these verses following were written: Hic jacent in Duno
qui tumulo tumulantur in uno, Brigida, Patricius atque Columba pius, which is for to say in
English: In Duno these three be buried all in one sepulchre: Bride, Patrick, and Columba the mild.

Men say that this holy bishop, St. Patrick, did three great things. One is that he drove with
his staff all the venomous beasts out of Ireland. The second, that he had grant of our Lord
God that none Irish man shall abide the coming of Antichrist. The third wonder is read of his
purgatory, which is more referred to the less St. Patrick, the Abbot. And this holy abbot,
because he found the people of that land rebel, he went out of Ireland and came in to England
in the Abbey of Glastonbury, where he died on a St. Bartholomew's day. He flourished about
the year of our Lord eight hundred and fifty.

OF SAINT FRANCIS

HOW HE RECEIVED THE COUNSEL OF ST. CLARE AND OF BROTHER SILVESTER, AND HOW HE PREACHED UNTO
THE BIRDS

The humble servant of Christ, St. Francis, a short while after his conversion, having already
gathered together many companions and received them into the order, fell into deep thought
and much doubting as to what he ought to do: whether to give himself wholly unto prayer, or
some time also unto preaching: and on this matter he much desired to learn the will of God.
And for that the holy humility that was in him suffered him not to trust over much in himself
nor in his own prayers, he thought to search out the will of God through the prayers of others:
wherefore he called Brother Masseo, and bespake him thus: "Go unto Sister Clare and tell her
on my behalf, that she with certain of her most spiritual companions, should pray devoutly
unto God, that it may please Him to show me which of the twain is the better: whether to give
myself to preaching or wholly unto prayer. And then go unto Brother Silvester and tell the
like to him." This was that Brother Silvester who when he was in the world had seen a cross
of gold proceeding from the mouth of St. Francis, the which reached even unto heaven and the
arms thereof unto the ends of the world, and this Brother Silvester was of so great devotion
and so great sanctity, that whatsoe'er he asked of God was granted him, and oftentimes he spake
with God; wherefore St. Francis had a great devotion unto him.

So Brother Masseo departed, and according to the bidding of St. Francis carried his message
first unto St. Clare and then unto Brother Silvester. Who, when he had heard thereof, forthwith
fell on his knees in prayer, and as he prayed received answer from God, and turned to Brother
Masseo, and bespake him thus: "Thus saith the Lord: Say unto Brother Francis that God has not
called him to this estate for himself alone, but to the end that he may gain fruit of souls,
and that many through him may be saved." With this reply Brother Masseo returned to St. Clare
to learn what she had received of God, and she answered that God had sent to her and her companions
the same reply as He had given to Brother Silvester. Whereat Brother Masseo hied him back again
to St. Francis; and St. Francis received him with exceeding great love, washing his feet and
making ready for him the meal, and after he had eaten, St. Francis called Brother Masseo into
the wood; and there kneeled down before him and drew back his hood, stretching out his arms
in the shape of a cross, and asked him: "What has my Lord Jesu Christ commanded that I should
do?" Replied Brother Masseo: "As unto Brother Silvester, so likewise unto Sister Clare and
her sisters, has Christ made answer and revealed: that it is His will that thou go throughout
the world to preach, since He hath chosen thee not for thyself alone, but also for the salvation
of others." And then St. Francis, when he had heard this answer and known thereby the will
of Jesu Christ, rose up with fervor exceeding great, and said: "Let us be going in the name
of God"; and he took for his companions Brother Masseo and Brother Agnolo, holy men. And setting
forth with fervent zeal of spirit, taking no thought for road or way, they came unto a little
town that was called Savurniano, and St. Francis set himself to preach, but first he bade the
swallows that were twittering keep silence till such time as he had done the preaching; and
the swallows were obedient to his word, and he preached there with such fervor that all the
men and women of that town minded through their devotion to come after him and leave the town,
but St. Francis suffered them not, saying: "Make not ill haste nor leave your homes; and I
will ordain for you what ye should do for the salvation of your souls": and therewith he resolved
to found the third Order, for the salvation of all the world.

And so leaving them much comforted and with minds firm set on penitence, he departed thence
and came unto a place between Cannaio and Bevagno. And as with great fervor he was going on
the way, he lifted up his eyes and beheld some trees hard by the road whereon sat a great company
of birds well-nigh without number; whereat St. Francis marvelled, and said to his companions:
"Ye shall wait for me here upon the way and I will go to preach unto my little sisters, the
birds." And he went unto the field and began to preach unto the birds that were on the ground;
and immediately those that were on the trees flew down to him, and they all of them remained
still and quiet together, until St. Francis made an end of preaching: and not even then did
they depart, until he had given them his blessing. And according to what Brother Masseo afterward
related unto Robert Jacques da Massa, St. Francis went among them touching them with his cloak,
howbeit none moved from out his place. The sermon that St. Francis preached unto them was after
this fashion: "My little sisters, the birds, much bounden are ye unto God, your Creator, and
always in every place ought ye to praise Him, for that He hath given you liberty to fly about
everywhere, and hath also given you double and triple raiment; moreover, He preserved your
seed in the ark of Noah, that your race might not perish out of the world; still more are ye
beholden to Him for the element of the air which he had appointed for you; beyond all this,
ye sow not, neither do you reap; and God feedeth you, and giveth you the streams and fountains
for your drink; the mountains and the valleys for your refuge and the high trees whereon to
make your nests; and because ye know not how to spin or sew, God clotheth you, you and your
children; wherefore your Creator loveth you much, seeing that He hath bestowed on you so many
benefits; and therefore, my little sisters, beware of the sin of ingratitude, and study always
to give praises unto God." Whenas St. Francis spake these words to them, those birds began
all of them to open their beaks, and stretch their necks, and spread their wings, and reverently
bend their heads down to the ground, and by their acts and by their songs to show that the
holy Father gave them joy exceeding great. And St. Francis rejoiced with them, and was glad,
and marvelled much at so great a company of birds and their most beautiful diversity and their
good heed and sweet friendliness, for the which cause he devoutly praised their Creator in
them. At the last, having ended the preaching, St. Francis made over them the sign of the cross,
and gave them leave to go away; and thereby all the birds with wondrous singing rose up in
the air; and then, in the fashion of the cross that St. Francis had made over them, divided
themselves into four parts; and the one part flew toward the East, and the other toward the
West, and the other toward the South, and the fourth toward the North, and each flight went
on its way singing wondrous songs; signifying thereby that even as St. Francis, the standard-bearer
of the Cross of Christ, had preached unto them, and made over them the sign of the cross, after
the pattern of which they separated themselves unto the four parts of the world: even so the
preaching of the Cross of Christ, renewed by St. Francis, would be carried by him and the brothers
throughout the world; the which brothers, after the fashion of the birds, possessing nothing
of their own in this world, commit their lives wholly unto the providence of God.

HOW ST. FRANCIS CONVERTED THE FIERCE WOLF OF AGOBIO

What time St. Francis abode in the city of Agobio, there appeared in the country of Agobio
an exceeding great wolf, terrible and fierce, the which not only devoured animals, but also
men, insomuch that all the city folk stood in great fear, sith ofttimes he came near to the
city, and all men when they went out arrayed them in arms as it were for the battle, and yet
withal they might not avail to defend them against him whensoe'er any chanced on him alone;
for fear of this wolf they were come to such a pass that none durst go forth of that place.
For the which matter, St. Francis having compassion on the people of that land, wished to go
forth unto that wolf, albeit the townsfolk all gave counsel against it: and making the sign
of the most holy cross he went forth from that place with his companions, putting all his trust
in God. And the others misdoubting to go further, St. Francis took the road to the place where
the wolf lay. And lo! in the sight of many of the townsfolk that had come out to see this miracle,
the said wolf made at St. Francis with open mouth: and coming up to him, St. Francis made over
him the sign of the most holy cross, and called him to him, and bespake him thus: "Come hither,
brother wolf: I command thee in the name of Christ that thou do no harm, nor to me nor to any
one." O wondrous thing! Whenas St. Francis had made the sign of the cross, right so the terrible
wolf shut his jaws and stayed his running: and when he was bid, came gently as a lamb and lay
him down at the feet of St. Francis. Thereat St. Francis thus bespake him: "Brother wolf, much
harm hast thou wrought in these parts and done grievous ill, spoiling and slaying the creatures
of God, without His leave: and not alone hast thou slain and devoured the brute beasts, but
hast dared to slay men, made in the image of God; for the which cause thou art deserving of
the gibbet as a thief and a most base murderer; and all men cry out and murmur against thee
and all this land is thine enemy. But I would fain, brother wolf, make peace between thee and
these; so that thou mayest no more offend them, and they may forgive thee all thy past offences,
and nor men nor dogs pursue thee any more." At these words the wolf with movements of body,
tail, and eyes, and by the bending of his head, gave sign of his assent to what St. Francis
said, and of his will to abide therby. Then spake St. Francis again: "Brother wolf, sith it
pleaseth thee to make and hold this peace, I promise thee that I will see to it that the folk
of this place give thee food alway so long as thou shalt live, so that thou suffer not hunger
any more; for that I wot well that through hunger hast thou wrought all this ill. But sith
I win for thee this grace, I will, brother wolf, that thou promise me to do none hurt to any
more, be he man or beast; dost promise me this?" And the wolf gave clear token by the bowing
of his head that he promised. Then quoth St. Francis: "Brother wolf, I will that thou plight
me troth for this promise, that I may trust thee full well." And St. Francis stretching forth
his hand to take pledge of his troth, the wolf lifted up his right paw before him and laid
it gently on the hand of St. Francis, giving thereby such sign of good faith as he was able.
Then quoth St. Francis: "Brother wolf, I bid thee in the name of Jesu Christ come now with
me, nothing doubting, and let us go stablish this peace in God's name." And the wolf obedient
set forth with him, in fashion as a gentle lamb; whereat the townsfolk made mighty marvel,
beholding. And straightway the bruit of it was spread through all the city, so that all the
people, men-folk and women-folk, great and small, young and old, gat them to the market place
for to see the wolf with St. Francis.

And the people being gathered all together, St. Francis rose up to preach, avizing them among
other matters how for their sins God suffered such things to be, and pestilences also: and
how far more parlous is the flame of hell, the which must vex the damned eternally, than is
the fury of the wolf that can but slay the body; how much then should men fear the jaws of
hell, when such a multitude stands sore adread of the jaws of one so small a beast? Then turn
ye, beloved, unto God, and work out a fit repentance for your sins; and God will set you free
from the wolf in this present time, and in time to come from out the fires of hell. And done
the preaching, St. Francis said: "Give ear, my brothers: brother wolf, who standeth here before
ye, hath promised me and plighted troth to make his peace with you, and to offend no more in
any thing; and do ye promise him to give him every day whate'er he needs: and I am made his
surety unto you that he will keep this pact of peace right steadfastly." Then promised all
the folk with one accord to give him food abidingly. Then quoth St. Francis to the wolf before
them all: "And thou, brother wolf, dost thou make promise to keep firm this pact of peace,
that thou offend not man nor beast nor any creature?" And the wolf knelt him down and bowed
his head: and with gentle movements of his body, tail, and eyes, gave sign as best he could
that he would keep their pact entire. Quoth St. Francis: "Brother wolf, I wish that as thou
hast pledged me thy faith to this promise without the gate, even so shouldest thou pledge me
thy faith to thy promise before all the people, and that thou play me not false for my promise,
and the surety that I have given for thee." Then the wolf lifting up his right paw, laid it
in the hand of St. Francis. Therewith, this act, and the others set forth above, wrought such
great joy and marvel in all the people, both through devotion to the saint, and through the
newness of the miracle, and through the peace with the wolf, that all began to lift up their
voices unto heaven praising and blessing God, that had sent St. Francis unto them, who by his
merits had set them free from the jaws of the cruel beast. And thereafter this same wolf lived
two years in Agobio; and went like a tame beast in and out the houses, from door to door, without
doing hurt to any or any doing hurt to him, and was courteously nourished by the people; and
as he passed thuswise through the country and the houses, never did any dog bark behind him.
At length, after a two years' space, brother wolf died of old age: whereat the townsfolk sorely
grieved, sith marking him pass so gently through the city, they minded them the better of the
virtue and the sanctity of St. Francis.

HOW ST. FRANCIS TAMED THE WILD TURTLE-DOVES

It befell on a day that a certain young man had caught many turtle-doves: and as he was carrying
them for sale, St. Francis, who had ever a tender pity for gentle creatures, met him, and looking
on those turtle-doves with pitying eyes, said to the youth: "I pray thee give them me, that
birds so gentle, unto which the Scripture likeneth chaste and humble and faithful souls, may
not fall into the hands of cruel men that would kill them." Forthwith, inspired of God, he
gave them all to St. Francis; and he receiving them into his bosom, began to speak tenderly
unto them: "O my sisters, simple-minded turtle-doves, innocent and chaste, why have ye let
yourselves be caught? Now would I fain deliver you from death and make you nests, that ye may
be fruitful and multiply, according to the commandments of your Creator." And St. Francis went
and made nests for them all: and they abiding therein, began to lay their eggs and hatch them
before the eyes of the brothers: and so tame were they, they dwelt with St. Francis and all
the other brothers as though they had been fowls that had always fed from their hands, and
never did they go away until St. Francis with his blessing gave them leave to go. And to the
young man who had given them to him, St. Francis said: "My little son, thou wilt yet be a brother
in this Order and do precious service unto Jesu Christ." And so it came to pass; for the said
youth became a brother and lived in the Order in great sanctity.

SONG OF THE EMIGRANTS IN BERMUDA

Where the remote Bermudas ride In the ocean's bosom unespied, From a small boat that row'd
along The listening winds received this song: "What should we do but sing His praise That led
us through the watery maze Where He the huge sea-monsters wracks That lift the deep upon their
backs, Unto an isle so long unknown, And yet far kinder than our own? He lands us on a grassy
stage, Safe from the storms, and prelate's rage: He gave us this eternal spring Which here
enamels everything, And sends the fowls to us in care On daily visits through the air. He hangs
in shades the orange bright Like golden lamps in a green night, And does in the pomegranates
close Jewels more rich than Ormus shows: He makes the figs our mouths to meet, And throws the
melons at our feet; But apples plants of such a price, No tree could ever bear them twice!
With cedars chosen by his hand From Lebanon he stores the land; And makes the hollow seas that
roar Proclaim the ambergris on shore. He cast (of which we rather boast) The Gospel's pearl
upon our coast; And in these rocks for us did frame A temple where to sound His name.

What! said Obstinate, and leave our friends and comforts behind us?

Yes, said Christian, for that was his name, because that all which you forsake is not worthy
to be compared with a little of that I am seeking to enjoy; and if you will go along with me,
and hold it, you shall fare as I myself; for there, where I go, is enough and to spare.

Tush, said Obstinate, away with your book; will you go back with us or no?

No, not I, said the other, because I have laid my hand to the plow.

Obst.

Pli. Then said Pliable, Don't revile; if what the good Christian says is true, the things he
looks after are better than ours; my heart inclines to go with my neighbor.

Pli.

Pli. Come then, good neighbor, let us be going.

Then they went both together.

Pit.

Pli. This is excellent: and what else? Then said Christian, I rejoice and tremble. Up this
way therefore did burdened Christian run, but not without great difficulty, because of the
load on his back.

Chr. Why came you not in at the gate which standeth at the beginning of the way? Know ye not
that it is written, that "he that cometh not in by the door, but climbeth up some other way,
the same is a thief and a robber?"

But, said Christian, will your practice stand a trial at law? Now as he was sleeping, there
came one to him, and awaked him, saying, "Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways,
and be wise." So Mistrust and Timorous run down the hill, and Christian went on his way.

Port. What is your name?

Port.

Port.

Port. I asked his name, and he told me it was Faithful.

Chr. Oh, said Christian, I know him; he is my townsman, my dear neighbor; he comes from the
place where I was born. How far do you think he may be before?

Port.

Apollyon. (but a Christian) "passeth through, and where no man dwelt."

Now here Christian was worse put to it than in his fight with Apollyon, as by the sequel you
shall see.

Then, said Christian, I perceive not yet, by what you have said, but that this is my way to
the desired haven. This put Christian more to it than anything that he met with before, even
to think that he should now blaspheme him that he loved so much before. Yet if he could have
helped it, he would not have done it; but he had not the discretion either to stop his ears,
or to know from whence these blasphemies came. Then said he, "His candle shineth on my head,
and by his light I go through darkness." Hold--give him his oath.

So they sware him. There was also an act made in the day of Nebuchadnezzar the Great, another
of his servants, that whoever would not fall down and worship his golden image, should be thrown
into a fiery furnace. And first among themselves, Mr. Blindman, the foreman, said, I see clearly
that this man is a heretic. This Hopeful also told Christian, that there were many more of
the men in the fair that would take their time and follow after.

That is not likely, said the other.

Then said Christian to his fellow, Now do I see myself in an error. Did not the Shepherds bid
us beware of the Flatterer? Also, are we not now to walk by faith? Let us go on, lest the man
with the whip overtake us again.

By no means, said the other, lest sleeping we never awake more.

Hope. Why, my brother? sleep is sweet to the laboring man; we may be refreshed if we take a nap.

Chr. Do you not remember that one of the Shepherds bid us to beware of the Enchanted Ground?
He meant by that, that we should beware of sleeping: wherefore, "let us not sleep as others
do, but let us watch and be sober."

Now then, said Christian, to prevent drowsiness in this place, let us fall into good discourse.

With all my heart, said the other. So I awoke, and behold it was a dream.

THE PILGRIM

Who would true valor see
  Let him come hither!
They had but to lift their eyes, and there it was plainly to be seen,
though miles away, with the sunshine brightening all its features.

And what was the Great Stone Face?

Embosomed among a family of lofty mountains, there was a valley so spacious that it contained
many thousand inhabitants. Some of these good people dwelt in log huts, with the black forest
all around them, on the steep and difficult hillsides. Others had their homes in comfortable
farmhouses, and cultivated the rich soil on the gentle slopes or level surfaces of the valley.
Others, again, were congregated into populous villages, where some wild, highland rivulet,
tumbling down from its birthplace in the upper mountain region, had been caught and tamed by
human cunning, and compelled to turn the machinery of cotton factories. The inhabitants of
this valley, in short, were numerous, and of many modes of life. But all of them, grown people
and children, had a kind of familiarity with the Great Stone Face, although some possessed
the gift of distinguishing this grand natural phenomenon more perfectly than many of their
neighbors.

The Great Stone Face, then, was a work of Nature in her mood of majestic playfulness, formed
on the perpendicular side of a mountain by some immense rocks, which had been thrown together
in such a position as, when viewed at a proper distance, precisely to resemble the features
of the human countenance. It seemed as if an enormous giant, or a Titan, had sculptured his
own likeness on the precipice. There was the broad arch of the forehead, a hundred feet in
height; the nose, with its long bridge; and the vast lips, which, if they could have spoken,
would have rolled their thunder accents from one end of the valley to the other. True it is,
that if the spectator approached too near, he lost the outline of the gigantic visage, and
could discern only a heap of ponderous and gigantic rocks, piled in chaotic ruin one upon another.
Retracing his steps, however, the wondrous features would again be seen; and the further he
withdrew from them, the more like a human face, with all its original divinity intact, did
they appear; until, as it grew dim in the distance, with the clouds and glorified vapor of
the mountains clustering about it, the Great Stone Face seemed positively to be alive.

It was a happy lot for children to grow up to manhood or womanhood with the Great Stone Face
before their eyes, for all the features were noble, and the expression was at once grand and
sweet, as if it were the glow of a vast, warm heart, that embraced all mankind in its affections,
and had room for more. It was an education only to look at it. According to the belief of many
people, the valley owed much of its fertility to this benign aspect that was continually beaming
over it, illuminating the clouds, and infusing its tenderness into the sunshine.

As we began with saying, a mother and her little boy sat at their cottage-door, gazing at the
Great Stone Face, and talking about it. The child's name was Ernest.

"Mother," said he, while the Titanic visage smiled on him, "I wish that it could speak, for
it looks so very kindly that its voice must needs be pleasant. If I were to see a man with
such a face, I should love him dearly."

"If an old prophecy should come to pass," answered his mother, "we may see a man, some time
or other, with exactly such a face as that."

"What prophecy do you mean, dear mother?" eagerly inquired Ernest. "Pray tell me all about it!"

So his mother told him a story that her own mother had told to her, when she herself was younger
than little Ernest; a story, not of things that were past, but of what was yet to come; a story,
nevertheless, so very old, that even the Indians, who formerly inhabited this valley, had heard
it from their forefathers, to whom, as they affirmed, it had been murmured by the mountain
streams, and whispered by the wind among the tree-tops. The purport was, that, at some future
day, a child should be born hereabouts, who was destined to become the greatest and noblest
personage of his time, and whose countenance, in manhood, should bear an exact resemblance
to the Great Stone Face. Not a few old-fashioned people, and young ones likewise, in the ardor
of their hopes, still cherished an enduring faith in this old prophecy. But others, who had
seen more of the world, had watched and waited till they were weary, and had beheld no man
with such a face, nor any man that proved to be much greater or nobler than his neighbors,
concluded it to be nothing but an idle tale. At all events, the great man of the prophecy had
not yet appeared.

"O mother, dear mother!" cried Ernest, clapping his hands above his head, "I do hope that I
shall live to see him!"

His mother was an affectionate and thoughtful woman, and felt that it was wisest not to discourage
the generous hopes of her little boy. So she only said to him, "Perhaps you may."

And Ernest never forgot the story that his mother told him. It was always in his mind, whenever
he looked upon the Great Stone Face. He spent his childhood in the log-cottage where he was
born, and was dutiful to his mother, and helpful to her in many things, assisting her much
with his little hands, and more with his loving heart. In this manner, from a happy yet often
pensive child, he grew up to be a mild, quiet, unobtrusive boy, and sun-browned with labor
in the fields, but with more intelligence brightening his aspect than is seen in many lads
who have been taught at famous schools. Yet Ernest had had no teacher, save only that the Great
Stone Face became one to him. When the toil of the day was over, he would gaze at it for hours,
until he began to imagine that those vast features recognized him, and gave him a smile of
kindness and encouragement, responsive to his own look of veneration. We must not take upon
us to affirm that this was a mistake, although the Face may have looked no more kindly at Ernest
than at all the world besides. But the secret was, that the boy's tender and confiding simplicity
discerned what other people could not see; and thus the love, which was meant for all, became
his peculiar portion.

About this time, there went a rumor throughout the valley, that the great man, foretold from
ages ago, who was to bear a resemblance to the Great Stone Face, had appeared at last. It seems
that, many years before, a young man had migrated from the valley and settled at a distant
seaport, where, after getting together a little money, he had set up as a shopkeeper. His name--but
I could never learn whether it was his real one, or a nickname that had grown out of his habits
and success in life--was Gathergold. Being shrewd and active, and endowed by Providence with
that inscrutable faculty which develops itself in what the world calls luck, he became an exceedingly
rich merchant, and owner of a whole fleet of bulky-bottomed ships. All the countries of the
globe appeared to join hands for the mere purpose of adding heap after heap to the mountainous
accumulation of this one man's wealth. The cold regions of the north, almost within the gloom
and shadow of the Arctic Circle, sent him their tribute in the shape of furs; hot Africa sifted
for him the golden sands of her rivers, and gathered up the ivory tusks of her great elephants
out of the forests; the East came bringing him the rich shawls, and spices, and teas, and the
effulgence of diamonds, and the gleaming purity of large pearls. The ocean, not to be behindhand
with the earth, yielded up her mighty whales, that Mr. Gathergold might sell their oil, and
make a profit on it. Be the original commodity what it might, it was gold within his grasp.
It might be said of him, as of Midas in the fable, that whatever he touched with his finger
immediately glistened, and grew yellow, and was changed at once into sterling metal, or, which
suited him still better, into piles of coin. And, when Mr. Gathergold had become so very rich
that it would have taken him a hundred years only to count his wealth, he bethought himself
of his native valley, and resolved to go back thither, and end his days where he was born.
With this purpose in view, he sent a skilful architect to build him such a palace as should
be fit for a man of his vast wealth to live in.

As I have said above, it had already been rumored in the valley that Mr. Gathergold had turned
out to be the prophetic personage so long and vainly looked for, and that his visage was the
perfect and undeniable similitude of the Great Stone Face. People were the more ready to believe
that this must needs be the fact, when they beheld the splendid edifice that rose, as if by
enchantment, on the site of his father's old weather-beaten farmhouse. The exterior was of
marble, so dazzingly white that it seemed as though the whole structure might melt away in
the sunshine, like those humbler ones which Mr. Gathergold, in his young play-days, before
his fingers were gifted with the touch of transmutation, had been accustomed to build of snow.
It had a richly ornamented portico, supported by tall pillars, beneath which was a lofty door,
studded with silver knobs, and made of a kind of variegated wood that had been brought from
beyond the sea. The windows, from the floor to the ceiling of each stately apartment, were
composed, respectively, of but one enormous pane of glass, so transparently pure that it was
said to be a finer medium than even the vacant atmosphere. Hardly anybody had been permitted
to see the interior of this palace; but it was reported, and with good semblance of truth,
to be far more gorgeous than the outside, insomuch that whatever was iron or brass in other
houses was silver or gold in this; and Mr. Gathergold's bedchamber, especially, made such a
glittering appearance that no ordinary man would have been able to close his eyes there. But,
on the other hand, Mr. Gathergold was now so inured to wealth, that perhaps he could not have
closed his eyes unless where the gleam of it was certain to find its way beneath his eyelids.

In due time, the mansion was finished; next came the upholsterers, with magnificent furniture;
then, a whole troop of black and white servants, the harbingers of Mr. Gathergold, who, in
his own majestic person, was expected to arrive at sunset. Our friend Ernest, meanwhile, had
been deeply stirred by the idea that the great man, the noble man, the man of prophecy, after
so many ages of delay, was at length to be made manifest to his native valley. He knew, boy
as he was, that there were a thousand ways in which Mr. Gathergold, with his vast wealth, might
transform himself into an angel of beneficence, and assume a control over human affairs as
wide and benignant as the smile of the Great Stone Face. Full of faith and hope, Ernest doubted
not that what the people said was true, and that now he was to behold the living likeness of
those wondrous features on the mountain side. While the boy was still gazing up the valley,
and fancying, as he always did, that the Great Stone Face returned his gaze and looked kindly
at him, the rumbling of wheels was heard, approaching swiftly along the winding road.

"Here he comes!" cried a group of people who were assembled to witness the arrival. "Here comes
the great Mr. Gathergold!"

A carriage, drawn by four horses, dashed round the turn of the road. Within it, thrust partly
out of the window, appeared the physiognomy of a little old man, with a skin as yellow as if
his own Midas-hand had transmuted it. He had a low forehead, small, sharp eyes, puckered about
with innumerable wrinkles, and very thin lips, which he made still thinner by pressing them
forcibly together.

"The very image of the Great Stone Face!" shouted the people. "Sure enough, the old prophecy
is true; and here we have the great man come, at last!"

And, what greatly perplexed Ernest, they seemed actually to believe that here was the likeness
which they spoke of. By the roadside there chanced to be an old beggar-woman and two little
beggar-children, stragglers from some far-off region, who, as the carriage rolled onward, held
out their hands and lifted up their doleful voices, most piteously beseeching charity. A yellow
claw--the very same that had clawed together so much wealth--poked itself out of the coach
window, and dropped some copper coins upon the ground; so that, though the great man's name
seems to have been Gathergold, he might just as suitably have been nicknamed Scattercopper.
Still, nevertheless, with an earnest shout, and evidently with as much good faith as ever,
the people bellowed--

"He is the very image of the Great Stone Face!"

But Ernest turned sadly from the wrinkled shrewdness of that sordid visage, and gazed up the
valley, where, amid a gathering mist, gilded by the last sunbeams, he could still distinguish
those glorious features which had impressed themselves into his soul. Their aspect cheered
him. What did the benign lips seem to say?

"He will come! Fear not, Ernest; the man will come!"

The years went on, and Ernest ceased to be a boy. He had grown to be a young man now. He attracted
little notice from the other inhabitants of the valley; for they saw nothing remarkable in
his way of life, save that, when the labor of the day was over, he still loved to go apart
and gaze and meditate upon the Great Stone Face. According to their idea of the matter, it
was a folly, indeed, but pardonable, inasmuch as Ernest was industrious, kind, and neighborly,
and neglected no duty for the sake of indulging this idle habit. They knew not that the Great
Stone Face had become a teacher to him, and that the sentiment which was expressed in it would
enlarge the young man's heart, and fill it with wider and deeper sympathies than other hearts.
They knew not that thence would come a better wisdom than could be learned from books, and
a better life than could be molded on the defaced example of other human lives. Neither did
Ernest know that the thoughts and affections which came to him so naturally, in the fields
and at the fireside, and wherever he communed with himself, were of a higher tone than those
which all men shared with him. A simple soul--simple as when his mother first taught him the
old prophecy--he beheld the marvellous features beaming adown the valley, and still wondered
that their human counterpart was so long in making his appearance.

By this time poor Mr. Gathergold was dead and buried; and the oddest part of the matter was,
that his wealth, which was the body and spirit of his existence, had disappeared before his
death, leaving nothing of him but a living skeleton, covered over with a wrinkled, yellow skin.
Since the melting away of his gold, it had been very generally conceded that there was no such
striking resemblance, after all, between the ignoble features of the ruined merchant and that
majestic face upon the mountain-side. So the people ceased to honor him during his lifetime,
and quietly consigned him to forgetfulness after his decease. Once in a while, it is true,
his memory was brought up in connection with the magnificent palace which he had built, and
which had long ago been turned into a hotel for the accommodation of strangers, multitudes
of whom came, every summer, to visit that famous natural curiosity, the Great Stone Face. Thus,
Mr, Gathergold being discredited and thrown into the shade, the man of prophecy was yet to come.

It so happened that a native-born son of the valley, many years before, had enlisted as a soldier,
and, after a great deal of hard fighting, had now become an illustrious commander. Whatever
he may be called in history, he was known in camps and on the battle-field under the nickname
of Old Blood-and-Thunder. This war-worn veteran, being now infirm with age and wounds, and
weary of the turmoil of a military life, and of the roll of the drum and the clangor of the
trumpet, that had so long been ringing in his ears, had lately signified a purpose of returning
to his native valley, hoping to find repose where he remembered to have left it. The inhabitants,
his old neighbors and their grown-up children, were resolved to welcome the renowned warrior
with a salute of cannon and a public dinner; and all the more enthusiastically, it being affirmed
that now, at last, the likeness of the Great Stone Face had actually appeared. An aid-de-camp
of Old Blood-and-Thunder, travelling through the valley, was said to have been struck with
the resemblance. Moreover the schoolmates and early acquaintances of the general were ready
to testify, on oath, that, to the best of their recollection, the aforesaid general had been
exceedingly like the majestic image, even when a boy, only that the idea had never occurred
to them at that period. Great, therefore, was the excitement throughout the valley; and many
people, who had never once thought of glancing at the Great Stone Face for years before, now
spent their time in gazing at it, for the sake of knowing exactly how General Blood-and-Thunder
looked.

On the day of the great festival, Ernest, with all the other people of the valley, left their
work, and proceeded to the spot where the sylvan banquet was prepared. As he approached, the
loud voice of the Rev. Dr. Battleblast was heard, beseeching a blessing on the good things
set before them, and on the distinguished friend of peace in whose honor they were assembled.
The tables were arranged in a cleared space of the woods, shut in by the surrounding trees,
except where a vista opened eastward, and afforded a distant view of the Great Stone Face.
Over the general's chair, which was a relic from the home of Washington, there was an arch
of verdant boughs, with the laurel profusely intermixed, and surmounted by his country's banner,
beneath which he had won his victories. Our friend Ernest raised himself on his tiptoes, in
hopes to get a glimpse of the celebrated guest; but there was a mighty crowd about the tables
anxious to hear the toasts and speeches, and to catch any word that might fall from the general
in reply; and a volunteer company, doing duty as a guard, pricked ruthlessly with their bayonets
at any particularly quiet person among the throng. So Ernest, being of an unobtrusive character,
was thrust quite into the background, where he could see no more of Old Blood-and-Thunder's
physiognomy than if it had been still blazing on the battle-field. To console himself, he turned
toward the Great Stone Face, which, like a faithful and long-remembered friend, looked back
and smiled upon him through the vista of the forest. Meantime, however, he could overhear the
remarks of various individuals, who were comparing the features of the hero with the face on
the distant mountain-side.

"'Tis the same face, to a hair!" cried one man, cutting a caper for joy.

"Wonderfully like, that's a fact!" responded another.

"Like! why, I call it Old Blood-and-Thunder himself, in a monstrous looking-glass!" cried a
third. "And why not? He's the greatest man of this or any other age, beyond a doubt."

And then all three of the speakers gave a great shout, which communicated electricity to the
crowd, and called forth a roar from a thousand voices, that went reverberating for miles among
the mountains, until you might have supposed that the Great Stone Face had poured its thunder-breath
into the cry. All these comments, and this vast enthusiasm, served the more to interest our
friend; nor did he think of questioning that now, at length, the mountain-visage had found
its human counterpart. It is true, Ernest had imagined that this long-looked-for personage
would appear in the character of a man of peace, uttering wisdom, and doing good, and making
people happy. But, taking an habitual breadth of view, with all his simplicity, he contended
that Providence should choose its own method of blessing mankind, and could conceive that this
great end might be effected even by a warrior and a bloody sword, should inscrutable wisdom
see fit to order matters so.

"The general! the general!" was now the cry. "Hush! silence! Old Blood-and-Thunder's going
to make a speech."

Even so; for, the cloth being removed, the general's health had been drunk amid shouts of applause,
and he now stood upon his feet to thank the company. Ernest saw him. There he was, over the
shoulders of the crowd, from the two glittering epaulets and embroidered collar upward, beneath
the arch of green boughs with intertwined laurel, and the banner drooping as if to shade his
brow! And there, too, visible in the same glance, through the vista of the forest, appeared
the Great Stone Face! And was there, indeed, such a resemblance as the crowd had testified?
Alas, Ernest could not recognize it! He beheld a war-worn and weather-beaten countenance, full
of energy, and expressive of an iron will; but the gentle wisdom, the deep, broad, tender sympathies,
were altogether wanting in Old Blood-and Thunder's visage; and even if the Great Stone Face
had assumed his look of stern command, the milder traits would still have tempered it.

"This is not the man of prophecy," sighed Ernest, to himself, as he made his way out of the
throng. "And must the world wait longer yet?"

The mists had congregated about the distant mountain-side, and there were seen the grand and
awful features of the Great Stone Face, awful but benignant, as if a mighty angel were sitting
among the hills, and enrobing himself in a cloud-vesture of gold and purple. As he looked,
Ernest could hardly believe but that a smile beamed over the whole visage, with a radiance
still brightening, although without motion of the lips. It was probably the effect of the western
sunshine, melting through the thinly diffused vapors that had swept between him and the object
that he gazed at. But--as it always did--the aspect of his marvellous friend made Ernest as
hopeful as if he had never hoped in vain.

"Fear not, Ernest," said his heart, even as if the Great Face were whispering him--"fear not,
Ernest; he will come."

More years sped swiftly and tranquilly away. Ernest still dwelt in his native valley, and was
now a man of middle age. By imperceptible degrees, he had become known among the people. Now,
as heretofore, he labored for his bread, and was the same simple-hearted man that he had always
been. But he had thought and felt so much, he had given so many of the best hours of his life
to unworldly hopes for some great good to mankind, that it seemed as though he had been talking
with the angels, and had imbibed a portion of their wisdom unawares. It was visible in the
calm and well-considered beneficence of his daily life, the quiet stream of which had made
a wide green margin all along its course. Not a day passed by, that the world was not the better
because this man, humble as he was, had lived. He never stepped aside from his own path, yet
would always reach a blessing to his neighbor. Almost involuntarily, too, he had become a preacher.
The pure and high simplicity of his thought, which, as one of its manifestations, took shape
in the good deeds that dropped silently from his hand, flowed also forth in speech. He uttered
truths that wrought upon and molded the lives of those who heard him. His auditors, it may
be, never suspected that Ernest, their own neighbor and familiar friend, was more than an ordinary
man; least of all did Ernest himself suspect it; but, inevitably as the murmur of a rivulet,
came thoughts out of his mouth that no other human lips had spoken.

When the people's minds had had a little time to cool, they were ready enough to acknowledge
their mistake in imagining a similarity between General Blood-and-Thunder's truculent physiognomy
and the benign visage on the mountain-side. But now, again, there were reports and many paragraphs
in the newspapers, affirming that the likeness of the Great Stone Face had appeared upon the
broad shoulders of a certain eminent statesman. He, like Mr. Gathergold and Old Blood-and-Thunder,
was a native of the valley, but had left it in his early days, and taken up the trades of law
and politics. Instead of the rich man's wealth and the warrior's sword, he had but a tongue,
and it was mightier than both together. So wonderfully eloquent was he, that whatever he might
choose to say, his auditors had no choice but to believe him; wrong looked like right, and
right like wrong; for when it pleased him, he could make a kind of illuminated fog with his
mere breath, and obscure the natural daylight with it. His tongue, indeed, was a magic instrument:
sometimes it rumbled like the thunder; sometimes it warbled like the sweetest music. It was
the blast of war--the song of peace; and it seemed to have a heart in it, when there was no
such matter. In good truth, he was a wondrous man; and when his tongue had acquired him all
other imaginable success,--when it had been heard in halls of state, and in the courts of princes
and potentates--after it had made him known all over the world, even as a voice crying from
shore to shore--it finally persuaded his countrymen to select him for the Presidency. Before
this time--indeed, as soon as he began to grow celebrated--his admirers had found out the resemblance
between him and the Great Stone Face; and so much were they struck by it, that throughout the
country this distinguished gentleman was known by the name of Old Stony Phiz. The phrase was
considered as giving a highly favorable aspect to his political prospects; for, as is likewise
the case with the Popedom, nobody ever becomes President without taking a name other than his own.

While his friends were doing their best to make him President, Old Stony Phiz, as he was called,
set out on a visit to the valley where he was born. Of course, he had no other object than
to shake hands with his fellow-citizens, and neither thought nor cared about any effect which
his progress through the country might have upon the election. Magnificent preparations were
made to receive the illustrious statesman; a cavalcade of horsemen set forth to meet him at
the boundary line of the State, and all the people left their business and gathered along the
wayside to see him pass. Among these was Ernest. Though more than once disappointed, as we
have seen, he had such a hopeful and confiding nature, that he was always ready to believe
in whatever seemed beautiful and good. He kept his heart continually open, and thus was sure
to catch the blessing from on high, when it should come. So now again, as buoyantly as ever,
he went forth to behold the likeness of the Great Stone Face.

The cavalcade came prancing along the road, with a great clattering of hoofs and a mighty cloud
of dust, which rose up so dense and high that the visage of the mountain-side was completely
hidden from Ernest's eyes. All the great men of the neighborhood were there on horseback: militia
officers, in uniform; the member of Congress; the sheriff of the county; the editors of newspapers;
and many a farmer, too, had mounted his patient steed, with his Sunday coat upon his back.
It really was a very brilliant spectacle, especially as there were numerous banners flaunting
over the cavalcade, on some of which were gorgeous portraits of the illustrious statesman and
the Great Stone Face, smiling familiarly at one another, like two brothers. If the pictures
were to be trusted, the mutual resemblance, it must be confessed, was marvellous. We must not
forget to mention that there was a band of music, which made the echoes of the mountains ring
and reverberate with the loud triumph of its strains; so that airy and soul-thrilling melodies
broke out among all the heights and hollows, as if every nook of his native valley had found
a voice, to welcome the distinguished guest. But the grandest effect was when the far-off mountain
precipice flung back the music; for then the Great Stone Face itself seemed to be swelling
the triumphant chorus, in acknowledgment that, at length, the man of prophecy was come.

All this while the people were throwing up their hats and shouting, with enthusiasm so contagious
that the heart of Ernest kindled up, and he likewise threw up his hat, and shouted, as loudly
as the loudest, "Huzza for the great man! Huzza for Old Stony Phiz!" But as yet he had not
seen him.

"Here he is, now!" cried those who stood near Ernest. "There! There! Look at Old Stony Phiz
and then at the Old Man of the Mountain, and see if they are not as like as two twin-brothers!"

In the midst of all this gallant array, came an open barouche, drawn by four white horses;
and in the barouche, with his massive head uncovered, sat the illustrious statesman, Old Stony
Phiz himself.

"Confess it," said one of Ernest's neighbors to him, "the Great Stone Face has met its match
at last!"

Now, it must be owned that, at his first glimpse of the countenance which was bowing and smiling
from the barouche, Ernest did fancy that there was a resemblance between it and the old familiar
face upon the mountain-side. The brow, with its massive depth and loftiness, and all the other
features, indeed, were boldly and strongly hewn, as if in emulation of a more than heroic,
of a Titanic model. But the sublimity and stateliness, the grand expression of a divine sympathy,
that illuminated the mountain visage, and etherealized its ponderous granite substance into
spirit, might here be sought in vain. Something had been originally left out, or had departed.
And therefore the marvellously gifted statesman had always a weary gloom in the deep caverns
of his eyes, as of a child that has outgrown its playthings, or a man of mighty faculties and
little aims, whose life, with all its high performances, was vague and empty, because no high
purpose had endowed it with reality.

Still, Ernest's neighbor was thrusting his elbow into his side, and pressing him for an answer.

"Confess! confess! Is not he the very picture of your Old Man of the Mountain?"

"No!" said Ernest, bluntly, "I see little or no likeness."

"Then so much the worse for the Great Stone Face!" answered his neighbor; and again he set
up a shout for Old Stony Phiz.

But Ernest turned away, melancholy, and almost despondent: for this was the saddest of his
disappointments, to behold a man who might have fulfilled the prophecy, and had not willed
to do so. Meantime, the cavalcade, the banners, the music, and the barouches swept past him,
with the vociferous crowd in the rear, leaving the dust to settle down, and the Great Stone
Face to be revealed again, with the grandeur that it had worn for untold centuries.

"Lo, here I am, Ernest!" the benign lips seemed to say. "I have waited longer than thou, and
am not yet weary. Fear not; the man will come."

The years hurried onward, treading in their haste on one another's heels. And now they began
to bring white hairs, and scatter them over the head of Ernest; they made reverend wrinkles
across his forehead, and furrows in his cheeks. He was an aged man. But not in vain had he
grown old: more than the white hairs on his head were the sage thoughts in his mind; his wrinkles
and furrows were inscriptions that Time had graved, and in which he had written legends of
wisdom that had been tested by the tenor of a life. And Ernest had ceased to be obscure. Unsought
for, undesired, had come the fame which so many seek, and made him known in the great world,
beyond the limits of the valiey in which he had dwelt so quietly. College professors, and even
the active men of cities, came from far to see and converse with Ernest; for the report had
gone abroad that this simple husbandman had ideas unlike those of other men, not gained from
books, but of a higher tone--a tranquil and familiar majesty, as if he had been talking with
the angels as his daily friends. Whether it were sage, statesman, or philanthropist, Ernest
received these visitors with the gentle sincerity that had characterized him from boyhood,
and spoke freely with them of whatever came uppermost, or lay deepest in his heart or their
own. While they talked together, his face would kindle, unawares, and shine upon them, as with
a mild evening light. Pensive with the fulness of such discourse, his guests took leave and
went their way; and passing up the valley, paused to look at the Great Stone Face, imagining
that they had seen its likeness in a human countenance, but could not remember where.

While Ernest had been growing up and growing old, a bountiful Providence had granted a new
poet to this earth. He, likewise, was a native of the valley, but had spent the greater part
of his life at a distance from that romantic region, pouring out his sweet music amid the bustle
and din of cities. Often, however, did the mountains which had been familiar to him in his
childhood lift their snowy peaks into the clear atmosphere of his poetry. Neither was the Great
Stone Face forgotten, for the poet had celebrated it in an ode, which was grand enough to have
been uttered by its own majestic lips. This man of genius, we may say, had come down from heaven
with wonderful endowments. If he sang of a mountain, the eyes of all mankind beheld a mightier
grandeur reposing on its breast, or soaring to its summit, than had before been seen there.
If his theme were a lovely lake, a celestial smile had now been thrown over it, to gleam forever
on its surface. If it were the vast old sea, even the deep immensity of its dread bosom seemed
to swell the higher, as if moved by the emotions of the song. Thus the world assumed another
and a better aspect from the hour that the poet blessed it with his happy eyes. The Creator
had bestowed him, as the last best touch to his own handiwork. Creation was not finished till
the poet came to interpret, and so complete it.

The effect was no less high and beautiful, when his human brethren were the subject of his
verse. The man or woman, sordid with the common dust of life, who crossed his daily path, and
the little child who played in it, were glorified if he beheld them in his mood of poetic faith.
He showed the golden links of the great chain that intertwined them with an angelic kindred;
he brought out the hidden traits of a celestial birth that made them worthy of such kin. Some,
indeed, there were, who thought to show the soundness of their judgment by affirming that all
the beauty and dignity of the natural world existed only in the poet's fancy. Let such men
speak for themselves, who undoubtedly appear to have been spawned forth by Nature with a contemptuous
bitterness; she having plastered them up out of her refuse stuff, after all the swine were
made. As respects all things else, the poet's ideal was the truest truth.

The songs of this poet found their way to Ernest. He read them after his customary toil, seated
on the bench before his cottage-door, where for such a length of time he had filled his repose
with thought, by gazing at the Great Stone Face. And now as he read stanzas that caused the
soul to thrill within him, he lifted his eyes to the vast countenance beaming on him so benignantly.

"O majestic friend," he murmured, addressing the Great Stone Face, "is not this man worthy
to resemble thee?"

The Face seemed to smile, but answered not a word.

Now it happened that the poet, though he dwelt so far away, had not only heard of Ernest, but
had meditated much upon his character, until he deemed nothing so desirable as to meet this
man, whose untaught wisdom walked hand in hand with the noble simplicity of his life. One summer
morning, therefore, he took passage by the railroad, and, in the decline of the afternoon,
alighted from the cars at no great distance from Ernest's cottage. The great hotel, which had
formerly been the palace of Mr. Gathergold, was close at hand, but the poet, with his carpet-bag
on his arm, inquired at once where Ernest dwelt, and was resolved to be accepted as his guest.

Approaching the door, he there found the good old man, holding a volume in his hand, which
alternately he read, and then, with a finger between the leaves, looked lovingly at the Great
Stone Face.

"Good evening," said the poet. "Can you give a traveller a night's lodging?"

"Willingly," answered Ernest; and then he added, smiling, "Methinks I never saw the Great Stone
Face look so hospitably at a stranger."

The poet sat down on the bench beside him, and he and Ernest talked together. Often had the
poet held intercourse with the wittiest and the wisest, but never before with a man like Ernest,
whose thoughts and feelings gushed up with such a natural freedom, and who made great truths
so familiar by his simple utterance of them. Angels, as had been so often said, seemed to have
wrought with him at his labor in the fields; angels seemed to have sat with him by the fireside;
and, dwelling with angels as friend with friends, he had imbibed the sublimity of their ideas,
and imbued it with the sweet and lowly charm of household words. So thought the poet. And Ernest,
on the other hand, was moved and agitated by the living images which the poet flung out of
his mind, and which peopled all the air about the cottage-door with shapes of beauty, both
gay and pensive. The sympathies of these two men instructed them with a profounder sense than
either could have attained alone. Their minds accorded into one strain, and made delightful
music which neither of them could have claimed as all his own, nor distinguished his own share
from the other's. They led one another, as it were, into a high pavilion of their thoughts,
so remote, and hitherto so dim, that they had never entered it before, and so beautiful that
they desired to be there always.

As Ernest listened to the poet, he imagined that the Great Stone Face was bending forward to
listen too. He gazed earnestly into the poet's glowing eyes.

"Who are you, my strangely gifted guest?" he said.

The poet laid his finger on the volume that Ernest had been reading.

"You have read these poems," said he. "You know me, then--for I wrote them."

Again, and still more earnestly than before, Ernest examined the poet's features; then turned
toward the Great Stone Face; then back, with an uncertain aspect, to his guest. But his countenance
fell; he shook his head, and sighed.

"Wherefore are you sad?" inquired the poet.

"Because," replied Ernest, "all through life I have awaited the fulfilment of a prophecy; and,
when I read these poems, I hoped that it might be fulfilled in you."

"You hoped," answered the poet, faintly smiling, "to find in me the likeness of the Great Stone
Face. And you are disappointed, as formerly with Mr. Gathergold, and Old Blood-and-Thunder,
and Old Stony Phiz. Yes, Ernest, it is my doom. You must add my name to the illustrious three,
and record another failure of your hopes. For--in shame and sadness do I speak it, Ernest--I
am not worthy to be typified by yonder benign and majestic image."

"And why?" asked Ernest. He pointed to the volume. "Are not those thoughts divine?"

"They have a strain of the Divinity," replied the poet. "You can hear in them the far-off echo
of a heavenly song. But my life, dear Ernest, has not corresponded with my thought. I have
had grand dreams, but they have been only dreams, because I have lived--and that, too, by my
own choice--among poor and mean realities. Sometimes even--shall I dare to say it?--I lack
faith in the grandeur, the beauty, and the goodness, which my own works are said to have made
more evident in nature and in human life. Why, then, pure seeker of the good and true, shouldst
thou hope to find me, in yonder image of the divine?"

The poet spoke sadly, and his eyes were dim with tears. So, likewise, were those of Ernest.

At the hour of sunset, as had long been his frequent custom, Ernest was to discourse to an
assemblage of the neighboring inhabitants in the open air. He and the poet, arm in arm, still
talking together as they went along, proceeded to the spot. It was a small nook among the hills,
with a gray precipice behind, the stern front of which was relieved by the pleasant foliage
of many creeping plants, that made a tapestry for the naked rock, by hanging their festoons
from all its rugged angles. At a small elevation above the ground, set in a rich framework
of verdure, there appeared a niche, spacious enough to admit a human figure, with freedom for
such gestures as spontaneously ascompany earnest thought and genuine emotion. Into this natural
pulpit Ernest ascended, and threw a look of familiar kindness around upon his audience. They
stood, or sat, or reclined upon the grass, as seemed good to each, with the departing sunshine
falling obliquely over them, and mingling its subdued cheerfulness with the solemnity of a
grove of ancient trees, beneath and amid the boughs of which the golden rays were constrained
to pass. In another direction was seen the Great Stone Face, with the same cheer, combined
with the same solemnity, in its benignant aspect.

Ernest began to speak, giving to the people of what was in his heart and mind. His words had
power, because they accorded with his thoughts; and his thoughts had reality and depth, because
they harmonized with the life which he had always lived. It was not mere breath that this preacher
uttered; they were the words of life, because a life of good deeds and holy love was melted
into them. Pearls, pure and rich, had been dissolved into this precious draught. The poet,
as he listened, felt that the being and character of Ernest were a nobler strain of poetry
than he had ever written. His eyes glistening with tears, he gazed reverentially at the venerable
man, and said within himself that never was there an aspect so worthy of a prophet and a sage
as that mild, sweet, thoughtful countenance, with the glory of white hair diffused about it.
At a distance, but distinctly to be seen, high up in the golden light of the setting sun, appeared
the Great Stone Face, with hoary mists around it, like the white hairs around the brow of Ernest.
Its look of grand beneficence seemed to embrace the world.

At that moment, in sympathy with a thought which he was about to utter, the face of Ernest
assumed a grandeur of expression, so imbued with benevolence, that the poet, by an irresistible
impulse, threw his arms aloft, and shouted:

"Behold! Behold! Ernest is himself the likeness of the Great Stone Face!"

Then all the people looked, and saw that what the deep-sighted poet said was true. The prophecy
was fulfilled. But Ernest, having finished what he had to say, took the poet's arm, and walked
slowly homeward, still hoping that some wiser and better man than himself would by and by appear,
bearing a resemblance to the GREAT STONE FACE.

THE GENTLE BOY

By NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

In the course of the year 1656, several of the people called Quakers, led, as they professed,
by the inward movement of the spirit, made their appearance in New England. Their reputation,
as holders of mystic and pernicious principles, having spread before them, the Puritans early
endeavored to banish, and to prevent the further intrusion of the rising sect. But the measures
by which it was intended to purge the land of heresy, though more than sufficiently vigorous,
were entirely unsuccessful. The Quakers, esteeming persecution as a divine call to the post
of danger, laid claim to a holy courage, unknown to the Puritans themselves, who had shunned
the cross, by providing for the peaceable exercise of their religion in a distant wilderness.
Though it was the singular fact, that every nation of the earth rejected the wandering enthusiasts
who practiced peace toward all men, the place of greatest uneasiness and peril, and therefore,
in their eyes, the most eligible, was the province of Massachusetts Bay.

The fines, imprisonments, and stripes, liberally distributed by our pious forefathers, the
popular antipathy, so strong that it endured nearly a hundred years after actual persecution
had ceased, were attractions as powerful for the Quakers as peace, honor, and reward would
have been for the wordly-minded. Every European vessel brought new cargoes of the sect, eager
to testify against the oppression which they hoped to share; and, when shipmasters were restrained
by heavy fines from affording them passage, they made long and circuitous journeys through
the Indian country, and appeared in the province as if conveyed by a supernatural power. Their
enthusiasm, heightened almost to madness by the treatment which they received, produced actions
contrary to the rules of decency, as well as of rational religion, and presented a singular
contrast to the calm and staid deportment of their sectarian successors of the present day.
The command of the spirit, inaudible except to the soul, and not to be controverted on grounds
of human wisdom, was made a plea for most indecorous exhibitions, which, abstractedly considered,
well deserved the moderate chastisement of the rod. These extravagances, and the persecution
which was at once their cause and consequence, continued to increase, till, in the year 1659,
the government of Massachusetts Bay indulged two members of the Quaker sect with the crown
of martyrdom.

An indelible stain of blood is upon the hands of all who consented to this act, but a large
share of the awful responsibility must rest upon the person then at the head of the government.
He was a man of narrow mind and imperfect education, and his uncompromising bigotry was made
hot and mischievous by violent and hasty passions; he exerted his influence indecorously and
unjustifiably to compass the death of the enthusiasts; and his whole conduct, in respect to
them, was marked by brutal cruelty.

The Quakers, whose revengeful feelings were not less deep because they were inactive, remembered
this man and his associates, in after times. The historian of the sect affirms that, by the
wrath of Heaven, a blight fell upon the land in the vicinity of the "bloody town" of Boston,
so that no wheat would grow there; and he takes his stand, as it were, among the graves of
the ancient persecutors, and triumphantly recounts the judgments that overtook them, in old
age or at the parting hour. He tells us that they died suddenly, and violently, and in madness;
but nothing can exceed the bitter mockery with which he records the loathsome disease, and
"death by rottenness," of the fierce and cruel governor.

On the evening of the autumn day, that had witnessed the martyrdom of two men of the Quaker
persuasion, a Puritan settler was returning from the metropolis to the neighboring country
town in which he resided. The air was cool, the sky clear, and the lingering twilight was made
brighter by the rays of a young moon, which had now nearly reached the verge of the horizon.
The traveller, a man of middle age, wrapped in a gray frieze cloak, quickened his pace when
he had reached the outskirts of the town, for a gloomy extent of nearly four miles lay between
him and his home. The low, straw-thatched houses were scattered at considerable intervals along
the road, and the country having been settled but about thirty years, the tracts of original
forest still bore no small proportion to the cultivated ground. The autumn wind wandered among
the branches, whirling away the leaves from all except the pine-trees, and moaning as if it
lamented the desolation of which it was the instrument. The road had penetrated the mass of
woods that lay nearest to the town, and was just emerging into an open space, when the traveller's
ears were saluted by a sound more mournful than even that of the wind. It was like the wailing
of some one in distress, and it seemed to proceed from beneath a tall and lonely fir-tree,
in the centre of a cleared, but uninclosed and uncultivated field. The Puritan could not but
remember that this was the very spot which had been made accursed a few hours before by the
execution of the Quakers, whose bodies had been thrown together into one hasty grave, beneath
the tree on which they suffered. He struggled, however, against the superstitious fears which
belonged to the age, and compelled himself to pause and listen.

"The voice is most likely mortal, nor have I cause to tremble if it be otherwise," thought
he, straining his eyes through the dim moonlight. "Methinks it is like the wailing of a child;
some infant, it may be, which has strayed from its mother, and chanced upon this place of death.
For the ease of mine own conscience, I must search this matter out."

He therefore left the path, and walked somewhat fearfully across the field. Though now so desolate,
its soil was pressed down and trampled by the thousand footsteps of those who had witnessed
the spectacle of that day, all of whom had now retired, leaving the dead to their loneliness.
The traveller at length reached the fir-tree, which from the middle upward was covered with
living branches, although a scaffold had been erected beneath, and other preparations made
for the work of death. Under this unhappy tree, which in after times was believed to drop poison
with its dew, sat the one solitary mourner for innocent blood. It was a slender and light-clad
little boy, who leaned his face upon a hillock of fresh-turned and half-frozen earth, and wailed
bitterly, yet in a suppressed tone, as if his grief might receive the punishment of crime.
The Puritan, whose approach had been unperceived, laid his hand upon the child's shoulder,
and addressed him compassionately.

"You have chosen a dreary lodging, my poor boy, and no wonder that you weep," said he. "But
dry your eyes, and tell me where your mother dwells. I promise you if the journey be not too
far, I will leave you in her arms to-night."

The boy had hushed his wailing at once, and turned his face upward to the stranger. It was
a pale, bright-eyed countenance, certainly not more than six years old, but sorrow, fear, and
want had destroyed much of its infantile expression. The Puritan, seeing the boy's frightened
gaze, and feeling that he trembled under his hand, endeavored to reassure him.

"Nay, if I intended to do you harm, little lad, the readiest way were to leave you here. What!
you do not fear to sit beneath the gallows on a new-made grave, and yet you tremble at a friend's
touch. Take heart, child, and tell me what is your name, and where is your home!"

"Friend," replied the little boy, in a sweet, though faltering voice, "they call me Ilbrahim,
and my home is here."

The pale, spiritual face, the eyes that seemed to mingle with the moonlight, the sweet airy
voice, and the outlandish name almost made the Puritan believe that the boy was in truth a
being which had sprung up out of the grave on which he sat. But perceiving that the apparition
stood the test of a short mental prayer, and remembering that the arm which he had touched
was life-like, he adopted a more rational supposition. "The poor child is stricken in his intellect,"
thought he, "but verily his words are fearful, in a place like this." He then spoke soothingly,
intending to humor the boy's fantasy.

"Your home will scarce be comfortable, Ilbrahim, this cold autumn night, and I fear you are
ill provided with food. I am hastening to a warm supper and bed, and if you will go with me,
you shall share them!"

"I thank thee, friend, but though I be hungry, and shivering with cold, thou wilt not give
me food nor lodging," replied the boy, in the quiet tone which despair had taught him, even
so young. "My father was of the people whom all men hate. They have laid him under this heap
of earth, and here is my home."

The Puritan, who had laid hold of little Ilbrahim's hand, relinquished it as if he were touching
a loathsome reptile. But he possessed a compassionate heart, which not even religious prejudice
could harden into stone.

"God forbid that I should leave this child to perish, though he comes of the accursed sect,"
said he to himself. "Do we not all spring from an evil root? Are we not all in darkness till
the light doth shine upon us? He shall not perish, neither in body, nor, if prayer and instruction
may avail for him, in soul." He then spoke aloud and kindly to Ilbrahim, who had again hid
his face in the cold earth of the grave. "Was every door in the land shut against you, my child,
that you have wandered to this unhallowed spot?"

"They drove me forth from the prison when they took my father thence," said the boy, "and I
stood afar off, watching the crowd of people; and when they were gone, I came hither, and found
only this grave. I knew that my father was sleeping here, and I said, This shall be my home."

"No, child, no; not while I have a roof over my head, or a morsel to share with you!" exclaimed
the Puritan, whose sympathies were now fully excited. "Rise up and come with me, and fear not
any harm."

The boy wept afresh, and clung to the heap of earth, as if the cold heart beneath it were warmer
to him than any in a living breast. The traveller, however, continued to entreat him tenderly,
and seeming to acquire some degree of confidence, he at length arose. But his slender limbs
tottered with weakness, his little head grew dizzy, and he leaned against the tree of death
for support.

"My poor boy, are you so feeble?" said the Puritan. "When did you taste food last?"

"I ate of bread and water with my father in the prison," replied Ilbrahim, "but they brought
him none neither yesterday nor to-day, saying that he had eaten enough to bear him to his journey's
end. Trouble not thyself for my hunger, kind friend, for I have lacked food many times ere now."

The traveller took the child in his arms and wrapped his cloak about him, while his heart stirred
with shame and anger against the gratuitous cruelty of the instruments in this persecution.
In the awakened warmth of his feelings, he resolved that, at whatever risk, he would not forsake
the poor little defenceless being whom Heaven had confided to his care. With this determination,
he left the accursed field, and resumed the homeward path from which the wailing of the boy
had called him. The light and motionless burden scarcely impeded his progress, and he soon
beheld the fire rays from the windows of the cottage which he, a native of a distant clime,
had built in the Western wilderness. It was surrounded by a considerable extent of cultivated
ground, and the dwelling was situated in the nook of a wood-covered hill, whither it seemed
to have crept for protection.

"Look up, child," said the Puritan to Ilbrahim, whose faint head had sunk upon his shoulder,
"there is our home."

At the word "home," a thrill passed through the child's frame, but he continued silent. A few
moments brought them to the cottage-door, at which the owner knocked; for at that early period,
when savages were wandering everywhere among the settlers, bolt and bar were indispensable
to the security of a dwelling. The summons was answered by a bond-servant, a coarse-clad and
dull-featured piece of humanity, who, after ascertaining that his master was the applicant,
undid the door, and held a flaring pine-knot torch to light him in. Further back in the passageway,
the red blaze discovered a matronly woman, but no little crowd of children came bounding forth
to greet their father's return. As the Puritan entered, he thrust aside his cloak, and displayed
Ilbrahim's face to the female.

"Dorothy, here is a little outcast whom Providence hath put into our hands," observed he. "Be
kind to him, even as if he were of those dear ones who have departed from us."

"What pale and bright-eyed little boy is this, Tobias?" she inquired. "Is he one whom the wilderness
folk have ravished from some Christian mother?"

"No, Dorothy, this poor child is no captive from the wilderness," he replied. "The heathen
savage would have given him to eat of his scanty morsel, and to drink of his birchen cup; but
Christian men, alas! had cast him out to die."

Then he told her how he had found him beneath the gallows, upon his father's grave; and how
his heart had prompted him, like the speaking of an inward voice, to take the little outcast
home, and be kind unto him. He acknowledged his resolution to feed and clothe him, as if he
were his own child, and to afford him the instruction which should counteract the pernicious
errors hitherto instilled into his infant mind. Dorothy was gifted with even a quicker tenderness
than her husband, and she approved of all his doings and intentions.

"Have you a mother, dear child?" she inquired.

The tears burst forth from his full heart, as he attempted to reply; but Dorothy at length
understood that he had a mother, who, like the rest of her sect, was a persecuted wanderer.
She had been taken from the prison a short time before, carried into the uninhabited wilderness,
and left to perish there by hunger or wild beasts. This was no uncommon method of disposing
of the Quakers, and they were accustomed to boast, that the inhabitants of the desert were
more hospitable to them than civilized man.

"Fear not, little boy, you shall not need a mother, and a kind one," said Dorothy, when she
had gathered this information. "Dry your tears, Ilbrahim, and be my child, as I will be your
mother."

The good woman prepared the little bed, from which her own children had successively been borne
to another resting-place. Before Ilbrahim would consent to occupy it, he knelt down, and as
Dorothy listened to his simple and affecting prayer, she marvelled how the parents that had
taught it to him could have been judged worthy of death. When the boy had fallen asleep, she
bent over his pale and spiritual countenance, pressed a kiss upon his white brow, drew the
bedclothes up about his neck, and went away with a pensive gladness in her heart.

Tobias Pearson was not among the earliest emigrants from the old country. He had remained in
England during the first years of the civil war, in which he had borne some share as a cornet
of dragoons, under Cromwell. But when the ambitious designs of his leader began to develop
themselves, he quitted the army of the Parliament, and sought a refuge from the strife, which
was no longer holy, among the people of his persuasion in the colony of Massachusetts. A more
worldly consideration had perhaps an influence in drawing him thither; for New England offered
advantages to men of unprosperous fortunes, as well as to dissatisfied religionists, and Pearson
had hitherto found it difficult to provide for a wife and increasing family. To this supposed
impurity of motive, the more bigoted Puritans were inclined to impute the removal by death
of all the children, for whose earthly good the father had been over-thoughtful. They had left
their native country blooming like roses, and like roses they had perished in a foreign soil.
Those expounders of the ways of Providence, who had thus judged their brother, and attributed
his domestic sorrows to his sin, were not more charitable when they saw him and Dorothy endeavoring
to fill up the void in their hearts by the adoption of an infant of the accursed sect. Nor
did they fail to communicate their disapprobation to Tobias; but the latter, in reply, merely
pointed at the little, quiet, lovely boy, whose appearance and deportment were indeed as powerful
arguments as could possibly have been adduced in his own favor. Even his beauty, however, and
his winning manners, sometimes produced an effect ultimately unfavorable; for the bigots, when
the outer surfaces of their iron hearts had been softened and again grew hard, affirmed that
no merely natural cause could have so worked upon them.

Their antipathy to the poor infant was also increased by the ill success of divers theological
discussions, in which it was attempted to convince him of the errors of his sect. Ilbrahim,
it is true, was not a skilful controversialist; but the feeling of his religion was strong
as instinct in him, and he could neither be enticed nor driven from the faith which his father
had died for. The odium of this stubbornness was shared in a great measure by the child's protectors,
insomuch that Tobias and Dorothy very shortly began to experience a most bitter species of
persecution, in the cold regards of many a friend whom they had valued. The common people manifested
their opinions more openly. Pearson was a man of some consideration, being a representative
to the General Court, and an approved lieutenant in the trainbands; yet within a week after
his adoption of Ilbrahim, he had been both hissed and hooted. Once, also, when walking through
a solitary piece of woods, he heard a loud voice from some invisible speaker; and it cried,
"What shall be done to the backslider? Lo! the scourge is knotted for him, even the whip of
nine cords, and every cord three knots!" These insults irritated Pearson's temper for the moment;
they entered also into his heart, and became imperceptible but powerful workers toward an end
which his most secret thought had not yet whispered.

       *       *       *       *       *

On the second Sabbath after Ilbrahim became a member of their family, Pearson and his wife
deemed it proper that he should appear with them at public worship. They had anticipated some
opposition to this measure from the boy, but he prepared himself in silence, and at the appointed
hour was clad in the new mourning suit which Dorothy had wrought for him. As the parish was
then, and during many subsequent years, unprovided with a bell, the signal for the commencement
of religious exercises was the beat of a drum. At the first sound of that martial call to the
place of holy and quiet thoughts, Tobias and Dorothy set forth, each holding a hand of little
Ilbrahim, like two parents linked together by the infant of their love. On their path through
the leafless woods, they were overtaken by many persons of their acquaintance, all of whom
avoided them, and passed by on the other side; but a severer trial awaited their constancy
when they had descended the hill, and drew near the pine-built and undecorated house of prayer.
Around the door, from which the drummer still sent forth his thundering summons, was drawn
up a formidable phalanx, including several of the oldest members of the congregation, many
of the middle aged, and nearly all the younger males. Pearson found it difficult to sustain
their united and disapproving gaze; but Dorothy, whose mind was differently circumstanced,
merely drew the boy closer to her, and faltered not in her approach. As they entered the door,
they overheard the muttered sentiments of the assemblage, and when the reviling voices of the
little children smote Ilbrahim's ear, he wept.

The interior aspect of the meeting-house was rude. The low ceiling, the unplastered walls,
the naked woodwork, and the undraperied pulpit offered nothing to excite the devotion, which,
without such external aids, often remains latent in the heart. The floor of the building was
occupied by rows of long, cushionless benches, supplying the place of pews, and the broad aisle
formed a sexual division, impassable except by children beneath a certain age.

Pearson and Dorothy separated at the door of the meeting-house, and Ilbrahim, being within
the years of infancy, was retained under the care of the latter. The wrinkled beldams involved
themselves in their rusty cloaks as he passed by; even the mild-featured maidens seemed to
dread contamination; and many a stern old man arose, and turned his repulsive and unheavenly
countenance upon the gentle boy, as if the sanctuary were polluted by his presence. He was
a sweet infant of the skies, that had strayed away from his home, and all the inhabitants of
this miserable world closed up their impure hearts against him, drew back their earth-soiled
garments from his touch, and said, "We are holier than thou."

Ilbrahim, seated by the side of his adopted mother, and retaining fast hold of her hand, assumed
a grave and decorous demeanor, such as might befit a person of matured taste and understanding,
who should find himself in a temple dedicated to some worship which he did not recognize, but
felt himself bound to respect. The exercises had not yet commenced, however, when the boy's
attention was arrested by an event, apparently of trifling interest. A woman, having her face
muffled in a hood, and a cloak drawn completely about her form, advanced slowly up the broad
aisle, and took a place upon the foremost bench. Ilbrahim's faint color varied, his nerves
fluttered, he was unable to turn his eyes from the muffled female.

When the preliminary prayer and hymn were over, the minister arose, and having turned the hour-glass
which stood by the great Bible, commenced his discourse. He was now well stricken in years,
a man of pale, thin countenance, and his gray hairs were closely covered by a black velvet
skull cap. In his younger days he had practically learned the meaning of persecution from Archbishop
Laud, and he was not now disposed to forget the lesson against which he had murmured then.
Introducing the often-discussed subject of the Quakers, he gave a history of that sect, and
a description of their tenets, in which error predominated, and prejudice distorted the aspect
of what was true. He adverted to the recent measures in the province, and cautioned his hearers
of weaker parts against calling in question the just severity which God-fearing magistrates
had at length been compelled to exercise. He spoke of the danger of pity, in some cases a commendable
and Christian virtue, but inapplicable to this pernicious sect. He observed that such was their
devilish obstinacy in error, that even the little children, the sucking babes, were hardened
and desperate heretics. He affirmed that no man, without Heaven's especial warrant, should
attempt their conversion, lest while he lent his hand to draw them from the slough, he should
himself be precipitated into its lowest depths.

The sands of the second hour were principally in the lower half of the glass when the sermon
concluded. An approving murmur followed, and the clergyman, having given out a hymn, took his
seat with much self-congratulation, and endeavored to read the effect of his eloquence in the
visages of the people. But while voices from all parts of the house were tuning themselves
to sing, a scene occurred, which, though not very unusual at that period in the province, happened
to be without precedent in this parish.

The muffled female, who had hitherto sat motionless in the front rank of the audience, now
arose, and with slow, stately, and unwavering step ascended the pulpit stairs. The quiverings
of incipient harmony were hushed, and the divine sat in speechless and almost terrified astonishment,
while she undid the door, and stood up in the sacred desk from which his maledictions had just
been thundered. She then divested herself of the cloak and hood, and appeared in a most singular
array. A shapeless robe of sackcloth was girded about her waist with a knotted cord; her raven
hair fell down upon her shoulders, and its blackness was defiled by pale streaks of ashes,
which she had strewn upon her head. Her eyebrows, dark and strongly defined, added to the deathly
whiteness of a countenance, which, emaciated with want, and wild with enthusiasm and strange
sorrows, retained no trace of earlier beauty. This figure stood gazing earnestly on the audience,
and there was no sound, nor any movement, except a faint shuddering which every man observed
in his neighbor, but was scarcely conscious of in himself. At length, when her fit of inspiration
came, she spoke, for the first few moments in a low voice and not invariably distinct utterance.
Her discourse gave evidence of an imagination hopelessly entangled with her reason; it was
a vague and incomprehensible rhapsody, which, however, seemed to spread its own atmosphere
round the hearer's soul, and to move his feelings by some influence unconnected with the words.
As she proceeded, beautiful but shadowy images would sometimes be seen, like bright things
moving in a turbid river; or a strong and singularly shaped idea leaped forth, and seized at
once on the understanding or the heart. But the course of her unearthly eloquence soon led
her to the persecutions of her sect, and from thence the step was short to her own peculiar
sorrows. She was naturally a woman of mighty passions, and hatred and revenge now wrapped themselves
in the garb of piety; the character of her speech was changed, her images became distinct though
wild, and her denunciations had an almost hellish bitterness.

"The governor and his mighty men," she said, "have gathered together, taking counsel among
themselves and saying, 'What shall we do unto this people--even unto the people that have come
into this land to put our iniquity to the blush?' And lo! the Devil entereth into the council-chamber,
like a lame man of low stature and gravely apparelled, with a dark and twisted countenance,
and a bright, downcast eye. And he standeth up among the rulers; yea, he goeth to and fro,
whispering to each; and every man lends his ear, for his word is, 'Slay, slay!' But I say unto
ye, Woe to them that slay! Woe to them that shed the blood of saints! Woe to them that have
slain the husband, and cast forth the child, the tender infant, to wander homeless, and hungry,
and cold, till he die; and have saved the mother alive, in the cruelty of their tender mercies!
Woe to them in their lifetime, cursed are they in the delight and pleasure of their hearts!
Woe to them in their death-hour, whether it come swiftly with blood and violence, or after
long and lingering pain! Woe, in the dark house, in the rottenness of the grave, when the children's
children shall revile the ashes of the fathers! Woe, woe, woe, at the judgment, when all the
persecuted and all the slain in this bloody land, and the father, the mother, and the child
shall await them in a day that they cannot escape! Seed of the faith, seed of the faith, ye
whose hearts are moving with a power that ye know not, arise, wash your hands of this innocent
blood! Lift your voices, chosen ones, cry aloud, and call down a woe and a judgment with me!"

Having thus given vent to the flood of malignity which she mistook for inspiration, the speaker
was silent. Her voice was succeeded by the hysteric shrieks of several women, but the feelings
of the audience generally had not been drawn onward in the current with her own. They remained
stupefied, stranded as it were, in the midst of a torrent, which deafened them by its roaring,
but might not move them by its violence. The clergyman, who could not hitherto have ejected
the usurper of his pulpit otherwise than by bodily force, now addressed her in the tone of
just indignation and legitimate authority.

"Get you down, woman, from the holy place which you profane," he said. "Is it to the Lord's
house that you came to pour forth the foulness of your heart, and the inspiration of the Devil?
Get you down, and remember that the sentence of death is on you, yea, and shall be executed,
were it but for this day's work!"

"I go, friend, I go, for the voice hath had its utterance," replied she, in a depressed and
even mild tone. "I have done my mission unto thee and to thy people. Reward me with stripes,
imprisonment, or death, as ye shall be permitted."

The weakness of exhausted passion caused her steps to totter as she descended the pulpit stairs.
The people, in the meanwhile, were stirring to and fro on the floor of the house, whispering
among themselves, and glancing toward the intruder. Many of them now recognized her as the
woman who had assaulted the governor with frightful language, as he passed by the window of
her prison; they knew, also, that she was adjudged to suffer death, and had been preserved
only by an involuntary banishment into the wilderness. The new outrage, by which she had provoked
her fate, seemed to render further lenity impossible; and a gentleman in military dress, with
a stout man of inferior rank, drew toward the door of the meeting-house, and awaited her approach.
Scarcely did her feet press the floor, however, when an unexpected scene occurred. In that
moment of her peril, when every eye frowned with death, a little timid boy pressed forth, and
threw his arms round his mother.

"I am here, mother, it is I, and I will go with thee to prison," he exclaimed.

She gazed at him with a doubtful and almost frightened expression, for she knew that the boy
had been cast out to perish, and she had not hoped to see his face again. She feared, perhaps,
that it was but one of the happy visions, with which her excited fancy had often deceived her,
in the solitude of the desert or in prison. But when she felt his hand warm within her own,
and heard his little eloquence of childish love, she began to know that she was yet a mother.

"Blessed art thou, my son," she sobbed. "My heart was withered; yea, dead with thee and with
thy father; and now it leaps as in the first moment when I pressed thee to my bosom."

She kneeled down and embraced him again and again, while the joy that could find no words expressed
itself in broken accents, like the bubbles gushing up to vanish at the surface of a deep fountain.
The sorrows of past years, and the darker peril that was nigh, cast not a shadow on the brightness
of that fleeting moment. Soon, however, the spectators saw a change upon her face, as the consciousness
of her sad estate returned, and grief supplied the fount of tears which joy had opened. By
the words she uttered, it would seem that the indulgence of natural love had given her mind
a momentary sense of its errors, and made her know how far she had strayed from duty, in following
the dictates of a wild fanaticism.

"In a doleful hour art thou returned to me, poor boy," she said, "for thy mother's path has
gone darkening onward, till now the end is death. Son, son, I have borne thee in my arms when
my limbs were tottering, and I have fed thee with the food that I was fainting for; yet I have
ill performed a mother's part by thee in life, and now I leave thee no inheritance but woe
and shame. Thou wilt go seeking through the world, and find all hearts closed against thee,
and their sweet affections turned to bitterness for my sake. My child, my child, how many a
pang awaits thy gentle spirit and I the cause of all!"

She hid her face on Ilbrahim's head, and her long raven hair, discolored with the ashes of
her mourning, fell down about him like a veil. A low and interrupted moan was the voice of
her heart's anguish, and it did not fail to move the sympathies of many who mistook their involuntary
virtue for a sin. Sobs were audible in the female section of the house, and every man who was
a father drew his hand across his eyes. Tobias Pearson was agitated and uneasy, but a certain
feeling like the consciousness of guilt oppressed him, so that he could not go forth and offer
himself as the protector of the child. Dorothy, however, had watched her husband's eye. Her
mind was free from the influence that had begun to work on his, and she drew near the Quaker
woman, and addressed her in the hearing of all the congregation.

"Stranger, trust this boy to me, and I will be his mother," she said, taking Ilbrahim's hand.
"Providence has signally marked out my husband to protect him, and he has fed at our table
and lodged under our roof, now many days, till our hearts have grown very strongly unto him.
Leave the tender child with us, and be at ease concerning his welfare."

The Quaker rose from the ground, but drew the boy closer to her, while she gazed earnestly
in Dorothy's face. Her mild, but saddened features, and neat matronly attire harmonized together,
and were like a verse of fireside poetry. Her very aspect proved that she was blameless, so
far as mortal could be so, in respect to God and man; while the enthusiast, in her robe of
sackcloth and girdle of knotted cord, had as evidently violated the duties of the present life
and the future, by fixing her attention wholly on the latter. The two females, as they held
each a hand of Ilbrahim, formed a practical allegory; it was rational piety and unbridled fanaticism
contending for the empire of a young heart.

"Thou art not of our people," said the Quaker, mournfully.

"No, we are not of your people," replied Dorothy, with mildness, "but we are Christians, looking
upward to the same Heaven with you. Doubt not that your boy shall meet you there, if there
be a blessing on our tender and prayerful guidance of him. Thither, I trust, my own children
have gone before me, for I also have been a mother; I am no longer so," she added, in a faltering
tone, "and your son will have all my care."

"But will ye lead him in the path which his parents have trodden?" demanded the Quaker. "Can
ye teach him the enlightened faith which his father has died for, and for which I, even I,
am soon to become an unworthy martyr? The boy has been baptized in blood; will ye keep the
mark fresh and ruddy upon his forehead?"

"I will not deceive you," answered Dorothy. "If your child become our child, we must breed
him up in the instruction which Heaven has imparted to us; we must pray for him the prayers
of our own faith; we must do toward him according to the dictates of our own consciences, and
not of yours. Were we to act otherwise, we should abuse your trust, even in complying with
your wishes."

The mother looked down upon her boy with a troubled countenance, and then turned her eyes upward
to Heaven. She seemed to pray internally, and the contention of her soul was evident.

"Friend," she said at length to Dorothy, "I doubt not that my son shall receive all earthly
tenderness at thy hands. Nay, I will believe that even thy imperfect lights may guide him to
a better world; for surely thou art on the path thither. But thou hast spoken of a husband.
Doth he stand here among this multitude of people? Let him come forth, for I must know to whom
I commit this most precious trust."

She turned her face upon the male auditors, and after a momentary delay, Tobias Pearson came
forth from among them. The Quaker saw the dress which marked his military rank, and shook her
head; but then she noted the hesitating air, the eyes that struggled with her own, and were
vanquished; the color that went and came, and could find no resting-place. As she gazed, an
unmirthful smile spread over her features, like sunshine that grows melancholy in some desolate
spot. Her lips moved inaudibly, but at length she spake.

"I hear it, I hear it. The voice speaketh within me and saith, 'Leave thy child, Catharine,
for his place is here, and go hence, for I have other work for thee. Break the bonds of natural
affection, martyr thy love, and know that in all these things eternal wisdom hath its ends.'
I go, friends, I go. Take ye my boy, my precious jewel. I go hence, trusting that all shall
be well, and that even for his infant hands there is a labor in the vineyard."

She knelt down and whispered to Ilbrahim, who at first struggled and clung to his mother, with
sobs and tears, but remained passive when she had kissed his cheek and arisen from the ground.
Having held her hands over his head in mental prayer, she was ready to depart.

"Farewell, friends in mine extremity," she said to Pearson and his wife; "the good deed ye
have done me is a treasure laid up in Heaven, to be returned a thousand-fold hereafter. And
farewell ye, mine enemies, to whom it is not permitted to harm so much as a hair of my head,
nor to stay my footsteps even for a moment. The day is coming when ye shall call upon me to
witness for ye to this one sin uncommitted, and I will rise up and answer."

She turned her steps toward the door, and the men, who had stationed themselves to guard it,
withdrew, and suffered her to pass. A general sentiment of pity overcame the virulence of religious
hatred. Sanctified by her love and her affliction, she went forth, and all the people gazed
after her till she had journeyed up the hill, and was lost behind its brow. She went, the apostle
of her own unquiet heart, to renew the wanderings of past years. For her voice had been already
heard in many lands of Christendom; and she had pined in the cells of a Catholic Inquisition
before she felt the lash and lay in the dungeons of the Puritans. Her mission had extended
also to the followers of the Prophet, and from them she had received the courtesy and kindness
which all the contending sects of our purer religion united to deny her. Her husband and herself
had resided many months in Turkey, where even the Sultan's countenance was gracious to them;
in that pagan land, too, was Ilbrahim's birthplace, and his Oriental name was a mark of gratitude
for the good deeds of an unbeliever.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Pearson and his wife had thus acquired all the rights over Ilbrahim that could be delegated,
their affection for him became, like the memory of their native land, or their mild sorrow
for the dead, a piece of the immovable furniture of their hearts. The boy, also, after a week
or two of mental disquiet, began to gratify his protectors, by many inadvertent proofs that
he considered them as parents, and their house as home. Before the winter snows were melted,
the persecuted infant, the little wanderer from a remote and heathen country, seemed native
in the New England cottage, and inseparable from the warmth and security of its hearth. Under
the influence of kind treatment, and in the consciousness that he was loved, Ilbrahim's demeanor
lost a premature manliness which had resulted from his earlier situation; he became more childlike,
and his natural character displayed itself with freedom. It was in many respects a beautiful
one, yet the disordered imaginations of both his father and mother had perhaps propagated a
certain unhealthiness in the mind of the boy. In his general state, Ilbrahim would derive enjoyment
from the most trifling events, and from every object about him; he seemed to discover rich
treasures of happiness, by a faculty analogous to that of the witch-hazel, which points to
hidden gold where all is barren to the eye. His airy gayety, coming to him from a thousand
sources, communicated itself to the family, and Ilbrahim was like a domesticated sunbeam, brightening
moody countenances, and chasing away the gloom from the dark corners of the cottage.

On the other hand, as the susceptibility of pleasure is also that of pain, the exuberant cheerfulness
of the boy's prevailing temper sometimes yielded to moments of deep depression. His sorrows
could not always be followed up to their original source, but most frequently they appeared
to flow, though Ilbrahim was young to be sad for such a cause, from wounded love. The flightiness
of his mirth rendered him often guilty of offences against the decorum of a Puritan household,
and on these occasions he did not invariably escape rebuke. But the slightest word of real
bitterness, which he was infallible in distinguishing from pretended anger, seemed to sink
into his heart and poison all his enjoyments, till he became sensible that he was entirely
forgiven. Of the malice which generally accompanies a superfluity of sensitiveness, Ilbrahim
was altogether destitute; when trodden upon, he would not turn; when wounded, he could but
die. His mind was wanting in the stamina for self-support; it was a plant that would twine
beautifully round something stronger than itself, but if repulsed, or torn away, it had no
choice but to wither on the ground. Dorothy's acuteness taught her that severity would crush
the spirit of the child, and she nurtured him with the gentle care of one who handles a butterfly.
Her husband manifested an equal affection, although it grew daily less productive of familiar
caresses.

The feelings of the neighboring people, in regard to the Quaker infant and his protectors,
had not undergone a favorable change, in spite of the momentary triumph which the desolate
mother had obtained over their sympathies. The scorn and bitterness, of which he was the object,
were very grievous to Ilbrahim, especially when any circumstance made him sensible that the
children, his equals in age, partook of the enmity of their parents. His tender and social
nature had already overflowed in attachments to everything about him, and still there was a
residue of unappropriated love, which he yearned to bestow upon the little ones who were taught
to hate him. As the warm days of spring came on, Ilbrahim was accustomed to remain for hours
silent and inactive within hearing of the children's voices at their play; yet, with his usual
delicacy of feeling, he avoided their notice, and would flee and hide himself from the smallest
individual among them. Chance, however, at length seemed to open a medium of communication
between his heart and theirs; it was by means of a boy about two years older than Ilbrahim,
who was injured by a fall from a tree in the vicinity of Pearson's habitation. As the sufferer's
own home was at some distance, Dorothy willingly received him under her roof, and became his
tender and careful nurse.

Ilbrahim was the unconscious possessor of much skill in physiognomy, and it would have deterred
him, in other circumstances, from attempting to make a friend of this boy. The countenance
of the latter immediately impressed a beholder disagreeably, but it required some examination
to discover that the cause was a very slight distortion of the mouth, and the irregular, broken
line and near approach of the eyebrows. Analogous, perhaps, to these trifling deformities was
an almost imperceptible twist of every joint, and the uneven prominence of the breast; forming
a body, regular in its general outline, but faulty in almost all its details. The disposition
of the boy was sullen and reserved, and the village schoolmaster stigmatized him as obtuse
in intellect; although, at a later period of life, he evinced ambition and very peculiar talents.
But whatever might be his personal or moral irregularities, Ilbrahim's heart seized upon, and
clung to him, from the moment that he was brought wounded into the cottage; the child of persecution
seemed to compare his own fate with that of the sufferer, and to feel that even different modes
of misfortune had created a sort of relationship between them. Food, rest, and the fresh air,
for which he languished, were neglected; he nestled continually by the bedside of the little
stranger, and, with a fond jealousy, endeavored to be the medium of all the cares that were
bestowed upon him. As the boy became convalescent, Ilbrahim contrived games suitable to his
situation, or amused him by a faculty which he had perhaps breathed in with the air of his
barbaric birthplace. It was that of reciting imaginary adventures, on the spur of the moment,
and apparently in inexhaustible succession. His tales were of course monstrous, disjointed,
and without aim; but they were curious on account of a vein of human tenderness which ran through
them all, and was like a sweet, familiar face, encountered in the midst of wild and unearthly
scenery. The auditor paid much attention to these romances, and sometimes interrupted them
by brief remarks upon the incidents, displaying shrewdness above his years, mingled with a
moral obliquity which grated very harshly against Ilbrahim's instinctive rectitude. Nothing,
however, could arrest the progress of the latter's affection, and there were many proofs that
it met with a response from the dark and stubborn nature on which it was lavished. The boy's
parents at length removed him, to complete his cure under their own roof.

Ilbrahim did not visit his new friend after his departure; but he made anxious and continual
inquiries respecting him, and informed himself of the day when he was to reappear among his
playmates. On a pleasant summer afternoon, the children of the neighborhood had assembled in
the little forest-crowned amphitheatre behind the meeting-house, and the recovering invalid
was there, leaning on a staff. The glee of a score of untainted bosoms was heard in light and
airy voices, which danced among the trees like sunshine become audible; the grown men of this
weary world, as they journeyed by the spot, marvelled why life, beginning in such brightness,
should proceed in gloom; and their hearts, or their imaginations, answered them and said, that
the bliss of childhood gushes from its innocence. But it happened that an unexpected addition
was made to the heavenly little band. It was Ilbrahim, who came toward the children with a
look of sweet confidence on his fair and spiritual face, as if, having manifested his love
to one of them, he had no longer to fear a repulse from their society. A hush came over their
mirth the moment they beheld him, and they stood whispering to each other while he drew nigh;
but, all at once, the devil of their fathers entered into the unbreeched fanatics, and sending
up a fierce, shrill cry, they rushed upon the poor Quaker child. In an instant, he was the
centre of a brood of baby-fiends, who lifted sticks against him, pelted him with stones, and
displayed an instinct of destruction far more loathsome than the blood-thirstiness of manhood.

The invalid, in the meanwhile, stood apart from the tumult, crying out with a loud voice, "Fear
not, Ilbrahim, come hither and take my hand"; and his unhappy friend endeavored to obey him.
After watching the victim's struggling approach with a calm smile and unabashed eye, the foul-hearted
little villain lifted his staff, and struck Ilbrahim on the mouth, so forcibly that the blood
issued in a stream. The poor child's arms had been raised to guard his head from the storm
of blows; but now he dropped them at once. His persecutors beat him down, trampled upon him,
dragged him by his long, fair locks, and Ilbrahim was on the point of becoming as veritable
a martyr as ever entered bleeding into heaven. The uproar, however, attracted the notice of
a few neighbors, who put themselves to the trouble of rescuing the little heretic, and of conveying
him to Pearson's door.

Ilbrahim's bodily harm was severe, but long and careful nursing accomplished his recovery;
the injury done to his sensitive spirit was more serious, though not so visible. Its signs
were principally of a negative character, and to be discovered only by those who had previously
known him. His gait was thenceforth slow, even, and unvaried by the sudden bursts of sprightlier
motion, which had once corresponded to his overflowing gladness; his countenance was heavier,
and its former play of expression, the dance of sunshine reflected from moving water, was destroyed
by the cloud over his existence; his notice was attracted in a far less degree by passing events,
and he appeared to find greater difficulty in comprehending what was new to him, than at a
happier period. A stranger, founding his judgment upon these circumstances, would have said
that the dulness of the child's intellect widely contradicted the promise of his features;
but the secret was in the direction of Ilbrahim's thoughts, which were brooding within him
when they should naturally have been wandering abroad. An attempt of Dorothy to revive his
former sportiveness was the single occasion on which his quiet demeanor yielded to a violent
display of grief; he burst into passionate weeping, and ran and hid himself, for his heart
had become so miserably sore that even the hand of kindness tortured it like fire. Sometimes,
at night and probably in his dreams, he was heard to cry, "Mother! mother!" as if her place,
which a stranger had supplied while Ilbrahim was happy, admitted of no substitute in his extreme
affliction. Perhaps, among the many life-weary wretches then upon the earth, there was not
one who combined innocence and misery like this poor, broken-hearted infant, so soon the victim
of his own heavenly nature.

While this melancholy change had taken place in Ilbrahim, one of an earlier origin and of different
character had come to its perfection in his adopted father. The incident with which this tale
commences found Pearson in a state of religious dulness, yet mentally disquieted, and longing
for a more fervid faith than he possessed. The first effect of his kindness to Ilbrahim was
to produce a softened feeling, and incipient love for the child's whole sect; but joined to
this, and resulting perhaps from self-suspicion, was a proud and ostentatious contempt of their
tenets and practical extravagances. In the course of much thought, however, for the subject
struggled irresistibly into his mind, the foolishness of the doctrine began to be less evident,
and the points which had particularly offended his reason assumed another aspect, or vanished
entirely away. The work within him appeared to go on even while he slept, and that which had
been a doubt, when he laid down to rest, would often hold the place of a truth, confirmed by
some forgotten demonstration, when he recalled his thoughts in the morning. But while he was
thus becoming assimilated to the enthusiasts, his contempt, in no wise decreasing toward them,
grew very fierce against himself; he imagined, also, that every face of his acquaintance wore
a sneer, and that every word addressed to him was a gibe. Such was his state of mind at the
period of Ilbrahim's misfortune; and the emotions consequent upon that event completed the
change, of which the child had been the original instrument.

In the meantime, neither the fierceness of the persecutors, nor the infatuation of their victims,
had decreased. The dungeons were never empty; the streets of almost every village echoed daily
with a lash; the life of a woman, whose mild and Christian spirit no cruelty could imbitter,
had been sacrificed; and more innocent blood was yet to pollute the hands that were so often
raised in prayer. Early after the Restoration, the English Quakers represented to Charles II.
that a "vein of blood was open in his dominions"; but though the displeasure of the voluptuous
king was roused, his interference was not prompt. And now the tale must stride forward over
many months, leaving Pearson to encounter ignominy and misfortune; his wife to a firm endurance
of a thousand sorrows; poor Ilbrahim to pine and droop like a cankered rosebud; his mother
to wander on a mistaken errand, neglectful of the holiest trust which can be committed to a woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

A winter evening, a night of storm, had darkened over Pearson's habitation, and there were
no cheerful faces to drive the gloom from his broad hearth. The fire, it is true, sent forth
a glowing heat and a ruddy light, and large logs, dripping with half-melted snow, lay ready
to be cast upon the embers. But the apartment was saddened in its aspect by the absence of
much of the homely wealth which had once adorned it; for the exaction of repeated fines, and
his own neglect of temporal affairs, had greatly impoverished the owner. And with the furniture
of peace, the implements of war had likewise disappeared; the sword was broken, the helm and
cuirass were cast away forever; the soldier had done with battles, and might not lift so much
as his naked hand to guard his head. But the Holy Book remained, and the table on which it
rested was drawn before the fire, while two of the persecuted sect sought comfort from its pages.

He who listened, while the other read, was the master of the house, now emaciated in form,
and altered as to the expression and healthiness of his countenance; for his mind had dwelt
too long among visionary thoughts, and his body had been worn by imprisonment and stripes.
The hale and weather-beaten old man, who sat beside him, had sustained less injury from a far
longer course of the same mode of life. In person he was tall and dignified, and, which alone
would have made him hateful to the Puritans, his gray locks fell from beneath the broad-brimmed
hat, and rested on his shoulders. As the old man read the sacred page, the snow drifted against
the windows, or eddied in at the crevices of the door, while a blast kept laughing in the chimney,
and the blaze leaped fiercely up to seek it. And sometimes, when the wind struck the hill at
a certain angle, and swept down by the cottage across the wintry plain, its voice was the most
doleful that can be conceived; it came as if the Past were speaking, as if the Dead had contributed
each a whisper, as if the Desolation of Ages were breathed in that one lamenting sound.

The Quaker at length closed the book, retaining however his hand between the pages which he
had been reading, while he looked steadfastly at Pearson. The attitude and features of the
latter might have indicated the endurance of bodily pain; he leaned his forehead on his hands,
his teeth were firmly closed, and his frame was tremulous at intervals with a nervous agitation.

"Friend Tobias," inquired the old man, compassionately, "hast thou found no comfort in these
many blessed passages of Scripture?"

"Thy voice has fallen on my ear like a sound afar off and indistinct," replied Pearson, without
lifting his eyes. "Yea, and when I have hearkened carefully, the words seemed cold and lifeless,
and intended for another and a lesser grief than mine. Remove the book," he added, in a tone
of sullen bitterness. "I have no part in its consolations, and they do but fret my sorrow the
more."

"Nay, feeble brother, be not as one who hath never known the light," said the elder Quaker,
earnestly, but with mildness. "Art thou he that wouldst be content to give all, and endure
all, for conscience' sake; desiring even peculiar trials, that thy faith might be purified,
and thy heart weaned from worldly desires? And wilt thou sink beneath an affliction which happens
alike to them that have their portion here below, and to them that lay up treasure in heaven?
Faint not, for thy burden is yet light."

"It is heavy! It is heavier than I can bear!" exclaimed Pearson, with the impatience of a variable
spirit. "From my youth upward I have been a man marked out for wrath; and year by year, yea,
day after day, I have endured sorrows, such as others know not in their lifetime. And now I
speak not of the love that has been turned to hatred, the honor to ignominy, the ease and plentifulness
of all things to danger, want, and nakedness. All this I could have borne, and counted myself
blessed. But when my heart was desolate with many losses, I fixed it upon the child of a stranger,
and he became dearer to me than all my buried ones; and now he too must die, as if my love
were poison. Verily, I am an accursed man, and I will lay me down in the dust, and lift up
my head no more."

"Thou sinnest, brother, but it is not for me to rebuke thee; for I also have had my hours of
darkness, wherein I have murmured against the cross," said the old Quaker. He continued, perhaps
in the hope of distracting his companion's thoughts from his own sorrows. "Even of late was
the light obscured within me, when the men of blood had banished me on pain of death, and the
constables led me onward from village to village, toward the wilderness. A strong and cruel
hand was wielding the knotted cords; they sunk deep into the flesh, and thou mightst have tracked
every reel and totter of my footsteps by the blood that followed. As we went on--"

"Have I not borne all this; and have I murmured?" interrupted Pearson, impatiently.

"Nay, friend, but hear me," continued the other. "As we journeyed on, night darkened on our
path, so that no man could see the rage of the persecutors, or the constancy of my endurance,
though Heaven forbid that I should glory therein. The lights began to glimmer in the cottage
windows, and I could discern the inmates as they gathered in comfort and security, every man
with his wife and children by their own evening hearth. At length we came to a tract of fertile
land; in the dim light, the forest was not visible around it; and behold! there was a straw-thatched
dwelling, which bore the very aspect of my home, far over the wild ocean, far in our own England.
Then came bitter thoughts upon me; yea, remembrances that were like death to my soul. The happiness
of my early days was painted to me; the disquiet of my manhood, the altered faith of my declining
years. I remembered how I had been moved to go forth a wanderer, when my daughter, the youngest,
the dearest of my flock, lay on her dying bed, and--"

"Couldst thou obey the command at such a moment?" exclaimed Pearson, shuddering.

"Yea, yea," replied the old man, hurriedly. "I was kneeling by her bedside when the voice spoke
loud within me; but immediately I rose, and took my staff, and gat me gone. O, that it were
permitted me to forget her woful look, when I thus withdrew my arm, and left her journeying
through the dark valley alone! for her soul was faint, and she had leaned upon my prayers.
Now in that night of horror I was assailed by the thought that I had been an erring Christian,
and a cruel parent; yea, even my daughter, with her pale, dying features, seemed to stand by
me and whisper, 'Father, you are deceived; go home and shelter your gray head.' O Thou, to
whom I have looked in my furthest wanderings," continued the Quaker, raising his agitated eyes
to Heaven, "inflict not upon the bloodiest of our persecutors the unmitigated agony of my soul,
when I believed that all I had done and suffered for thee was at the instigation of a mocking
fiend! But I yielded not; I knelt down and wrestled with the tempter, while the scourge bit
more fiercely into the flesh. My prayer was heard, and I went on in peace and joy toward the
wilderness."

The old man, though his fanaticism had generally all the calmness of reason, was deeply moved
while reciting this tale; and his unwonted emotion seemed to rebuke and keep down that of his
companion. They sat in silence, with their faces to the fire, imagining perhaps, in its red
embers, new scenes of persecution yet to be encountered. The snow still drifted hard against
the windows, and sometimes, as the blaze of the logs had gradually sunk, came down the spacious
chimney and hissed upon the hearth. A cautious footstep might now and then be heard in a neighboring
apartment, and the sound invariably drew the eyes of both Quakers to the door which led thither.
When a fierce and riotous gust of wind had led his thoughts, by a natural association, to homeless
travellers on such a night, Pearson resumed the conversation.

"I have well-nigh sunk under my own share of this trial," observed he, sighing heavily; "yet
I would that it might be doubled to me, if so the child's mother could be spared. Her wounds
have been deep and many, but this will be the sorest of all."

"Fear not for Catharine," replied the old Quaker, "for I know that valiant woman, and have
seen how she can bear the cross. A mother's heart, indeed, is strong in her, and may seem to
contend mightily with her faith; but soon she will stand up and give thanks that her son has
been thus early an accepted sacrifice. The boy hath done his work, and she will feel that he
is taken hence in kindness both to him and her. Blessed, blessed are they that with so little
suffering can enter into peace!"

The fitful rush of the wind was now disturbed by a portentous sound; it was a quick and heavy
knocking at the outer door. Pearson's wan countenance grew paler, for many a visit of persecution
had taught him what to dread; the old man, on the other hand, stood up erect, and his glance
was firm as that of the tried soldier who awaits his enemy.

"The men of blood have come to seek me," he observed, with calmness. "They have heard how I
was moved to return from banishment; and now am I to be led to prison, and thence to death.
It is an end I have long looked for. I will open unto them, lest they say, 'Lo, he feareth!'"

"Nay, I will present myself before them," said Pearson, with recovered fortitude. "It may be
that they seek me alone, and know not that thou abidest with me."

"Let us go boldly, both one and the other," rejoined his companion. "It is not fitting that
thou or I should shrink."

They therefore proceeded through the entry to the door, which they opened, bidding the applicant,
"Come in, in God's name!" A furious blast of wind drove the storm into their faces, and extinguished
the lamp; they had barely time to discern a figure, so white from head to foot with the drifted
snow, that it seemed like Winter's self, come in human shape to seek refuge from its own desolation.

"Enter, friend, and do thy errand, be it what it may," said Pearson. "It must needs be pressing,
since thou comest on such a bitter night."

"Peace be with this household," said the stranger, when they stood on the floor of the inner
apartment.

Pearson started, the elder Quaker stirred the slumbering embers of the fire, till they sent
up a clear and lofty blaze; it was a female voice that had spoken; it was a female form that
shone out, cold and wintry, in that comfortable light.

"Catharine, blessed woman," exclaimed the old man, "art thou come to this darkened land again?
art thou come to bear a valiant testimony as in former years? The scourge hath not prevailed
against thee, and from the dungeon hast thou come forth triumphant; but strengthen, strengthen
now thy heart, Catharine, for Heaven will prove thee yet this once, ere thou go to thy reward."

"Rejoice, friends!" she replied. "Thou who hast long been of our people, and thou whom a little
child hath led to us, rejoice! Lo! I come, the messenger of glad tidings, for the day of persecution
is overpast. The heart of the king, even Charles, hath been moved in gentleness toward us,
and he hath sent forth his letters to stay the hands of the men of blood. A ship's company
of our friends hath arrived at yonder town, and I also sailed joyfully among them."

As Catharine spoke, her eyes were roaming about the room, in search of him for whose sake security
was dear to her. Pearson made a silent appeal to the old man, nor did the latter shrink from
the painful task assigned him.

"Sister," he began, in a softened yet perfectly calm tone, "thou tellest us of His love, manifested
in temporal good; and now must we speak to thee of that selfsame love, displayed in chastenings.
Hitherto, Catharine, thou hast been as one journeying in a darksome and difficult path, and
leading an infant by the hand; fain wouldst thou have looked heavenward continually, but still
the cares of that little child have drawn thine eyes and thy affections to the earth. Sister!
go on rejoicing, for his tottering footsteps shall impede thine own no more."

But the unhappy mother was not thus to be consoled; she shook like a leaf, she turned white
as the very snow that hung drifted into her hair. The firm old man extended his hand and held
her up, keeping his eye upon hers, as if to repress any outbreak of passion.

"I am a woman, I am but a woman; will He try me above my strength?" said Catharine very quickly,
and almost in a whisper. "I have been wounded sore; I have suffered much; many things in the
body, many in the mind; crucified in myself, and in them that were dearest to me. Surely,"
added she, with a long shudder, "He hath spared me in this one thing." She broke forth with
sudden and irrepressible violence, "Tell me, man of cold heart, what has God done to me? Hath
he cast me down, never to rise again? Hath he crushed my very heart in his hand? And thou,
to whom I committed my child, how hast thou fulfilled thy trust? Give me back the boy, well,
sound, alive, alive; or earth and Heaven shall avenge me!"

The agonized shriek of Catharine was answered by the faint, the very faint voice of a child.

On this day it had become evident to Pearson, to his aged guest, and to Dorothy that Ilbrahim's
brief and troubled pilgrimage drew near its close. The two former would willingly have remained
by him, to make use of the prayers and pious discourses which they deemed appropriate to the
time, and which, if they be impotent as to the departing traveller's reception in the world
whither it goes, may at least sustain him in bidding adieu to earth. But though Ilbrahim uttered
no complaint, he was disturbed by the faces that looked upon him; so that Dorothy's entreaties,
and their own conviction that the child's feet might tread heaven's pavement and not soil it,
had induced the two Quakers to remove. Ilbrahim then closed his eyes and grew calm, and, except
for now and then a kind and low word to his nurse, might have been thought to slumber. As nightfall
came on, however, and the storm began to rise, something seemed to trouble the repose of the
boy's mind, and to render his sense of hearing active and acute. If a passing wind lingered
to shake the casement, he strove to turn his head toward it; if the door jarred to and fro
upon its hinges, he looked long and anxiously thitherward; if the heavy voice of the old man,
as he read the Scriptures, rose but a little higher, the child almost held his dying breath
to listen; if a snowdrift swept by the cottage, with a sound like the trailing of a garment,
Ilbrahim seemed to watch that some visitant should enter.

But, after a little time, he relinquished whatever secret hope had agitated him, and, with
one low, complaining whisper, turned his cheek upon the pillow. He then addressed Dorothy with
his usual sweetness, and besought her to draw near him; she did so, and Ilbrahim took her hand
in both of his, grasping it with a gentle pressure, as if to assure himself that he retained
it. At intervals, and without disturbing the repose of his countenance, a very faint trembling
passed over him from head to foot, as if a mild but somewhat cool wind had breathed upon him,
and made him shiver. As the boy thus led her by the hand, in his quiet progress over the borders
of eternity, Dorothy almost imagined that she could discern the near, though dim delightfulness
of the home he was about to reach; she would not have enticed the little wanderer back, though
she bemoaned herself that she must leave him and return. But just when Ilbrahim's feet were
pressing on the soil of Paradise, he heard a voice behind him, and it recalled him a few, few
paces of the weary path which he had travelled. As Dorothy looked upon his features, she perceived
that their placid expression was again disturbed; her own thoughts had been so wrapped in him,
that all sounds of the storm, and of human speech, were lost to her; but when Catharine's shriek
pierced through the room, the boy strove to raise himself.

"Friend, she is come! Open unto her!" cried he.

In a moment, his mother was kneeling by the bedside; she drew Ilbrahim to her bosom, and he
nestled there, with no violence of joy, but contentedly, as if he were hushing himself to sleep.
He looked into her face, and, reading its agony, said, with feeble earnestness, "Mourn not,
dearest mother. I am happy now." And with these words, the gentle boy was dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

The king's mandate to stay the New England persecutors was effectual in preventing further
martyrdoms; but the colonial authorities, trusting in the remoteness of their situation, and
perhaps in the supposed instability of the royal government, shortly renewed their severities
in all other respects. Catharine's fanaticism had become wilder by the sundering of all human
ties; and wherever a scourge was lifted, there was she to receive the blow; and whenever a
dungeon was unbarred, thither she came, to cast herself upon the floor. But in process of time,
a more Christian spirit--a spirit of forbearance, though not of cordiality or approbation--began
to pervade the land in regard to the persecuted sect. And then, when the rigid old Pilgrims
eyed her rather in pity than in wrath; when the matrons fed her with the fragments of their
children's food, and offered her a lodging on a hard and lowly bed; when no little crowd of
schoolboys left their sports to cast stones after the roving enthusiast--then did Catharine
return to Pearson's dwelling, and made that her home.

As if Ilbrahim's sweetness yet lingered round his ashes, as if his gentle spirit came down
from heaven to teach his parent a true religion, her fierce and vindictive nature was softened
by the same griefs which had once irritated it. When the course of years had made the features
of the unobtrusive mourner familiar in the settlement, she became a subject of not deep, but
general interest; a being on whom the otherwise superfluous sympathies of all might be bestowed.
Every one spoke of her with that degree of pity which it is pleasant to experience, every one
was ready to do her the little kindnesses, which are not costly, yet manifest good-will; and
when at last she died, a long train of her once bitter persecutors followed her, with decent
sadness and tears that were not painful, to her place by Ilbrahim's green and sunken grave.

THE ANGEL

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

Whenever a good child dies, an angel from heaven comes down to earth, and takes the dead child
in his arms, spreads out his great white wings, and flies away over all the places the child
has loved, and picks quite a handful of flowers, which he carries up to the Almighty, that
they may bloom in heaven more brightly than on earth. And the Father presses all the flowers
to His heart; but He kisses the flower that pleases him best, and the flower is then endowed
with a voice, and can join in the great chorus of praise!

"See"--this is what an angel said, as he carried a dead child up to heaven, and the child heard,
as if in a dream, and they went on over the regions of home where the little child had played,
and they came through gardens with beautiful flowers--"which of these shall we take with us
to plant in heaven?" asked the angel.

Now there stood near them a slender, beautiful rose bush; but a wicked hand had broken the
stem, so that all the branches, covered with half-opened buds, were hanging drooping around,
quite withered.

"The poor rose bush!" said the child. "Take it, that it may bloom up yonder."

And the angel took it, and kissed the child, and the little one half opened his eyes. They
plucked some of the rich flowers, but also took with them the despised buttercup and the wild
pansy.

"Now we have flowers," said the child.

And the angel nodded, but he did not yet fly upward to heaven. It was night and quite silent.
They remained in the great city; they floated about there in a small street, where lay whole
heaps of straw, ashes, and sweepings, for it had been removal-day. There lay fragments of plates,
bits of plaster, rags, and old hats, and all this did not look well. And the angel pointed
amid all this confusion to a few fragments of a flower-pot, and to a lump of earth which had
fallen out, and which was kept together by the roots of a great dried field flower, which was
of no use, and had therefore been thrown out into the street.

"We will take that with us," said the angel. "I will tell you why, as we fly onward.

"Down yonder in the narrow lane, in the low cellar, lived a poor sick boy; from his childhood
he had been bedridden. When he was at his best he could go up and down the room a few times,
leaning on crutches; that was the utmost he could do. For a few days in summer the sunbeams
would penetrate for a few hours to the ground of the cellar, and when the poor boy sat there
and the sun shone on him, and he looked at the red blood in his three fingers, as he held them
up before his face, he would say, 'Yes, to-day he has been out.' He knew the forest with its
beautiful vernal green only from the fact that the neighbor's son brought him the first green
branch of a beech-tree, and he held that up over his head, and dreamed he was in the beech
wood where the sun shone and the birds sang. On a spring day the neighbor's boy also brought
him field flowers, and among these was, by chance, one to which the root was hanging; and so
it was planted in a flower-pot, and placed by the bed, close to the window. And the flower
had been planted by a fortunate hand; and it grew, threw out new shoots, and bore flowers every
year. It became as a splendid flower-garden to the sickly boy--his little treasure here on
earth. He watered it, and tended it, and took care that it had the benefit of every ray of
sunlight, down to the last that struggled in through the narrow window; and the flower itself
was woven into his dreams, for it grew for him and gladdened his eyes, and spread its fragrance
about him; and toward it he turned in death when the Father called him. He has now been with
the Almighty for a year; for a year the flower has stood forgotten in the window, and is withered;
and thus, at the removal, it has been thrown out into the dust of the street. And this is the
flower, the poor withered flower, which we have taken into our nosegay; for this flower has
given more joy than the richest flower in a Queen's garden!"

"But how do you know all this?" asked the child which the angel was carrying to heaven.

"I know it," said the angel, "for I myself was that little boy who walked on crutches! I know
my flower well!"

And the child opened his eyes and looked into the glorious, happy face of the angel; and at
the same moment they entered the regions where there is peace and joy. And the Father pressed
the dead child to His bosom, and then it received wings like the angel, and flew hand in hand
with him. And the Almighty pressed all the flowers to His heart; but He kissed the dry withered
field flower, and it received a voice and sang with all the angels hovering around--some near,
and some in wider circles, and some in infinite distance, but all equally happy. And they all
sang, little and great, the good happy child, and the poor field flower that had lain there
withered, thrown among the dust, in the rubbish of the removal-day, in the narrow, dark lane.

THE RED SHOES

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

There once was a little girl; a very nice pretty little girl. But in summer she had to go barefoot,
because she was poor, and in winter she wore thick wooden shoes, so that her little instep
became quite red, altogether red.

In the middle of the village lived an old shoemaker's wife; she sat, and sewed, as well as
she could, a pair of little shoes, of old strips of red cloth; they were clumsy enough, but
well meant, and the little girl was to have them. The little girl's name was Karen.

On the day when her mother was buried she received the red shoes and wore them for the first
time. They were certainly not suited for mourning; but she had no others, and therefore thrust
her little bare feet into them and walked behind the plain deal coffin.

Suddenly a great carriage came by, and in the carriage sat an old lady; she looked at the little
girl and felt pity for her and said to the clergyman:

"Give me the little girl and I will provide for her."

Karen thought this was for the sake of the shoes; but the old lady declared they were hideous;
and they were burned. But Karen herself was clothed neatly and properly: she was taught to
read and to sew, and the people said she was agreeable. But her mirror said, "You are much
more than agreeable; you are beautiful."

Once the Queen travelled through the country, and had her little daughter with her; and the
daughter was a Princess. And the people flocked toward the castle, and Karen too was among
them; and the little Princess stood in a fine white dress at a window, and let herself be gazed
at. She had neither train nor golden crown, but she wore splendid red morocco shoes; they were
certainly far handsomer than those the shoemaker's wife had made for little Karen. Nothing
in the world can compare with red shoes!

Now Karen was old enough to be confirmed: new clothes were made for her, and she was to have
new shoes. The rich shoemaker in the town took the measure of her little feet; this was done
in his own house, in his little room, and there stood great glass cases with neat shoes and
shining boots. It had quite a charming appearance, but the old lady could not see well, and
therefore took no pleasure in it. Among the shoes stood a red pair, just like those which the
princess had worn. How beautiful they were! The shoemaker also said they had been made for
a Count's child, but they had not fitted.

"That must be patent leather," observed the old lady, "the shoes shine so!"

"Yes, they shine!" replied Karen; and they fitted her, and were bought. But the old lady did
not know that they were red; for she would never have allowed Karen to go to the confirmation
in red shoes; and that is what Karen did.

Every one was looking at her shoes. And when she went across the church porch, toward the door
of the choir, it seemed to her as if the old pictures on the tombstones, the portraits of clergymen
and clergymen's wives, in their stiff collars and long black garments, fixed their eyes upon
her red shoes. And she thought of her shoes only, when the priest laid his hand upon her head
and spoke holy words. And the organ pealed solemnly, the children sang with their fresh sweet
voices, and the old preceptor sang too; but Karen thought only of her red shoes.

In the afternoon the old lady was informed by everyone that the shoes were red; and she said
it was naughty and unsuitable, and that when Karen went to church in future, she should always
go in black shoes, even if they were old.

Next Sunday was sacrament Sunday. And Karen looked at the black shoes, and looked at the red
ones--looked at them again--and put on the red ones.

The sun shone gloriously; Karen and the old lady went along the footpath through the fields,
and it was rather dusty.

By the church door stood an old invalid soldier with a crutch and a long beard; the beard was
rather red than white, for it was red altogether; and he bowed down almost to the ground, and
asked the old lady if he might dust her shoes. And Karen also stretched out her little foot.

"Look, what pretty dancing shoes!" said the old soldier. "Fit so tightly when you dance!"

And he tapped the soles with his hand. And the old lady gave the soldier an alms, and went
into the church with Karen.

And every one in the church looked at Karen's red shoes, and all the pictures looked at them.
And while Karen knelt in the church she only thought of her red shoes; and she forgot to sing
her psalm, and forgot to say her prayer.

Now all the people went out of church, and the old lady stepped into her carriage. Karen lifted
up her foot to step in too; then the old soldier said:

"Look, what beautiful dancing shoes!"

And Karen could not resist: she was obliged to dance a few steps; and when she once began,
her legs went on dancing. It was just as though the shoes had obtained power over her. She
danced round the corner of the church--she could not help it; the coachman was obliged to run
behind her and seize her; he lifted her into the carriage, but her feet went on dancing, so
that she kicked the good old lady violently. At last they took off her shoes, and her legs
became quiet.

At home the shoes were put away in a cupboard; but Karen could not resist looking at them.

Now the old lady became very ill, and it was said she would not recover. She had to be nursed,
and waited on: and this was no one's duty so much as Karen's. But there was to be a great ball
in the town, and Karen was invited. She looked at the old lady who could not recover; she looked
at the red shoes, and thought there would be no harm in it. She put on the shoes, and that
she might very well do; but they went to the ball and began to dance.

But when she wished to go to the right hand, the shoes danced to the left, and when she wanted
to go upstairs the shoes danced downward, down into the street and out at the town gate. She
danced, and was obliged to dance, till she danced straight out into the dark wood.

There was something glistening up among the trees, and she thought it was the moon, for she
saw a face. But it was the old soldier with the red beard: he sat and nodded, and said:

"Look, what beautiful dancing-shoes!"

Then she was frightened, and wanted to throw away the red shoes; but they clung fast to her.
And she tore off her stockings; but the shoes had grown fast to her feet. And she danced and
was compelled to go dancing over field and meadow, in rain and sunshine, by night and by day;
but it was most dreadful at night.

She danced out into the open churchyard; but the dead there do not dance; they have far better
things to do. She wished to sit down on the poor man's grave, where the bitter fern grows;
but there was no peace nor rest for her. And when she danced toward the open church door, she
saw there an angel in long white garments, with wings that reached from his shoulders to his
feet; his countenance was serious and stern, and in his hand he held a sword that was broad
and gleaming.

"Thou shalt dance!" he said--"dance on thy red shoes, till thou art pale and cold, and till
thy body shrivels to a skeleton. Thou shalt dance from door to door, and where proud, haughty
children dwell, shalt thou knock, that they may hear thee, and be afraid of thee! Thou shalt
dance, dance!"

"Mercy!" cried Karen.

But she did not hear what the angel answered, for the shoes carried her away--carried her through
the door on to the field, over stock and stone, and she was always obliged to dance.

One morning she danced past a door which she knew well. There was a sound of psalm-singing
within, and a coffin was carried out, adorned with flowers. Then she knew that the old lady
was dead, and she felt that she was deserted by all, and condemned by the angel of heaven.

She danced, and was compelled to dance--to dance in the dark night. The shoes carried her on
over thorn and brier; she scratched herself till she bled; she danced away across the heath
to a little lonely house. Here she knew the executioner dwelt; and she tapped with her fingers
on the panes, and called:

"Come out, come out! I cannot come in for I must dance!"

And the executioner said:

"You probably don't know who I am? I cut off the bad people's heads with my axe, and mark how
my axe rings!"

"Do not strike off my head," said Karen, "for if you do I cannot repent of my sin. But strike
off my feet with the red shoes!"

And then she confessed all her sin, and the executioner cut off her feet with the red shoes;
but the shoes danced away with the little feet over the fields and into the deep forest.

And he cut her a pair of wooden feet, with crutches, and taught her a psalm, which the criminals
always sing; and she kissed the hand that had held the axe, and went away across the heath.

"Now I have suffered pain enough for the red shoes," said she. "Now I will go into the church,
that they may see me."

And she went quickly toward the church door, but when she came there the red shoes danced before
her, so that she was frightened, and turned back.

The whole week through she was sorrowful, and wept many bitter tears; but when Sunday came
she said:

"Now I have suffered and striven enough! I think that I am just as good as many of those who
sit in the church and carry their heads high."

And then she went boldly on; but she did not get further than the churchyard gate before she
saw the red shoes dancing along before her; then she was seized with terror, and turned back,
and repented of her sin right heartily.

And she went to the parsonage, and begged to be taken there as a servant. She promised to be
industrious, and to do all she could; she did not care for wages, and only wished to be under
a roof and with good people. The clergyman's wife pitied her, and took her into her service.
And she was industrious and thoughtful. Silently she sat and listened when in the evening the
pastor read the Bible aloud. All the little ones were very fond of her; but when they spoke
of dress and splendor and beauty, she would shake her head.

Next Sunday they all went to church, and she was asked if she wished to go too, but she looked
sadly, with tears in her eyes, at her crutches. And then the others went to hear God's word;
but she went alone into her little room, which was only large enough to contain her bed and
a chair. And here she sat with her hymn-book; and as she read it with a pious mind, the wind
bore the notes of the organ over to her from the church; and she lifted up her face, wet with
tears, and said:

"O Lord, help me!"

Then the sun shone so brightly; and before her stood the angel in the white garments, the same
as she had seen that night at the church door. But he no longer grasped the sharp sword; he
held a green branch covered with roses; and he touched the ceiling, and it rose up high, and
wherever he touched it a golden star gleamed forth; and he touched the walls, and they spread
forth widely, and she saw the organ which was pealing its rich sounds; and she saw the old
pictures of clergymen and their wives; and the congregation sat in the decorated seats, and
sang from their hymn-books. The church had come to the poor girl in her narrow room, or her
chamber had become a church. She sat in the chair with the rest of the clergyman's people;
and when they had finished the psalm, and looked up, they nodded and said:

"That was right that you came here, Karen."

"It was mercy!" said she.

And the organ sounded its glorious notes; and the children's voices singing in the chorus sounded
sweet and lovely; the clear sunshine streamed so warm through the window upon the chair in
which Karen sat; and her heart became so filled with sunshine, peace, and joy, that it broke.
Her soul flew on the sunbeams to heaven; and there was nobody who asked after the RED SHOES.

THE LOVLIEST ROSE IN THE WORLD

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

Once there reigned a Queen, in whose garden were found the most glorious flowers at all seasons
and from all the lands in the world; but especially she loved roses, and therefore she possessed
the most various kinds of this flower, from the wild dog-rose, with the apple-scented green
leaves, to the most splendid Provence rose. They grew against the earth walls, wound themselves
round pillars and window-frames, into the passages, and all along the ceiling in all the halls.
And the roses were various in fragrance, form, and color.

But care and sorrow dwelt in these halls: the Queen lay upon a sick-bed, and the doctors declared
that she must die.

"There is still one thing that can serve her," said the wisest of them. "Bring her the loveliest
rose in the world, the one which is the expression of the brightest and purest love; for if
that is brought before her eyes ere they close, she will not die."

And young and old came from every side with roses, the loveliest that bloomed in each garden;
but they were not the right sort. The flower was to be brought out of the garden of Love; but
what rose was it there that expressed the highest and purest love?

And the poets sang of the loveliest rose in the world, and each one named his own; and intelligence
was sent far round the land to every heart that beat with love, to every class and condition,
and to every age.

"No one has till now named the flower," said the wise man. "No one has pointed out the place
where it bloomed in its splendor. They are not the roses from the coffin of Romeo and Juliet,
or from the Walburg's grave, though these roses will be ever fragrant in song. They are not
the roses that sprouted forth from Winkelried's blood-stained lances, from the blood that flows
in a sacred cause from the breast of the hero who dies for his country; though no death is
sweeter than this, and no rose redder than the blood that flows then. Nor is it that wondrous
flower, to cherish which man devotes, in a quiet chamber, many a sleepless night, and much
of his fresh life--the magic flower of science."

"I know where it blooms," said a happy mother, who came with her pretty child to the bedside
of the Queen. "I know where the loveliest rose of the world is found! The rose that is the
expression of the highest and purest love springs from the blooming cheeks of my sweet child
when, strengthened by sleep, it opens its eyes and smiles at me with all its affection!"

"Lovely is this rose; but there is still a lovelier," said the wise man.

"Yes, a far lovelier one," said one of the women. "I have seen it, and a loftier, purer rose
does not bloom. I saw it on the cheeks of the Queen. She had taken off her golden crown, and
in the long dreary night she was carrying her sick child in her arms: she wept, kissed it,
and prayed for her child as a mother prays in the hour of her anguish."

"Holy and wonderful in its might is the white rose of grief; but it is not the one we seek."

"No, the loveliest rose of the world I saw at the altar of the Lord," said the good old Bishop.
"I saw it shine as if an angel's face had appeared. The young maidens went to the Lord's Table,
and renewed the promise made at their baptism, and roses were blushing, and pale roses shining
on their fresh cheeks. A young girl stood there; she looked with all the purity and love of
her young spirit up to heaven: that was the expression of the highest and purest love."

"May she be blessed," said the wise man; "but not one of you has yet named to me the loveliest
rose of the world."

Then there came into the room a child, the Queen's little son. Tears stood in his eyes and
glistened on his cheeks; he carried a great open book, and the binding was of velvet, with
great silver clasps.

"Mother!" cried the boy, "only hear what I have read."

And the child sat by the bedside, and read from the book of Him who suffered death on the cross
to save men, and even those who were not yet born.

"Greater love there is not"--

And a roseate hue spread over the cheeks of the Queen, and her eyes gleamed, for she saw that
from the leaves of the book there bloomed the loveliest rose, that sprang from the blood of
Christ shed on the cross.

"I see it!" she said: "he who beholds this, the loveliest rose on earth, shall never die."

A VISION OF THE LAST DAY

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

Of all the days of our life the greatest and most solemn is the day on which we die. Hast thou
ever tried to realize that most sure, most portentous hour, the last hour we shall spend on earth?

There was a certain man, an upholder of truth and justice, a Christian man and orthodox, so
the world esteemed him. And, in sooth, it may be that some good thing was found in him, since
in sleep, amid the visions of the night, it pleased the Father of spirits to reveal him to
himself, making manifest to him what he was in truth, namely, one of those who trust in themselves
that they are righteous and despise others.

He went to rest, secure that his accounts were right with all men, that he had paid his dues
and wrought good works that day; of the secret pride of his heart, of the harsh words that
had passed his lips, he took no account at all. And so he slept, and in his sleep Death stood
by his bedside, a glorious Angel, strong, spotless, beautiful, but unlike every other angel,
stern, unsmiling, pitiless of aspect.

"Thine hour is come, and thou must follow me!" spake Death. And Death's cold finger touched
the man's feet, whereupon they became like ice, then touched his forehead, then his heart.
And the chain that bound the immortal soul to clay was riven asunder, and the soul was free
to follow the Angel of Death.

But during those brief seconds, while yet that awful touch thrilled through feet, and head,
and heart, there passed over the dying man, as in great, heaving, ocean waves, the recollection
of all that he had wrought and felt in his whole life; just as one shuddering glance into a
whirlpool suffices to reveal in thought rapid as lightning, the entire unfathomable depth;
just as in one momentary glance at the starry heavens we can conceive the infinite multitude
of that glorious host of unknown orbs.

In such a retrospect the terrified sinner shrinks back into himself, and finding there no stay
by which to cling, must feel shrinking into infinite nothingness; while the devout soul raises
its thoughts to the Almighty, yielding itself up to Him in childlike trust, and praying, "Thy
will be done in me!"

But this man had not the childlike mind, neither did he tremble like the sinner; his thoughts
were still the self-praising thoughts in which he had fallen asleep. His path, he believed,
must lead straight heavenward, and Mercy, the promised Mercy, would open to him the gates.

And, in his dream, the Soul followed the Angel of Death, though not without first casting one
wistful glance at the couch where lay, in its white shroud, the lifeless image of clay, still,
as it were, bearing the impress of the soul's own individuality. And now they hovered through
the air, now glided along the ground. Was it a vast decorated hall they were passing through,
or a forest? It seemed hard to tell; Nature, it appeared, was formally set out for show, as
in the artificial old French gardens, and amid its strange, carefully arranged scenes, passed
and repassed troops of men and women, all clad as for a masquerade.

"Such is human life!" said the Angel of Death.

The figures seemed more or less disguised; those who swept by in the glories of velvet and
gold were not all among the noblest or most dignified-looking, neither were all those who wore
the garb of poverty insignificant or vulgar. It was a strange masquerade! But most strange
it was to see how one and all carefully concealed under their clothing something they would
not have others perceive, but in vain, for each was bent upon discovering his neighbor's secret,
and they tore and snatched at one another till, now here, now there, some part of an animal
was revealed. In one was found the grinning head of an ape, in another the cloven foot of a
goat, in a third the poison-fang of a snake, in a fourth the clammy fin of a fish.

All had in them some token of the animal--the animal which is fast rooted in human nature,
and which here was seen struggling to burst forth. And, however closely a man might hold his
garment over it, the others would never rest till they had rent the hiding veil, and all kept
crying out, "Look here! look now! here he is! there she is!"--and every one mockingly laid
bare his fellow's shame.

"And what was the animal in me?" inquired the disembodied Soul; and the Angel of Death pointed
to a haughty form, around whose head shone a bright, widespread glory of rainbow-colored rays,
but at whose heart might be seen lurking, half-hidden, the feet of the peacock; the glory was,
in fact, merely the peacock's gaudy tail.

And as they passed on, large, foul-looking birds shrieked out from the boughs of the trees;
with clear, intelligible, though harsh, human voices they shrieked, "Thou that walkest with
Death, dost remember me?" All the evil thoughts and desires that had nestled within him from
his birth until his death now called after him, "Rememberest thou me?"

And the Soul shuddered, recognizing the voices; it could not deny knowledge of the evil thoughts
and desires that were now rising up in witness against it.

"In our flesh, in our evil nature, dwelleth no good thing," cried the Soul; "but, at least,
thoughts never with me ripened into actions; the world has not seen the evil fruit." And the
Soul hurried on to get free from the accusing voices; but the great black fowls swept in circles
round, and screamed out their scandalous words louder and louder, as though they would be heard
all over the world. And the Soul fled from them like the hunted stag, and at every step stumbled
against sharp flint stones that lay in the path. "How came these sharp stones here? They look
like mere withered leaves lying on the ground."

"Every stone is for some incautious word thou hast spoken, which lay as a stumbling-block in
thy neighbor's path, which wounded thy neighbor's heart far more sorely and deeply than these
sharp flints now wound thy feet."

"Alas! I never once thought of that," sighed the Soul.

And those words of the gospel rang through the air, "Judge not, that ye be not judged."

"We have all sinned," said the Soul, recovering from its momentary self-abasement. "I have
kept the Law and the Gospel, I have done what I could, I am not as others are!"

And in his dream this man now stood at the gates of heaven, and the Angel who guarded the entrance
inquired, "Who art thou? Tell me thy faith, and show it to me in thy works."

"I have faithfully kept the Commandments, I have humbled myself in the eyes of the world, I
have preserved myself free from the pollution of intercourse with sinners, I have hated and
persecuted evil, and those who practice it, and I would do so still, yea, with fire and sword,
had I the power."

"Then thou art one of Mohammed's followers?" said the Angel.

"I? a Mohammedan?--never!"

"'He who strikes with the sword shall perish by the sword,' thus spake the Son; His religion
thou knowest not. It may be that thou art one of the children of Israel, whose maxim is, 'An
eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth'--art thou such?"

"I am a Christian."

"I see it not in thy faith or in thine actions. The law of Christ is the law of forgiveness,
love, and mercy."

"Mercy!" The gracious echo of that sweet word thrilled through infinite space, the gates of
heaven opened, and the Soul hovered toward the realms of endless bliss.

But the flood of light that streamed forth from within was so dazzlingly bright, so transcendently
white and pure, that the Soul shrank back as from a two-edged sword, and the hymns and harp-tones
of Angels mingled in such exquisite celestial harmony as the earthly mind has not power either
to conceive or to endure. And the Soul trembled and bowed itself deeper and deeper, and the
heavenly light penetrated it through and through, and it felt to the quick, as it had never
truly felt before, the burden of its own pride, cruelty, and sin.

"What I have done of good in the world, that did I because I could not otherwise, but the evil
that I did--that was of myself!"

The confession was wrung from him; more and more the man felt dazzled and overpowered by the
pure light of heaven; he seemed falling into a measureless abyss, the abyss of his own nakedness
and unworthiness. Shrunk into himself, humbled, cast out, unripe for the kingdom of heaven,
shuddering at the thought of the just and holy God--hardly dared he to gasp out, "Mercy!"

And the face of the Angel at the portal was turned toward him in softening pity. "Mercy is
for them who implore it, not claim it; there is Mercy also for thee. Turn thee, child of man,
turn thee back the way thou camest to thy clayey tabernacle; in pity is it given thee to dwell
in dust yet a little while. Be no longer righteous in thine own eyes, copy Him who with patience
endured the contradiction of sinners, strive and pray that thou mayest become poor in spirit,
and so mayest thou yet inherit the Kingdom."

"Holy, loving, glorious forever shalt thou be, O, erring human spirit!"--thus rang the chorus
of Angels. And again overpowered by those transcendent melodies, dazzled and blinded by that
excess of purest light, the Soul again shrank back into itself. It seemed to be falling an
infinite depth; the celestial music grew fainter and fainter, till common earthly sights and
sounds dispelled the vision. The rays of the early morning sun falling full on his face, the
cheerful crow of the vigilant cock, called the sleeper up to pray.

Inexpressibly humbled, yet thankful, he arose and knelt beside his bed. Thou, who hast convicted
me of sin, now purify me, strengthen me, that, though ever unworthy of Thy presence, I may
yet, supported by Thy Love, dare to ascend into Thine ever lasting light!"

The Vision was his; be the lesson, the prayer, also ours.

THE OLD GRAVESTONE

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

In one of our small trading towns, at that time of year when folk say "The evenings grow long,"
a whole family was assembled together. The air was still mild and warm; the lamp was lighted,
the long curtains hung down before the windows, and bright moonlight prevailed without. They
were talking about a big old stone that lay down in the yard, close by the kitchen door, where
the servants often placed the kitchen utensils, after they had been cleaned, to dry in the
sun, and where the children were fond of playing; it was, in fact, an old gravestone.

"Yes," said the master of the house, "I believe it comes from the old ruined convent chapel;
pulpit and gravestones, with all their epitaphs, were sold; my late father bought several of
these; the others were broken into paving-stones, but this one was left unused, lying in the yard."

"It is easy to know it for a gravestone," said the eldest of the children. "You can still see
on it an mountain-sides and a piece of an angel, but the inscription is almost quite worn out,
except the name 'Preben,' and a capital 'S' a little further on, and underneath it 'Martha,'
but it is impossible to make out any more, and that you can only read after if has been raining,
or when we have washed it."

"Why, then, it must be the gravestone of Preben Swan and his wife!" exclaimed an old man, who
by his age might appear the grandfather of everybody in the room. "To be sure, they were among
the last that were buried in the old convent churchyard--the grand old couple! Everybody knew
them, everybody loved them; they were like king and queen in the town. Folk said they had more
than a barrelful of gold, and yet they went about simply clad, in the coarsest cloth, only
their linen was always of dazzling whiteness. Yes, that was a charming old pair, Preben and
Martha. One was always so glad to see them, sitting together on the bench at the top of their
stone staircase, under the old lime-tree's shade. They were so good to the poor! they feasted
them, clothed them, and there was good sense and a true Christian spirit in all their benevolence.

"The wife died first; I remember the day quite well; I was then a little boy, and went with
my father to see old Preben: the old man was so grieved, he cried like a child. The corpse
still lay in her bedroom, close to the chamber where we sat; she looked as if she had just
fallen asleep. And the old man told my father how he should now be so lonely, and how many
years, they had spent together, and how they had first made acquaintance and came to love each
other. As I said before, I was a child, but it moved me strangely to listen to the old man,
and watch how he grew more animated as he went on speaking, a faint color coming into his cheeks
as he talked of their youthful days, how pretty she had been, how many little innocent tricks
he had played, in order to meet her. And when he spoke of his wedding-day his eyes quite sparkled;
he seemed to be living his happy time over again--and all the while she was lying dead in the
next chamber, an old lady, and he was an old man--ah, how time passes! I was a child then,
and now I am as old as Preben Swan. Yes, time and change come to all. I remember as well as
possible the funeral-day, and Preben Swan following the coffin. They had had their gravestone
carved with names and inscriptions, all except the dates of their death, some years before;
that same evening the stone was taken to the grave, and put into its place. The next year the
grave had to be reopened, and old Preben rejoined his wife. They did not turn out to be so
rich as people had fancied, and what they did leave went to distant relations very far off.
The old wooden house, with the bench at the top of the high stone staircase under the lime-tree,
was ordered to be pulled down, for it was too ruinous to stand any longer. And afterward, when
the convent chapel and cemetery were destroyed, the gravestone of Preben and Martha was sold,
like others, to whomsoever chose to buy it. And so now it lies in the yard for the little ones
to roll over, and to make a shelf for the kitchen pots and pans. And the paved street now covers
the resting-place of old Preben and his wife, and nobody thinks of them any more."

And the old man who related all this shook his head sadly. "Forgotten! All things are forgotten!"

And the rest began to speak of other matters; but the youngest boy, a child with large, grave
eyes, crept up on a chair behind the curtains, and looked out into the yard, where the moon
shone brightly on the big stone that before had seemed to him flat and uninteresting enough,
but now had become to him like a page of a large-sized story-book. For all that the boy had
heard concerning Preben and his wife, the stone seemed to contain within it; and he looked
first at the stone, and then at the brilliant moon, which looked to him like a bright kind
face looking down through the pure still air upon the earth.

"Forgotten! all shall be forgotten!" these words came to his ears from the room; but at that
very moment an invisible angel kissed the boy's forehead and softly whispered, "Keep the seed
carefully, keep it till the time for ripening. Through thee, child as thou art, shall the half-erased
inscription, the crumbling gravestone, stand out in clear, legible characters for generations
to come! Through thee shall the old couple again walk arm-in-arm through the ancient gateways,
and sit with smiling faces on the bench under the lime tree, greeting rich and poor. The good
and the beautiful perish never; they live eternally in tale and song."

"GOOD-FOR-NOTHING"

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

The sheriff stood at the open window; he wore ruffles, and a dainty breastpin decorated the
front of his shirt; he was neatly shaven, and a tiny little strip of sticking-plaster covered
the little cut he had given himself during the process. "Well, my little man?" quoth he.

The "little man" was no other than the laundress's son, who respectfully took off his cap in
passing. His cap was broken in the rim, and adapted to be put into the pocket on occasion;
his clothes were poor, but clean, and very neatly mended, and he wore heavy wooden shoes. He
stood still when the sheriff spoke, as respectfully as though he stood before the king.

"Ah, you're a good boy, a well-behaved boy!" said the sheriff. "And so your mother is washing
down at the river; she isn't good for much. And you're going to her, I see. Ah, poor child!--well,
you may go."

And the boy passed on, still holding his cap in his hand, while the wind tossed to and fro
his waves of yellow hair. He went through the street, down a little alley to the brook, where
his mother stood in the water, at her washing-stool, beating the heavy linen. The water-mill's
sluices were opened, and the current was strong; the washing-stool was nearly carried away
by it, and the laundress had hard work to strive against it.

"I am very near taking a voyage," she said, "and it is so cold out in the water; for six hours
have I been standing here. Have you anything for me?"--and the boy drew forth a phial, which
his mother put to her lips. "Ah, that is as good as warm meat, and it is not so dear. O, the
water is so cold--but if my strength will but last me out to bring you up honestly, my sweet
child!"

At that moment approached an elderly woman, poorly clad, blind of one eye, lame on one leg,
and with her hair brushed into one large curl to hide the blind eye--but in vain, the defect
was only the more conspicuous. This was "Lame Maren," as the neighbors called her, a friend
of the washerwoman's. "Poor thing, slaving and toiling away in the cold water! it is hard that
you should be called names"--for Maren had overheard the sheriff speaking to the child about
his own mother-- "hard that your boy should be told you are good-for-nothing."

"What! did the sheriff really say so, child?" said the Laundress, and her lips quivered. "So
you have a mother who is good-for-nothing! Perhaps he is right, only he should not say so to
the child--but I must not complain, for good things have come to me from that house."

"Why yes, you were in service there once, when the sheriff's parents were alive, many years
since. There is a grand dinner at the sheriff's to-day," went on Maren; "it would have been
put off, though, had not everything been prepared. I heard it from the porter. News came in
a letter, an hour ago, that the sheriff's younger brother, at Copenhagen, is dead."

"Dead!" repeated the Laundress, and she turned as white as a corpse.

"What do you care about it?" said Maren. "To be sure, you must have known him, since you served
in the house."

"Is he dead? he was the best, the kindest of creatures! indeed, there are not many like him,"
and the tears rolled down her cheeks. "O, the world is turning round, I feel so ill!" and she
clung to the washing-stool for support.

"You are ill, indeed!" cried Maren. "Take care, the stool will overturn. I had better get you
home at once."

"But the linen?"

"I will look after that--only lean on me. The boy can stay here and watch it till I come back
and wash what is left; it is not much."

The poor laundress's limbs trembled under her. "I have stood too long in the cold water; I
have had no food since yesterday. O, my poor child!" and she wept.

The boy cried too, as he sat alone beside the brook, watching the wet linen. Slowly the two
women made their way up the little alley and through the street, past the sheriff's house.
Just as she reached her humble home, the laundress fell down on the paving-stones, fainting.
She was carried upstairs and put to bed. Kind Maren hastened to prepare a cup of warm ale--that
was the best medicine in this case, she thought--and then went back to the brook and did the
best she could with the linen.

In the evening she was again in the laundress's miserable room. She had begged from the sheriff's
cook a few roasted potatoes and a little bit of bacon, for the sick woman. Maren and the boy
feasted upon these, but the patient was satisfied with the smell of them--that, she declared,
was very nourishing.

Supper over, the boy went to bed, lying crosswise at his mother's feet, with a coverlet made
of old carpet-ends, blue and red, sewed together.

The Laundress now felt a little better; the warm ale had strengthened her, the smell of the
meat had done her good.

"Now, you good soul," said she to Maren, "I will tell you all about it, while the boy is asleep.
That he is already; look at him, how sweetly he looks with his eyes closed; he little thinks
how his mother has suffered. May he never feel the like! Well, I was in service with the sheriff's
parents when their youngest son, the student, came home; I was a wild young thing then, but
honest--that I must say for myself. And the student was so pleasant and merry, a better youth
never lived. He was a son of the house, I only a servant, but we became sweethearts--all in
honor and honesty--and he told his mother that he loved me; she was like an angel in his eyes,
so wise, kind, and loving! And he went away, but his gold ring of betrothal was on my finger.
When he was really gone, my mistress called me in to speak to her; so grave, yet so kind she
looked, so wisely she spoke, like an angel, indeed. She showed me what a gulf of difference
in tastes, habits, arid mind lay between her son and me. 'He sees you now to be good-hearted
and pretty, but will you always be the same in his eyes? You have not been educated as he has
been; intellectually you cannot rise to his level. I honor the poor,' she continued, 'and I
know that in the kingdom of heaven many a poor man will sit in a higher seat than the rich;
but that is no reason for breaking the ranks in this world, and you two, left to yourselves,
would drive your carriage full tilt against all obstacles till it toppled over with you both.
I know that a good honest handicraftsman, Erik, the glove-maker, has been your suitor; he is
a widower without children, he is well off; think whether you cannot be content with him.'
Every word my mistress spoke went like a knife through my heart, but I knew she was right;
I kissed her hand, and shed such bitter tears! But bitterer tears still came when I went into
my chamber and lay upon my bed. O, the long, dreary night that followed! Our Lord alone knows
what I suffered. Not till I went to church on Sunday did a light break upon my darkness. It
seemed providential that as I came out of church I met Erik the glove-maker. There were no
more doubts in my mind; he was a good man, and of my own rank. I went straight to him, took
his hand, and asked, 'Art thou still in the same mind toward me?'--'Yes, and I shall never
be otherwise minded,' he replied.--'Dost thou care to have a girl who likes and honors thee,
but does not love thee?'--'I believe love will come,' he said, and so he took my hand. I went
home to my mistress; the gold ring that her son had given to me, that I wore all day next my
heart, and on my finger at night in bed, I now drew forth; I kissed it till my mouth bled,
I gave it to my mistress, and said that next week the bans would be read for me and the glove-maker.
My mistress took me in her arms and kissed me; she did not tell me I was good-for-nothing;
I was good for something then, it seems, before I had known so much trouble. The wedding was
at Candlemastide, and our first year all went well; my husband had apprentices, and you, Maren,
helped me in the housework."

"O, and you were such a good mistress!" exclaimed Maren. "Never shall I forget how kind you
and your husband were to me."

"Ah, you were with us during our good times! We had no children then. The student I never saw
again--yes, once I saw him, but he did not see me. He came to his mother's funeral; I saw him
standing by her grave, looking so sad, so ashy pale--but all for his mother's sake. When afterward
his father died, he was abroad and did not come to the funeral. Nor has he been here since;
he is a lawyer, that I know, and he has never married. But he thought no more of me, and had
he seen me, he would certainly have never recognized me, so ugly as I am now. And it is right
it should be so."

Then she went on to speak of the bitter days of adversity, when troubles had come upon them
in a flood. They had five hundred rix-dollars, and as in their street a house could be bought
for two hundred, it was considered a good investment to buy it, take it down, and build it
anew. The house was bought; masons and carpenters made an estimate that one thousand and twenty
rix-dollars more would be required. Erik arranged to borrow this sum from Copenhagen, but the
ship that was to bring him the money was lost, and the money with it. "It was just then that
my sweet boy, who lies sleeping here, was born. Then his father fell sick; for three-quarters
of a year I had to dress and undress him every day. We went on borrowing and borrowing; all
our things had to be sold, one by one; at last Erik died. Since then I have toiled and moiled
for the boy's sake, have gone out cleaning and washing, done coarse work or fine, whichever
I could get; but I do everything worse and worse; my strength will never return any more; it
is our Lord's will! He will take me away, and find better provision for my boy."

She fell asleep. In the morning she seemed better, and fancied she was strong enough to go
to her work again. But no sooner did she feel the cold water than a shivering seized her, she
felt about convulsively with her hands, tried to step forward, and fell down. Her head lay
on the dry bank, but her feet were in the water of the brook, her wooden shoes were carried
away by the stream. Here she was found by Maren.

A message had been taken to her lodging that the sheriff wanted her, had something to say to
her. It was too late; the poor washerwoman was dead. The letter that had brought the sheriff
news of his brother's death also gave an abstract of his will; among other bequests he had
left six hundred rix-dollars to the glove-maker's widow, who had formerly served his parents.
"There was some love-nonsense between my brother and her," quoth the sheriff. "It is all as
well she is out of the way; now it will all come to the boy, and I shall apprentice him to
honest folk who will make him a good workman." For whatever the sheriff might do, were it ever
so kind an action, he always spoke harshly and unkindly. So he now called the boy to him, promised
to provide for him, and told him it was a good thing his mother was dead; she was good-for-nothing!

She was buried in the paupers' churchyard. Maren planted a little rose-tree over the grave;
the boy stood by her side the while.

"My darling mother!" he sighed, as the tears streamed down from his eyes. "It was not true
that she was good-for-nothing!"

"No, indeed!" cried her old friend, looking up to heaven. "Let the world say she was good-for-nothing;
our Lord in his heavenly kingdom will not say so."

"IN THE UTTERMOST PARTS OF THE SEA"

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

Some large ships were sent up toward the North Pole, for the purpose of discovering the boundaries
of land and sea, and of trying how far men could make their way.

A year and a day had elapsed; amid mist and ice had they, with great difficulty, steered further
and further; the winter had now begun; the sun had set, one long night would continue during
many, many weeks. One unbroken plain of ice spread around them; the ships were all fast moored
to it; the snow lay about in heaps, and had even shaped itself into cubiform houses, some as
big as our barrows, some only just large enough for two or three men to find shelter within.
Darkness they could not complain of, for the Northern Lights--Nature's fireworks--now red,
now blue, flashed unceasingly, and the snow glistened so brightly.

At times when it was brightest came troops of the natives, strange-looking figures, clad in
hairy skins, and with sledges made out of hard fragments of ice; they brought skins to exchange,
which the sailors were only too glad to use as warm carpets inside their snow houses, and as
beds whereon they could rest under their snowy tents, while outside prevailed an intensity
of cold such as we never experience during our severest winters. But the sailors remembered
that at home it was still autumn; and they thought of the warm sunbeams and the leaves still
clinging to the trees in varied glories of crimson and gold. Their watches told them it was
evening, and time for rest, and in one of the snow houses two sailors had already lain down
to sleep; the youngest of these two had with him his best home-treasure, the Bible that his
grandmother had given him at parting. Every night it lay under his pillow; he had known its
contents from childhood, and every day he read a portion; and often as he lay on his couch,
he recalled to mind those holy words of comfort, "If I should take the wings of the morning,
and remain in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there should Thy hand lead me, and Thy right
hand should hold me."

These sublime words of faith were on his lips as he closed his eyes, when sleep came to him,
and dreams with sleep--busy, swift-winged dreams, proving that though the body may rest, the
soul must ever be awake. First he seemed to hear the melodies of songs dear to him in his home;
a mild summer breeze seemed to breathe upon him, and a light shone upon his couch, as though
the snowy dome above him had become transparent; he lifted his head, and behold! the dazzling
white light was not the white of a snow wall, it came from the large wings of an angel stooping
over him, an angel with eyes beaming with love. The angel's form seemed to spring from the
pages of the Bible, as from the pitcher of a lily-blossom; he extended his arms, and lo! the
narrow walls of the snow-hut sank back like a mist melting before the daylight. Once again
the green meadows and autumnal-tinted woods of the sailor's home lay around him, bathed in
quiet sunshine; the stork's nest was empty, but the apples still clung to the wild apple-tree;
though leaves had fallen, the red hips glistened, and the blackbird whistled in the little
green cage that hung in the lowly window of his childhood's home; the blackbird whistled the
tune he had taught him, and the old grandmother wound chickweed about the bars of the cage,
as her grandson had been wont to do. And the smith's pretty young daughter stood drawing water
from the well, and as she nodded to the grandmother, the latter beckoned to her, and held up
a letter to show her, a letter that had come that morning from the cold northern lands, from
the North Pole itself, where the old woman's grandson now was--safe under God's protecting
hand. And the two women, old and young, laughed and wept by turns--and he the while, the young
sailor whose body was sleeping amid ice and snow, his spirit roaming in the world of dreams,
under the angel's wings, saw and heard it all, and laughed and wept with them. And from the
letter these words were read aloud, "Even in the uttermost parts of the sea, His right hand
shall hold me fast": and a sweet, solemn music was wafted round him, and the angel drooped
his wings; like a soft protecting veil they fell closer over the sleeper.

The dream was ended; all was darkness in the little snow-hut, but the Bible lay under the sailor's
head, faith and hope abode in his heart. God was with him, and his home was with him, "even
in the uttermost parts of the sea."

"SOMETHING"

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

"I will be Something," declared the eldest of five brothers; "I will be of use in the world;
be it ever so humble a position that I may hold, let me be but useful, and that will be Something.
I will make bricks; folk cannot do without them, so I shall at least do Something."

"Something very little, though," replied the second brother. "Why, it is as good as nothing!
it is work that might be done by a machine. Better be a mason, as I intend to be. Then one
belongs to a guild, becomes a citizen, has a banner of one's own. Nay, if all things go well,
I may become a master, and have apprentices and workmen under me. That will be Something!"

"It will be nothing at all then, I can tell you that!" rejoined the third. "Think how many
different ranks there are in a town far above that of a master-mason. You may be an honest
sort of a man, but you will never be a gentleman; gentle and simple; those are the two grand
divisions, and you will always be one of the 'simple.' Well, I know better than that. I will
be an architect; I will be one of the thinkers, the artists; I will raise myself to the aristocracy
of intellect. I may have to begin from the very lowest grade; I may begin as a carpenter's
boy, and run about with a paper-cap on my head, to fetch ale for the workmen; I may not enjoy
it, but I shall try to imagine it is only a masquerade. 'To-morrow,' I shall say, 'I will go
my own way, and others shall not come near me.' Yes, I shall go to the Academy, learn to draw,
and be called an architect. That will be Something! I may get a title, perhaps; and I shall
build and build, as others before me have done. Yes, that will be Something!"

"But it is Something that I care nothing about," said the fourth. "I should not care to go
on, on, in the beaten track, to be a mere copyist; I will be a genius, cleverer than all of
you put together; I will create a new style, provide ideas for buildings suited to the climate
and materials of our country, suited to our national character, and the requirements of the age."

"But supposing the climate and the materials don't agree," suggested the fifth, "how will you
get on then, if they won't co-operate? As for our national character, to be following out that
in architecture will be sheer affectation, and the requirements of modern civilization will
drive you perfectly mad. I see you will none of you ever be anything, though of course you
won't believe me. But do as you please, I shall not be like you. I shall reason over what you
execute; there is something ridiculous in everything; I shall find it out, show you yeur faults--that
will be Something!"

And he kept his word; and folk said of this fifth brother, "There is something in him, certainly;
he has plenty of brains! but he does nothing." But he was content, he was Something.

But what became of the five brothers? We will hear the whole.

The eldest brother, the brickmaker, found that every brick he turned out whole yielded him
a tiny copper coin--only copper--but a great many of these small coins, added together, could
be converted into a bright silver dollar, and through the power of this, wheresoever he knocked,
whether at baker's, butcher's, or tailor's, the door flew open, and he received what he wanted.
Such was the virtue of his bricks; some, of course, got broken before they were finished, but
a use was found even for these. For up by the trench would poor Mother Margaret fain build
herself a little house, if she might; she took all the broken bricks, ay, and she got a few
whole ones besides, for a good heart had the eldest brother, though only a brickmaker. The
poor thing built her house with her own hands; it was very narrow, its one window was all on
one side, the door was too low, and the thatch on the roof might have been laid on better,
but it gave her shelter and a home, and could be seen far over the sea, which sometimes burst
over the trench in its might, and sprinkled a salt shower over the little house, which kept
its place there years after he who made the bricks was dead and gone.

As for the second brother, he learned to build after another fashion, as he had resolved. When
he was out of his apprenticeship, he buckled on his knapsack and started, singing as he went,
on his travels. He came home again, and became a master in his native town; he built, house
after house, a whole street of houses; there they stood, looked well, and were a credit to
the town; and these houses soon built him a little house for himself. How? Ask the houses,
and they will give you no answer; but the people will answer you and say, "Why, of course,
the street built him his house!" It was small enough, and had only a clay floor, but when he
and his bride danced over it, the floor grew as smooth as if it had been polished, and from
every stone in the wall sprung a flower, that looked as gay as the costliest tapestry. It was
a pretty house and a happy wedded pair. The banner of the Masons' Guild waved outside, and
workmen and apprentices shouted "Hurra!" Yes, that was Something! and at last he died--that,
too, was Something!

Next comes the architect, the third brother. He began as a carpenter's apprentice, and ran
about the town on errands, wearing a paper-cap; but he studied industriously at the Academy,
and rose steadily upward. If the street full of houses had built a house for his brother the
mason, the street took its name from the architect; the handsomest house in the whole street
was his--that was Something, and he was Something! His children were gentlemen, and could boast
of their "birth"; and when he died, his widow was a widow of condition--that is Something--and
his name stood on the corner of the street, and was in everybody's lips--that is Something, too!

Now for the genius, the fourth brother, who wanted to invent something new, something original.
Somehow the ground gave way beneath his feet; he fell and broke his neck. But he had a splendid
funeral, with music and banners, and flowery paragraphs in the newspapers; and three eulogiums
were pronounced over him, each longer than the last, and this would have pleased him mightily,
for he loved speechifying of all things. A monument was erected over his grave, only one story
high--but that is Something!

So now he was dead, as well as his three elder brothers; the youngest, the critic, outlived
them all, and that was as it should be, for thus he had the last word, which to him was a matter
of the greatest importance. "He had plenty of brains," folk said. Now his hour had struck,
he died, and his soul sought the gates of heaven. There it stood side by side with another
soul--old Mother Margaret from the trenches.

"It is for the sake of contrast, I suppose, that I and this miserable soul should wait here
together," thought the critic. "Well now, who are you, my good woman?" he inquired.

And the old woman replied, with as much respect as though St. Peter himself were addressing
her--in fact, she took him for St. Peter, he gave himself such grand airs--"I am a poor old
soul, I have no family, I am only old Margaret from the house near the trenches."

"Well, and what have you done down below?"

"I have done as good as nothing in the world! nothing whatever! It will be mercy, indeed, if
such as I am suffered to pass through this gate."

"And how did you leave the world?" inquired the critic, carelessly. He must talk about something;
it wearied him to stand there, waiting.

"Well, I can hardly tell how I left it; I have been sickly enough during these last few years,
and could not well bear to creep out of bed at all during the cold weather. It has been a severe
winter, but now that is all past. For a few days, as your highness must know, the wind was
quite still, but it was bitterly cold; the ice lay over the water as far as one could see.
All the people in the town were out on the ice; there was dancing, and music, and feasting,
and sledge-racing, I fancy; I could hear something of it all as I lay in my poor little chamber.
And when it was getting toward evening, the moon was up, but was not yet very bright; I looked
from my bed through the window, and I saw how there rose up over the sea a strange white cloud;
I lay and watched it, watched the black dot in it, which grew bigger and bigger, and then I
knew what it foreboded; that sign is not often seen, but I am old and experienced. I knew it,
and I shivered with horror. Twice before in my life have I seen that sign, and I knew that
there would be a terrible storm and a spring flood; it would burst over the poor things on
the ice, who were drinking and dancing and merry-making. Young and old, the whole town was
out on the ice; who was to warn them, if no one saw it, or no one knew what I knew? I felt
so terrified, I felt all alive, as I had not felt for years! I got out of bed, forced the window
open; I could see the folk running and dancing over the ice; I could see the gay-colored flags,
I could hear the boys shout 'Hurra!' and the girls and lads a-singing. All were so merry; and
all the time the white cloud with its black speck rose higher and higher! I screamed as loud
as I could; but no one heard me, I was too far off. Soon would the storm break loose, the ice
would break in pieces, and all that crowd would sink and drown. Hear me they could not; get
out to them I could not; what was to be done? Then our Lord sent me a good thought; I could
set fire to my bed; better let my house be burned to the ground than that so many should miserably
perish. So I kindled a light; I saw the red flame mount up; I got out at the door, but then
I fell down; I lay there, I could not get up again. But the flames burst out through the window
and over the roof; they saw it down below, and they all ran as fast as they could to help me;
the poor old crone they believed would be burned; there was not one who did not come to help
me. I heard them come, and I heard, too, such a rustling in the air, and then a thundering
as of heavy cannon-shots, for the spring-flood was loosening the ice, and it all broke up.
But the folk were all come off it to the trenches, where the sparks were flying about me; I
had them all safe. But I could not bear the cold and the fright, and that is how I have come
up here. Can the gates of heaven be opened to such a poor old creature as I? I have no house
now at the trenches; where can I go, if they refuse me here?"

Then the gates opened, and the Angel bade poor Margaret enter. As she passed the threshold,
she dropped a blade of straw--straw from her bed--that bed which she had set alight to save
the people on the ice, and lo! it had changed into gold! dazzling gold! yet flexible withal,
and twisting into various forms.

"Look, that was what yonder poor woman brought," said the Angel. "But what dost thou bring?
Truly, I know well that thou hast done nothing, not even made bricks. It is a pity thou canst
not go back again to fetch at least one brick--not that it is good for anything when it is
made, no, but because anything, the very least, done with a good will, is Something. But thou
mayst not go back, and I can do nothing for thee."

Then poor Margaret pleaded for him thus: "His brother gave me all the bricks and broken bits
wherewith I built my poor little house--that was a great kindness toward a poor old soul like
me! May not all those bits and fragments, put together, be reckoned as one brick for him? It
will be an act of mercy; he needs it, and this is the home of mercy."

"To thy brother, whom thou didst despise," said the Angel, "to him whose calling, in respect
of worldly honor, was the lowest, shalt thou owe this mite of heavenly coin. Thou shalt not
be sent away; thou shalt have leave to stand here without, and think over thy manner of life
down below. But within thou canst not enter, until thou hast done something that is good--Something!"

"I fancy I could have expressed that better," thought the critic; but he did not say it aloud,
and that was already--Something!

THE JEWISH GIRL

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

There was in the charity-school among the other children a little Jewish girl, so clever and
good; the best, in fact, of them all; but one of the lessons she could not attend--the one
when religion was taught, for this was a Christian school.

Then she held her geography book before her to learn from it, or she did her sum; but the lesson
was quickly learned, the sum was soon done; the book might be there open before her, but she
did not read, she was listening; and the teacher soon noticed that she was attending more intently,
even, than any of the rest.

"Read your book," the teacher urged, mildly and earnestly; but she looked at him with her black
sparkling eyes, and when he put questions to her also, she knew more than all the others. She
had listened, understood, and kept his words.

Her father was a poor honest man, and when first he brought her to the school, he had made
the stipulation that she should not be taught the Christian faith. To let her go away during
the Scripture lesson might, however, have given offence, and raised thoughts of various kinds
in the minds of the other children, and so she stayed; but this could not go on any longer.

The teacher went to her father, and told him that either he must take his daughter away from
the school, or consent to her becoming a Christian.

"I cannot bear to see those burning eyes, that yearning, that thirst of the soul, as it were,
after the words of the gospel," said the teacher.

And the father burst into tears. "I know but little myself of our own religion, but her mother
was a daughter of Israel, of strong and firm faith, and on her dying bed I made a vow that
our child should never receive Christian baptism; that vow I must keep; it is to me as a convenant
with God."

And the little Jewish girl was taken away from the school of the Christians.

Years rolled by.

In one of the smallest towns of Jutland served as maid in a plain burgher's house a poor girl
of the Mosaic faith; this was Sarah. Her hair was black as ebony, her eyes dark, and yet brilliant
and full of light, such as you see among the daughters of the East; and the expression in the
countenance of the grown-up girl was still that of the child who sat on the school-room bench,
listening with thoughtful and wistful eye.

Each Sunday sounded from the church the pealing of the organ to the song of the congregation,
and the tones floated over the street, into the house, where the Jewish girl attended to her
work, diligent and faithful in her calling. "Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy," this
was her law; but her Sabbath was a day of labor to the Christians, and only in her heart could
she keep it holy; and that was not enough for her. But when the thought arose in her soul,
"What matters it before God about days and hours?" and on the Sunday of the Christians her
hour of devotion remained undisturbed. If, then, the organ's peal and the psalm-tunes reached
over to her, where she stood in the kitchen, even this became a quiet and consecrated spot.
She would read then the treasure and peculiar property of her people, the Old Testament, and
this alone; for she kept deep in her heart what her father had told the teacher and herself
when she was taken from the school--the vow made to her dying mother, "that Sarah should not
be baptized, not forsake the faith of her fathers." The New Testament was, and should remain
forever, a sealed book to her; and yet she knew much of it; it shone to her through the recollections
of childhood.

One evening she sat in a corner of the parlor, and heard her master reading aloud. She might
listen, she thought, for this was not the gospel; nay! 'twas out of an old story-book he read:
she might stay. And he read of a Hungarian knight, taken captive by a Turkish pasha, who had
him yoked with oxen to the plow; and he was driven with lashes, and had to suffer pain and
ignominy beyond endurance.

But at home the knight's wife sold all her jewels, and mortgaged castle and lands, and his
friends contributed large sums, for enormous was the ransom demanded; still it was raised,
and he was delivered out of thraldom and disgrace. Sick and suffering, he came to his home.
But soon resounded far and near the summons to war against the foe of Christianity. The sick
man heard the call, and had neither peace nor rest any longer; he was placed on his charger;
the blood came again to his cheeks, his strength seemed to return, and he rode forth to victory.
The very pasha who had him yoked to the plow, and made him suffer pain and scorn, became his
captive. He was carried home to the castle dungeon, but before his first hour there had elapsed
the knight came, and asked the prisoner, "What dost thou think awaiteth thee?"

"I know," said the Turk; "retribution."

"Yes, the Christian's retribution," said the knight. "Christ taught us to forgive our enemies,
to love our fellow-men. God is love! Depart in peace to thy home and thy dear ones, and be
gentle and good to those who suffer."

Then the prisoner burst into tears.

"How could I believe such a thing could be possible? Torments and sufferings I looked forward
to as a certainty, and I took poison, which must kill me; within a few hours I shall die. There
is no remedy. But before I die make known to me the faith that embraces such an amount of love
and mercy; it is great and divine! In it let me die; let me die a Christian!" and his prayer
was granted.

This was the legend, the history which was read; they all listened to it with attention, but
deepest sank it into the heart of her who sat alone in the corner--the servant maid--Sarah,
the Jewess. Heavy tears stood in her black sparkling eyes while she sat here, as once on the
school-bench, and felt the greatness of the gospel. The tears rolled down her cheeks.

"Let not my child become a Christian!" were the mother's last words on her dying bed, and they
rang through her soul with those of the law, "Honor thy father and thy mother!"

"Still I have not been baptized! they call me 'the Jewess'; the neighbors' boys did so, hooting
at me last Sunday as I stood outside the open church door, and looked in where the altar-lights
burned and the congregation sang. Ever since my school-days, up to this hour--even though I
have tried to close my eyes against it--a power from Christianity has like a sunbeam shone
into my heart. But, my mother, I will not give thee sorrow in thy grave! I will not betray
the vow my father made to thee; I will not read the Christian's Bible. Have not I the God of
my fathers? On Him let me rest my head!"

And years rolled by.

The husband died, the wife was left behind in hard plight. Now she could no longer afford to
have a maid; but Sarah did not forsake the widow; she became her help in distress, and kept
the household together; she worked till late in the night, and got bread for the house by the
labor of her hands. There were no near relatives to help a family where the mother grew weaker
each day, lingering for months on a bed of sickness. Sarah, gentle and pious, watched, nursed,
and worked, and became the blessing of the poor home.

"There lies the Bible," said the invalid; "read to me this wearisome evening; I sadly want
to hear God's word."

And Sarah bowed her head; she folded her hands round the Bible, which she opened, and read
aloud to the sick woman; now and again the tears welled forth, but her eyes shone clearer,
even as the darkness cleared from her soul. "Mother, thy child shall not receive the baptism
of the Christians, shall not be named in their communion; in this we will be united here on
earth, but above this there is--is a greater unity--even in God. 'He goes with us beyond the
grave'; 'It is He who pours water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground.'
I understand it! I do not know myself how I came to it! through Him it is--in Him--Christ!"

And she trembled as she named the holy name; a baptism of fire streamed through her, stronger
than her frame could bear, and she bent down, more powerless even than she by whom she watched.

"Poor Sarah!" they said; "she is worn out with labor and watching."

They took her to the hospital for the poor; there she died; thence she was borne to her grave;
not to the Christians' graveyard; that was not the place for the Jewish girl: no, outside,
by the wall, her grave was dug.

And God's sun, which shone upon the graves of the Christians, shines also upon that of the
Jewish girl; and the hymns which are sung by the graves of the Christians resound by her grave
beyond the wall; thither, too, reaches the promise: "There is resurrection in Christ, in Him,
the Saviour, who said to his disciples, 'John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be baptized
with the Holy Ghost.'"

THE STORY OF A MOTHER

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

A mother sat by her little child: she was very sorrowful, and feared that it would die. Its
little face was pale, and its eyes were closed. The child drew its breath with difficulty,
and sometimes so deeply as if it were sighing; and then the mother looked more sorrowfully
than before on the little creature.

Then there was a knock at the door, and a poor old man came in, wrapped up in something that
looked like a great horse-cloth, for that keeps warm; and he required it, for it was cold winter.
Without, everything was covered with ice and snow, and the wind blew so sharply that it cut
one's face.

And as the old man trembled with cold, and the child was quiet for a moment, the mother went
and put some beer on the stove in a little pot, to warm it for him. The old man sat down and
rocked the cradle, and the mother seated herself on an old chair by him, looked at her sick
child that drew its breath so painfully, and seized the little hand.

"You think I shall keep it, do you not?" she asked. "The good God will not take it from me!"

And the old man--he was Death--nodded in such a strange way, that it might just as well mean
yes as no. And the mother cast down her eyes, and tears rolled down her cheeks. Her head became
heavy: for three days and three nights she had not closed her eyes; and now she slept, but
only for a minute; then she started up and shivered with cold.

"What is that?" she asked, and looked round on all sides; but the old man was gone, and her
little child was gone; he had taken it with him. And there in the corner the old clock was
humming and whirring; the heavy leaden weight ran down to the floor--plump!--and the clock stopped.

But the poor mother rushed out of the house crying for her child.

Out in the snow sat a woman in long black garments, and she said, "Death has been with you
in your room; I saw him hasten away with your child: he strides faster than the wind, and never
brings back what he has taken away."

"Only tell me which way he has gone," said the mother. "Tell me the way, and I will find him."

"I know him," said the woman in the black garments; "but before I tell you, you must sing me
all the songs that you have sung to your child. I love those songs; I have heard them before.
I am Night, and I saw your tears when you sang them."

"I will sing them all, all!" said the mother. "But do not detain me, that I may overtake him,
and find my child."

But Night sat dumb and still. Then the mother wrung her hands, and sang and wept. And there
were many songs, but yet more tears, and then Night said, "Go to the right into the dark fir
wood; for I saw Death take that path with your little child."

Deep in the forest there was a cross road, and she did not know which way to take. There stood
a Blackthorn Bush, with not a leaf nor a blossom upon it; for it was in the cold winter time,
and icicles hung from the twigs.

"Have you not seen Death go by, with my little child?"

"Yes," replied the Bush, "but I shall not tell you which way he went unless you warm me on
your bosom. I'm freezing to death here; I'm turning to ice."

And she pressed the Blackthorn Bush to her bosom, quite close, that it might be well warmed.
And the thorns pierced into her flesh, and her blood oozed out in great drops. But the Blackthorn
shot out fresh green leaves, and blossomed in the dark winter night: so warm is the heart of
a sorrowing mother! And the Blackthorn Bush told her the way that she should go.

Then she came to a great Lake, on which there were neither ships nor boat. The Lake was not
frozen enough to carry her, nor sufficiently open to allow her to wade through, and yet she
must cross it if she was to find her child. Then she laid herself down to drink the Lake; and
that was impossible for any one to do. But the sorrowing mother thought that perhaps a miracle
might be wrought.

"No, that can never succeed," said the Lake. "Let us rather see how we can agree. I'm fond
of collecting pearls, and your eyes are the two clearest I have ever seen: if you will weep
them out into me I will carry you over into the great greenhouse, where Death lives and cultivates
flowers and trees; each of these is a human life."

"Oh, what would I not give to get my child!" said the afflicted mother; and she wept yet more,
and her eyes fell into the depths of the Lake, and became two costly pearls. But the Lake lifted
her up, as if she sat in a swing, and she was wafted to the opposite shore, where stood a wonderful
house, miles in length. One could not tell if it was a mountain containing forests and caves,
or a place that had been built. But the poor mother could not see it, for she had wept her
eyes out.

"Where shall I find Death, who went away with my little child?" she asked.

"He has not arrived here yet," said an old gray-haired Woman, who was going about and watching
the hothouse of Death. "How have you found your way here, and who helped you?"

"The good God has helped me," she replied. "He is merciful, and you will be merciful too. Where
shall I find my little child?"

"I do not know it," said the old Woman, "and you cannot see. Many flowers and trees have faded
this night, and Death will soon come and transplant them. You know very well that every human
being has his tree of life, or his flower of life, just as each is arranged. They look like
other plants, but their hearts beat. Children's hearts can beat too. Think of this. Perhaps
you may recognize the beating of your child's heart. But what will you give me if I tell you
what more you must do?"

"I have nothing more to give," said the afflicted mother. "But I will go for you to the ends
of the earth."

"I have nothing for you to do there," said the old Woman, "but you can give me your long black
hair. You must know yourself that it is beautiful, and it pleases me. You can take my white
hair for it, and that is always something."

"Do you ask for nothing more?" asked she. "I will give you that gladly." And she gave her beautiful
hair, and received in exchange the old Woman's white hair.

And then they went into the great hothouse of Death, where flowers and trees were growing marvellously
intertwined. There stood the fine hyacinths under glass bells, some quite fresh, others somewhat
sickly; water snakes were twining about them, and black crabs clung tightly to the stalks.
There stood gallant palm-trees, oaks, and plantains, and parsley and blooming thyme. Each tree
and flower had its name; each was a human life: the people were still alive, one in China,
another in Greenland, scattered about in the world. There were great trees thrust into little
pots, so that they stood quite crowded, and were nearly bursting the pots; there was also many
a little weakly flower in rich earth, with moss round about it, cared for and tended. But the
sorrowful mother bent down over all the smallest plants, and heard the human heart beating
in each, and out of millions she recognized that of her child.

"That is it!" she cried, and stretched out her hands over a little crocus flower, which hung
down quite sick and pale.

"Do not touch the flower," said the old dame; "but place yourself here; and when Death comes--I
expect him every minute--then don't let him pull up the plant, but threaten him that you will
do the same to the other plants; then he'll be frightened. He has to account for them all;
not one may be pulled up till he receives commission from Heaven."

And all at once there was an icy cold rush through the hall, and the blind mother felt that
Death was arriving.

"How did you find your way hither?" said he. "How have you been able to come quicker than I?"

"I am a mother," she answered.

And Death stretched out his long hands toward the little delicate flower; but she kept her
hands tight about it, and held it fast; and yet she was full of anxious care lest he should
touch one of the leaves. Then Death breathed upon her hands, and she felt that his breath was
colder than the icy wind; and her hands sank down powerless.

"You can do nothing against me," said Death.

"But the merciful God can," she replied.

"I only do what He commands," said Death. "I am his gardener. I take all his trees and flowers,
and transplant them into the great Paradise gardens, in the unknown land. But how they will
flourish there, and how it is there, I may not tell you."

"Give me back my child," said the mother; and she implored and wept. All at once she grasped
two pretty flowers with her two hands, and called to Death, "I'll tear off all your flowers,
for I am in despair."

"Do not touch them," said Death. "You say you are so unhappy, and now you would make another
mother just as unhappy!"

"Another mother?" said the poor woman; and she let the flowers go.

"There are your eyes for you," said Death. "I have fished them up out of the Lake; they gleamed
up quite brightly. I did not know that they were yours. Take them back--they are clearer now
than before--and then look down into the deep well close by. I will tell you the names of the
two flowers you wanted to pull up, and you will see what you were about to frustrate and destroy."

And she looked down into the well, and it was a happiness to see how one of them became a blessing
to the world, how much joy and gladness she diffused around her. And the woman looked at the
life of the other, and it was made up of care and poverty, misery and woe.

"Both are the will of God," said Death.

"Which of them is the flower of misfortune, and which the blessed one?" she asked.

"That I may not tell you," answered Death; "but this much you shall hear, that one of these
two flowers is that of your child. It was the fate of your child that you saw--the future of
your own child."

Then the mother screamed aloud for terror.

"Which of them belongs to my child? Tell me that. Release the innocent child! Let my child
free from all that misery! Rather carry it away! Carry it into God's kingdom! Forget my tears,
forget my entreaties, and all that I have done!"

"I do not understand you," said Death. "Will you have your child back, or shall I carry it
to that place that you know not?"

Then the mother wrung her hands, and fell on her knees, and prayed to the good God.

"Hear me not when I pray against Thy will, which is at all times the best! Hear me not! hear
me not!" And she let her head sink down on her bosom.

And Death went away with her child into the unknown land.

THE LITTLE MATCH GIRL

By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

It was terribly cold; it snowed and was already almost dark, and evening came on, the last
evening of the year. In the cold and gloom a poor little girl, bareheaded and barefoot, was
walking through the streets. When she left her own house she certainly had had slippers on;
but of what use were they? They were very big slippers, and her mother had used them till then,
so big were they. The little maid lost them as she slipped across the road, where two carriages
were rattling by terribly fast. One slipper was not to be found again, and a boy had seized
the other, and run away with it. He thought he could use it very well as a cradle, some day
when he had children of his own. So now the little girl went with her little naked feet, which
were quite red and blue with the cold. In an old apron she carried a number of matches, and
a bundle of them in her hand. No one had bought anything of her all day, and no one had given
her a farthing.

Shivering with cold and hunger she crept along, a picture of misery, poor little girl! The
snowflakes covered her long fair hair, which fell in pretty curls over her neck; but she did
not think of that now. In all the windows lights were shining, and there was a glorious smell
of roast goose, for it was New Year's Eve. Yes, she thought of that!

In a corner formed by two houses, one of which projected beyond the other, she sat down, cowering.
She had drawn up her little feet, but she was still colder, and she did not dare to go home,
for she had sold no matches, and did not bring a farthing of money. From her father she would
certainly receive a beating, and besides, it was cold at home, for they had nothing over them
but a roof through which the wind whistled, though the largest rents had been stopped with
straw and rags.

Her little hands were almost benumbed with the cold. Ah, a match might do her good, if she
could only draw one from the bundle, and rub it against the wall, and warm her hands at it.
She drew one out. R-r-atch! how it spluttered and burned! It was a warm bright flame, like
a little candle, when she held her hands over it; it was a wonderful little light! It really
seemed to the little girl as if she sat before a great polished stove, with bright brass feet
and a brass cover. How the fire burned! how comfortable it was! but the little flame went out,
the stove vanished, and she had only the remains of the burned match in her hand.

A second was rubbed against the wall. It burned up, and when the light fell upon the wall it
became transparent like a thin veil, and she could see through it into the room. On the table
a snow-white cloth was spread; upon it stood a shining dinner service; the roast goose smoked
gloriously, stuffed with apples and dried plums. And what was still more splendid to behold,
the goose hopped down from the dish, and waddled along the floor, with a knife and fork in
its breast, to the little girl. Then the match went out, and only the thick, damp, cold wall
was before her. She lighted another match. Then she was sitting under a beautiful Christmas
tree; it was greater and more ornamented than the one she had seen through the glass door at
the rich merchant's. Thousands of candles burned upon the green branches, and colored pictures
like those in the print shops looked down upon them. The little girl stretched forth her hand
toward them; then the match went out. The Christmas lights mounted higher. She saw them now
as stars in the sky: one of them fell down, forming a long line of fire.

"Now some one is dying," thought the little girl, for her old grandmother, the only person
who had loved her, and who was now dead, had told her that when a star fell down a soul mounted
up to God.

She rubbed another match against the wall; it became bright again, and in the brightness the
old grandmother stood clear and shining, mild and lovely.

"Grandmother!" cried the child, "O! take me with you! I know you will go when the match is
burned out. You will vanish like the warm fire, the warm food, and the great, glorious Christmas
tree!"

And she hastily rubbed the whole bundle of matches, for she wished to hold her grandmother
fast. And the matches burned with such a glow that it became brighter than in the middle of
the day; grandmother had never been so large or so beautiful. She took the little girl in her
arms, and both flew in brightness and joy above the earth, very, very high, and up there was
neither cold, nor hunger, nor care--they were with God.

But in the corner, leaning against the wall, sat the poor girl with red cheeks and smiling
mouth, frozen to death on the last evening of the Old Year. The New Year's sun rose upon a
little corpse! The child sat there, stiff and cold, with the matches, of which one bundle was
burned. "She wanted to warm herself," the people said. No one imagined what a beautiful thing
she had seen, and in what glory she had gone in with her grandmother to the New Year's Day.

FLOWERS WITHOUT FRUIT

Prune thou thy words; the thoughts control
  That o'er thee swell and throng:--
They will condense within thy soul,
  And change to purpose strong.

But he who lets his feelings run
  In soft luxurious flow,
Shrinks when hard service must be done,
  And faints at every woe.

Content I live--this is my stay;
  I seek no more than may suffice:
I press to bear no haughty sway;
   Look--what I lack, my mind supplies!
Lo! thus I triumph like a king,
Content with that my mind doth bring.

I see how plenty surfeits oft,
   And hasty climbers soonest fall;
I see how those that sit aloft
   Mishap doth threaten most of all;
These get with toil, and keep with fear:
Such cares my mind could never bear.

I laugh not at another's loss;
   I grudge not at another's gain;
No worldly wave my mind can toss;
   I brook that is another's pain.
I fear no foe: I scorn no friend:
I dread no death: I fear no end.

Some have too much, yet still they crave;
   I little have, yet seek no more:
They are but poor, though much they have,
   And I am rich, with little store.
They poor, I rich: they beg, I give:
They lack, I lend: they pine, I live.

I wish but what I have at will:
   I wander not to seek for more:
I like the plain; I climb no hill:
   In greatest storm I sit on shore,
And laugh at those that toil in vain,
To get what must be lost again.
--This is my choice; for why?--I find
No wealth is like a quiet mind.

--Unknown

THE SEARCH FOR PEACE

Sweet Peace, where dost thou dwell? I humbly crave,
    Let me once know.
  I sought thee in a secret cave,
    And ask'd, if Peace were there?
A hollow wind did seem to answer, "No:--
    Go seek elsewhere."

I did; and going did a rainbow note:
    Surely, thought I,
  This is the lace of Peace's coat:
    I will search out the matter.
But while I look'd, the clouds immediately
    Did break and scatter.

Then went I to a garden, and did spy
    A gallant flower,
  The Crown Imperial: Sure, said I,
    Peace at the root must dwell.
But when I digg'd, I saw a worm devour
    What show'd so well.

At length I met a reverend good old man:
    Whom when for Peace
  I did demand, he thus began:
    "There was a Prince of old
At Salem dwelt, who lived with good increase
    Of flock and fold.

"He sweetly lived; yet sweetness did not save
    His life from foes.
  But after death, out of his grave
    There sprang twelve stalks of wheat:
Which many wondering at, got some of those
    To plant and set.

"It prosper'd strangely, and did soon disperse
    Through all the earth:
  For they that taste it do rehearse,
    That virtue lies therein;
A secret virtue, bringing peace and mirth
  By flight of sin.

"Take of this grain, which in my garden grows,
    And grows for you;
  Make bread of it:--and that repose
    And peace, which everywhere
With so much earnestness you do pursue,
    Is only there."

--G. Herbert

A SONG OF PRAISE

To God, ye choir above, begin
  A hymn so loud and strong
That all the universe may hear
  And join the grateful song.

Praise Him, thou sun, Who dwells unseen
  Amidst transcendent light,
Where thy refulgent orb would seem
  A spot, as dark as night.

Thou silver moon, 'ye host of stars,
  The universal song
Through the serene and silent night
  To listening worlds prolong.

Sing Him, ye distant worlds and suns,
  From whence no travelling ray
Hath yet to us, through ages past,
  Had time to make its way.

Assist, ye raging storms, and bear
  On rapid wings His praise,
From north to south, from east to west,
  Through heaven, and earth, and seas.

Exert your voice, ye furious fires
  That rend the watery cloud,
And thunder to this nether world
  Your Maker's words aloud.

In foreign realms, and lands remote,
  Supported by Thy care,
Through burning climes I pass'd unhurt,
  And breathed in tainted air.

Thy mercy sweeten'd every soil,
  Made every region please;
The hoary Alpine hills it warm'd,
  And smoothed the Tyrrhene seas.

Think, O my soul, devoutly think,
  How, with affrighted eyes,
Thou saw'st the wide-extended deep
  In all its horrors rise.

Confusion dwelt in every face,
  And fear in every heart;
When waves on waves, and gulfs on gulfs,
  O'ercame the pilot's art.

Yet then from all my griefs, O Lord,
  Thy mercy set me free;
Whilst, in the confidence of prayer,
  My soul took hold on Thee.

For though in dreadful whirls we hung
  High on the broken wave,
I knew Thou wert not slow to hear,
  Nor impotent to save.

--The storm was laid; the winds retired,
  Obedient to Thy will;
The sea that roar'd at Thy command,
  At Thy command was still.

--J. Addison

TRUE GREATNESS

The fairest action of our human life
  Is scorning to revenge an injury:
For who forgives without a further strife
  His adversary's heart to him doth tie:
And 'tis a firmer conquest truly said
  To win the heart, than overthrow the head.

If we a worthy enemy do find,
  To yield to worth, it must be nobly done:--
But if of baser metal be his mind,
  In base revenge there is no honor won.
Who would a worthy courage overthrow?
  And who would wrestle with a worthless foe?

We say our hearts are great, and cannot yield;
  Because they cannot yield, it proves them poor:
Great hearts are task'd beyond their power but seld:
  The weakest lion will the loudest roar.
Low is my porch, as is my fate:
  Both void of state;
And yet the threshold of my door
  Is worn by th' poor,
Who thither come, and freely get
  Good words, or meat.
Like as my parlor, so my hall
   And kitchen's small;
A little buttery, and therein
   A little bin,
Which keeps my little loaf of bread
   Unchipt, unflead;
Some brittle sticks of thorn or briar
   Make me a fire,
Close by whose living coal I sit,
   And glow like it.
Lord, I confess too, when I dine,
   The pulse is thine,
And all those other bits that be
   There placed by thee;
The worts, the purslain, and the mess
   Of water-cress,
Which of thy kindness thou hast sent;
   And my content
Makes those, and my beloved beet,
   To be more sweet.
  And I alone sit lingering here!
Their very memory is fair and bright,
  And my sad thoughts doth clear.

It glows and glitters in my cloudy breast
  Like stars upon some gloomy grove,
Or those faint beams in which this hill is drest
  After the Sun's remove.

I see them walking in an air of glory,
  Whose light doth trample on my days;
My days, which are at best but dull and hoary,
  Mere glimmerings and decays.

O holy hope! and high humility!
  High as the Heavens above!
These are your walks, and you have show'd them me,
  To kindle my cold love.

Dear, beauteous Death; the jewel of the just!
  Shining nowhere but in the dark;
What mysteries do lie beyond thy dust,
  Could man outlook that mark!

He that hath found some fledged birdes nest may know
  At first sight if the bird be flown;
But what fair dell or grove he sings in now,
  That is to him unknown.

And yet, as Angels in some brighter dreams
  Call to the soul when man doth sleep,
So some strange thoughts transcend our wonted themes,
  And into glory peep.

--H. Vaughan

THE LAND OF DREAMS

"Awake, awake, my little boy! Thou wast thy mother's only joy; Why dost thou weep in thy gentle
sleep? O wake! thy father does thee keep."

--"O what land is the Land of Dreams? What are its mountains, and what are its streams? O father!
I saw my mother there Among the lilies by waters fair.

"Among the lambs, clothed in white, She walk'd with her Thomas in sweet delight: I wept for
joy; like a dove I mourn:-- O when shall I again return!"

--"Dear child! I also by pleasant streams Have wander'd all night in the Land of Dreams:--
But, though calm and warm the waters wide, I could not get to the other side."

--"Father, O father! what do we here, In this land of unbelief and fear?-- The Land of Dreams
is better far, Above the light of the morning star."

--W. Blake

ADORATION

Sweet is the dew that falls betimes,
And drops upon the leafy limes;
  Sweet Hermon's fragrant air:
Sweet is the lily's silver bell,
And sweet the wakeful tapers smell
  That watch for early prayer.

Sweet the young nurse, with love intense,
Which smiles o'er sleeping innocence;
  Sweet when the lost arrive;
Sweet the musician's ardor beats,
While his vague mind's in quest of sweets,
  The choicest flowers to hive.

Strong is the horse upon his speed;
Strong in pursuit the rapid glede,
  Which makes at once his game:
Strong the tall ostrich on the ground;
Strong through the turbulent profound
  Shoots xiphias to his aim.

Strong is the lion--like a coal
His eyeball--like a bastion's mole
  His chest against the foes:
Strong the gier-eagle on his sail;
Strong against tide the enormous whale
  Emerges as he goes.

But stronger still, in earth and air,
And in sea, the man of prayer,
  And far beneath the tide:
And in the seat to Faith assign'd,
Where ask is, have; where seek is, find;
  Where knock is, open wide.

--C. Smart