WIKKEY

A SCRAP

By YAM

NEW YORK E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY 31 WEST TWENTY-THIRD STREET 1888

WIKKEY.

A SCRAP.

CHAPTER I.

Mr. Ruskin has it that we are all kings and queens, possessing realms and treasuries. However
this may be, it is certain that there are souls born to reign over the hearts of their fellows,
kings walking about the world in broad-cloth and fustian, shooting-jackets, ulsters, and what
not--swaying hearts at will, though it may be all unconscious of their power; and only the
existence of some such psychological fact as this will account for the incident which I am
about to relate.

Lawrence Granby was, beyond all doubt, one of these royal ones, his kingdom being co-extensive
with the circle of his acquaintance--not that he was in the least aware of the power he exercised
over all who came in contact with him, as he usually attributed the fact that he "got on" with
people "like a house on fire" to the good qualities possessed by "other fellows." Even the
comforts by which he was surrounded in his lodging by his landlady and former nurse, Mrs. Evans,
he considered as the result of the dame's innate geniality, though the opinion entertained
of her by underlings and by those who met her in the way of business was scarcely as favorable.
He was a handsome fellow too, this Lawrence, six feet three, with a curly brown head and the
frankest blue eyes that ever looked pityingly, almost wonderingly, on the small and weak things
of the earth.

And the boy, Wikkey Whiston, was a crossing-sweeper. I am sorry for this, for I fancy people
are becoming a little tired of the race, in story-books at least, but as he was a crossing-sweeper
it cannot be helped. It would not mend matters much to invest him with some other profession,
especially as it was while sitting broom in hand, under the lamp-post at one end of his crossing
that he first saw Lawrence Granby, and if he had never seen Lawrence Granby I should not be
writing about him at all.

It was a winter's morning in 1869, bright as it is possible for such a morning to be in London,
but piercingly cold, and Wikkey had brushed and re-brushed the pathway--which scarcely needed
it, the east wind having already done half the work--just to put some feeling of warmth into
his thin frame before seating himself in his usual place beneath the lamp-post. There were
a good many passers-by, for it was the time of day at which clerks and business men are on
their way to their early occupation, and the boy scanned each face in the fashion that had
become habitual to him in his life-long look out for coppers. Presently he saw approaching
a peculiarly tall figure, and looked at it curiously, tracing its height upward from his own
stunted point of view till he encountered the cheery glance of Lawrence Granby. Wikkey was
strangely fascinated by the blue eyes looking down from so far above him, and scarcely knowing
what he did, he rose and went shambling on alongside of the young man, his eyes riveted on
his face. Lawrence, however, being almost unconscious of the boy's presence till his attention
was drawn to him by the friend with whom he was walking, who said, laughing and pointing to
Wikkey, "Friend of yours, eh? Seems to know you." Then he looked down again and met the curious,
intent stare fixed upon him.

"Well, small boy! I hope you'll know me again," he said.

To which Wikkey promptly returned in the shrill, aggressively aggrieved voice of the London
Arab: "I reckon it don't do you no harm, guvner; a cat may look at a king."

Lawrence laughed, and threw him a copper, saying, "You are a cheeky little fellow," and went
on his way.

Wikkey stood looking after him, and then picked up the penny, holding it between his cold hands,
as though it possessed some warming properties, and muttering: "It seems fur to warm a chap
to look at him;" and then he sat down once more, still pondering over the apparition that had
so fascinated him. Oddly enough the imputation of cheekiness rankled in his mind in a most
unusual fashion--not that Wikkey entertained the faintest objection to "cheek" in the abstract,
and there were occasions on which any backwardness in its use would betray a certain meanness
of spirit: for instance to the natural enemy of the race--the Bobby--it was only right to exhibit
as much of the article as was compatible with safety. Indeed, the inventor of a fresh sarcasm,
biting in its nature yet artfully shrouded in language which might be safely addressed to an
arm of the law was considered by his fellows in the light of a public benefactor. The errand-boy
also, who, because he carried a parcel or basket and happened to wear shoes, thought himself
at liberty to cast obloquy on those whose profession was of a more desultory nature, and whose
clothing was scantier--he must be held in check and his pride lowered by sarcasms yet more
biting and far less veiled. These things were right and proper, but Wikkey felt uncomfortable
under an imputation of "cheekiness" from the "big chap" who had so taken his fancy, and wondered
at his own feeling. That evening, as Lawrence walked briskly homeward, after his day's work,
he became aware of the pale, wizen face again looking up into his through the dusk, and of
a shrill voice at his side.

"I say, guvner, you hadn't no call fur to call me cheeky; I didn't mean no cheek, only I likes
the look of yer; it seems fur to warm a chap."

Lawrence stopped this time and looked curiously at the boy, at the odd, keen eyes gazing at
him so hungrily.

"You are a strange lad if you are not a cheeky one," he said. "Why do you like the look of me?"

"I dunno," said Wikkey, and then he repeated his formula, "it seems to warm a chap."

"You must be precious cold if that will do it, poor little lad. What's your name?"

"Wikkey."

"Wikkey? Is that all?"

"No, I've another name about me somewheres, but I can't just mind of it. They allus calls me
Wikkey."

"Poor lad!" Lawrence said again, looking at the thin skeleton frame, sadly visible through
the tattered clothing. "Poor little chap! it's sharp weather for such a mite as you. There!
get something to warm you." And feeling in his pocket he drew out half-a-crown, which he slipped
into Wikkey's hand, and then turned and walked away. Wikkey stood looking after him with two
big tears rolling down his dirty face; it was so long since any one had called him a poor little
chap, and he repeated the words over and over as he threaded his way in the darkness to the
dreary lodging usually called "Skimmidges," and kept by a grim woman of that name.

"It seems fur to warm a chap," he said again, as he crept under the wretched blanket which
Mrs. Skimmidge designated and charged for as a bed.

From that day forward Wikkey was possessed by one idea--that of watching for the approach of
the "big chap," following his steps along the crossing, and then, if possible, getting a word
or look on which to live until the next blissful moment should arrive. Nor was he often disappointed,
for Lawrence, having recently obtained employment in a certain government office, and Wikkey's
crossing happening to lie on the shortest way from his own abode to the scene of his daily
labor, he seldom varied his route, and truth to say, the strange little figure, always watching
so eagerly for his appearance, began to have an attraction for him. He wondered what the boy
meant by it, and at first, naturally connected the idea of coppers with Wikkey's devotion;
but he soon came to see that it went deeper than that, for with a curious instinct of delicacy
which the lad would probably have been quite unable to explain to himself, he would sometimes
hang back as Lawrence reached the pavement, and nod his funny "Good night, guvner," from midway
on his crossing, in a way that precluded any suspicion of mercenary motives.

But at last there came a season of desolation very nearly verging on despair. Day after day
for a week--ten days--a fortnight--did Wikkey watch in vain for his hero. Poor lad, he could
not know that Lawrence had been suddenly summoned to the country, and had arranged for a substitute
to take his duty for a fortnight; and the terrible thought haunted the child that the big chap
had changed his route, perhaps even out of dislike to his--Wikkey's--attentions, and he should
never see his face again. The idea was horrible--so horrible that as it became strengthened
by each day's disappointment, and at last took possession of the boy's whole soul, it sapped
away what little vitality there was in the small, fragile frame, leaving it an easy prey to
the biting wind which caught his breath away as he crept shivering around the street corners,
and to the frost which clutched the thinly-clad body. The cough, which Wikkey scarcely remembered
ever being without, increased to such violence as to shake him from head to foot, and his breathing
became hard and painful; yet still he clung to his crossing with the pertinacity of despair,
scanning each figure that approached with eager, hungry eyes. He had laid out part of Lawrence's
half-crown on a woolen muffler, which at first had seemed a marvel of comfort, but the keen
north-easter soon found its way even through that, and the hot pies on which he expended the
rest did not warm him for very long; there came a day, too, when he could only hold his pie
between his frozen hands, dreamily wondering why he felt no wish to eat it, why the sight of
it made him feel so sick. A dreadful day that was. Mechanically, Wikkey from time to time,
swept his way slowly over the crossing, but the greater part of the time he spent sitting at
the foot of the lamp-post at either end, coughing and shivering, and now and then dozing and
starting up in terror lest the "big chap" should have passed by during his brief unconsciousness. Now,
what plant suggested this almost indispensable form of ornament, which ranks along with the acanthus
and palmetta, and which has also become so important by a certain fusion with the structural
laws of both?

We meet with organism of the form in the family of the Araceæ, or aroid plants. An enveloping leaf
(bract), called the spathe, which is often brilliantly colored, surrounds the florets, or fruits,
that are disposed upon a spadix. Even the older writers--Theophrastus, Dioscorides, Galen, and
Pliny--devote a considerable amount of attention to several species of this interesting family,
especially to the value of their swollen stems as a food-stuff, to
their uses in medicine, etc. Some species of Arum were eaten, and
even nowadays the value of the swollen stems of some species of the
family causes them to be cultivated, as, for instance, in Egypt and
India, etc. (the so-called Portland sago, Portland Island arrowroot,
is prepared from the swollen stems of Arum maculatum).

In contrast with the smooth or softly undulating outlines of the
spathe of Mediterranean Araceæ, one species stands out in relief,
in which the sharply-marked fold of the spathe almost corresponds
to the forms of the ornaments which we are discussing.

It is Dracunculus vulgaris, and derives its name from its stem, which is spotted like a snake.
This plant, which is pretty widely distributed in olive woods and
in the river valleys of the countries bordering on the Mediterranean,
was employed to a considerable extent in medicine by the ancients
(and is so still nowadays, according to Von Heldreich, in Greece).

It was, besides, the object of particular regard, because it was said not only to heal snake-bite,
but the mere fact of having it about one was supposed to keep away
snakes, who were said altogether to avoid the places where it grew.

 "Wikkey,"
he said, at last, "you must come home with me;" and he took one of the claw-like hands in his
warmly gloved one, and walked on slowly, out of compassion for the child's feeble limbs: even
then, however, they soon gave way, and Wikkey once more slid down crying on the pavement. There
was nothing for it but for Lawrence to gather up the child in his strong arms, and stride on,
wondering whether after all it were not too late to revive the frozen-out life. For one blissful
moment Wikkey felt himself held close and warm, and his head nestled against the woolly ulster,
and then all was blank.

To say that Lawrence enjoyed his position would be going too far. Whatever might be Wikkey's
mental peculiarities, his exterior differed in no way from that of the ordinary street Arab,
and such close contact could not fail to be trying to a young man more than usually sensitive
in matters of cleanliness; but Lawrence strode manfully on with his strange burden, choosing
out the least frequented streets, and earnestly hoping he might meet none of his acquaintances,
till at last he reached his lodgings and admitted himself into a small well-lighted hall, where,
after calling "Mrs. Evans," he stood under the lamp awaiting her arrival, not without considerable
trepidation, and becoming each moment more painfully conscious how extraordinary his behavior
must appear in her eyes.

"Mrs. Evans," he began, as the good lady emerged from her own domain on the ground floor. "Mrs.
Evans, I have brought this boy"--then he paused, not knowing how to enter upon the needful
explanation under the chilling influence of Mrs. Evans' severe and respectful silence.

"I dare say you are surprised," he went on at last in desperation; "but the poor child is terribly
ill, dying, I think, and if you could do anything."

"Of course, Mr. Lawrence, you do as you think proper," Mrs. Evans returned, preserving her
severest manner, though she eyed Wikkey with some curiosity; "only if you had mentioned when
you engaged my rooms that you intended turning them into a refuge for vagabonds, it would have
been more satisfactory to all parties."

"I know all that. I know its very inconsiderate of me, and I am very sorry; but you see the
little fellow is so bad--he looks just like little Robin, nurse."

Mrs. Evans sniffed at the comparison, but the allusion to the child she had so fondly tended,
as he sank into an early grave, had its effect; together with the seldom revived appellation
of "nurse," and her mollified manner encouraged Lawrence to continue.

"If you wouldn't mind getting a hot bath ready in the kitchen, I will manage without troubling
you."

"I hope, Mr. Lawrence, that I know my place better than that," was the reply, and forthwith
Mrs. Evans, who, beneath a somewhat stern exterior, possessed a really good heart, took Wikkey
under her wing, administered warmth and restoratives, washed the grimy little form, cropped
and scrubbed the matted locks, and soon the boy, dreamily conscious and wondrously happy, was
lying before a blazing fire, clean and fair to look on, enveloped in one of Mrs. Evans' own
night-dresses. Then the question arose, where was Wikkey to pass the night, followed by a whispered
dialogue and emphatic "Nothing will be safe" from the lady of the house. All of which the boy
perfectly understanding, he remarked:

"I aint a prig; I'll not take nothink."

There was a touch of injured innocence in the tone; it was simply the statement of a fact which
might easily have been otherwise, and the entire matter-of-factness of the assertion inspired
Lawrence with a good deal of confidence, together with the cough which returned on the slightest
movement, and would effectually prevent a noiseless evasion on the part of poor Wikkey. So
once more he was lifted up in the strong arms and carried to a sofa in Lawrence's own room,
where snugly tucked up in blankets, he soon fell asleep. His benefactor, after prolonged meditation
in his arm-chair, likewise betook himself to rest, having decided that a doctor must be the
first consideration on the following morning, and that the next step would be to consult Reg--Reg
would be able to advise him: it was his business to understand about such matters.

A terrible fit of coughing proceeding from the sofa awoke Lawrence next morning, startling
him into sudden recollection of the evening's adventure; and when the shutters were opened
Wikkey looked so fearfully wan and exhausted in the pale gray light, that he made all speed
to summon Mrs. Evans, and to go himself for the doctor. The examination of the patient did
not last long, and at its conclusion the doctor muttered something about the "workhouse--as
of course, Mr. Granby, you are not prepared----" The look of imploring agony which flashed
from the large, wide-open eyes made Lawrence sign to the doctor to follow him into another
room; but before leaving Wikkey he gave him an encouraging nod, saying:

"All right, Wikkey. The operation is as follows:

The saturated, but limpid, solution of lime is poured into the first tube up to the black mark,
the tube of the air bulb is introduced into the lime water in such
a way that its orifice shall be in perfect contact with the bottom
of the other tube, and then, while the bulb is held between the fore
and middle fingers of the upturned hand, one presses slowly with the
thumb upon its bottom so as to expel all the air that it contains.

This air enters the lime-water bubble by bubble.



"Poor little chap!" he said at last, sadly.

"Well, thank you, doctor. Good-morning."

"Do you wish any steps taken with regard to the workhouse, Mr. Granby?" asked the doctor, preparing
to depart.

Wikkey's beseeching eyes rose up before Lawrence, and he stammered out hastily:

"No--no thank you; not just at present. I'll think about it;" and the doctor took his leave,
wondering whether it could be possible that Mr. Granby intended to keep the boy; he was not
much used to such Quixotic proceedings.

Lawrence stood debating with himself.

"Should he send Wikkey to the workhouse? What should he do with a boy dying in the house? How
should he decide?" Certainly not by going back to meet those wistful eyes.

The decision must be made before seeing the boy again, or, as the soft-hearted fellow well
knew, it would be all up with his common sense. Calling Mrs. Evans, therefore, he bade her
tell Wikkey that he would come back presently; and then he said, timidly:

"Should you mind it very much, nurse, if I were to keep the boy here? The doctor says he is
dying, so that it would not be for long, and I would take all the trouble I could off your
hands. I have not made up my mind about it yet, but of course I could not decide upon anything
without first consulting you."

The answer, though a little stiff, was more encouraging than might have been expected from
the icy severity of Mrs. Evans' manner. (Was she also making her protest on the side of common
sense against a lurking desire to keep Wikkey?)

"If it's your wish, Mr. Lawrence, I'm not the one to turn out a homeless boy. It's not quite
what I'm accustomed to, but he seems a quiet lad enough--poor child!" the words came out in
a softer tone; "and as you say, sir, it can't be for long."

