4.  And for largeness a place so copious as to contain all the world. Over against the word
'copious' Bunyan hangs for a key, Ecclesiastes third and eleventh; and under it Miss Peacock
adds this as a note--'Copious, spacious.  Old French, copieux; Latin, copiosus, plentiful.'
The human heart, as we have already read to-night, is the highest, greatest, strongest, and
noblest part of human nature.  And so it is.  Fearfully and wonderfully made as is the whole
of human nature, that fear and that wonder surpass themselves in the spaciousness and the copiousness
of the human heart.  For what is it that the human heart has not space for, and to spare? 
After the whole world is received home into a human heart, there is room, and, indeed, hunger,
for another world, and after that for still another.  The sun is--I forget how many times bigger
than our whole world, and yet we can open our heart and take down the sun into it, and shut
him out again and restore him to his immeasurable distances in the heavens, and all in the
twinkling of an eye.  As for instance.  As I wrote these lines I read a report of a lecture
by Sir Robert Ball in which that distinguished astronomer discoursed on recent solar discoveries.
A globe of coal, Sir Robert said, as big as our earth, and all set ablaze at the same moment,
would not give out so much heat to the worlds around as the sun gives out in a thousandth part
of a second.  Well, as I read that, and ere ever I was aware what was going on, my heart had
opened over my newspaper, and the sun had swept down from the sky, and had rushed into my heart,
and before I knew where I was the cry had escaped my lips, 'Great and marvellous are Thy works,
Lord God Almighty!  Who shall not fear Thee and glorify thy name?'  And then this reflection
as suddenly came to me: How good it is to be at peace with God, and to be able and willing
to say, My Father!  That the whole of the surging and flaming sun was actually down in my straitened
and hampered heart at that idle moment over my paper is scientifically demonstrable; for only
that which is in the heart of a man can kindle the passions that are in the heart of that man;
and nothing is more sure to me than that the great passions of fear and love, wonder and rapture
were at that moment at a burning point within me.  There is a passage well on in the Holy War,
which for terror and for horror, and at the same time for truth and for power, equals anything
either in Dante or in Milton. Lucifer has stood up at the council board to second the scheme
of Beelzebub.  'Yes,' he said, amid the plaudits of his fellow-princes--'Yes, I swear it. 
Let us fill Mansoul full with our abundance.  Let us make of this castle, as they vainly call
it, a warehouse, as the name is in some of their cities above.  For if we can only get Mansoul
to fill herself full with much goods she is henceforth ours.  My peers,' he said, 'you all
know His parable of how unblessed riches choke the word; and, again, we know what happens when
the hearts of men are overcharged with surfeiting and with drunkenness.  But, my brethren,
you will outwit hell herself and all her counsellors and all her machinations, if, out of all
the riches, pleasures, cares, and possessions, that both heaven and earth and hell can heap
into your heart, those riches, pleasures, cares, and possessions but produce corresponding
passions and affections towards God and man.  Only let fear, and love, and thankfulness, and
helpfulness be kindled and fed to all their fulness in your heart, and all the world and all
that it contains will only leave the more room in your boundless heart for God and for your
brother.  All that God has made, or could make with all His counsel and all His power laid
out, will not fill your boundless and bottomless heart.  He must come down and come into your
boundless and bottomless heart Himself.  Himself: your Father, your Redeemer, and your Sanctifier
and Comforter also.  Let the whole universe try to fill your heart, O man of God, and after
it all we shall hear you singing in famine and in loneliness the doleful ditty:

   'O come to my heart, Lord Jesus,
   There is room in my heart for Thee.

5.  'Madame,' said a holy solitary to Madame Guyon in her misery--'Madame, you are disappointed
and perplexed because you seek without what you have within.  Accustom yourself to seek for
God in your own heart and you will always find Him there.'  From that hour that gifted woman
was a Mystic. The secret of the interior life flashed upon her in a moment.  She had been starving
in the midst of fulness; God was near and not far off; the kingdom of heaven was within her.
The love of God from that hour took possession of her soul with an inexpressible happiness.
Prayer, which had before been so difficult, was now delightful and indispensable; hours passed
away like moments: she could scarcely cease from praying.  Her domestic trials seemed great
to her no longer; her inward joy consumed like a fire the reluctance, the murmur, and the sorrow,
which all had their birth in herself.  A spirit of comforting peace, a sense of rejoicing possession,
pervaded all her days.  God was continually with her, and she seemed continually yielded up
to God.  'Madame,' said the solitary, 'you seek without for what you have within.'  Where do
you seek for God when you pray, my brethren?  To what place do you direct your eyes?  Is it
to the roof of your closet?  Is it to the east end of your consecrated chapel?  Is it to that
wooden table in the east end of your chapel?  Or, passing out of all houses made with hands
and consecrated with holy oil, do you lift up your eyes to the skies where the sun and the
moon and the stars dwell alone?  'What a folly!' exclaims Theophilus, in the golden dialogue,
'for no way is the true way to God but by the way of our own heart.  God is nowhere else to
be found.  And the heart itself cannot find Him but by its own love of Him, faith in Him, dependence
upon Him, resignation to Him, and expectation of all from Him.'  'You have quite carried your
point with me,' answered Theogenes after he had heard all that Theophilus had to say.  'The
God of meekness, of patience, and of love is henceforth the one God of my heart.  It is now
the one bent and desire of my soul to seek for all my salvation in and through the merits and
mediation of the meek, humble, patient, resigned, suffering Lamb of God, who alone has power
to bring forth the blessed birth of those heavenly virtues in my soul.  What a comfort it is
to think that this Lamb of God, Son of the Father, Light of the World; this Glory of heaven
and this Joy of angels is as near to us, is as truly in the midst of us, as He is in the midst
of heaven.  And that not a thought, look, or desire of our heart that presses toward Him, longing
to catch one small spark of His heavenly nature, but is as sure a way of finding Him, as the
woman's way was who was healed of her deadly disease by longing to touch but the border of
His garment.'

To sum up.  This palace the King intends but for Himself alone, and not another with Him, and
He commits the keeping of that palace day and night to the men of the town.'

CHAPTER VI--MY LORD WILLBEWILL

   --'to will is present with me.'--Paul

There is a large and a learned literature on the subject of the will. There is a philosophical
and a theological, and there is a religious and an experimental literature on the will.  Jonathan
Edwards's well-known work stands out conspicuously at the head of the philosophical and theological
literature on the will, while our own Thomas Boston's Fourfold State is a very able and impressive
treatise on the more practical and experimental side of the same subject.  The Westminster
Confession of Faith devotes one of its very best chapters to the teaching of the word of God
on the will of man, and the Shorter Catechism touches on the same subject in Effectual Calling.
Outstanding philosophical and theological schools have been formed around the will, and both
able and learned and earnest men have taken opposite sides on the subject of the will under
the party names of Necessitarians and Libertarians.  This is not the time, nor am I the man,
to discuss such abstruse subjects; but those students who wish to master this great matter
of the will, so far as it can be mastered in books, are recommended to begin with Dr. William
Cunningham's works, and then to go on from them to a treatise that will reward all their talent
and all their enterprise, Jonathan Edwards's perfect masterpiece.

1.  Nor could anything now be done but at his beck and good pleasure throughout that town.
Indeed, it will not out of my thoughts what a desperate fellow this Willbewill was when full
power was put into his hand.  All which--how this apostate prince lost power and got it again,
and lost it and got it again--the interested and curious reader will find set forth with great
fulness and clearness in many powerful pages of the Holy War.

John Bunyan was as hard put to it to get the right name for this head of the gentry of Mansoul
as Paul was to get the right name for sin in the seventh of the Romans.  In that profoundest
and intensest of all his profound and intense passages, the apostle has occasion to seek about
for some expression, some epithet, some adjective, as we say, to apply to sin so as to help
him to bring out to his Roman readers something of the malignity, deadliness, and unspeakable
evil of sin as he had sin living and working in himself.  But all the resources of the Greek
language, that most resourceful of languages, utterly failed Paul for his pressing purpose.
And thus it is that, as if in scorn of the feebleness and futility of that boasted tongue,
he tramples its grammars and its dictionaries under his feet, and makes new and unheard-of
words and combinations of words on the spot for himself and for his subject.  He heaps up a
hyperbole the like of which no orator or rhetorician of Greece or Rome had ever needed or had
ever imagined before.  He takes sin, and he makes a name for sin out of itself.  The only way
to describe sin, he feels, the only way to characterise sin, the only way to aggravate sin,
is just to call it sin; sinful sin; 'sin by the commandment became exceeding sinful.'  And,
in like manner, John Bunyan, who has only his own mother tongue to work with, in his straits
to get a proper name for this terrible fellow who was next to Diabolus himself, cannot find
a proud enough name for him but just by giving him his own name, and then doubling it.  Add
will to will, multiply will by will, and multiply it again, and after you have done all you
are no nearer to a proper name for that apostate, who, for pride, and insolence, and headstrongness,
in one word, for wilfulness, is next to Diabolus himself.  But as Willbewill, if he is to be
named and described at all, is best named and described by his own naked name; so Bunyan is
always best illustrated out of his own works.  And I turn accordingly to the Heavenly Footman
for an excellent illustration of the wilfulness of the will both in a good man and in a bad;
as, thus: 'Your self-willed people, nobody knows what to do with them.  We use to say, He will
have his own will, do all we can. Could fire and fagot, sword or halter, dungeons, whips, bears,
bulls, lions, cruel rackings, stonings, starvings, nakedness?  So willing had they been made
in the day of His power.  But, alas! the thing is, they are not willing.  For, were they once
soundly willing, these, and a thousand things such as these, would hold them no faster than
the cords held Samson when he broke them like flax.  I tell you the will is all. The Lord give
thee a will, then, and courage of heart.'

2.  Let that, then, suffice for this man's name and nature, and let us look at him now when
his name and his nature have both become evil; that is to say, when Willbewill has become Illwill.
You can imagine; no, you cannot imagine unless you already know, how evil, and how set upon
evil, Illwill was.  His whole mind, we are told, now stood bending itself to evil.  Nay, so
set was he now upon sheer evil that he would act it of his own accord, and without any instigation
at all from Diabolus.  And that went on till he was looked on in the city as next in wickedness
to very Diabolus himself.  Parable apart, my ill-willed brethren, our ill-will has made us
very fiends in human shape.  What a fall, what a fate, what a curse it is to be possessed of
a devil of ill-will!  Who can put proper words on it after Paul had to confess himself silent
before it?  Who can utter the diabolical nature, the depth and the secrecy, the subtlety and
the spirituality, the range and the reach-out of an ill-will?  Our hearts are full of ill-will
at those we meet and shake hands with every day.  At men also we have never seen, and who are
totally ignorant even of our existence.  Over a thousand miles we dart our viperous hearts
at innocent men.  At great statesmen we have ill-will, and at small; at great churchmen and
at small; at great authors and at small; at great, and famous, and successful men in all lines
of life; for it is enough for ill- will that another man be praised, and well-paid, and prosperous,
and then placed in our eye.  No amount of suffering will satiate ill-will; the very grave has
no seal against it.  And, now and then, you have it thrust upon you that other men have the
same devil in them as deeply and as actively as he is in you.  You will suddenly run across
a man on the street.  His face was shining with some praise he had just had spoken to him,
or with some recognition he had just received from some great one; or with some good news for
himself he had just heard, before he caught sight of you.  But the light suddenly dies on his
face, and darkness comes up out of his heart at his sudden glimpse of you.  What is the matter?
you ask yourself as he scowls past you.  What have you done so to darken any man's heart to
you?  And as you stumble on in the sickening cloud he has left behind him, you suddenly recollect
that you were once compelled to vote against that man on a public question: on some question
of home franchise, or foreign war, or church government, or city business; or perchance, a
family has left his shop to do business in yours, or his church to worship God in yours, or
such like.  It will be a certain relief to you to recollect such things.  But with it all there
will be a shame and a humiliation and a deep inward pain that will escape into a cry of prayer
for him and for yourself and for all such sinners on the same street.  If you do not find an
escape from your sharp resentment in ejaculatory prayer and in a heart-cleansing great good-will,
your heart, before you are a hundred steps on, will be as black with ill-will as his is.  But
that must not again be.  Would you hate or strike back at a blind man who stumbled and fell
against you on the street?  Would you retaliate at a maniac who gnashed his teeth and shook
his fist at you on his way past you to the madhouse?  Or at a corpse being carried past you
that had been too long without burial?  And shall you retaliate on a miserable man driven mad
with diabolical passion?  Or at a poor sinner whose heart is as rotten as the grave?  Ill-will
is abroad in our learned and religious city at all hours of the day and night.  He glares at
us under the sun by day, and under the street lamps at night.  We suddenly feel his baleful
eye on us as we thoughtlessly pass under his overlooking windows: it will be a side street
and an unfrequented, where you will not be ashamed and shocked and pained at heart to meet
him.  Public men; much purchased and much praised men; rich and prosperous men; men high in
talent and in place; and, indeed, all manner of men,--walk abroad in this life softly.  Keep
out of sight.  Take the side streets, and return home quickly.  You have no idea what an offence
and what a snare you are to men you know, and to men you do not know.  If you are a public
man, and if your name is much in men's mouths, then the place you hold, the prices and the
praises you get, do not give you one-tenth of the pleasure that they give a thousand other
men pain.  Men you never heard of, and who would not know you if they met you, gnaw their hearts
at the mere mention of your name.  Desire, then, to be unknown, as A Kempis says.  O teach
me to love to be concealed, prays Jeremy Taylor.  Be ambitious to be unknown, Archbishop Leighton
also instructs us.  And the great Fenelon took Ama nesciri for his crest and for his motto.
No wonder that an apostle cried out under the agony and the shame of ill-will.  No wonder that
to kill it in the hearts of men the Son of God died under it on the cross.  And no wonder that
all the gates of hell are wide open, day and night, for there is no day there, to receive home
all those who will entertain ill-will in their hearts, and all the gates of heaven shut close
to keep all ill-will for ever out.

3.  But, bad enough as all that is, the half has not been told, and never will be told in this
life.  Butler has a passage that has long stumbled me, and it stumbles me the more the longer
I live and study him and observe myself.  'Resentment,' he says, in a very deep and a very
serious passage--'Resentment being out of the case, there is not, properly speaking, any such
thing as direct ill-will in one man towards another.' Well, great and undisputed as Butler's
authority is in all these matters, at the same time he would be the first to admit and to assert
that a man's inward experience transcends all outward authority.  Well, I am filled with shame
and pain and repentance and remorse to have to say it, but my experience carries me right in
the teeth of Butler's doctrine.  I have dutifully tried to look at Butler's inviting and exonerating
doctrine in all possible lights, and from all possible points of view, in the anxious wish
to prove it true; but I dare not say that I have succeeded.  The truth for thee--my heart would
continually call to me--the best truth for thee is in me, and not in any Butler!  And when
looking as closely as I can at my own heart in the matter of ill-will, what do I find--and
what will you find?  You will find that after subtracting all that can in any proper sense
come under the head of real resentment, and in cases where real resentment is out of the question;
in cases where you have received no injury, no neglect, no contempt, no anything whatsoever
of that kind, you will find that there are men innocent of all that to you, yet men to whom
you entertain feelings, animosities, antipathies, that can be called by no other name than
that of ill-will.  Look within and see.  Watch within and see.  And I am sure you will come
to subscribe with me to the humbling and heart-breaking truth, that, even where there is no
resentment, and no other explanation, excuse, or palliation of that kind, yet that festering,
secret, malignant ill-will is working in the bottom of your heart.  If you doubt that, if you
deny that, if all that kind of self-observation and self-sentencing is new to you, then observe
yourself, say, for one week, and report at the end of it whether or no you have had feelings
and thoughts and wishes in your secret heart toward men who never in any way hurt you, which
can only be truthfully described as pure ill-will; that is to say, you have not felt and thought
and wished toward them as you would have them, and all men, feel and think and wish toward you.

4.  The will is often regenerate and right; the will often bends, as Bunyan has it, to that
which is good; but behind the will and beneath the will the heart is still full of passions,
affections, inclinations, dispositions that are evil; instinctively, impulsively, involuntarily
evil, even 'in natures most sincere.'  And hence arises a conflict, a combat, a death-grip,
an agony, a hell on earth, that every regenerate and advancing soul of man is full of His will
is right.  If his will is wrong; if he chooses evil; then there is no mystery in the matter
so far as he is concerned.  He is a bad man, and he is so intentionally and deliberately and
of set purpose; and it is a rule in divine truth that 'wilfulness in sinning is the measure
of our sinfulness.'  But his will is right.  To will is present with him.  He is every day
like Thomas Boston one Sabbath-day: 'Though I cannot be free of sin, God Himself knows that
He would be welcome to make havoc of my sins and to make me holy.  I know no lust that I would
not be content to part with to-night. My will, bound hand and foot, I desire to lay at His
feet.'  Now, is it not as clear as noonday that in the case of such a man as Boston his mind
is one thing and his heart another?  Is it not plain that he has both a good-will and an ill-will
within him?  A will that immediately and resolutely chooses for God, and for truth, and for
righteousness, and for love; and another law in his members warring against that law of his
mind?  'Before conversion,' says Thomas Shepard, 'the main wound of a man is in his will. 
And then, after conversion, though his will is changed, yet, ex infirmitate, there are many
things that he cannot do, so strong is the remnant of malignity that is still in his heart.
Let him get Christ to help him here.'  In all that ye see your calling, my brethren.

5.  'Now, if I do that I would not,' adds the apostle, extricating himself and giving himself
fair-play and his simple due among all his misery and self-accusation--'Now, if I do that I
would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.'  Or, again, as William
Law has it: 'All our natural evil ceases to be our own evil as soon as our will turns away
from it.  Our natural evil then changes its nature and loses all its poison and death, and
becomes an holy cross on which we die to self and this life and enter the kingdom of heaven.'
My dear brethren, tell me, is your sin your cross?  Is your sinfulness your cross?  Is the
evil that is ever present with you your holy cross?  For, every other cross beside sin is a
cross of straw, a cross of feathers, a paste-board and a painted cross, and not a real and
genuine cross at all. The wood and the nails and the spear all taken together were not our
Lord's real cross.  His real cross was sin; our sin laid on His hands, and on His heart, and
on His imagination, and on His conscience, till it was all but His very own sin.  Our sin was
so fearfully and wonderfully laid upon Christ that He was as good as a sinner Himself under
it.  So much so that all the nails and all the spears, all the thirst and all the darkness
that His body and His soul could hold were as nothing beside the sin that was laid upon Him.
And so it is with us; with as many of us as are His true disciples.  Our sin is our cross;
not our actual transgressions, any more than His; but our inward sinfulness.  And not the sinfulness
of our will; that is no real cross to any man; but the sinfulness of our hearts against our
will, and beneath our will, and behind our will.  And this is such a cross that if Christ had
something in His cross that we have not, then we have something in ours that He had not.  He
made many sad and sore Psalms His own; but even if He had lived on earth to read the seventh
of the Romans, He could not have made it His own.  His true people are beyond Him here.  The
disciple is above his Master here.  The Master had His own cross, and it was a sufficient cross;
but we can challenge Him to come down and look and say if He ever saw a cross like our cross.
He was made a curse.  He was hanged on the tree.  He bore our sins in His own body on the tree.
But his people are beyond Him in the real agony and crucifixion of sin.  For He never in Gethsemane
or on Calvary either cried as Paul once cried, and as you and I cry every day--To will is present
with me!  But the good that I would I do not!  And, oh! the body of this death!

6.  Now, if any total stranger to all that shall ask me: What good there is in all that? and,
Why I so labour in such a world of unaccustomed and unpleasant things as that?  I have many
answers to his censure.  For example, and first, I labour and will continue to labour more
and more in this world of things, and less and less in any other world, because here we begin
to see things as they are--the deepest things of God and of man, that is.  Also, because I
have the precept, and the example, and the experience of God's greatest and best saints before
me here.  Because, also, our full and true salvation begins here, goes on here, and ends here.
Because, also, teaching these things and learning these things will infallibly make us the
humblest of men, the most contrite, the most self-despising, the most prayerful, and the most
patient, meek, and loving of men.  And, students, I labour in this because this is science;
because this is the first in order and the most fruitful of all the sciences, if not the noblest
and the most glorious of all the sciences. There is all that good for us in this subject of
the will and the heart, and whole worlds of good lie away out beyond this subject that eye
hath not seen nor ear heard.

CHAPTER VII--SELF-LOVE

   'This know, that men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
   boasters, proud, unthankful, without natural affection,
   truce-breakers, false accusers, traitors, heady, high-minded: from all
   such turn away.'--Paul.

'Pray, sir, said Academicus, tell me more plainly just what this self of ours actually is.
Self, replied Theophilus, is hell, it is the devil, it is darkness, pain, and disquiet.  It
is the one and only enemy of Christ. It is the great antichrist.  It is the scarlet whore,
it is the fiery dragon, it is the old serpent that is mentioned in the Revelation of St John.
You rather terrify me than instruct me by this description, said Academicus.  It is indeed
a very frightful matter, returned Theophilus; for it contains everything that man has to dread
and to hate, to resist and to avoid.  Yet be assured, my friend, that, careless and merry as
this world is, every man that is born into this world has all those enemies to overcome within
himself; and every man, till he is in the way of regeneration, is more or less governed by
those enemies.  No hell in any remote place, no devil that is separate from you, no darkness
or pain that is not within you, no antichrist either at Rome or in England, no furious beast,
no fiery dragon, without you or apart from you, can do you any real hurt.  It is your own hell,
your own devil, your own beast, your own antichrist, your own dragon that lives in your own
heart's blood that alone can hurt you.  Die to this self, to this inward nature, and then all
outward enemies are overcome.  Live to this self, and then, when this life is out, all that
is within you, and all that is without you, will be nothing else but a mere seeing and feeling
this hell, serpent, beast, and fiery dragon.  But, said Theogenes, a third party who stood
by, I would, if I could, more perfectly understand the precise nature of self, or what it is
that makes it to be so full of evil and misery.  To whom Theophilus turned and replied: Covetousness,
envy, pride, and wrath are the four elements of self.  And hence it is that the whole life
of self can be nothing else but a plague and torment of covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath,
all of which is precisely sinful nature, self, or hell.  Whilst man lives, indeed, among the
vanities of time, his covetousness, his envy, his pride, and his wrath, may be in a tolerable
state, and may help him to a mixture of peace and trouble; they may have their gratifications
as well as their torments.  But when death has put an end to the vanity of all earthly cheats,
the soul that is not born again of the supernatural Word and Spirit of God must find itself
unavoidably devoured by itself, shut up in its own insatiable, unchangeable, self-tormenting
covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath.  O Theogenes! that I had power from God to take those
dreadful scales off men's eyes that hinder them from seeing and feeling the infinite importance
of this most certain truth! God give a blessing, Theophilus, to your good prayer.  And then
let me tell you that you have quite satisfied my question about the nature of self.  I shall
never forget it, nor can I ever possibly after this have any doubt about the truth of it.'

1.  'All my theology,' said an old friend of mine to me not long ago--'all my theology is out
of Thomas Goodwin to the Ephesians.'  Well, I find Thomas Goodwin saying in that great book
that self is the very quintessence of original sin; and, again, he says, study self-love for
a thousand years and it is the top and the bottom of original sin; self is the sin that dwelleth
in us and that doth most easily beset us.  Now, that is just what Academicus and Theophilus
and Theogenes have been saying to us in their own powerful way in their incomparable dialogue.
All sin and all misery; all covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath,--trace it all back to its
roots, travel it all up to its source, and, as sure as you do that, self and self-love are
that source, that root, and that black bottom.  I do not forget that Butler has said in some
stately pages of his that self-love is morally good; that self-love is coincident with the
principle of virtue and part of the idea; and that it is a proper motive for man.  But the
deep bishop, in saying all that, is away back at the creation-scheme and Eden-state of human
nature.  He has not as yet come down to human nature in its present state of overthrow, dismemberment,
and self-destruction.  But when he does condescend and comes close to the mind and the heart
of man as they now are in all men, even Butler becomes as outspoken, and as eloquent, and as
full of passion and pathos as if he were an evangelical Puritan.  Self-love, Butler startles
his sober-minded reader as he bursts out--self-love rends and distorts the mind of man!  Now,
you are a man.  Well, then, do you feel and confess that rending and distorting to have taken
place in you? Butler is a philosopher, and Goodwin is a preacher, but you are more: you are
a man.  You are the owner of a human heart, and you can say whether or no it is a rent and
a distorted heart.  Is your mind warped and wrenched by self-love, and is your heart rent and
torn by the same wicked hands?  Do you really feel that it needs nothing more to take you back
again to paradise but that your heart be delivered from self-love?  Do you now understand that
the foundations of heaven itself must be laid in a heart healed and cleansed and delivered
from self-love?  If you do, then your knowledge of your own heart has set you abreast of the
greatest of philosophers and theologians and preachers.  Nay, before multitudes of men who
are called such.  It is my meditation all the day, you say.  I have more understanding now
than all my teachers; for Thy testimonies are my meditation.  I understand more than the ancients;
because now I keep Thy precepts.

2.  'Self-love has made us all malicious,' says John Calvin.  We are Calvinists, were we to
call any man master.  But we are to call no man master, and least of all in the matters of
the heart.  Every man must be his own philosopher, his own moralist, and his own theologian
in the matters of the heart.  He who has a heart in his bosom and an eye in his head can need
no Calvin, no Butler, no Goodwin, and no Law to tell him what goes on in his own heart.  And,
on the other hand, his own heart will soon tell him whether or no Calvin, and Butler, and Goodwin,
and Law know anything about those matters on which some men would set them up as our masters.
Well, come away all of you who own a human heart.  Come and say whether or no your heart, and
the self-love of which it is full, have made you a malicious man.  I do not ask if you are
always and to everybody full of maliciousness.  No; I know quite well that you are sometimes
as sweet as honey and as soft as butter.  No; I do not trifle with you and with this serious
matter so as to ask if you are full of malice at all times and to all men.  No.  For, let a
man be fortunate enough to be on your side; let him pass over to your party; let him become
profitable to you; let him be clever enough and mean enough to praise and to flatter you up
to the top of your appetite for praise and flattery, and, no doubt, you will love that man.
Or, if that is not exactly love, at least it is no longer hate.  But let that man unfortunately
be led to leave your party; let him cease being profitable to you; let him weary of flattering
you with his praise; let him forget you, neglect you, despise you, and go against you, and
then look at your own heart.  Do you care now to know what malice is?  Well, that is malice
that distorts and rends your heart as often as you meet that man on the street or even pass
by his door.  That is malice that dances in your eyes when you see his name in print.  That
is malice with which you always break out when his name is mentioned in conversation.  That
is malice that heats your heart when you suddenly recollect him in the multitude of your thoughts
within you.  And you are in good company all the time.  'We, ourselves,' says Paul to Titus,
'we also at one time lived in malice and in envy.  We were hateful and we hated one another.'
'Hateful,' Goodwin goes on in his great book, 'every man is to another man more or less; he
is hated of another and he hateth another more or less; and if his nature were let out to the
full, there is that in him, "every man is against every man," as is said of Ishmael.  Homo
homini lupus,' adds our brave preacher.  And Abbe Grou speaks out with the same challenge from
the opposite church pole, and says: 'Yes; self-love makes us touchy, ready to take offence,
ill-tempered, suspicious, severe, exacting, easily offended; it keeps alive in our hearts a
certain malignity, a secret joy at the mortifications which befall our neighbour; it nourishes
our readiness to criticise, our dislike at certain persons, our ill-feeling, our bitterness,
and a thousand other things prejudicial to charity.'

3.  'Myself is my own worst enemy,' says Abbe Grou.  That is to say, we may have enemies who
hate us more than we hate ourselves, and enemies who would hurt us, if they could, as much
as we hurt ourselves; but the Abbe's point is that they cannot.  And he is right.  No man has
ever hurt me as I have hurt myself.  There are men who hate me so much that they would poison
my life of all its peace and happiness if they could.  But they cannot.  They cannot; but let
them not be cast down on that account, for there is one who can do, and who will do as long
as he lives, what they cannot do.  A man's foes, to be called foes, are in his own house: they
are in his own heart.  Let our enemies attend to their own peace and happiness, and our self-love
will do all, and more than all, that they would fain do.  At the most, they and their ill-will
can only give occasion to our self-love; but it is our self-love that seizes upon the occasion,
and through it rends and distorts our own hearts.  And were our hearts only pure of self-love,
were our hearts only clothed with meekness and humility, we could laugh at all the ill-will
of our enemies as leviathan laughs at the shaking of a spear.  'Know thou,' says A Kempis to
his son, 'that the love of thyself doth do thee more hurt than anything in the whole world.'
Yes; but we shall never know that by merely reading The Imitation.  We must read ourselves.
We must study, as we study nothing else, our own rent and distorted hearts.  Our own hearts
must be our daily discovery.  We must watch the wounds our hearts take every day; and we must
give all our powers of mind to tracing all our wounds back to their true causes.  We must say:
'that sore blow came on my mind and on my heart from such and such a quarter, from such and
such a hand, from such and such a weapon; but this pain, this rankling, poisoned, and ever-festering
wound, this sleepless, gnawing, cancerous sore, comes from the covetousness, the pride, the
envy, and the wrath of my own heart.'  When we begin to say that, we shall then begin to understand
and to love Thomas; we shall sit daily at his feet and shall be numbered among his sons.

4.  And this suffering at our own hands goes on till at last the tables are completely turned
against self-love, and till what was once to us the dearest thing in the whole world becomes,
as Pascal says, the most hateful.  We begin life by hating the men, and the things, who hurt
us. We hate the men who oppose us and hinder us; the men who speak, and write, and act, and
go in any way against us.  We bitterly hate all who humble us, despise us, trample upon us,
and in any way ill-use us.  But afterwards, when we have become men, men in experience of this
life, and, especially, of ourselves in this life; after we gain some real insight and attain
to some real skill in the life of the heart, we come round to forgive those we once hated.
We have come now to see why they did it.  We see now exactly how much they hurt us after all,
and how little.  And, especially, we have come to see,--what at one time we could not have
believed,--that all our hurt, to be called hurt, has come to us from ourselves. From this time to
1646, through want of a Minister, and carelessness of ye Cleark, during ye wars, much of ye
Register is lost, only here and there a name registered."

"1652. June 14. Mem. From this time till August there was noe Minister, soe that ye children were
carried to other parishes to be baptized."

St. Helen's Aukland, Durham, A.D. 1633.--"Mr. John Vaux, our minister, was suspended.... Mr.
Robert Cowper, of Durham, served in his place, and left out divers christenings unrecorded, and
regestered others disorderly."

Gainford, Durham.--"Courteous Reader, this is to let thee understand that many children were left
unrecorded or redgestered, but the reason and cause was this; some would and some would not, being
of a fickle condition, as the time was then; this being their end and aim, to save a groate
from the poor Clarke, so they would rather have them unredgestered--but now ... it is their design to
have them redgestered."

Lowestoft, Suffolk, 1644 ... "For some time following there was in this Town neither Minister nor
Clarke, but the inhabitants were inforced to procure now one and then another to baptize their
children, by which means there was no Register kept, only those few
hereafter mentioned weare by myself baptized in those intervalls when
I enjoyed my freedom."

Hexham, Northumberland, c. 1655.--"Note y't Mr. Will. Lister, Minister of S't. John Lees in those
distracted times, did both marry and baptize all that made ther application to him, for w'ch
he was sometimes severely threatened by y'e souldiers, and had once a cockt pistoll held to
his breest, &c., so y't its no wond'r y't y'e {442} Registers for these times are so imperfect,
and besides, they are extremely confused."

In the Preface to the Enumeration Abstract of the Census of 1841, pp. 34-37., your correspondent
will find information and statistics relative to the estimated population of England and Wales,
1570-1750, compiled from the parish registers, and--

"calculated
on the supposition, that the registered baptisms, burials, and marriages,
on an average of three years, in 1570, 1600, 1630, 1670, 1700, and
1750, bore the same proportion to the actual population as in the
year 1801."

   
   From the Table, pp. 36, 37, it appears, that whilst the population
(estimated) in the thirty years 1600-1630 increased upwards of 16
percent., in the forty years 1630-1670 it increased a mere trifle
over 3 per cent. only.

   In no fewer than twenty English counties, the population, estimated
as before, was absolutely less in 1670 than in 1630; and in Kent,
the county in which Chart is situate, the decrease is striking: population
of Kent in 1630, 189,212; in 1670, 167,398; in 1700, 157,833; in 1750,
181,267; and in 1801, the enumerated population was 307,624.

   
   

Your correspondent might also find it useful to consult Sir William Petty's Political Arithmetic,
the various documents compiled at the different censuses, and the Reports of the Registrar-General.

ARUN.

*
* * * *

PARISH REGISTER STATISTICS.--CHART, KENT.

Your correspondent "E.R.J.H." It must be a matter of regret to all who are acquainted with the
value of these national records--which for extent and antiquity are unequalled in any other
country--that this question cannot be answered affirmatively. By the exertions of the late Mr. Rickman,
their importance, in a statistical point of view, has been shown, but only to a very limited extent.
In 1801, being entrusted with the duty of collecting and arranging the returns of the first
actual enumeration of the population, he obtained from the clergyman of each parish a statement
of the number of baptisms and burials recorded in the register book in every tenth year from 1700,
and of marriages in every consecutive year from 1754, when the Marriage Act of George II. took
effect. The results were published with the census returns of 1801; but, instead of each parish
being separately shown, only the totals of the hundreds and similar county divisions, and of a
few principal towns, were given. In subsequent "Parish Register Abstracts" down to that of 1841,
the same meagre information has been afforded by an adherence to this generalising system.

In 1836, with a view of forming an estimate of the probable population for England and Wales
at certain periods anterior to 1801, Mr. Rickman, acting upon the result of inquiries previously
made respecting the condition and earliest date of the register books in every parish, applied
to the clergy for returns of the number of baptisms, burials, and marriages registered in three years
at six irregular periods, viz. A.D. 1570, 1600, 1630, 1670, 1700, and 1750. The clergy, with
their accustomed readiness to aid in any useful investigation, responded very generally to the
application, and Mr. Rickman obtained nearly 3000 returns of the earliest date required (1570),
and nearly 4000 (from not much less than half the parishes of England) as far back as 1600;
those for the more recent periods being tolerably complete from all the counties. The interesting
details thus collected have not been published; nor am I able to
say where the original returns, if still extant, are deposited.

In pursuance of this design, however, Mr. Rickman proceeded with these materials to calculate
the probable population of the several counties on the supposition that the registered baptisms,
&c., in 1570, 1600, and at the other assigned periods, bore the same proportion to the actual
population as in 1801. The numerical results are embodied in a table which appears in the
Census Enumeration Abstract for 1841 (Preface, pp. 36, 37.), and it is stated that there is
reason for supposing the estimate arrived at to be an approximation to the truth.

During the Civil Wars and the Protectorate, few parochial registers were kept with any degree
of accuracy; indeed, in many parishes they are altogether defective at that period, owing to the
temporary expulsion of the clergy from their benefices. It is not improbable, therefore, that
the remarkable decrease of baptismal entries in the register book of Chart next Sutton Valence
may have arisen partly from imperfect registration, as well as from the other causes suggested.
But the trifling increase observable after the Restoration undoubtedly points to the conclusion
arrived at by your corespondent--that a great diminution had taken place in the population
of the parish: and Mr. Rickman's estimate above referred to gives
a result for the entire county, which, if it does not fully establish
the supposed decrease, shows at least that the registers of other
Kentish parishes were affected in a similar manner.

Applying the average of England to the parish {443} of Chart, the 120 baptisms in the years 1640-1659, if
representing the actual births, would indicate a population of about 200 during that period;
while the 246 entries in the previous twenty years would give upwards of 400 inhabitants.
According to the several censuses, Chart contained 381 persons in 1801, and 424, 500, 610, 604,
respectively, at the subsequent decades.

While on the subject of parish registers, I may add, that a scheme has been propounded by the
Rev. E. Wyatt Edgell, in a paper read before the Statistical Society, for transcribing and printing
in a convenient form the whole of the extant parish register books of England and Wales, thus
concentrating those valuable records, and preserving, before it is too late, their contents
from the effects of time and accidental injuries. The want of funds to defray the cost of copying
and printing is the one great difficulty of the plan.

JAMES T. HAMMACK.

April 2.

* * * * *

EARLY STATISTICS.--PARISH REGISTERS.

In reference to the observations of your correspondent "E.R.J.H.," he will find, upon closer examination,
that no comparison approaching to accuracy can be made between the population of any place at
different periods of the seventeenth century, founded upon the entries in parish registers of
baptisms, births, or marriages.

In 1653 the ecclesiastical registers ceased to contain much of the information they had before
given. In that year was passed, "An Act how Marriages shall be solemnised and registered, and also
for a Register of Births and Burials;" which first introduced registers of births and not of
baptisms. The Act treated marriage as a civil contract, to be solemnised before a justice of
the peace; and it directed that, for the entry of all marriages, and "of all births of children,
and burial of all sorts of people, within every parish," the rated inhabitants should choose
"an honest and able person to be called 'The Parish Register,'" sworn before and approved by a neighbouring
magistrate. Until after the Restoration, this Act was found practicable; and in many parishes
these books (distinct from the clergyman's register of baptisms, &c., celebrated in the church)
continue to be fairly preserved. In such parishes, and in no others, a correct comparative estimate
of the population may be formed.

The value of the parochial registers for statistical and historical purposes cannot be overrated;
and yet their great loss in very recent times is beyond all doubt. It was given in evidence before
the committee on registration, that out of seventy or eighty parishes for which Bridges made
collections a century since, thirteen of the old registers have been lost, and three accidentally
burnt. On a comparison of the dates of the Sussex registers, seen by Sir W. Burrell between
1770 and 1780, and of those returned as the earliest in the population returns of 1831, the old
registers, in no less than twenty-nine parishes, had in the interval disappeared; whilst,
during the same half-century, nineteen old registers had found their way back to the proper repository.
On searching the MSS. in Skelton Castle, in Cleveland, a few years since, the first register
of that parish was discovered, and has been restored.

These changes show how great the danger is to which the old registers are exposed; and in many
instances it saves time and trouble to search the Bishop's transcripts before searching the
original registers.

WM. DURRANT COOPER.

81. Guildford Street, March 25. 1850.

* * * * *

BYRON'S LARA.

I cannot agree with your able corespondent "C.B." (No. 20. p. 324., and No. 17. p. 262.), that
Ezzelin in "Lara" is Seyd of the "Corsair." My interpretation of both tales is as follows:--Lara
and Ezzelin both lived in youth where they afterwards met, viz. in a midland county of England--time
about the fourteenth century. Ezzelin was a kinsman, or, more probably, a lover of Medora, whom
Lara induced to fly with him, and who shared his corsair life. When Lara had returned home, the
midnight scene in the gallery arose from some Frankenstein creation of his own bad conscience;
a "horrible shadow," an "unreal mockery." Kaled was Gulnare disguised as a page; and when
Lara met Ezzelin at Otho's house, Ezzelin's indignation arose from his recollection of Medora's
abduction. Otho favours Ezzelin in this quarrel; and, when Kaled looks down upon the "sudden strife,"
and becomes deeply moved, her agitation was from seeing in Ezzelin the champion of Medora,
her own rival in the affections of Lara. Ezzelin is murdered, probably by the contrivance of
Kaled, who had before shown that she could lend a hand in such an affair. After this, Lara collects
a band, like what David gathered to himself in the cave of Adullam, and what follows suits
the mediæval period of English history.

I will briefly quote in support of this view. Otho shows that Lara and Ezzelin had both sprung
from one spot, when he says,

"I pledge myself for thee, as not unknown, Though like Count Lara now return'd alone From other
lands, almost a stranger grown."

The 9th section of canto 1. is a description of Byron himself at Newstead (the two poems are
merely vehicles of their authors' own feelings), with the celebrated skull, since made into a drinking
cup, beside him. The succeeding section is a picture {444} of "our own dear lake." That Medora
was a gentlewoman, and not from the slave-market, is shown by Conrad's appreciation of her in
the 12th section of the first canto of the "Corsair;" and why not
formerly beloved by Ezzelin, and thus alluded to by him in the quarrel
scene?

"And deem'st thou me unknown too? Gaze again! At least thy
memory was not given in vain, Oh! never canst thou cancel half her
debt, Eternity forbids thee to forget."

The accents, muttered in
a foreign tongue by Lara, on recovering from his swoon in the gallery,--

"And
meant to meet an ear That hears him not--alas! that cannot hear"--

were
addressed, I think, to Medora; and I am only the more disposed to
this opinion by their effect on Kaled. (See canto 1. sec. 14.)

I
quite agree with "EMDEE" in esteeming "Lara" a magnificent poem.

A.G.

Ecclesfield,
March 18, 1850.

* * * * *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

Dr. Whichcot
and Lord Shaftesbury.--Your correspondent "C." (No. 24. p. 382.) will
find in the Alumni Etonenses, by Harwood, printed at Birmingham by
Pearson, and by Caddell, jun., and Davies, Strand, 1797, at p. 46.
in the account of Whichcot, under the head of "Provosts of King's
College," the following passage:--"A volume of his sermons was published
in 1628, from copies taken in short-hand as they were delivered from
the pulpit, with a preface by Lord Shaftesbury." In a MS. account
of the provosts it is stated, "the first volume of his discourses,
published by Lord Shaftesbury, 1698;" and that one of his brothers
was alive in 1749, at Finchley, aged 96.

6.  'It is the work of a philosopher,' says Addison in one of his best Spectators, 'to be every
day subduing his passions and laying aside his prejudices.'  We are not philosophers, but we
shall be enrolled in the foremost ranks of philosophy if we imitate such philosophers in their
daily work, as we must do and shall do.  Well, are we begun to do it?  Are we engaged in that
work of theirs and ours every day?  Is God our witness and our judge that we are?  Are we so
engaged upon that inward work, and so succeeding in it, that we can read our most prejudiced
newspaper with the same mind and spirit, with the same profit and progress, with which we read
our Bible?  A good man, a humble man, a man acutely sensible of his ill-conditions, will look
on every day as lost or won according as he has lost or won in this inward war.  If his partialities
are dropping off his mind; if his prejudices are melting; if he can read books and papers with
pleasure and instruction that once filled him with dark passions and angry outbursts; if his
Calvinism lets him read Thomas A Kempis and Jeremy Taylor and William Law; if his High-Churchism
lets him delight to worship God in an Independent or a Presbyterian church; if his Free-Churchism
permits him to see the Establishment reviving, and his State-Churchism admits that the Free
Churches have more to say to him than he had at one time thought; if his Toryism lets him take
in a Radical paper, and his Radicalism a Unionist paper--then let him thank God, for God is
in all that though he knew it not.  And when he counts up his incalculable benefits at each
return of the Lord's table, let him count up as not the least of them an open mind and a well-conditioned
heart, an unprejudiced mind, and an impartial heart.

7.  And now, to conclude: Take old, angry, ill-conditioned Prejudice, his daily prayer: 'My
Adorable God and Creator!  Thy Holy Church is by the wickedness of men divided into various
communions, all hating, condemning, and endeavouring to destroy one another.  I made none of
these divisions, nor am I any longer a defender of them.  I wish everything removed out of
every communion that hinders the Common Unity. The wranglings and disputings of whole churches
and nations have so confounded all things that I have no ability to make a true and just judgment
of the matters between them.  If I knew that any one of these communions was alone acceptable
to Thee, I would do or suffer anything to make myself a member of it.  For, my Good God, I
desire nothing so much as to know and to love Thee, and to worship Thee in the most acceptable
manner.  And as I humbly presume that Thou wouldst not suffer Thy Church to be thus universally
divided, if no divided portion could offer any worship acceptable unto Thee; and as I have
no knowledge of what is absolutely best in these divided parts, nor any ability to put an end
to them; so I fully trust in Thy goodness, that Thou wilt not suffer these divisions to separate
me from Thy mercy in Christ Jesus; and that, if there be any better ways of serving Thee than
those I already enjoy, Thou wilt, according to Thine infinite mercy, lead me into them, O God
of my peace and my love.'  After this manner old, angry, ill-conditioned Prejudice prayed every
day till he died, a little child, in charity with all men, and in acceptance with Almighty God.

CHAPTER IX--CAPTAIN ANYTHING

   'I am made all things to all men . . . I please all men in all
   things.'--Paul

Captain Anything came originally from the ancient town of Fair-speech.

Fair-speech had many royal bounties and many special privileges bestowed upon it, and Captain
Anything and his family had come to many titles and to great riches in that ancient, loyal,
and honourable borough.  As to his religion, from a child young Anything had sat under the
parson of the parish, the same Reverend Two- tongues as has been mentioned above.  And our
budding soldier followed the example of his minister in that he never strove too long against
wind or tide, or was ever to be seen on the same side of the street with Religion when she
was banished from court or had lost her silver slippers.  The crest of the Anythings was a
delicately poised weather- cock; and the motto engraved around the gyrating bird ran thus:
'Our judgment always jumps according to the occasion.'  As a military man, Captain Anything
is described in military books as a proper man, and a man of courage and skill--to appearance.
He and his company under him were a sort of Swiss guard in Mansoul.  They held themselves open
and ready for any master.  They lived not so much by religion or by loyalty as by the fates
of worldly fortune.  In his secret despatches Diabolus was wont to address Captain Anything
as My Darling; and be sure you recruit your Switzers well, Diabolus would say; but when the
real stress of the war came, even Diabolus cast Captain Anything off.  And thus it came about
that when both sides were against this despised creature he had to throw down his arms and
flee into a safe skulking place for his life.

1.  In that half-papist, half-atheistic country called France there is a class of politicians
known by the name of Opportunists.  They are a kind of public men that, we are thankful to
say, are not known in Protestant and Evangelical England, but they may be pictured out and
described to you in this homely way: An Opportunist stands well out of the sparks of the fire,
and well in behind the stone wall, till the fanatics for liberty, equality, and fraternity
have snatched the chestnuts out of the fire, and then the Opportunist steps out from his safe
place and blandly divides the well-roasted tid-bits among his family and his friends.  As long
as there is any jeopardy, the Jacobins are denounced and held up to opprobrium; but when the
jeopardy and the risk are well past, the sober- minded, cautious, conservative, and responsible
statesmen walk off with the portfolios of place and privilege and pay under their honest arms.
But these are the unprincipled papists and infidels of a mushroom republic; and, thank God,
such spurious patriotism, and such sham and selfish statesmanship, have not yet shown their
miserable heads among faithful, fearless, straightforward, and uncalculating Englishmen.  At
the same time, if ever that continental vice should attack our national character, we have
two well-known essays in our ethical and casuistical literature that may with perfect safety
be pitted against anything that either France or Italy has produced.  Even if they are but
a master's irony, let all ambitious men keep Of Cunning and Of Wisdom for a Man's Self under
their pillow.  Let all young men who would toady a great man; let all young ministers who would
tune their pulpit to king, or court, or society; let all tradesmen and merchants who prefer
their profits to their principles--if they have literature enough, let them soak their honest
minds in our great Chancellor's sage counsels; and he who promoted Anything and dubbed him
his Darling, he will, no doubt, publish both a post and a title on his birthday for you also.

2.  'What religion is he of?' asks Dean Swift.  'He is an Anythingarian,' is the answer, 'for
he makes his self-interest the sole standard of his life and doctrine.'  And Archbishop Leighton,
a very different churchman from the bitter author of the Polite Conversations, is equally contemptuous
toward the self-seeker in divine things.  'Your boasted peaceableness often proceeds from a
superficial temper; and, not seldom, from a supercilious disdain of whatever has no marketable
use or value, and from your utter indifference to true religion.  Toleration is an herb of
spontaneous growth in the soil of indifference.  Much of our union of minds proceeds from want
of knowledge and from want of affection to religion.  Many who boast of their church conformity,
and that no one hears of their noise, may thank the ignorance of their minds for that kind
of quietness.'  But by far the most powerful assault that ever was made upon lukewarmness in
religion and upon self-seeking in the Church was delivered by Dante in the tremendous third
canto of his Inferno:--

         Various tongues,
   Horrible languages, outcries of woe,
   Accents of anger, voices deep and hoarse,
   With hands together smote that swelled the sounds,
   Made up a tumult that for ever whirls
   Round through that air with solid darkness stain'd,
   Like to the sand that in the whirlwind flies.
   I then, with error yet encompass'd, cried,
   'O master!  What is this I hear?  Mercy and Justice scorn them both.
   Speak not of them, but look and pass them by.'
   Forthwith, I understood for certain this the tribe
   Of those ill spirits both to God displeasing
   And to His foes.  Those wretches who ne'er lived,
   Went on in nakedness, and sorely stung
   By wasps and hornets, which bedewed their cheeks
   With blood, that mix'd with tears dropp'd to their feet,
   And by disgustful worms was gathered there.

3.  Now, we must all lay it continually and with uttermost humiliation to heart that we all
have Captain Anything's opportunism, his self-interest, his insincerity, his instability, and
his secret deceitfulness in ourselves.  That man knows little of himself who does not despise
and hate himself for his secret self-seeking even in the service of God.  For, how the love
of praise will seduce and corrupt this man, and the love of gain that man!  How easy it is
to flatter and adulate this man out of all his former opinions and his deepest principles,
and how an expected advantage will make that other man forget now an old alliance and now a
deep antipathy!  How often the side we take even in the most momentous matters is decided by
the most unworthy motives and the most contemptible considerations!  Unstable as water, Reuben
shall not excel.  Double-minded men, we, like Jacob's first-born, are unstable in all our ways.
We have no anchor, or, what anchor we sometimes have soon slips.  We have no fixed pole-star
by which to steer our life.  Any will-o'-the-wisp of pleasure, or advantage, or praise will
run us on the rocks.  The searchers of Mansoul, after long search, at last lighted on Anything,
and soon made an end of him.  Seek him out in your own soul also.  Be you sure he is somewhere
there.  He is skulking somewhere there.  And, having found him, if you cannot on the spot make
an end of him, keep your eye on him, and never say that you are safe from him and his company
as long as you are in this soul-deceiving life.  And, that Anything will not be let enter the
gates of the city you are set on seeking, that will go largely to make that sweet and clean
and truthful city your very heaven to you.

4.  'I am made all things to all men, and I please all men in all things.'  One would almost
think that was Captain Anything himself, in a frank, cynical, and self-censorious moment. 
But if you will look it up you will see that it was a very different man.  The words are the
words of Anything, but the heart behind the words is the heart of Paul.  And this, again, teaches
us that we should be like the Messiah in this also, not to judge after the sight of our eyes,
nor to reprove after the hearing of our ears.  Miserable Anything! outcast alike of heaven
and hell!  But, O noble and blessed Apostle! the man, says Thomas Goodwin, who shall be found
seated next to Jesus Christ Himself in the kingdom of God.  To the weak became I as weak, that
I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save some.
Giving none offence, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.  Even
as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that
they may be saved.'  Noble words, and inspiring to read.  Yes: but look within, and think what
Paul must have passed through; think what he must have been put through before he,--a man of
like selfish passions as we are, a man of like selfish passions as Anything was,--could say
all that.  Let his crosses and his thorns; his raptures up to the third heaven, and his body
of death that he bore about with him all his days; let his magnificent spiritual gifts, and
his still more magnificent spiritual graces tell how they all worked together to make the chief
of sinners out of the blameless Pharisee, and, at the same time, Christ's own chosen vessel
and the apostle of all the churches. Boasting about his patron apostle, St. Augustine says:
'Far be it from so great an apostle, a vessel elect of God, an organ of the Holy Ghost, to
be one man when he preached and another when he wrote; one man in private and another in public.
He was made all things to all men, not by the craft of a deceiver, but from the affection of
a sympathiser, succouring the diverse diseases of souls with the diverse emotions of compassion;
to the little ones dispensing the lesser doctrines, not false ones, but the higher mysteries
to the perfect--all of them, however, true, harmonious, and divine.'  The exquisite irony of
Socrates comes into my mind in this connection, and will not be kept out of my mind.  By instinct
as well as by art Socrates mixed up the profoundest seriousness with the humorous affectation
of qualities of mind and even of character the exact opposite of what all who loved him knew
to be the real Socrates.  'Intellectually,' says Dr. Thomson, 'the acutest man of his age,
Socrates represents himself in all companies as the dullest person present.  Morally the purest,
he affects to be the slave of passion and borrows the language even of the lewd to describe
a love and a good-will far too exalted for the comprehension of his contemporaries.  This irony
of his disarmed ridicule by anticipating it; it allayed jealousy and propitiated envy; and
it possibly procured him admission into gay circles from which a more solemn teacher would
have been excluded.  But all the time it had for its basis a real greatness of soul, a hearty
and an unaffected disregard of public opinion, a perfect disinterestedness, and an entire abnegation
of self.  He made himself a fool in order that fools by his folly might be made wise; he humbled
himself to the level of those among whom his work lay that he might raise some few among them
to his own level; he was all things to all men, if by any means he might save some.  Till Alcibiades
ends the splendid eloge that Plato puts into his mouth with these words, "All my master's vice
and stupidity and worship of wealthy and great men is counterfeit.  It is all but the Silenus-mask
which conceals the features of the god within; for if you remove the covering, how shall I
describe to you, my friends and boon companions, the excellence of the beauty you will find
within!  Whether any of you have seen Socrates in his serious mood, when he has thrown aside
the mask and disclosed the divine features beneath it, is more than I know.  But I have seen
them, and I can tell you that they seemed to me glorious and marvellous, and, truly, godlike
in their beauty."'

Well, now, I gather out of all that this great lesson: that it is, to begin with, a mere matter
of temperament, or what William Law would call a mere matter of complexion and sensibility,
whether, to begin with, a man is hard, and dry, and narrow, and stiff, and proud, and scornful,
and cruel; or again, whether he is soft and tender, broad and open, and full of sympathy and
of the milk of human kindness.  At first, and to begin with, there is neither praise nor blame
as yet in the matter.  A man is hard just as a stone is hard; it is his nature.  Or he is soft
as clay is soft; it is again his nature.  But, inheriting such a nature, and his inherited
nature beginning to appear, then is the time when the true man really begins to be made.  The
bad man dwells in contentment, and, indeed, by preference, at home in his own hard, proud,
scornful, resentful heart; or, again, in his facile, fawning, tide-waiting, time- serving heart;
and thus he chooses, accepts, and prefers his evil fate, and never seeks the help either of
God or man to enable him to rise above it.  Paul was not, when we meet him first, the sweet,
humble, affable, placable, makeable man that he made himself and came to be after a lifetime
of gospel-preaching and of adorning the gospel he preached.  And all the assistances and all
the opportunities that came to Paul are still coming to you and to me; till, whether naturally
pliable and affectionate or the opposite, we at last shall come to the temperament, the complexion,
and the exquisite sensibility of Paul himself.  Are you, then, a hard, stiff, severe, censorious,
proud, angry, scornful man?  Or are you a too-easy, too-facile man-pleaser and self-seeker,
being all things to all men that you may make use of all men?  Are you?  Then say so.  Confess
it to be so.  Admit that you have found yourself out.  And reflect every day what you have
got to do in life.  Consider what a new birth you need and must have.  Number your days that
are left you in which to make you a new heart, and a new nature, and a new character. Consider
well how you are to set about that divine work.  You have a minister, and your minister is
called a divine because by courtesy he is supposed to understand that divine work, and to be
engaged on it night and day in himself, and in season and out of season among his people. 
He will tell you how you are to make you a new heart.  Or, if he does not and cannot do that;
if he preaches about everything but that to a people who will listen to anything but that,
then your soul is not in his hands but in your own.  You may not be able to choose your minister,
but you can choose what books you are to buy, or borrow, and read.  And if there is not a minister
within a hundred miles of you who knows his right hand from his left, then there are surely
some booksellers who will advise you about the classical books of the soul till you can order
them for yourselves.  And thus, if it is your curse and your shame to be as spongy, and soapy,
and oily, and slippery as Anything himself; if you choose your church and your reading with
any originality, sense, and insight, you need not fear but that you will be let live till you
die an honest, upright, honourable, fearless gentleman: no timid friend to unfashionable truth,
as you are to-night, but a man like Thomas Boston's Ettrick elder, who lies waiting the last
trump under a gravestone engraven with this legend: Here lies a man who had a brow for every
good cause.  Only, if you would have that written and read on your headstone, you have no time
to lose.  If I were you I would not sit another Sabbath under a minister whose preaching was
not changing my nature, making my heart new, and transforming my character; no, not though
the Queen herself sat in the same loft.  And I would leave the church even of my fathers, and
become anything as far as churches go, if I could get a minister who held my face close and
ever closer up to my own heart.  Nor would I spend a shilling or an hour that I could help
on any impertinent book,--any book that did not powerfully help me in the one remaining interest
of my one remaining life: a new nature and a new heart.  No, not I.  No, not I any more.

CHAPTER X--CLIP-PROMISE

   ' . . . the promise made of none effect.'--Paul

Toward the end of the thirteenth century Edward the First, the English Justinian, brought a
select colony of artists from Italy to England and gave them a commission to execute their
best coinage for the English Mint.  Deft and skilful as those artists were, the work they turned
out was but rude and clumsy compared with some of the gold and silver and copper coins of our
day.  The Florentine artists took a sheet of gold or of silver and divided the sheet up with
great scissors, and then they hammered the cut-out pieces as only a Florentine hammerman could
hammer them. The two former appear to be young cocks and the last to be hens. Baby koels, in addition
to hatching out before their foster-brethren, develop more quickly, so that they leave the nest
fully a week in advance of the young corvi. After vacating the nest they squat for some days
on a branch close by; numbers of them are to be seen thus in suitable localities towards the
end of July. At first the call of the koel is a squeak, but later it takes the form of a creditable,
if ludicrous, attempt at a caw. The young cuckoo does not seem to be able to distinguish its
foster-parents from other crows; it clamours for food whenever any crow comes near it.

Of the scenes characteristic of the rains in India none is more pleasing than that presented
by a colony of nest-building bayas or weaver-birds (Ploceus baya). These birds build in company.
Sometimes more than twenty of their wonderful retort-like nests are to be seen in one tree. This means
that more than forty birds are at work, and, as each of these indulges in much cheerful twittering,
the tree in question presents an animated scene. Both sexes take part in nest-construction.

Having
selected the branch of a tree from which the nest will hang, the birds proceed to collect material.
Each completed nest contains many yards of fibre not much thicker than stout thread. Such material
is not found in quantity in nature. The bayas have, therefore, to manufacture it. This is easily
done. The building weaver-bird betakes itself to a clump of elephant-grass, and, perching on
one of the blades, makes a notch in another near the base. Then, grasping with its beak the
edge of this blade above the notch, the baya flies away and thus strips off a narrow strand.
Sometimes the strand adheres to the main part of the blade at the tip so firmly that the force
of the flying baya is not sufficient to sever it. The bird then swings for a few seconds in mid-air,
suspended by the strip of leaf. Not in the least daunted the baya makes a fresh effort and flies off,
still gripping the strand firmly. At the third, if not at the second attempt, the thin strip
is completely severed. Having secured its prize the weaver-bird proceeds to tear off one or
two more strands and then flies with these in its bill to the nesting site, uttering cries
of delight. The fibres obtained in this manner are bound round the branch from which the nest
will hang. More strands are added to form a stalk; when this has attained a length of several
inches it is gradually expanded in the form of an umbrella or bell. The next step is to weave a
band of grass across the mouth of the bell. In this condition the nest is often left unfinished.
Indians call such incomplete nests jhulas or swings; they assert that these are made in order
that the cocks may sit in them and sing to their mates while these are incubating the eggs. It
may be, as "Eha" suggests, that at this stage the birds are dissatisfied
with the balance of the nest and for this reason leave it.

If the nest, at this point of its construction, please the weaver-birds they proceed to finish
it by closing up the bell at one side of the cross-band to form a receptacle for the eggs, and
prolonging the other half of the bell into a long tunnel or neck. This neck forms the entrance to
the nest; towards its extremity it becomes very flimsy so that it affords no foothold to an enemy.
Nearly every baya's nest contains some lumps of clay attached to it. Jerdon was of opinion
that the function of these is to balance the nest properly. Indians state that the bird sticks
fireflies into the lumps of clay to light up the nest at night. This story has found its way into
some ornithological text-books. There is no truth in it. The present writer is inclined to
think that the object of these lumps of clay is to prevent the light loofah-like nest swinging
too violently in a gale of wind.

Both sexes take part in nest-construction. After the formation of the cross-bar at the mouth
of the bell one of the birds sits inside and the other outside, and they pass the strands to
each other and thus the weaving proceeds rapidly. While working at the nest the bayas, more
especially the cocks, are in a most excited state. They sing, scream, flap their wings and snap
the bill. Sometimes one cock in his excitement attacks a neighbour by jumping on his back!
This results in a fight in which the birds flutter in the air, pecking at one another. Often
the combatants "close" for a few seconds, but neither bird seems to get hurt in these little contests.

Every
bird-lover should make a point of watching a company of weaver-birds while these are constructing
their nests. The tree or trees in which they build can easily be
located by sending a servant in July to search for them.

The favourite sites for nests in the United Provinces seem to be babul trees that grow near borrow
pits alongside the railroad.

In the rainy season two other birds weave nests, which are nearly as elegant as those woven
by the baya. These birds, however, do not nest in company. They usually build inside bushes,
or in long grass.

For this reason they do not lend themselves to observation while at work so readily as bayas do.
The birds in question are the Indian and the ashy wren-warbler.

The former species brings up two broods in the year. One, as has been mentioned, in March and the
other in the "rains."

The nest of the Indian wren-warbler (Prinia inornata) is, except for its shape and its smaller
size, very like that of a weaver-bird. It is an elongated purse or pocket, closely and compactly
woven with fine strips of grass from 1/40 to 1/20 inch in breadth. The nest is entered by a hole
near the top. They push the ends of the grass in and out just as weaver-birds do. Like the baya,
the Indian wren-warbler does not line its nest.

The ashy wren-warbler (Prinia socialis) builds two distinct kinds of nest. One is just like
that of the tailor-bird, being formed by sewing or cobbling together two, three, four or five
leaves, and lining the cup thus formed with down, wool, cotton or other soft material. The
second kind of nest is a woven one. This is a hollow ball with a hole in the side. The weaving
is not so neat as that of the baya and the Indian wren-warbler. Moreover, several kinds of material
are usually worked into the nest, which is invariably lined.

The building of two totally different types of nest is an interesting phenomenon, and seems to indicate
that under the name Prinia socialis are classed two different species, which anatomically are
so like one another that systematists are unable to separate them. Both kinds of nests are found
in the same locality and at the same time of the year. Against the theory that there are two
species of ashy wren-warbler is the fact that there is no difference in appearance between the eggs
found in the two kinds of nest. All eggs are brick-red or mahogany colour, without any spots
or markings.

Many of the Indian cliff-swallows, of which the nests are described in the calendar for March,
bring up a second brood in the "rains."

Needless to state that in the monsoon the tank and the jhil are the happy hunting grounds of
the ornithologist.

In July and August not less than thirty species of waterfowl nidificate. Floating nests are constructed
by sarus cranes, purple coots and the jacanas. The various species of egrets breed in colonies
in trees in some village not far from a tank; in company with them spoonbills, cormorants,
snake-birds, night-herons and other birds often nest. The white-breasted waterhen constructs
its nursery in a thicket at the margin of some village pond.

The resident ducks are also busy with their nests. These are in branches of trees, in holes
in trees or old buildings, or on the ground.

When describing the nesting operations of waterfowl in Northern India it is difficult to apportion
these between July and August, for the eggs of almost all such species are as likely to be found
in the one month as in the other. A few individuals begin to lay in June, the majority commence
in July, but a great many defer operations until August. There is scarcely an aquatic species
of which it can be said: "It never lays before August." Nor are there many of which it can be
asserted: "Their eggs are never found after July."

Individuals differ in their habit. A retarded monsoon means that the water-birds begin to nest later
than usual.

The first fall of the monsoon rain seems to be the signal for the commencement of nesting operations,
but by no means every pair of birds obeys the signal immediately.

The nearest approach to a generalisation which it is possible to make is that the egrets and paddy-birds
are usually the first of the monsoon breeders to begin nest-building, while the spot-billed
duck, the whistling teal and the bronze-winged jacana are the last. In other words, the eggs
of the former are most likely to be found in July and those of the latter in August.

As the calendar for this month has already attained considerable dimensions, a description
of the nests of all these water-birds is given in the August calendar. It is, however, necessary
to state that the eggs of the following birds are likely to be found in July: purple coot, common
coot, bronze-winged and pheasant-tailed jacana, black ibis, white-necked stork, cormorant, snake-bird,
cotton teal, comb duck, spot-billed duck, spoonbill, and the various herons and egrets.

AUGUST

See! the flushed horizon flames intense With vivid red, in rich profusion streamed O'er heaven's
pure arch. At once the clouds assume Their gayest liveries; these with silvery beams Fringed
lovely; splendid those in liquid gold, And speak their sovereign's state. He comes, behold!
MALLET.

The transformation scene described in July continues throughout August. Torrential rain alternates
with fierce sunshine. The earth is verdant with all shades of green. Most conspicuous of these
are the yellowish verdure of the newly-transplanted rice, the vivid emerald of the young plants
that have taken root, the deeper hue of the growing sugar-cane, and the dark green of the
mango topes.

Unless the monsoon has been unusually late in reaching Northern India the autumn crops are
all sown before the first week in August. The sugar-cane is now over five feet in height. The
cultivators are busily transplanting the better kinds of rice, or running the plough through
fields in which the coarser varieties are growing.

The aloes are in flower. Their white spikes of drooping tulip-like flowers are almost the only
inflorescences to be seen outside gardens at this season of the year. The mango crop is over,
but that of the pineapples takes its place.

At night-time many of the trees are illumined by hundreds of fireflies. These do not burn their
lamps continuously. Each insect lets its light shine for a few seconds and then suddenly puts
it out. It sometimes happens that all the fireflies in a tree show their lights and extinguish
them simultaneously and thereby produce a luminous display which is strikingly beautiful.
Fireflies are to be seen during the greater part of the year, but they are far more abundant
in the "rains" than at any other season.

As in July so in August the voices of the birds are rarely heard after dark. The nocturnal
music is now the product of the batrachian band, ably seconded by the crickets.

During a prolonged break in the rains the frogs and toads are hushed,
except in jhils and low-lying paddy fields.

   Cessation of the rain, however, does not silence the crickets.

   
   

   The first streak of dawn is the signal for the striking up of the
jungle and the spotted owlets.

Hard upon them follow the koels and the brain-fever birds. These call only for a short time, remaining
silent during the greater part of the day. Other birds that lift up their voices at early dawn
are the crow-pheasant, the black partridge and the peacock. These also call towards dusk. As
soon as the sun has risen the green barbets, coppersmiths, white-breasted kingfishers and king-crows
utter their familiar notes; even these birds are heard but rarely in the middle of the day, nor
have their voices the vigour that characterised them in the hot weather. Occasionally the brown rock-chat
emits a few notes, but he does so in a half-hearted manner. In the early days of August the magpie-robins
sing at times; their song, however, is no longer the brilliant performance it was. By the end of the
month it has completely died away.

The Indian cuckoo no more raises its voice in the plains, but the pied crested-cuckoo continues
to call lustily and the pied starlings make a joyful noise. The oriole's
liquid pee-ho is gradually replaced by the loud tew, which is its
usual cry at times when it is not nesting.

The water-birds, being
busy at their nests, are of course noisy, but, with the exception
of the loud trumpeting of the sarus cranes, their vocal efforts are
heard only at the jhil.

The did-he-do-its, the rollers, the bee-eaters,
two or three species of warblers and the perennial singers complete
the avian chorus.

Numbers of rosy starlings are returning from Asia
Minor, where they have reared up their broods. The inrush of these
birds begins in July and continues till October. They are the forerunners
of the autumn immigrants. Towards the end of the month the garganey
or blue-winged teal (Querquedula circia), which are the earliest of
the migratory ducks to visit India, appear on the tanks. Along with
them comes the advance-guard of the snipe. The pintail snipe (Gallinago
stenura) are invariably the first to appear, but they visit only the
eastern parts of Northern India. Large numbers of them sojourn in
Bengal and Assam. Stragglers appear in the eastern portion of the
United Provinces; in the western districts and in the Punjab this
snipe is a rara avis. By the third week in August good bags of pintail
snipe are sometimes obtained in Bengal. The fantail or full-snipe
(G. coelestis) is at least one week later in arriving. This species
has been shot as early as the 24th August, but there is no general
immigration of even the advance-guard until quite the end of the month.

The
jack-snipe (G. gallinula) seems never to appear before September.

Most
of the monsoon broods of the Indian cliff-swallow emerge from the
eggs in August. The "rains" breeding season of the amadavats or red
munias is now over, and the bird-catcher issues forth to snare them.

His
stock-in-trade consists of some seed and two or three amadavats in
one of the pyramid-shaped wicker cages that can be purchased for a
few annas in any bazaar. To the base of one of the sides of the cage
a flap is attached by a hinge. The flap, which is of the same shape
and size as the side of the cage, is composed of a frame over which
a small-meshed string net is stretched. A long string is fastened
to the apex of the flap and passed through a loop at the top of the
cage. Selecting an open space near some tall grass in which amadavats
are feeding, the bird-catcher sets down the cage and loosens the string
so that the flap rests on the earth. Some seed is sprinkled on the
flap. Then the trapper squats behind a bush, holding the end of the
string in his hand. The cheerful little lals inside the cage soon
begin to twitter and sing, and their calls attract the wild amadavats
in the vicinity. These come to the cage, alight on the flap, and begin
to eat the seed.  'Lord, is it I?' was a very good question, though put by a very bad man. 
Let us, one and all, then, put the traitor's question to ourselves to-night.  Am I stiff old
Loth-to-stoop?--let every man in this house say to himself all through this service, and then
at home when reviewing the day, and then all to-morrow when to stoop will be so loathsome and
so impossible to us all.

1.  To begin, then, at the very bottom of this whole matter, take stiff old Loth-to-stoop as
a guilty sinner in the sight of God.  Let us take this stiff old man in this dreadful character
to begin with, because it is in this deepest and most dreadful aspect of his nature and his
character that he is introduced to us in the Holy War.  And I shall stand aside and let John
Bunyan himself describe Loth-to-stoop in the matter of his justification before God.  'That
is a great stoop for a sinner to have to take,' says our apostolic author in another classical
place, 'a too great stoop to have to suffer the total loss of all his own righteousness, and,
actually, to have to look to another for absolutely everything of that kind.  That is no easy
matter for any man to do.  I say to do that in deed and in truth is the biggest piece of the
cross, and therefore it is that Paul calls it a suffering.  "I have suffered the loss of all
things that I might win Christ, and be found in Him, not having mine own righteousness."' 
That is John Bunyan's characteristic comment on stiff old Loth-to-stoop as a guilty sinner,
with the offer of a full forgiveness set before him.

2.  And then our so truthful and so fertile author goes on to give us Loth-to-stoop as a half-saved
sinner; a sinner, that is, trying to make his own terms with God about his full salvation.
Through three most powerful pages we see stiff old Loth-to-stoop engaged in beating down God's
unalterable terms of salvation, and in bidding for his full salvation upon his own reduced
and easy terms.  It was the tremendous stoop of the Son of God from the throne of God to the
cradle and the carpenter's shop; and then, as if that were not enough, it was that other tremendous
stoop of His down to the Garden and the Cross,--it was these two so tremendous stoops of Jesus
Christ that made stiff old Loth-to-stoop's salvation even possible.  But, with all that, his
true salvation was not possible without stoop after stoop of his own; stoop after stoop which,
if not so tremendous as those of Christ, were yet tremendous enough, and too tremendous, for
him.  Old Loth-to-stoop carries on a long and a bold debate with Emmanuel in order to lessen
the stoop that Emmanuel demands of him; and your own life and mine, my brethren, at their deepest
and at their closest to our own heart, are really at bottom, like Loth-to-stoop's life, one
long roup of salvation, in which God tries to get us up to His terms and in which we try to
get Him down to our terms.  His terms are, that we shall sell absolutely all that we have for
the salvation of our souls; and our terms are, salvation or no salvation, to keep all that
we have and to seek every day for more. God absolutely demands that we shall stoop to the very
dust every day, till we become the poorest, the meanest, the most despicable, and the most
hopeless of men; whereas we meet that divine demand with the proud reply--Is Thy servant a
dog?  It was with this offended mind that stiff old Loth-to-stoop at last left off from Emmanuel's
presence; he would die rather than come down to such degrading terms.  And as Loth-to-stoop
went away, Emmanuel looked after him, well remembering the terrible night when He Himself was,
not indeed like Loth-to-stoop, nor near like him, but when His own last stoop was so deep that
it made Him cry out, Father, save Me from this hour! and again, If it be possible let this
so tremendous stoop pass from Me.  For a moment Emmanuel Himself was loth to stoop, but only
for a moment.  For He soon rose from off His face in a bath of blood, saying, Not My will,
but Thine be done!  When Thomas A Kempis is negotiating with the Loth-to-stoops of his unevangelical
day, we hear him saying to them things like this: 'Jesus Christ was despised of men, forsaken
of His friends and lovers, and in the midst of slanders. He was willing, under His Father's
will, to suffer and to be despised, and darest thou to complain of any man's usage of thee?
Christ, thy Master, had enemies and back-biters, and dost thou expect to have all men to be
thy friends and benefactors?  Whence shall thy patience attain her promised crown if no adversity
befall thee?  Suffer thou with Jesus Christ, and for His sake, if thou wouldst reign with Him.
Set thyself, therefore, to bear manfully the cross of thy Lord, who, out of love, was crucified
for thee.  Know for certain that thou must lead a daily dying life.  And the more that thou
diest to thyself all that the more shalt thou live unto God.'  With many such words as these
did Thomas teach the saints of his day to stoop to their daily cross; a daily cross then, which
has now been for long to him and to them an everlasting crown.

3.  And speaking of A Kempis, and having lately read some of his most apposite chapters, such
as that on the Holy Fathers and that on Obedience and Subjection, leads me on to look at Loth-to-stoop
when he enters the sacred ministry, as he sometimes does.  When a half-converted, half-subdued,
half-saved sinner gets himself called to the sacred ministry his office will either greatly
hasten on his salvation, or else it will greatly hinder and endanger it.  He will either stoop
down every day to deeper and ever deeper depths of humility, or he will tower up in pride of
office and in pride of heart past all hope of humility, and thus of salvation.  The holy ministry
is a great nursing-house of pride as we see in a long line of popes, and prelates, and priests,
and other lords over God's heritage.  And our own Presbyterian polity, while it hands down
to us the simplicity, the unity, the brotherhood, and the humility of the apostolic age, at
the same time leaves plenty of temptation and plenty of opportunity for the pride of the human
heart.  Our preaching and pastoral office, when it is aright laid to our hearts, will always
make us the meekest and the humblest of men, even when we carry the most magnificent of messages.
But when our own hearts are not right the very magnificence of our message, and the very authority
of our Master, become all so many subtle temptations to pride, pique, self-importance, and
lothness-to-stoop.  With so much still to learn, how slow we ministers are to stoop to learn!
How still we stand, and even go back, when all other men are going forward!

And then, when, not having so resolved, our thin vein of youthful knowledge and experience
has been worked to the rock; when grey hairs are here and there upon us, how slow we are to
stoop to that!  How unwilling we are to let it light on our hearts that our time is past; that
we are no longer able to understand, or interest, or attract the young; and, besides, that
that is not all their blame, no, nor ours either, but simply the order and method of Divine
Providence.  How slow we are to see that Divine Providence has other men standing ready to
take up our work if we would only humbly lay it down;--how loth we are to stoop to see all
that!  How unwilling we are to make up our minds, we old and ageing ministers, and to humble
our hearts to accept an assistant or to submit to a colleague to stand alongside of us in our
unaccomplished work!

4.  In public life also, as we call it, what disasters to the state, to the services, and to
society, are constantly caused by this same Loth-to- stoop!  When he holds any public office;
when he becomes the leader of a party; when he is promoted to be an adviser of the Crown; when
he is put at the head of a fleet of ships, or of an army of men, what untold evils does Loth-to-stoop
bring both on himself and on the nation!  An old statesman will have committed himself to some
line of legislation or of administration; a great captain will have committed himself to some
manoeuvre of a squadron or of a division, or to some plan of battle, and some subordinate will
have discovered the error his leader has made, and will be bold to point it out to him.  But
stiff old Loth-to-stoop has taken his line and has passed his word.  His honour, as he holds
it, is committed to this announced line of action; and, if the Crown itself should perish before
his policy, he will not stoop to change it.  How often you see that in great affairs as well
as in small.  How seldom you see a public man openly confessing that he has hitherto all along
been wrong, and that he has at last and by others been set right.  Not once in a generation.
But even that once redeems public life; it ennobles public life; and it saves the nation and
the sovereign who possess such a true patriot.  Consistency and courage, independence and dignity,
are high- sounding words; but openness of mind, teachableness, diffidence, and humility always
go with true nobility as well as with ultimate success and lasting honour.

CHAPTER XII--THAT VARLET ILL-PAUSE, THE DEVIL'S ORATOR

   'I made haste and delayed not.'--David.

John Bunyan shall himself introduce, describe, and characterise this varlet, this devil's ally
and accomplice, this ancient enemy of Mansoul, whose name is Ill-pause.  Well, this same Ill-pause,
says our author, was the orator of Diabolus on all difficult occasions, nor took Diabolus any
other one with him on difficult occasions, but just Ill-pause alone.  And always when Diabolus
had any special plot a-foot against Mansoul, and when the thing went as Diabolus would have
it go, then would Ill-pause stand up, for he was Diabolus his orator.  When Mansoul was under
siege of Emmanuel his four noble captains sent a message to the men of the town that if they
would only throw Ill-pause over the wall to them, that they might reward him according to his
works, then they would hold a parley with the city; but if this varlet was to be let live in
the city, then, why, the city must see to the consequences.  At which Diabolus, who was there
present, was loth to lose his orator, because, had the four captains once laid their fingers
on Ill-pause, be sure his master had lost his orator.  And, then, in the last assault, we read
that Ill-pause, the orator that came along with Diabolus, he also received a grievous wound
in the head, some say that his brain-pan was cracked.  This, at any rate, I have taken notice
of, that never after this was he able to do that mischief to Mansoul as he had done in times
past.  And then there was also at Eye-gate that Ill-pause of whom you have heard before.  The
same was he that was orator to Diabolus.  He did much mischief to the town of Mansoul, till
at last he fell by the hand of the Captain Good- hope.

1.  Well, to begin with, this Ill-pause was a filthy Diabolonian varlet; a treacherous and
a villainous old varlet, the author of the Holy War calls him.  Now, what is a varlet?  Well,
a varlet is just a broken-down old valet.  A varlet is a valet who has come down, and down,
and down, and down again in the world, till, from once having been the servant and the trusty
friend of the very best of masters, he has come to be the ally and accomplice of the very worst
of masters.  His first name, the name of his first office, still sticks to him, indeed; but,
like himself, and with himself, his name has become depraved and corrupted till you would not
know it.  A varlet, then, is just short and sharp for a scoundrel who is ready for anything;
and the worse the thing is the more ready he is for it.  There are riff-raff and refuse always
about who are ready to volunteer for any filibustering expedition; and that full as much for
the sheer devilry of the enterprise as for any real profit it is to be to themselves.  Wherever
mischief is to be done, there your true varlet is sure to turn up.  Well, just such a land-shark
was this Ill-pause, who was such an ally and accomplice to Diabolus that he had need for no
other.  What possible certificate in evil could exceed this--that the devil took not any with
him when he went out on his worst errand but this same Ill-pause, who was his orator on all
his most difficult occasions?

2.  Ill-pause was a varlet, then, and he was also an orator.  Now, an orator, as you know,
is a great speaker.  An orator is a man who has the excellent and influential gift of public
speech.  And on great occasions in public life when people are to be instructed, and impressed,
and moved, and won over, then the great orator sets up his platform. Quintilian teaches us
in his Institutes that it is only a good man who can be a really great orator.  What would
that fine writer have said had he lived to read the Holy War, and seen the most successful
of all orators that ever opened a mouth, and who was all the time a diabolical old varlet?
What would the author of The Education of an Orator have said to that?  Diabolus did not on
every occasion bring up his great orator Ill-pause.  He did not always come up himself, and
he did not always send up Ill-pause.  It was only on difficult occasions that both Diabolus
and his orator also came up.  You do not hear your great preachers every Sabbath.  They would
not long remain great preachers, and you would soon cease to pay any attention to them, if
they were always in the pulpit.  Neither do you have your great orators at every street corner.
Their masters only build theatres for them when some great occasion arises in the land, and
when the best wisdom must straightway be spoken to the people and in the best way.  Then you
bring up Quintilian's orator if you have him at your call.  As Diabolus has done from time
to time with his great and almost always successful orator Ill-pause.  On difficult occasions
he came himself on the scene and Ill-pause with him. On such difficult occasions as in the
Garden of Eden; as when Noah was told to make haste and build an ark; as also when Abraham
was told to make haste and leave his father's house; when Jacob was bid remember and pay the
vow he had made when his trouble was upon him; as also when Joseph had to flee for what was
better than life; and on that memorable occasion when David sent Joab out against Rabbah, but
David tarried still at Jerusalem.  On all these essential, first-class, and difficult occasions
the old serpent brought up Ill-pause.  As also when our Lord was in the wilderness; when He
set His face to go up to Jerusalem; when He saw certain Greeks among them that came up to the
passover; as also again and again in the Garden.  As also on crucial occasions in your own
life.  As when you had been told not to eat, not to touch, and not even to look at the forbidden
fruit, then Ill-pause, the devil's orator, came to you and said that it was a tree to be desired.
And, you shall not surely die.  As also when you were moved to terror and to tears under a
Sabbath, or under a sermon, or at some death-bed, or on your own sick- bed--Ill-pause got you
to put off till a more convenient season your admitted need of repentance and reformation and
peace with God.  On such difficult occasions as these the devil took Ill-pause to help him
with you, and the result, from the devil's point of view, has justified his confidence in his
orator.  When Ill-pause gets his new honours paid him in hell; when there is a new joy in hell
over another sinner that has not yet repented, your name will be heard sounding among the infernal
cheers. Just think of your baptismal name and your pet name at home giving them joy to-night
at their supper in hell!  And yet one would not at first sight think that such triumphs and
such toasts, such medals, and clasps, and garters were to be won on earth or in hell just by
saying such simple- sounding and such commonplace things as those are for which Ill-pause receives
his decorations.  'Take time,' he says.  'Yes,' he admits, 'but there is no such hurry; to-morrow
will do; next year will do; after you are old will do quite as well.  The darkness shall cover
you, and your sin will not find you out.  Christ died for sin, and it is a faithful saying
that His blood will cleanse you later on from all this sin.' Everyday and well-known words,
indeed, but a true orator is seen in nothing more than in this, that he can take up what everybody
knows and says, and put it so as to carry everybody captive.  One of Quintilian's own orators
has said that a great speaker only gives back to his hearers in flood what they have already
given to him in vapour.

3.  'I was always pleased,' says Calvin, 'with that saying of Chrysostom, "The foundation of
our philosophy is humility"; and yet more pleased with that of Augustine: "As," says he, "the
rhetorician being asked, What was the first thing in the rules of eloquence? he answered, Pronunciation;
what was the second? Pronunciation; what was the third? and still he answered, Pronunciation.
So if you would ask me concerning the precepts of the Christian religion, I would answer, firstly,
secondly, thirdly, and for ever, Humility."'  And when Ill-pause opened his elocutionary school
for the young orators of hell, he is reported to have said this to them in his opening address,
'There are only three things in my school,' he said; 'three rules, and no more to be called
rules.  The first is Delay, the second is Delay, and the third is Delay.  Study the art of
delay, my sons; make all your studies to tell on how to make the fools delay.  Only get those
to whom your master sends you to delay, and you will not need to envy me my laurels; you will
soon have a shining crown of your own.  Get the father to delay teaching his little boy how
to pray.  Get him on any pretext you can invent to put off speaking in private to his son about
his soul.  Get him to delegate all that to the minister.  And then by hook or by crook get
that son as he grows up to put off the Lord's Supper.  And after that you will easily get him
to put off purity and prayer till he is a married man and at the head of a house.  Only get
the idea of a more convenient season well into their heads, and their game is up, and your
spurs are won.  Take their arm in yours, as I used to do, at their church door, if you are
posted there, and say to them as they come out that to-morrow will be time enough to give what
they had thought of giving while they were still in their pew and the minister or missionary
was still in the pulpit.  Only, as you value your master's praises and the applause of all
this place, keep them, at any cost, from striking while the iron is hot.  Let them fill their
hearts, and their mouths too, if it gives them any comfort, with the best intentions; only,
my scholars, remember that the beginning and middle and end of your office is by hook or by
crook to secure delay.' And a great crop of young orators sprang up ready for their work under
that teaching and out of the persuasionary school of Ill-pause.  In fine, Mansoul desired some
time in which to prepare its answer.'

There are many men among ourselves who have been bedevilled out of their best life, out of
the salvation of their souls, and out of all that constitutes and accompanies salvation now
for many years.  And still their sin-deceived hearts are saying to them to-night, Take time!
For many years, every new year, every birthday, and, for a long time, every Communion-day,
they were just about to be done with their besetting sin; and now all the years lie behind
them, one long downward road all paved, down to this Sabbath night, with the best intentions.
And, still, as if that were not enough, that same varlet is squat at their ear.  Well, my very
miserable brother, you have long talked about the end of an old year and the beginning of a
new year as being your set time for repentance and for reformation.  Let all the weight of
those so many remorseful years fall on your heart at the close of this year, and at last compel
you to take the step that should have been taken, oh! so many unhappy years ago! Go straight
home then, to-night, shut your door, and, after so many desecrated Sabbath nights, God will
still meet you in your secret chamber.  As soon as you shut your door God will be with you,
and you will be with God.  With GOD!  Think of it, my brother, and the thing is done.  With
GOD!  And then tell Him all.  And if any one knocks at your door, say that there is Some One
with you to-night, and that you cannot come down.  And continue till you have told it all to
God.  He knows it all already; but that is one of Ill-pause's sophistries still in your heart.
Tell your Father it all.  Tell Him how many years it is.  Tell Him all that you so well remember
over all those wild, miserable, mad, remorseful years.  Tell Him that you have not had one
really happy, one really satisfied day all those years, and tell Him that you have spent all,
and are now no longer a young man; youth and health and self-respect and self-command are all
gone, till you are a shipwreck rather than a man.  And tell Him that if He will take you back
that you are to-night at His feet.

4.  'We seldom overcome any one vice perfectly,' complains A Kempis.  And, again, 'If only
every new year we would root out but one vice.'  Well, now, what do you say to that, my true
and very brethren?  What do you say to that?  Here we are, by God's grace and long-suffering
to usward, near the end of another year, another vicious year; and why have we been borne with
through so many vicious years but that we should now cease from vice and begin to learn virtue?
Why are we here over Ill-pause this Sabbath night?  Why, but that we should shake off that
varlet liar before another new year.  That is the whole reason why we have been spared to see
this Sabbath night.  God decreed it for us that we should have this text and this discourse
here to-night, and that is the reason why you and I have been so unaccountably spared so long.
Let us select one vice for the axe then to-night, and give God in heaven the satisfaction of
seeing that His long-suffering with us has not been wholly in vain.  Let us lay the axe at
one vice from this night.  And what one from among so many shall it be?  What is the mockery
of preaching if a preacher does not practise? And, accordingly, I have selected one vice out
of my thicket for next year.  Will you do the same?  The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear Him.  Just make your selection and keep it to yourself, at least till you are able this
time next year to say to us--Come, all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what He hath done
for my soul.  Yes, come on, and from this day all your days on earth, and all the days of eternity,
you will thank God for John Bunyan and his Holy War and his Ill-pause.  Make your selection,
then, for your new axe.  Attack some one sin at this so auspicious season.  Swear before God,
and unknown to all men--swear sure death, and that without any more delay, to that selected
sin.  Never once, all your days, do that sin again.  Determine never once to do it again. 
Determine that by prayer, by secret, and at the same time outspoken, prayer on your knees.
Determine it by faith in the cleansing blood and renewing spirit of Jesus Christ.  Determine
it by fear of instant death, and by sure hope of everlasting life.  Determine it by reasons,
and motives, and arguments, and encouragements known to no- one but yourself, and to be suspected
by no human being.  Name the doomed sin.  Denounce it.  Execrate it.  Execute it.  Draw a line
across your short and uncertain life, and say to that besetting and presumptuous sin, Hitherto,
and no further!  Do not say you cannot do it.  You can if you only will.  You can if you only
choose.  And smiting down that one sin will loosen and shake down the whole evil fabric of
sin.  Breaking but that one link will break the whole of Satan's snare and evil fetter.  Here
is A Kempis's forest of vices out of which he hewed down one every year. Restless lust, outward
senses, empty phantoms, always longing to get, always sparing to give, careless as to talk,
unwilling to sit silent, eager for food, wakeful for news, weary of a good book, quick to anger,
easy of offence at my neighbour, and too ready to judge him, too merry over prosperity, and
too gloomy, fretful, and peevish in adversity; so often making good rules for my future life,
and coming so little speed with them all, and so on.  And, in facing even such a terrible thicket
as that, let not even an old man absolutely despair.  At forty, at sixty, at threescore and
ten, let not an old penitent despair.  Only take axe in hand and see if the sun does not stand
still upon Gibeon, and the moon in the valley of Ajalon till you have avenged yourself on your
enemies.  And always when you stop to wipe your brow, and to whet the edge of your axe, and
to wet your lips with water, keep on saying things like those of another great sinner deep
in his thicket of vice, say this: O God, he said, Thou hast not cut off as a weaver my life,
nor from day even to night hast Thou made an end of me.  But Thou hast vouchsafed to me life
and breath even to this hour from childhood, youth, and hitherto even unto old age.  He holdeth
our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to slide, rescuing me from perils, sicknesses,
poverty, bondage, public shame, evil chances; keeping me from perishing in my sins, and waiting
patiently for my full conversion.  Glory be to Thee, O Lord, glory to Thee, for Thine incomprehensible
and unimaginable goodness toward me of all sinners far and away the most unworthy.  The voices
and the concert of voices of angels and men be to Thee; the concert of all thy saints in heaven
and of all Thy creatures in heaven and on earth; and of me, beneath their feet an unworthy
and wretched sinner, Thy abject creature; my praise also, now, in this day and hour, and every
day till my last breath, and till the end of this world, and then to all eternity, where they
cease not saying, To Him who loved us, Amen!

This whole world is the penny, and our own souls are the pound.  This whole world is the hundred,
while heaven itself is the shire.  And the question this evening is, Are we wise in the penny
and foolish in the pound?  And, are we getting in the hundred and losing in the shire?

1.  Well, then, to begin at the beginning, we are already begun to be penny-wise and pound-foolish
with our children when we are so particular with them about their saying their little prayers
night and morning, while all the time we are so inattentive and so indolent to explain to them
how they are to pray, what they are to pray for, and how they are to wait and how long they
are to wait for the things they pray for.  Then, again, we are penny-wise and pound-foolish
with our children when we train them up into all the proprieties and etiquettes of family and
social life, and at the same time pay so little attention to their inward life of opening thought
and quickening desire and awakening passion.  When we are so eager also for our children to
be great with great people, without much regard to the moral and religious character of those
great people, then again we are like a man who may be wise for a penny, but is certainly a
fool for a pound.  When we prefer the gay and the fashionable world to the intellectual, the
religious, and the philanthropical world for our children, then we lose both the penny and
the pound as well. Almost as much as we do when we accept the penny of wealth and station and
so-called connection for a son or a daughter, in room of the pound of character, and intelligence,
and personal religion.

Then, again, even in our own religious life we are ourselves often and notoriously wise in
the penny and foolish in the pound.  As, for instance, when we are so scrupulous and so conscientious
about forms and ceremonies, about times and places, and so on.  In short, the whole ritual
that has risen up around spiritual religion in all our churches, from that of the Pope himself
out to that of George Fox--it is all the penny rather than the pound.  This rite and that ceremony;
this habit and that tradition; this ancient and long-established usage, as well as that new
departure and that threatened innovation;--it is all, at its best, always the penny and never
the pound.  Satan busied me about the lesser matters of religion, says James Fraser of Brea,
and made me neglect the more substantial points.  He made me tithe to God my mint, and my anise
and my cummin, and many other of my herbs, to my all but complete neglect of justice and mercy
and faith and love.  Whether there are any of the things that Brea would call mint and anise
and cummin that are taking up too much of the time of our controversially-minded men in all
our churches, highland and lowland, to-day is a matter for humbling thought. Labour, my brethren,
for yourselves, at any rate, to get yourselves into that sane and sober habit of mind that
instantly and instinctively puts all mint and all cummin of all kinds into the second place,
and all the weightier matters, both of law and of gospel, into the first place.  I wasted myself
on too nice points, laments Brea in his deep, honest, clear- eyed autobiography.  I did not
proportion my religious things aright.  The laird of Brea does not say in as many words that
he was wise in the penny and foolish in the pound, but that is exactly what he means.

Then, again, the narrowness, the partiality, the sickliness, and the squeamishness of our consciences,--all
that makes us to be too often penny-wise and pound-foolish in our religious life.  A well-instructed,
thoroughly wise, and well-balanced conscience is an immense blessing to that man who has purchased
such a conscience for himself.  There is an immense and a criminal waste of conscience that
goes on among some of our best Christian people through the want of light and space, room,
and breadth, and balance in their consciences.  We are all pestered with people every day who
are full of all manner of childish scrupulosity and sickly squeamishness in their ill-nourished,
ill-exercised consciences. As long as a man's conscience is ignorant and weak and sickly it
will, it must, spend and waste itself on the pennyworths of religion and' morals instead of
the pounds.  It will occupy and torture itself with points and punctilios, jots and tittles,
to the all but total oblivion, and to the all but complete neglect, of the substance and the
essence of the Christian mind, the Christian heart, and the Christian character.  The washing
of hands, of cups, and of pots, was all the conscience that multitudes had in our Lord's day;
and multitudes in our day scatter and waste their consciences on the same things.  A good man,
an otherwise good and admirable man, will absolutely ruin and destroy his conscience by points
and scruples and traditions of men as fatally as another will by a life of debauchery.  Some
old and decayed ecclesiastical rubric; some absolutely indifferent form in public worship;
some small casuistical question about a creed or a catechism; some too nice point of confessional
interpretation; the mint and anise and cummin of such matters will fill and inflame and poison
a man's mind and heart and conscience for months and for years, to the total destruction of
all that for which churches and creeds exist; to the total suspense, if not the total and lasting
destruction, of sobriety of mind, balance and breadth of judgment, humility, charity, and a
hidden and a holy life.  The penny of a perverted, partial, and fanaticised conscience has
swallowed up the pound of instruction, and truth, and justice, and brotherly love.

2.  'Nor is the man with the long name at all inferior to the other,' said Lucifer, in laying
his infernal plot against the peace and prosperity of Mansoul.  Now, the man with the long
name was just Mr. Get- i'-the-hundred-and-lose-i'-the-shire.  A hundred in the old county geography
of England was a political subdivision of a shire, in which five score freemen lived with their
freeborn families.  A county or a shire was described and enumerated by the poll-sheriff of
that day as containing so many enfranchised hundreds; and the total number of hundreds made
up the political unity of the shire.  To this day we still hear from time to time of the 'Chiltern
Hundreds,' which is a division of Buckinghamshire that belongs, along with its political franchise,
to the Crown, and which is utilised for Crown purposes at certain political emergencies.  This
proverb, then, to get i' the hundred and lose i' the shire, is now quite plain to us.  You
might canvass so as to get a hundred, several hundreds, many hundreds on your side, and yet
you might lose when it came to counting up the whole shire.  You might possess yourself of
a hundred or two and yet be poor compared with him who possessed the whole shire.  And then
the proverb has been preserved out of the old political life of England, and has been moralised
and spiritualised to us in the Holy War.  And thus after to-night we shall always call this
shrewd proverb to mind when we are tempted to take a part at the risk of the whole; to receive
this world at the loss of the next world; or, as our Lord has it, to gain the whole world and
to lose our own soul.  Lot's choice of Sodom and Gomorrah, and Esau's purchase of the mess
of pottage in the Old Testament; and then Judas's thirty pieces of silver, and Ananias and
Sapphira's part of the price in the New Testament, are all so many well-known instances of
getting in the hundred and losing in the shire.  And not Esau's and Lot's only, but our own
lives also have been full up to to-day of the same fatal transaction. This house, as our Lord
again has it, this farm, this merchandise, this shop, this office, this salary, this honour,
this home--all this on the one hand, and then our Lord Himself, His call, His cause, His Church,
with everlasting life in the other--when it is set down before us in black and white in that
way, the transaction, the proposal, the choice is preposterous, is insane, is absolutely impossible.
But preposterous, insane, absolutely impossible, and all, there it is, in our own lives, in
the lives of our sons and daughters, and in the lives of multitudes of other men and other
men's sons and daughters besides ours.  Every day you will be taken in, and you will stand
by and see other men taken in with the present penny for the future pound: and with the poor
pelting hundred under your eye for the full, far-extending, and ever-enriching shire. Lucifer
is always abroad pressing on us in his malice the penny on the spot, for the pound which he
keeps out of sight; he dazzles our eyes with the gain of the hundred till we gnash our teeth
at the loss of the shire.

   'He hath in sooth good cause for endless grief,
   Who, for the love of thing that lasteth not,
   Despoils himself for ever of THAT LOVE.'

3.  Let these engage in this business for us, and let Mansoul be taken up with much business,
and if possible with much pleasure, and this is the way to get ground of them.  Let us but
cumber and occupy and amuse Mansoul sufficiently, and they will make their castle a warehouse
for goods instead of a garrison for men of war.'  This diabolical advice was highly applauded
all through hell till all the lesser devils, while setting themselves to carry it out, gnashed
their teeth with envy and malice at Lucifer for having thought of this masterpiece and for
having had it received with such loud acclamation.  'Only get them,' so went on that so able,
so well-envied, and so well-hated devil, 'let us only get those fribble sinners for a night
at a time to forget their misery.  And it will not cost us much to do that.  Only let us offer
them in one another's houses a supper, a dance, a pipe, a newspaper full of their own shame,
a tale full of their own folly, a silly song, and He who loved them with an everlasting love
will soon see of the travail of His soul in them!'  Yes, my fellow-sinners, Lucifer and his
infernal crew know us and despise us and entrap us at very little trouble, till He who travailed
for us on the tree covers His face in heaven and weeps over us.  As long as we remember our
misery, all the mind, and all the malice, and all the sleeplessness in hell cannot touch a
hair of our head.  But when by any emissary and opportunity either from earth around us or
from hell beneath us we for another night forget our misery, it is all over with us.  And yet,
to tell the truth, we never can quite forget our misery.  We are too miserable ever to forget
our misery.  In the full steam of Lucifer's best- spread supper, amid the shouts of laughter
and the clapping of hands, and all the outward appearance of a complete forgetfulness of our
misery, yet it is not so.  It is far from being so.  Our misery is far too deep-seated for
all the devil's drugs.  Only, to give Lucifer his due, we do sometimes, under him, so get out
of touch with the true consolation for our misery that, night after night, through cumber,
through pursuit of pleasure, through the time being taken up with these and other like things,
we do so far forget our misery as to lie down without dealing with it; but only to have it
awaken us, and take our arm as its own for another miserable day.  Yes; though never completely
successful, yet this masterpiece of hell is sufficiently successful for Satan's subtlest purposes;
which are, not to make us forget our misery, but to make us put it away from us at the natural
and proper hour for facing it and for dealing with it in the only proper and successful way.
But, wholly, any night, or even partially for a few nights at a time, to forget our misery--no,
with all thy subtlety of intellect and with all thy hell-filled heart, O Lucifer, that is to
us impossible!  Forget our misery!  O devil of devils, no!  Bless God, that can never be with
us! Our misery is too deep, too dreadful, too acute, too all-consuming ever to be forgotten
by us even for an hour.  Our misery is too terrible for thee, with all thy overthrown intellect
and all thy malice-filled heart, ever to understand!  Didst thou for one midnight hour taste
it, and so understand it, then there would be the same hope for thee that, I bless God, there
still is for me!

Let us bend all our strength and all our wit to this, went on Lucifer, to make their castle
a warehouse instead of a garrison.  Let us set ourselves and all our allies, he explained to
the duller-witted among the devils, to make their hearts a shop,--some of them, you know, are
shopkeepers; a bank,--some of them are bankers; a farm,--some of them are farmers; a study,--some
of them are students; a pulpit,--some of them like to preach; a table,--some of them are gluttons;
a drawing-room,--some of them are busybodies who forget their own misery in retailing other
people's misery from house to house.  Be wise as serpents, said the old serpent; attend, each
several fallen angel of you, to his own special charge.  Study your man.  Get to the bottom
of your man.  Follow him about; never let him out of your sight; be sure before you begin,
be sure you have the joint in his harness, the spot in his heel, the chink in his wall full
in your eye.  I do not surely need to tell you not to scatter our snares for souls at random,
he went on.  Give the minister his study Bible, the student his classic, the merchant his ledger,
the glutton his well-dressed dish and his elect year of wine, the gossip her sweet secret,
and the flirt her fool.  Study them till they are all naked and open to your sharp eyes.  Find
out what best makes them forget even for one night their misery and ply them with that.  If
I ever see that soul I have set thee over on his knees on account of his misery I shall fling
thee on the spot into the bottomless pit.  And if any of you shall anywhere discover a man--and
there are such men--a man who forgets his misery through always thinking and speaking about
it, only keep him in his pulpit, and off his knees, and no man so safe for hell as he.  There
are fools, and there are double-dyed fools, and that man is the chief of them.  Give him his
fill of sin and misery; let him luxuriate himself in sin and misery; only, keep him there,
and I will not forget thy most excellent service to me.

Make all their hearts, so Lucifer summed up, as he dismissed his obsequious devils, make all
their several hearts each a warehouse, a shop, a farm, a pulpit, a library, a nursery, a supper-table,
a chamber of wantonness--let it be to each man just after his own heart.  Only, keep--as you
shall answer for it,--keep faith and hope and charity and innocence and patience and especially
prayerfulness out of their hearts. And when this my counsel is fulfilled, and when the pit
closes over thy charge, I shall pay thee thy wages, and promote thee to honour.  And before
he was well done they were all at their posts.

CHAPTER XIV--THE DEVIL'S LAST CARD

   'Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light'--Paul.

Wodrow has an anecdote in his delightful Analecta which shall introduce us into our subject
to-night.  Mr. John Menzies was a very pious and devoted pastor; he was a learned man also,
and well seen in the Popish and in the Arminian controversies.  And to the end of his life
he was much esteemed of the people of Aberdeen as a foremost preacher of the gospel.  And yet,
'Oh to have one more Sabbath in my pulpit!' he cried out on his death-bed.  'What would you
then do?' asked some one who sat at his bedside. The bronze-winged jacana does not grow these long
tail feathers.

The nests of jacanas are truly wonderful structures. They are just floating pads of rushes and
leaves of aquatic plants. Sometimes practically the whole of the pad is under water, so that
the eggs appear to be resting on the surface of the tank. The nest of the bronze-winged species
is usually larger and more massive than that of the water-pheasant. The latter's nest is sometimes
so small as hardly to be able to contain the eggs--a little, shallow, circular cup of rushes
and water-weeds or floating lotus leaves or tufts of water-grass. The eggs of the two species
show but little similarity. Both, however, are very beautiful and remarkable. The eggs of the
bronze-winged jacana have a rich brownish-bronze background, on which black lines are scribbled
in inextricable confusion, so that the egg looks as though Arabic texts had been scrawled over
it. This species might well be called "the Arabic writing-master." The eggs of the water-pheasant
are in shape like pegtops without the peg. They are of a dark rich green-bronze colour, and
devoid of any markings.

The nest of the handsome, but noisy, purple coot (Porphyrio poliocephalus) is a platform of rushes
and reeds which is sometimes placed on the ground in a rice field, but is more often floating,
and is then tethered to a tree or some other object. From six to ten eggs are laid. These are
very beautiful objects. The ground colour is delicate pink. This is spotted and blotched with
crimson; beneath these spots there are clouds of pale purple which have the appearance of lying
beneath the surface of the shell.

The white-breasted water-hen (Gallinula phoenicura) is a bird that
must be familiar to all.

One pair, at least, is to be found in every village which boasts of a tank and a bamboo clump,
no matter how small these be. The water-hen is a black bird about the size of the average
bazaar fowl, with a white face, throat and breast. It carries its short tail almost erect, and
under this is a patch of brick-red feathers. During most seasons of the year it is a silent bird,
but from mid-May until the end of the monsoon it is exceedingly noisy, and, were it in the
habit of haunting our gardens and compounds, its cries would attract as much attention as do
those of the koel and the brain-fever bird. As, however, water-hens are confined to tiny hamlets
situated far away from cities, many people are not acquainted with their calls, which "Eha"
describes as "roars, hiccups and cackles." The nest is built in a bamboo clump or other dense
thicket. The eggs are stone-coloured, with spots of brown, red and purple. The young birds, when
first hatched, are covered with black down, and look like little
black ducklings.

They can run, swim and dive as soon as they leave the egg. Little parties of them are to be seen
at the edge of most village tanks in August.

The resident ducks are all busy with their nests. The majority of them lay their eggs in July,
so that in August they are occupied with their young.

The cotton-teal (Nettopus coromandelianus) usually lays its eggs in
a hole in a mango or other tree. The hollow is sometimes lined with
feathers and twigs. It is not very high up as a rule, from six to
twelve feet above the ground being the usual level. The tree selected
for the nesting site is not necessarily close to water. Thirteen or
fourteen eggs seem to be the usual clutch, but as many as twenty-two
have been taken from one nest. Young teal, when they emerge from the
egg, can swim and walk, but they are unable to fly. No European seems
to have actually observed the process whereby they get from the nest
to the ground or the water. It is generally believed that the parent
birds carry them.  Then your minister will not need to come back from
his death-bed to preach to you on the difficulty of salvation.

4.  And yet such is the grace of God, such is the work of Christ, and such is the power and
the patience of the Holy Ghost that, if we had only an adequate ministry in our pulpits, and
an assisting literature in our homes, even this three-fold impossibility would be overcome
and we would be saved.  But if the ministry that is set over us is an ignorant, indolent, incompetent,
self-deceived ministry; if our own chosen, set-up, and maintained minister is himself an uninstructed,
unspiritual, unsanctified man; and if the books we buy and borrow and read are all secular,
unspiritual, superficial, ephemeral, silly, stupid, impertinent books, then the impossibility
of our salvation is absolute, and we are as good as in hell already with all our guilt and
all our corruption for ever on our heads.  Now, that was the exact case of Mansoul in the allegory
of the Holy War at one of the last and acutest stages of that war.  Or, rather, that would
have been her exact case had Diabolus got his own deep, diabolical way with her.  For what
did her ancient enemy do but sound a parley till he had played his last card in these glozing
and deceitful words;--'I myself,' he had the face to say to Emmanuel, 'if Thou wilt raise Thy
siege and leave the town to me, I will, at my own proper cost and charge, set up and maintain
a sufficient ministry, besides lecturers, in Mansoul, who shall show to Mansoul that transgression
stands in the way of life; the ministers I shall set up shall also press the necessity of reformation
according to Thy holy law.' And even now, with the two pulpits, God's and the devil's, and
the two preachers, and the two pastors, in our own city,--how many of you see any difference,
or think that the one is any worse or any better than the other?  Or, indeed, that the ministry
of the last card is not the better of the two to your interest and to your taste, to the state
of your mind and to the need of your heart?  Let us proceed, then, to look at Mansoul's two
pulpits and her two lectureships as they stand portrayed on the devil's last card and in Emmanuel's
crowning commission; that is, if our eyes are sharp enough to see any difference.

5.  The first thing, then, on the devil's last card was this, 'A sufficient ministry, besides
lecturers, in Mansoul.'  Now, a sufficient ministry has never been seen in the true Church
of Christ since her ministry began.  And yet she has had great ministers in her time.  After
Christ Himself, Paul was the greatest and the best minister the Church of Christ has ever had.
But such was the transcendent greatness of his office, such were its tremendous responsibilities,
such were its magnificent opportunities and its incessant demands, such were its ceaseless
calls to consecration, to cross-bearing, to crucifixion, to more and more inwardness of holiness,
and to higher and higher heights of heavenly-mindedness, that the apostle was fain to cry out
continually, Who is sufficient for these things!  But so well did Paul learn that gospel which
he preached to others that amid all his insufficiency he was able to hear his Master saying
to him every day, My grace is sufficient for thee, and, My strength is made perfect in thy
weakness!  And to come down to the truly Pauline succession of ministers in our own lands and
in our own churches, what preachers and what pastors Christ gave to Kidderminster, and to Bedford,
and to Down and Connor, and to Sodor and Man, and to Anwoth, and to Ettrick, and to New England,
and to St. Andrews, and places too many to mention.  With all its infirmity and all its inefficiency,
what a truly heavenly power the pulpit is when it is filled by a man of God who gives his whole
mind and heart, his whole time and thought to it, and to the pastorate that lies around it.
His mind may be small, and his heart may be full of corruption; his time may be full of manifold
interruptions, and his best study may yield but a poor result; but if Heaven ever helps those
who honestly help themselves, then that is certainly the case in the Christian ministry.  Let
the choicest of our children, then, be sought out and consecrated to that service; let our
most gifted and most gracious-minded sons be sent to where they shall be best prepared for
the pulpit and the pastorate,--till by the blessing of her Head all the congregations and all
the parishes, all the pulpits and all the lectureships in the Church, shall be one garden of
the Lord. And then we shall escape that last curse of a ministry such as John Bunyan saw all
around him in the England of his day, and which, had he been alive in the England and Scotland
of our day, he would have painted again in colours we have neither the boldness nor the skill
to mix nor to put on the canvas.  But let all ministers put it every day to themselves to what
descent and succession they belong.  Let those even who believe that they have within themselves
the best seal and evidence attainable here that they have been ordained of Emmanuel, let them
all the more look well every day and every Sabbath day how much of another master's doctrine
and discipline, motives, and manners still mixes up with their best ministry.  And the surest
seal that, with all our insufficiency, we are still the ministers of Christ will be set on
us by this, that the harder we work and the more in secret we pray, the more and ever the more
shall we discover and confess our shameful insufficiency, and the more shall we, till the day
of our death, every day still begin our ministry of labour and of prayer anew.  Let us do that,
for the devil, with all his boldness and all his subtilty, never threw a card first or last
like that.

6.  After offering a sufficient ministry to Mansoul, and that, too, at his own proper cost
and charge, Diabolus undertook also to see that the absolute necessity of a reformation should
be preached and pressed from the pulpit he set up.  Now, reformation is all good and necessary,
in its own time and place and order, but God sent His Son not to be a Reformer but to be a
Redeemer.  John came to preach reformation, but Jesus came to preach regeneration.  Except
a man be born again, Jesus persistently preached to Nicodemus.  'Did it begin with regeneration?'
was Dr. Duncan's reply when a sermon on sanctification was praised in his hearing.  And like
so much else that the learned and profound Dr. John Duncan said on theology and philosophy,
that question went at once to the root of the matter.  For sanctification, that is to say,
salvation, is no mere reformation of morals or refinement of manners.  It is a maxim in sound
morals that the morality of the man must precede the morality of his actions.  And much more
is it the evangelical law of Jesus Christ. Make the tree good, our Lawgiver aphoristically
said.  Reformation and sanctification differ, says Dr. Hodge, as clean clothes differ from
a clean heart.  Now, Diabolus was all for clean clothes when he saw that Mansoul was slipping
out of his hands.  He would have all the drunkards to become moderate drinkers, if not total
abstainers; and all the sensualists to become, if need be, ascetics; and all those who had
sowed out their wild oats to settle down as heads of houses, and members, if not ministers
and elders, in his set-up church.  But we are too well taught, surely; we have gone too long
to another church than that which Diabolus ever sets up, to be satisfied with his superficial
doctrine and his skin-deep discipline.  We know, do we not, that we may do all that his last
card asks us to do, and yet be as far, ay, and far farther from salvation than the heathen
are who never heard the name.  A hundred Scriptures tell us that; and our hearts know too much
of their own plague and corruption ever now to be satisfied short of a full regeneration and
a complete sanctification.  'Create in me a clean heart and renew a right spirit within me.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.  And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly.
Its pulpit orators handle many Scripture texts, but never these.

7.  Yes, the devil comes in even here with that so late, so subtle, and so contradicting card
of his.  Where is it in this world that he does not come in with some of his cards?  And he
comes in here as a very angel of evangelical light.  He puts on the gown of Geneva here, and
he ascends Emmanuel's own maintained pulpit here, and from that pulpit he preaches, and where
he so preaches he preaches nothing else but the very highest articles of the Reformed faith.
Carnal-security was strong on assurance, no other man in Mansoul was so strong; and the devil
will let us preachers be as strong and as often on election, and justification, and indefectible
grace, and the perseverance of the saints as we and our people like, if we but keep in season
and out of season on these transcendent subjects and keep off morals and manners, walk and
conversation, conduct and character.  In Hooker's and Travers' day, Thomas Fuller tells us,
the Temple pulpit preached pure Canterbury in the morning and pure Geneva in the afternoon.
And you will get the highest Calvinism off the last card in one pulpit, and the strictest and
most urgent morality off the same card in another; but never, if the devil can help it, never
both in one and the same pulpit; never both in one and the same sermon; and never both in one
and the same minister.  You have all heard of the difficulty the voyager had in steering between
Scylla and Charybdis in the Latin adage.  Well, the true preacher's difficulty is just like
that.  Indeed, it is beyond the wit of man, and it takes all the wit of God, aright to unite
the doctrine of our utter inability with the companion doctrine of our strict responsibility;
free grace with a full reward; the cross of Christ once for all, with the saint's continual
crucifixion; the Saviour's blood with the sinner's; and atonement with attainment; in short,
salvation without works with no salvation without works.  Deft steersman as the devil is, he
never yet took his ship clear through those Charybdic passages.

One thing there is that I must have preached continually in all my pulpits and expounded and
illustrated and enforced in all my lectureships, said Emmanuel, and that is, my new example
and my new law of motive. The nesting season is at its height for all the other birds of which the nests
have been described, namely, most species of dove, the jungle crow, the red-headed merlin,
the purple sunbird, the nuthatch, the fantail flycatcher, the finch-lark,
the pied woodpecker, the coppersmith, the alexandrine and the rose-ringed
paroquet, the white-eyed buzzard, the collared scops and the mottled
wood-owl, the kite, the black vulture and the pied kingfisher.

   
   
   The sand-martins breed from October to May, consequently
   their nests, containing eggs or young, are frequently taken in March.

Mention was made in January and February of the Indian cliff-swallow (Hirundo fluvicola). This species
is not found in the eastern districts of the United Provinces, but it is the common swallow of the
western districts. The head is dull chestnut. The back and shoulders are glistening steel-blue.
The remainder of the upper plumage is brown. The lower parts are white with brown streaks,
which are most apparent on the throat and upper breast. These swallows normally nest at two seasons
of the year--from February till April and in July or August.

They breed in colonies. The mud nests are spherical or oval with an entrance tube from two to six inches
long. The nests are invariably attached to a cliff or building, and, although isolated ones
are built sometimes, they usually occur in clusters, as many as two hundred have been counted
in one cluster. In such a case a section cut parallel to the surface to which the nests are
attached looks like that of a huge honeycomb composed of cells four inches in diameter--cells
of a kind that one could expect to be built by bees that had partaken of Mr. H. G. Wells' "food
of the gods."

The beautiful white-breasted kingfisher, (Halcyon smyrnensis) is now busy at its nest.

This species spends most of its life in shady gardens; it feeds on
insects in preference to fish. It does not invariably select a river
bank in which to nest, it is quite content with a sand quarry, a bank,
or the shaft of a kachcha well.  We shall
be openly acknowledged and acquitted in the day of judgment, and made perfectly blessed in
the full enjoying of God to all eternity.

CHAPTER XV--MR. PRYWELL

   'Search me, O God, and know my heart.'--David.

   'Let a man examine himself.'--Paul.

   'Look to yourselves.'--John.

   'Know thyself.'--Apollo.

The year 1668 saw the publication of one of the deepest books in the whole world, Dr. John
Owen's Remainders of Indwelling Sin in Believers. The heart-searching depth; the clear, fearless,
humbling truth, the intense spirituality, and the massive and masculine strength of John Owen's
book have all combined to make it one of the acknowledged masterpieces of the great Puritan
school.  Had John Owen's style been at all equal to his great learning, to the depth and the
grasp of his mind, and to the lofty holiness of his life, John Owen would have stood in the
very foremost and selectest rank of apostolical and evangelical theologians.  But in all his
books Owen labours under the fatal drawback of a bad style.  A fine style, a style like that
of Hooker, or Taylor, or Bunyan, or Howe, or Leighton, or Law, is such a winning introduction
to their works and such an abiding charm and spell.  The full title of Dr. Owen's great work
runs thus: The Nature, Power, Deceit, and Prevalency of the Remainders of Indwelling Sin in
Believers--a title that will tell all true students what awaits them when they have courage
and enterprise enough to address themselves to this supreme and all-essential subject. Fourteen
years after the publication of Dr. Owen's epoch-making book, John Bunyan's Holy War first saw
the light.  Equal in scriptural and in experimental depth, as also in their spiritual loftiness
and intensity, those two books are as different as any two books, written in the same language,
and written on the same subject, could by any possibility be. John Owen's book is the book
of a great scholar who has read the Fathers and the Schoolmen and the Reformers till he knows
them by heart, and till he has been able to digest all that is true to Scripture and to experience
in them into his rich and ripe book.  A powerful reasoner, a severe, bald, muscular writer,
John Owen in all these respects stands at the very opposite pole to that of John Bunyan.  The
author of the Holy War had no learning, but he had a mind of immense natural sagacity, combined
with a habit of close and deep observation of human life, and especially of religious life,
and he had now a lifetime of most fruitful experience as a Christian man and as a Christian
minister behind him; and, all that, taken up into Bunyan's splendid imagination, enabled him
to produce this extraordinarily able and impressive book.  A model of English style as the
Holy War is, at the same time it does not attain at all to the rank of the Pilgrim's Progress;
but then, to be second to the Pilgrim's Progress is reward and honour enough for any book.
Let all genuine students, then, who would know the best that has been written on experimental
religion, and who would preach to the deepest and divinest experience of their best people,
let them keep continually within their reach John Owen's Temptation, his Mortification of Sin
in Believers, his Nature and Power of Indwelling Sin, and John Bunyan's Holy War made for the
Regaining of the Metropolis of this World.  Now, that being so, it may interest and perhaps
instruct you to-night to look for a little at some of the features and at some of the feats
of the Scoutmaster-general of the Holy War, Mr. Prywell, of the town of Mansoul.

1.  'Well, now, as He who dwells on high would have it, there was one whose name was Mr. Prywell,
a great lover of the town of Mansoul.'  In other words: self-observation, self-examination,
strict, jealous, sleepless self-examination, is of God.  Our God who searches our hearts and
tries our reins would have it so.  And if He does not have it so in us, our souls are not as
our God would have them to be.  'Bunyan employs pry,' says Miss Peacock in her excellent notes,
'in a more favourable sense than it now bears.  As, for instance, it is said in another part
of this same book that the men of Mansoul were allowed to pry into the words of the Holy Ghost
and to expound them to their best advantage. Honest anxiety for the welfare of his fellow-townsmen
was Mr. Prywell's chief characteristic.  Pry is another form of peer--to look narrowly, to
look closely.'  And God, says John Bunyan, would have it so.

2.  'A great lover of Mansoul,' 'always a lover of Mansoul'; again and again that is testified
concerning Mr. Prywell.  It was not love for the work that led Mr. Prywell to give up his days
and his nights as his history tells us he did.  Mr. Prywell ran himself into many dangerous
situations both within and without the city, and he lost himself far more friends than he made
by his devotion to his thankless task.  But necessity was laid upon him.  And what held him
up was the sure and certain knowledge that his King would have that service at his hands. That,
and his love for the city, for the safety and the deliverance of the city,--all that kept Mr.
Prywell's heart fixed.  Am I therefore your enemy? he would say to some who would have had
it otherwise than the King would have it.  But it is a good thing to be zealously affected
in a work like mine, he would say, in self-defence and in self-encouragement.  And then, though
not many, there were always some in the city who said, Let him smite me and it shall be a kindness;
let him reprove me and it shall be an excellent oil which shall not break my head.  It was
in Mansoul with Mr. Prywell as it was in Kidderminster with Richard Baxter, when some of his
people said to one another, 'We will take all things well from one that we know doth entirely
love us.'   'Love them,' said Augustine, 'and then say anything you like to them.'  Now, that
was Mr. Prywell's way.  He loved Mansoul, and then he said many things to her that a false
lover and a flatterer would never have dared to say.

3.  Then, as the saying is, it goes without saying that 'Mr. Prywell was always a jealous man.'
Great lovers are always jealous men, and Mr. Prywell showed himself to be a great lover by
the great heat of his jealousy also.  'Vigilant,' says the excellent editress again; 'cautious
against dishonour, reasonably mistrustful--low Latin zelosus, full of zeal.  "And he said,
I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts."'  Now, it so happened that some of Mr.
Prywell's most private and not at all professional papers--papers evidently, and on the face
of them, connected with the state of the spy's own soul--came into my hands as good lot would
have it just the other night.  The moth-eaten chest was full of his old papers, but the pieces
that took my heart most were, as it looked to me, actually gnashed through with his remorseful
teeth, and soaked and sodden past recognition with his sweat and his tears and his agonising
hands.  But after some late hours over those remnants I managed to make some sense to myself
out of them.  There are some parts of the parchments that pass me; but, if only to show you
that this arch-spy's so vigilant jealousy was not all directed against other people's bad hearts
and bad habits, I shall copy some lines out of the old box.  'Have I penitence?' he begins
without any preface.  'Have I grief, shame, pain, horror, weariness for my sin?  Do I pray
and repent, if not seven times a day as David did, yet at least three times, as Daniel?  If
not as Solomon, at length, yet shortly as the publican?  If not like Christ, the whole night,
at least for one hour?  If not on the ground and in ashes, at least not in my bed?  If not
in sackcloth, at least not in purple and fine linen?  If not altogether freed from all, at
least from immoderate desires?  Do I give, if not as Zaccheus did, fourfold, as the law commands,
with the fifth part added?  If not as the rich, yet as the widow?  If not the half, yet the
thirtieth part?  If not above my power, yet up to my power?'  And then over the page there
are some illegible pencillings from old authors of his such as this from Augustine: 'A good
man would rather know his own infirmity than the foundations of the earth or the heights of
the heavens.'  And this from Cicero: 'There are many hiding-places and recesses in the mind.'
And this from Seneca: 'You must know yourself before you can amend yourself.  An unknown sin
grows worse and worse and is deprived of cure.'  And this from Cicero again: 'Cato exacted
from himself an account of every day's business at night'; and also Pythagoras,

   'Nor let sweet sleep upon thine eyes descend
   Till thou hast judged its deeds at each day's end.'

And this from Seneca again: 'When the light is removed out of sight, and my wife, who is by
this time aware of my practice, is now silent, I pass the whole of my day under examination,
and I review my deeds and my words.  O yes.'  Now, this 'O yes!' Miss Peacock tells us, is
the Anglicised form of a French word for our Lord's words, Take heed how ye hear!

4.  'A sober and a judicious man' it is said of Mr. Prywell also.  To a certainty that.  It
could not be otherwise than that.  For Mr. Prywell's office, its discoveries and its experiences,
would sober any man.  'I am sprung from a country,' says Abelard, 'of which the soil is light,
and the temper of the inhabitants is light.'  So was it with Mr. Prywell to begin with.  But
even Abelard was sobered in time, and so was Mr. Prywell.  Life sobered Abelard, and Mr. Prywell
too; life's crooks and life's crosses, life's duties and life's disappointments, especially
Mr. Prywell.  'The more narrowly a man looks into himself,' says A Kempis, 'the more he sorroweth.'
Not sober-mindedness alone comes to him who looks narrowly into himself, but great sorrow of
heart also.  And if you are not both sobered in your mind and full of an unquenchable sorrow
in your heart, O yes! attend to it, for you are not yet begun to be what God would have you
to be.  Dr. Newman, with all his mistakes and all his faults, was a master in two things: his
own heart and the English language.  And in writing home to his mother a confidential letter
from college on his birthday, he confides to her that he often 'shudders at himself.'  'No,'
he answered to his mother's fears and advices about food and air and exercise: 'No, I am neither
nervous, nor in ill-health, nor do I study too much.  I am neither melancholy, nor morose,
nor austere, nor distant, nor reserved, nor sullen.  I am always cheerful, ready and eager
to join in any merriment.  I am not clouded with sadness, nor absent in mind, nor deficient
in action.  No; take me when I am most foolish at home and extend mirth into childishness;
yet all the time I am shuddering at myself.'  There spake the future author of the immortal
sermons.  There spake a mind and a heart that have deepened the minds and the hearts of Christian
men more than any other influence of the century; a mind and a heart, moreover, that will shine
and beat in our best literature and in our deepest devotion for centuries to come.  You must
all know by this time another classical passage from the pen of another spiritual genius in
the Church of England, that greatly gifted church. Let me repeat it to illustrate how sober-mindedness
and great sorrow of heart always come to the best of men.  And shall pride be entertained in
a heart thus conscious of its own miserable behaviour?'  No wonder that Mr. Prywell was sober-minded!
No wonder that Dr. Newman shuddered at himself!  And no wonder that William Law chose strangling
and the pond rather than that any other man should see what went on in his heart!

5.  And as if all that were not enough, and more than enough, to commend Mr. Prywell to us--to
our trust, to our confidence, and to our imitation--his royal certificate continues, 'One that
looks into the very bottom of matters, and talks nothing of news, but by very solid arguments.'
The very bottom of matters--that is, the very bottom of his own and other men's hearts.  Mr.
Prywell counts nothing else worth a wise man's looking at.  Let fools and children look at
the painted and deceitful surface of things, but let men, men of matters, and especially men
of divine matters, look only at their own and other men's hearts.  The very bottom of all matters
is there.  All wars, all policies, all debates, all disputes, all good and all evil counsels,
all the much weal and all the multitudinous woe of Mansoul--all have their bottom in the heart;
in the heart of God, or in the heart of man, or in the heart of the devil.  The heart is the
root of absolutely every matter to Mr. Prywell.  He would not waste one hour of any day, or
one watch of any night, on anything else.  And it was this that made him both the extraordinarily
successful scout he was, and the extraordinarily sober and thoughtful and judicious man he
was.  O yes, my brethren, the bottom of matters, when you take to it, will work the same change
in you.  'Two things,' says one who had long looked at his own matters with Mr. Prywell's eyes--'two
things, O Lord, I recognise in myself: nature, which Thou hast made, and sin, which I have
added.'  My brethren, that recognition, that discovery in yourselves, when it comes to you,
will sober you as it has sobered so many men before you: when it comes to you, that is, about
yourselves.  That discovery made in yourselves will make you deep-thinking men.  It will make
common men and unlearned men among you to be philosophers and theologians and saints.  It will
work in you a thoughtfulness, a seriousness, a depth, an awe, a holy fear, and a great desire
that will already have made you new creatures.  When, in examining yourselves and in characterising
yourselves, you come on what some clear- eyed men have come on in themselves, and what one
of them has described as 'the diabolical animus of the human mind'--when you make that discovery
in yourselves, that will sober you, that will humble you and fill you full of remorse and compunction.
And if in God's grace to you, that were to begin to be wrought in you this week, there would
be one, at any rate, eating of that bread next Lord's day, and drinking of that cup as God
would have it.

6.  'A man that is no tattler, nor raiser of false reports, and that talks nothing of news,
but by very solid arguments.'  Mr. Prywell was more taken up with his own matters at home,
far more than the greatest busybodies are with other men's matters abroad.  His name, I fear,
will still sound somewhat ill in your ears, but I can assure you all the ill for you lies in
the sound.  Mr. Prywell would not hurt a hair of your head: the truth is, he does not know
whether there is a hair on your head or no.  This man's name comes to him and sticks to him,
not because he pries into your affairs, for he does not, and never did, but because he is so
drawn down into his own.  Mr. Prywell has no eye for your windows and he has no ear for your
doors.  If your servant is a leaky slave, Prywell, of all your neighbours, has no ear for his
idle tales.  This man is no eavesdropper; your evil secrets have only a sobering and a saddening
and a silencing effect upon him.  Your house might be full of skeletons for anything he would
ever discover or remember.  The beam in his own eye is so big that he cannot see past it to
speak about your small mote.  'The inward Christian,' says A Kempis, 'preferreth the care of
himself before all other cares.  He that diligently attendeth to himself can easily keep silence
concerning other men.  If thou attendest unto God and unto thyself, thou wilt be but little
moved with what thou seest abroad.'  At the same time, Mr. Prywell was no fool, and no coward,
and no hoodwinked witness.  He could tell his tale, when it was demanded of him, with such
truth, and with such punctuality, and on such ample grounds, that a conviction of the truth
instantly fell on all who heard him.  'Sirs,' said those who heard him break silence, 'it is
not irrational for us to believe it,' with such solid arguments and with such an absence of
mere suspicion and of all idle tales did he speak.  On one occasion, on a mere 'inkling,' he
woke up the guard; only, it was so true an inkling that it saved the city.  But I cannot follow
Mr. Prywell any further to-night.  How he went up and down Mansoul listening; how he kept his
eyes and his ears both shut and open; what splendid services he performed in the progress,
and specially toward the end, of the war; how the thanks of the city were voted to him; how
he was made Scoutmaster- general for the good of the town of Mansoul, and the great conscience
and good fidelity with which he managed that great trust--all that you will read for yourselves
under this marginal index, 'The story of Mr. Prywell.'

Now, my brethren, as the outcome of all that, we must all examine ourselves as before God all
this week.  We must wait on His word and on His providences while they examine us all this
week.  We must pry well into ourselves all this week.  Come, let us compel ourselves to do
it. Let us search and try our ways all this week as we shall give an account. Let us ask ourselves
how many Communion tables we have sat at, and at how many more we are likely to sit.  Let us
ask why it is that we have got so little good out of all our Communions.  Let us ask who is
to blame for that, and where the blame lies.  Let us go to the bottom of matters with ourselves,
and compel ourselves to say just what it is that is the cause of God's controversy with us.
What vow, what solemn promise, made when trouble was upon us, have we completely cast behind
our back?  What about secret prayer?  At what times, for what things, and for what people do
we in secret pray?  What about secret sin?  What is its name, and what does it deserve, and
what fruit are we already reaping out of it?  What is our besetting sin, and what steps do
we take, as God knows, to crucify it?  Do we love money too much?  Do we love praise too much?
Do we love eating and drinking too much?  Does envy make our heart a very hell?  Let us name
the man we envy, and let us keep our Communion eye upon him.  Let us mix his name with all
the psalms and prayers and sermons of this Communion season.  Or is it diabolical ill-will?
Or is it a wicked tongue against an unsuspecting friend?  Let us examine ourselves as Paul
did, as Prywell did, and as God would have us do it, and we shall discover things in ourselves
so bad that if I were to put words on them to-night, you would stop your ears in horror and
flee out of the church. Let a man see himself at least as others see him; and then he will
be led on from that to see himself as God sees him; and then he will judge himself so severely
as that he shall not need to be judged at the Judgment Day, and will condemn himself so sufficiently
as that he shall not be condemned with a condemned world at the last.

CHAPTER XVI--YOUNG CAPTAIN SELF-DENIAL

   'If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his
   cross daily and follow Me.'--Our Lord.

'Now the siege was long, and many a fierce attempt did the enemy make upon the town, and many
a shrewd brush did some of the townsmen meet with from the enemy, especially Captain Self-denial,
to whose care both Ear- gate and Eye-gate had been intrusted.  This Captain Self-denial was
a young man, but stout, and a townsman in Mansoul.  This young captain, therefore, being a
hardy man, and a man of great courage to boot, and willing to venture himself for the good
of the town, he would now and then sally out upon the enemy; but you must think this could
not easily be done, but he must meet with some sharp brushes himself, and, indeed, he carried
several of such marks on his face, yea, and some on some other parts of his body.'  Thus, Bunyan.
I shall now go on to-night to offer you some annotations and some reflections on this short
but excellent history of young Captain Self-denial.

1.  Well, to begin with, this Captain Self-denial was still a young man. 'And, now, it comes
into my mind, said Goodman Gains after supper, I will tell you a story well worth the hearing,
as I think.  There were two men once upon a time that went on pilgrimage; the one began when
he was young and the other began when he was old.  Why, the young man's, doubtless, answered
Mr. Honest.  For that which heads against the greatest opposition gives best demonstration
that it is strongest.  A young man, therefore, has the advantage of the fairest discovery of
a work of grace within him.  And thus they sat talking till the break of day.'

Now, I have taken up Captain Self-denial to-night because the young men and I are to begin
a study to-night to which I was first attracted because it taught me lessons about myself,
and about self-denial, and thus about both a young man's and an old man's deepest and most
persistent corruptions--lessons such as I have never been taught in any other school.  In all
my philosophical, theological, moral, and experimental reading, so to describe it, I have never
met with any school of authors for one moment to be compared with the great evangelical mystics,
especially when they treat of self, self-love, self-denial, the daily cross, and all suchlike
lessons.  Take the great doctrinal and experimental Puritans, such as John Owen, Thomas Goodwin,
Richard Baxter, John Howe, and Jonathan Edwards, and add on to them the greatest and best mystics,
such as Jacob Behmen, Thomas A Kempis, Francis Fenelon, Jeremy Taylor, Samuel Rutherford, Robert
Leighton, and William Law, and you will have the profoundest, the most complete, the most perfect,
and, I will add, the most fascinating and enthralling of spiritual teaching in all the world.
And I will be bold enough to promise you that if you will but join our Young Men's Class to-night,
and will buy and read our mystical books, and will resolve to put in practice what you hear
and read in the class, I will promise you, I say, that by the end of our short session you
will not only be ten times more open and hospitably-minded men, but also ten times more spiritually-minded
men, ten times more Christ-like men, and with your joy in Christ and His joy in you all but full.

2.  The Captain Self-denial was a young man, and he was also a townsman in Mansoul.  Young
Self-denial and one other were all of Emmanuel's captains who were townsmen in Mansoul.  All
his other captains Emmanuel had brought with him; but the Captains Self-denial and Experience
were both born and reared to their full manhood in that besieged city.  'A townsman.'  How
much there is for us all in that one word!  How much instruction!  How much encouragement!
How much caution and correction! Our greatest grace; our most essential and indispensable grace;
our most experimental and evidential grace; that grace, indeed, without which all our other
graces are but specious shows and painted surfaces of graces; that grace into which our Lord
here gathers up all our other graces;--that greatest of graces cannot be imputed, imported,
or introduced; it must be born, bred, exercised, reared up to its full maturity, and sent forth
to fight and to conquer, and all within the walls of its own native town; in short, our self-denial
must have its beginning and middle and end in our own heart.  Antinomians there were, as our
Puritan fathers nicknamed all those persons who glorified Christ by letting Him do all things
for them, both His own things and their things too, both their justification and their sanctification
too.  And there are many good but ill-instructed men among ourselves who have just this taint
of that old heresy cleaving to them still--this taint, namely, that they are tempted to carry
over the suretyship and substitutionary work of Christ into such regions, and to carry it to
such lengths in those regions, as, practically, to make Christ to minister to their soft and
sinful living, and to their excuse and indulgence of themselves.  I will put it squarely and
plainly to some of my very best friends here to-night.  Is it not the case, now, that you do
not like this direction into which this text, and the truth of this text, are now travelling?
Is it not so that you shift back in your seat from the approaching cross?  Is it not the very
and actual fact that you have secret ways of sin, secret habits of self-indulgence in your
body and in your soul, in your mind and in your heart, secret sins that you mantle over with
the robe of Christ's righteousness?  His spotless and imputed righteousness?  In your present
temper you would have disliked deeply the Sermon on the Mount had you heard it; and I see you
shaking your head over your Sabbath-day dinner at this text when it was first spoken.  Lay
this down for a law, all my brethren,--a New Testament and a never-to-be-abrogated law,--that
the best and the safest religion for you is that way of religion that is hardest on your pride,
on your self-importance, on your self-esteem, as well as on your purse and on your belly. 
You are not likely to err by practising too much of the cross.  You may very well have too
much of the cross of Christ preached to you, and too little of your own.  Why! did not Christ
die for me? you indignantly say.  Yes; so He did.  But only that you might die too.  He was
crucified, and so must you be crucified every day before one single drop of His sin-atoning
blood shall ever be wasted on You.  Be not deceived: the cross is not mocked; for only as a
man nails himself, body and soul, to the cross every day shall he ever be saved from sin and
death and hell by means of it.  And, exactly as a man denies himself--no more and no less--his
appetites, his passions, his thoughts and words and deeds, every day and every hour of every
day, just so much shall He who searches our hearts and sees us in secret, acknowledge us, both
every day now, and at the last day of all.

3.  This same Captain Self-denial, his history goes on, was stout, he was an hardy man also,
and a man of great courage.  Stout and hardy and of great courage at home, that is; in his
own mind and heart, soul and body, that is.  Young Captain Self-denial was a perfect hero at
saying No! and at saying No! to himself.  It is a proverb that there is nothing so difficult
as to say that monosyllable.  And the proverb is Scripture truth if you try to say No! to yourself.
It takes the very stoutest of hearts, the most noble, the most manly, the most soldierly, and
the most saintly of hearts to say No! to itself, and to keep on saying No! to itself to the
bitter end of every trial and temptation and opportunity.  I remember reading long ago a page
or two of a medical man's diary.  And in it he made a confession and an appeal I have never
forgot; though, to my loss, I have not always acted upon it.  He said that for many years he
had never been entirely well.  He had constant headaches and depressions, and it was seldom
that he was not to some extent out of sorts.  But, all the time, he had a shrewd guess within
himself as to what was the matter with him.  He felt ashamed to confess it even to himself
that he over-ate himself every day at table; till, at last, summoning up all divine and human
help, he determined that, however hungry he was, and however savoury the dish was, and however
excellent the wine was, he would never either ask for or accept a second helping.  And this
was his testimony, that from that stout and hardy day he grew better in health daily; 'my head
became clear, my eye bright, my complexion pure, my mind and feelings were redeemed from all
clouds and depressions.  And to-day I am a younger man at fifty than I was at thirty.'  Now,
if just saying No! to himself and to the waiter at table did work such a new birth in a confirmed
gourmand of middle life, what would it not have wrought for him had he carried his answer stoutly
and courageously through all the other parts of his body and soul?--as perhaps he did.  Perhaps,
having tasted the sweet beginnings of salvation, he carried his short and sure regimen through.
If he has done so, let him give us his full autobiography.  What a blessed, what a priceless
book it would be!

4.  Stout Captain Self-denial was commanded to begin his life as an officer in Emmanuel's army
by taking especial watch over Ear-gate and Eye- gate; and at our last accounts of our abstemious
doctor he had only got the length of Mouth-gate.  But having begun so well with those three
great outposts of the soul, if those two trusty officers only held on, and played the man courageously
enough, they would soon be promoted to still more important, still more central, and, if more
difficult and dangerous, then also much more honourable and remunerative posts. Appetite, deep
and deadly as its evils are, is, after all, only an outwork of the soul; and the same sharp
knife that the epicure and the sot in all their stages must put to their throat, that same
knife must be made to draw blood in all parts of their mind and their heart, in their will
and in their imagination, till a perfect chorus of self-denials rings like noblest martial
music through all the gates, and streets, and fortresses, and strongholds, and very palaces
and temples of the soul.  I shall here stand aside and let the greatest of the English mystics
speak to you on this present point.  'When we speak of self-denial,' he says, in his Christian
Perfection, 'we are apt to confine it to eating and drinking: but we ought to consider that,
though a strict temperance be necessary in these things, yet that these are the easiest and
the smallest instances of self-denial.  Pride, vanity, self-love, covetousness, envy, and other
inclinations of the like nature call for a more constant and a more watchful self-denial than
the appetites of hunger and thirst.  And till we enter into this course of universal self-
denial we shall make no progress in real piety, but our lives will be a ridiculous mixture
of I know not what; sober and covetous, proud and devout, temperate and vain, regular in our
forms of devotion and irregular in all our passions, circumspect in little modes of behaviour
and careless and negligent of tempers the most essential to piety.  And thus it will necessarily
be with us till we lay the axe to the root of the tree, till we deny and renounce the whole
corruption of our nature, and resign ourselves up entirely to the Spirit of God, to think and
speak and act by the wisdom and the purity of religion.'

5.  Stout as Captain Self-denial was, and notable alarms and some brisk execution as he did
upon the enemy, yet he must meet with some brushes himself; indeed, he carried several of the
marks of such brushes on his face as well as on some other parts of his body.  If I had read
in his history that Young Captain Self-denial had left his mark upon his enemies, I would have
said, Well done, and I would have added that I always expected as much.  But it is far more
to my purpose to read that he had not always got himself off without wounds that left lasting
scars both where they were seen of all, and where they were seen and felt only by Self-denial
himself.  And not Self-denial only, but even Paul, in our flesh, and with like passions with
us, had the same experience and has left us the same record.  'I keep my body under': so our
emasculated English version makes us read it.  But the visual image in the masterly original
Greek is not so mealy-mouthed.  I box and buffet myself day and night, says Paul.  I play the
truculent tyrant over a lewd and lazy slave.  I hit myself blinding blows on my tenderest part.
I am ashamed to look at myself in the glass, for all under my eyes I am black and blue.  If
David, after the matter of Uriah, had done that to himself, and even more than that, we would
not have wondered; we would have expected it, and we would have said, It is no more than we
would have done ourselves.  But that a spotless, gentle, noble soul like Paul should so have
mangled himself,--that quite dumfounders us.  If Paul, then, who, touching the righteousness
which is in the law, was blameless, had to handle himself in that manner in order to keep himself
blameless, shall any young man here hope to escape temptation without such blows at himself
as shall leave their mark on him all his days?  Nay, not only so, but after Self-denial had
thus exercised himself and subdued himself, still his enemy sometimes got such an advantage
over him as left him as his history here describes him.  All which is surely full of the most
excellent heartening to all who read, in earnest and for an example, his fine history.

6.  The last and crowning exploit of our matchless captain was to capture, and execute, and
quarter, and hang up on a gallows at the market- cross, the head and the hands and the feet
of his oldest, most sworn, and most deadly enemy, one Self-love.  So stout and so insufferable
was our captain in the matter of Self-love that when it was proposed by some of his many influential
friends and high-in-place relations in the city that the judgment of the court-martial on Self-love
should be deferred, our stout soldier with the cuts on his face and in some other parts of
his body stood up, and said that the city and the army must make up their mind either to relieve
him of his sword, hacked and broken off as it was, or else to execute the law upon Self-love
on the spot.  I will lay down my commission this very day, he said, with an extraordinary indignation.
Many rich men in the city, and many men deep in the King's service, muttered mutinous things
when their near relative was hurried to the open cause-way, but by that time the soldiers of
Self-denial's company had brained Self-love with the butts of their muskets.  And it was the
stand that our captain made in the matter of Self-love that at last lifted the young soldier
where many had felt he should have been lifted long ago. From that day he was made a lord,
a military peer, and an adviser of the crown and the crown officers in all the deepest counsels
concerning Mansoul.  Only, with the cloak and the coronet of Self-denial the present history
all but comes to an end.  For, before the outcast remains of Self- love had mouldered to their
dust on the city gate, the King's chariot had descended into the street, had ascended up to
the palace at the head of the street, and a new age of the city life had begun, the full history
of which has yet to be told.

Remain behind, then, and begin with us to-night, all you young men.  You cannot begin this
lifelong study and this lifelong pursuit of self-denial too early.  For, even if you begin
to read our books and to practise our discipline in your very boyhood, when you are old men
and very saints of God you will feel that your self-love is still so full of life and power,
that your self-denial has scarcely begun.  Ah, me! men: both old and young men.  Ah, me! what
a life's task set us of God it is to make us a new heart, to cleanse out an unclean heart,
to lay in the dust a proud heart, and to keep a heart at all times, and in all places, and
toward all people, with all diligence!  Who is sufficient for these things?

'Now was Christian somewhat in a maze.  But at last, when every man started back for fear,
Christian saw a man of a very stout countenance come up to him that sat there with the inkhorn
to write, saying, Set down my name, sir!  At which there was a pleasant voice heard from those
that were within, even of those who walked upon the top of that place, saying,

   "Come in, come in:
   Eternal glory thou shalt win."

Then Christian smiled, and said: I think, verily, that I know the meaning of all this now.'

CHAPTER XVII--FIVE PICKT MEN

   'I took wise men and known and made them captains.'--Moses.

John Bunyan never lost his early love for a soldier's life any more than he ever forgot the
rare delights of his bell-ringing days.  John Bunyan, all his days, never saw a bell-rope that
his fingers did not tingle, and he never saw a soldier in uniform without instinctively shouldering
his youthful musket.  Bunyan was one of those rare men who are of imagination all compact;
and consequently it is that all his books are full of the scenes, the occupations, and the
experiences of his early days.  Not that he says very much, in as many words, about what happened
to him in the days when he was a soldier; it is only once in all his many books that he says
that when he was a soldier such and such a thing happened to him.  At the same time, all his
books bear the impress of his early days upon them; and as for this special book of Bunyan's
now open before us, it is full from board to board of the strife and the din of his early battles.
The Holy War is just John Bunyan's soldierly life spiritualised--spiritualised and so worked
up into this fine English Classic.

Well, then, after Mansoul was taken and reduced, the victorious Prince determined so to occupy
the town with His soldiers that it should never again either be taken by force from without,
or ever again revolt by weakness or by fear from within.  And with this view He chose out five
of His best captains--My five pickt men, He always called them--and placed those five captains
and their thousands under them in the strongholds of the town.  On the margin of this page
our versatile author speaks of that step of Emmanuel's in the language of a philosopher, a
moralist, and a divine.  'Five graces,' he says, 'pickt out of an abundance of common virtues.'
This summing-up sentence stands on his stiff and dry margin. But in the rich and living flow
of the text itself our author goes on writing like the man of genius he is.  With all the warmth
and colour and dramatic movement of which this whole book is full, this great writer goes on
to set those five choice captains of our salvation before us in a way that we shall never forget.
In ordinary and peaceful days; in days of truce and parley; when the opposite armies were laid
up in their winter quarters, or were, for any cause, drawn off from one another, some of the
other captains might be more in evidence.  But in every exploit to be called an exploit; in
every single enterprise of danger; when any new position was to be taken up, or any forlorn
hope was to be led, there, in the very van of labour and of danger, was sure to be seen Captain
Credence with his blood-red colours in his own hand.  You understand your Bunyan by this time,
my brethren?  Captain Credence, your little boy at school will tell you, is just the soldier-like
faith of your sanctification.  Credo, he will tell you, is 'I believe'; it is to have faith
in God and in the word of God.  You will borrow your Latin from your little boy, and then you
will pay him back by telling him how Captain Credence has always led the van in your soul.
You will tell him and show him what a wonderful writer on the things of the soul John Bunyan
is, till you make John Bunyan one of your son's choicest authors for all his days. Here on a fine
lawn is the urn inscribed to Pope, mentioned by Shenstone:

Here Pope! ah, never must that towering mind To his loved haunts, or dearer friend return; What
art, what friendship! oh! what fame resign'd; In yonder glade I trace his mournful urn.

At the end of the valley, in an obscure corner is a hermitage, composed of roots and moss, whence
we look down on a piece of water in the hollow, thickly shaded with tall trees, (see the engraving,)
over which is a fine view of distant landscape. This spot is the extremity of the park, and
the Clent hills rise in all their wild irregularity, immediately behind it.

We have not space to describe, or rather to abridge from Whately's beautiful description, a tithe
of the classic embellishments of Hagley. Shenstone as well as Pope has here his votive urn.
Ivied ruin, temple, grotto, statue, fountain, and bridge; the proud portico and the humble rustic
seat, alternate amidst these ornamental charms, and never were Nature and art more delightfully
blended than in the beauties of Hagley. Here Pope, Shenstone, and Thomson[3] passed many hours
of calm contemplation and poetic ease, amidst the hospitalities of the noble owner of Hagley.
To think of their kindred spirits haunting its groves, and their imaginative contrivances
of votive temples, urns, and tablets, and to combine them with these enchanting scenes of Nature,
is to realize all that Poets have sung of Arcadia of old. Happy! happy life for the man of letters;
what a retreat must your bowers have afforded from the common-place perplexities of every-day
life: Alas! the picture is almost too sunny for sober contemplation.

[3] Thomson's affectionate letter to his sister, (quoted by Johnson, who received it from Boswell,)
is dated "Hagley, in Worcestershire, October the 4th, 1747."

* * * * *

In part of the impression of our last Number, we stated the architect of the front of Apsley House,
to be Sir Jeffrey Wyatville, instead of Mr. Benjamin Wyatt, by whom the design was furnished,
and under whose superintendence this splendid improvement has been executed. Mr. B. Wyatt is
likewise the architect of the superb mansion built for the late Duke of York.

* * * * *

INGRATITUDE.

A DRAMATIC SKETCH.

(For the Mirror.)

Hence, faithless wretch! thou hast forgot the hand That sav'd thee from oppression--from the
grasp Of want. I fed you once--then you was poor: Even as I am now. Yet from the store Of
your abundance, you refuse to grant The veriest trifle. May the bounty Of that great God who gave
you what you have Ne'er from you flow. You have forgot me, sir, But I remember ere I left this
land, By way of traffic for the western world, I had a favourite, faithful dog, Who for the
kindnesses I pour'd upon him Would fawn upon me: not in flattery, But in a sort that spoke his
generous nature. Lasting as memory, Faster than friendship--deeper than the wave Is the affection
of a mindless brute. In a few hours (for I can almost see The cot wherein these travell'd
bones were cradled,) I shall have ended an untoward enterprize, And if that honest creature
I have told you of Still breathes this vital air, and will not know me, May hospitality keep
closed her gates Against me, till I find a home within The grave. CYMBELINE.

* * * * *

M. BOILEAU TO HIS GARDENER.

IMITATED

(For the Mirror.)

Industrious man, thou art a prize to me, The best of masters--surely born for thee; Thou keeper
art of this my rural seat,[4] Kept at my charge to keep my garden
neat; To train the woodbine and to crop the yew-- In th' art of gard'ning
equall'd p'rhaps by few.

O! could I cultivate my barren soul, As thou this garden canst so well control; Pluck up each
brier and thorn, by frequent toil, And clear the mind as thou canst cleanse the soil[5]

But now, my faithful servant, Anthony, Just speak, and tell me what you think of me; When through
the day amidst the gard'ning trade You bear the wat'ring pot, or wield the spade, And by your
labour cause each part to yield, And make my garden like a fruitful field; What say you, when
you see me musing there With looks intent as lost in anxious care, And sending forth my sentiments
in words That oft intimidate the peaceful birds? Dost thou not then suppose me void of rest,
Or think some demon agitates my breast? Yon villagers, you know, are wont to say Thy master's
fam'd for writing many a lay, 'Mongst other matters too he's known to sing The glorious acts of
our victorious king;[6] Whose martial fame resounds thro' every town; Unparallel'd in wisdom
and renown. You know it well--and by this garden wall P'rhaps Mons and Namur[7] at this instant
fall. What shouldst thou think if haply some should say This noted chronicler's employ'd to-day
In writing something new--and thus his time Devotes to thee--to paint his thoughts in rhyme? My
master, thou wouldst say, can ably teach, And often tells me more than parsons preach; But still,
methinks, if he was forc'd to toil Like me each day--to cultivate the soil, To prune the trees,
to keep the fences round; Reduce the rising to the level ground, Draw water from the fountains
near at hand To cheer and fertilize the thirsty land, He would not trade in trifles such as these,
And drive the peaceful linnets from the trees.

Now, Anthony, I plainly see that you Suppose yourself the busiest of the two; But ah, methinks
you'd tell a diff'rent tale If two whole days beyond the garden pale
You were to leave the mattock and the spade And all at once take up
the poet's trade: To give a manuscript a fairer face, And all the
beauty of poetic grace; Or give the most offensive flower that blows
Carnation's sweets, and colours of the rose; And change the homely
language of the clown To suit the courtly readers of the town-- Just
such a work, in fact, I mean to say, As well might please the critics
of the day!

Soon from this work returning tir'd and lean, More tann'd than though you'd twenty summers
seen, The wonted gard'ning tools again you'd take Your long-accustom'd shovel and your rake; And
then exclaiming, you would surely say, 'Twere better far to labour many a day Than e'er attempt
to take such useless flights, And vainly strive to gain poetic heights, Impossible to reach--I
might as soon Ascend at once and land upon the moon!

Come, Anthony, attend: let me explain (Although an idler) weariness and pain. Man's ever rack'd
and restless, here below, And at his best estate must labour know. Then comes fatigue. The Sisters
nine may please And promise poets happiness and ease; But e'en amidst those trees, that cooling
shade, That calm retreat for them expressly made, No rest they find--there rich effusions flow
In all the measures bardic numbers know: Thus on their way in endless toil they move, And spend
their strength in labours that they love. Beneath the trees the bards the muses haunt, And
with incessant toil are seen to pant; But still amidst their pains, they pleasure find An
ample entertainment for the mind. But, after all, 'tis plain enough to me, A man unstudious, must
unhappy be; Who deems a dull, inactive life the best, A life of laziness,
a life of rest; A willing slave to sloth--and well I know, He suffers
much who nothing has to do.

His mind beclouded, he obscurely sees, And free from busy life imagines
ease.

   All sinful pleasures reign without control, And passions unsubdued
pollute the soul; He thus indulges in impure desires, Which long have
lurk'd within, like latent fires: At length they kindle--burst into
a flame On him they sport--sad spectacle of shame.

Remorse ensues--with every fierce disease. The stone and cruel gout upon him seize; To quell
their rage some fam'd physicians come Who scarce less cruel, crowd the sick man's room; On
him they operate--these learned folk, Make him saw rocks, and cleave the solid oak;[8] And
gladly would the man his fate resign For such an humble, happy state as thine. Be thankful, Anthony,
and think with me, The poor hardworking man may happier be If blest with strength, activity, and
health, Than those who roll in luxury and wealth.

Two truths important, I proceed to tell, One is a truth, you surely know full well; That labour is
essential here below To man--a source of weal instead of woe: The other truth, few words suffice
to prove, No blame attaches to the life I love. So still attend--but I must say no more, I
plainly see, you wish my sermon o'er; You gape, you close your eyes, you drop your chin, Again
methinks I'd better not begin. Besides, these melons seem to wish to know The reason why they
are neglected so; And ask if yonder village holds its feast And thou awhile art there detained
a guest, While all the flowery tribes make sad complaint. For want of water they are grown quite
faint.

Tipton. T.S.A.

[4] Anteuil, near Paris.

[5] Horace speaks thus to his steward in the country. Epistle xiv. book 1.

[6] Lewis XIV.

[7] See Ode sur la prise de Namur.

[8] This metaphor has been considered too bold, and perhaps justly, but Despreaux did not think
it so. He observed to M. Dagnesseau that if this line were not good, he might burn the whole
production.

* * * * *

THE SELECTOR, AND LITERARY NOTICES OF NEW WORKS.

* * * * *

LIVES OF BRITISH PAINTERS, SCULPTORS, AND ARCHITECTS.

By Allan Cunningham.

This volume is the first of a series of Lives of Artists, and the fourth number of Murray's
Family Library. The author is a first-rate poet, but it appears that he undertook this task with some
diffidence. We have, however, few artists of literary attainments, and they are more profitably
employed than in authorship. Little apology was necessary, for of all literary men, poets are
best calculated to write on the Fine Arts: and the genius of Poetry, Painting, Sculpture, and Music,
is often associated in one mind, in love of the subjects at least, if not in practice.

Prefixed to the "Lives," is a delightful chapter on British Art before the birth of Hogarth, from which
we quote the following:--

"Poetry, Painting, Sculpture, and Music, are the natural offspring of the heart of man. They are
found among the most barbarous nations; they flourish among the most civilized; and springing
from nature, and not from necessity or accident, they can never be wholly lost in the most disastrous
changes. In this they differ from mere inventions; and, compared with mechanical discoveries,
are what a living tree is to a log of wood. It may indeed be said that the tongue of poetry
is occasionally silent, and the hand of painting sometimes stayed; but this seems not to affect
the ever-living principle which I claim as their characteristic. They are heard and seen again
in their season, as the birds and flowers are at the coming of spring; and assert their title
to such immortality as the things of earth may claim. It is true that the poetry of barbarous
nations is rude, and their attempts at painting uncouth; yet even in these we may recognise
the foreshadowings of future excellence, and something of the peculiar character which, in
happier days, the genius of the same tribe is to stamp upon worthier productions. The future
Scott, or Lawrence, or Chantrey, may be indicated afar-off in the barbarous ballads, drawings,
or carvings, of an early nation. Coarse nature and crude simplicity are the commencement, as
elevated nature and elegant simplicity are the consummation of art.

"When the Spaniards invaded the palaces of Chili and Peru, they found them filled with works
of art. Cook found considerable beauty of drawing and skill of workmanship in the ornamented weapons
and war-canoes of the islanders of the South Sea; and in the interior recesses of India, sculptures
and paintings, of no common merit, are found in every village. In like manner, when Caesar landed
among the barbarians of Britain, he found them acquainted with arts and arms; and his savage successors,
the Saxons, added to unextinguishable ferocity a love of splendour and a rude sense of beauty,
still visible in the churches which they built, and the monuments which they erected to their
princes and leaders. All those works are of that kind called ornamental: the graces of true
art, the truth of action and the dignity of sentiment are wanting; and they seem to have been
produced by a sort of mechanical process, similar to that which creates figures in arras.
Art is, indeed, of slow and gradual growth; like the oak, it is long of growing to maturity
and strength. Much knowledge of colour, much skill of hand, much experience in human character,
and a deep sense of light and shade, have to be acquired, to enable
the pencil to embody the conceptions of genius.

The artist has to seek for all this in the accumulated mass of professional knowledge: which
time has gathered for his instruction, and with his best wisdom, and his happiest fortune, he
can only add a little more information to the common stock, for the benefit of his successors.
In no country has Painting risen suddenly into eminence. While Poetry takes wing at once, free
and unincumbered, she is retarded in her ascent by the very mechanism to which she must at last
owe at least half her glory. In Britain, Painting was centuries in throwing off the fetters
of mere mechanical skill, and in rising into the region of genius. The original spirit of England
had appeared in many a noble poem, while the two sister arts were still servilely employed
in preserving incredible legends, in taking the likeness of the last saint whom credulity had
added to the calendar, and in confounding the acts of the apostles in the darkness of allegory."

Then
follows an outline of early Art in England, in the embellishment of cathedrals, &c.; among
which is the following notice of one of the earliest of our attempts at historical portraiture
which can be authenticated:--

"It is a Painting on Wood; the figures are less than life, and represent Henry the Fifth and his
relations. It measures four feet six inches long, by four feet four inches high, and was in
the days of Catholic power the altarpiece of the church of Shene. An angel stands in the centre,
holding in his hands the expanding coverings of two tents, out of which the king, with three
princes, and the queen, with four princesses, are proceeding to kneel
at two altars, where crosses, and sceptres, and books are lying.

They wear long and flowing robes, with loose hair, and have crowns on their heads. In the background,
St. George appears in the air, combating with the dragon, while Cleodelinda kneels in prayer
beside a lamb. It is not, indeed, quite certain that this curious work was made during the reign
of Henry the Fifth, but there can be little doubt of its being painted as early as that of
his son."

In the next page we have the following character of an English artist of about the same period:--

"He
was at once architect, sculptor, carpenter, goldsmith, armourer, jeweller, saddler, tailor,
and painter. There is extant, in Dugdale, a curious example of the character of the times,
and a scale by which we can measure the public admiration of art. It is a contract between the
Earl of Warwick and John Rag, citizen and tailor, London, in which the latter undertakes to execute
the emblazonry of the earl's pageant in his situation of ambassador to France. In the tailor's
bill, gilded griffins mingle with Virgin Marys; painted streamers for battle or procession,
with the twelve apostles; and 'one coat for his grace's body, lute with fine gold,' takes precedence
of St. George and the Dragon."

We wish some of the criticism in this chapter had been milder, and a few of the invectives not
so highly charged; some of them even out-Herod the fury of an article on Painting, in a recent
number of the Edinburgh Review. But we must pass on to pleasanter matters--as the following
poetical paragraphs:--

"The art of tapestry as well as the art of illuminating books, aided in diffusing a love of
painting over the island. It was carried to a high degree of excellence. The earliest account
of its appearance in England is during the reign of Henry the Eighth, but there is no reason
to doubt that it was well known and in general esteem much earlier. The traditional account,
that we were instructed in it by the Saracens, has probably some foundation. The ladies encouraged
this manufacture by working at it with their own hands; and the rich aided by purchasing it in
vast quantities whenever regular practitioners appeared in the market. It found its way into
church and palace--chamber and hall. It served at once to cover and adorn cold and comfortless
walls. It added warmth, and, when snow was on the hill and ice in the stream, gave an air of social
snugness which has deserted some of our modern mansions.

"At first the figures and groups, which rendered this manufacture
popular, were copies of favourite paintings; but, as taste improved
and skill increased, they showed more of originality in their conceptions,
if not more of nature in their forms.

They exhibited, in common with all other works of art, the mixed taste of the times--a grotesque
union of classical and Hebrew history--of martial life and pastoral repose--of Greek gods and
Romish saints. Absurd as such combinations certainly were, and destitute of those beauties of
form and delicate gradations and harmony of colour which distinguish paintings worthily so called--still
when the hall was lighted up, and living faces thronged the floor, the silent inhabitants
of the walls would seem, in the eyes of our ancestors, something very splendid. As painting
rose in fame, tapestry sunk in estimation. The introduction of a lighter and less massive mode
of architecture abridged the space for its accommodation, and by
degrees the stiff and fanciful creations of the loom vanished from
our walls.

   The art is now neglected. I am sorry
      for this, because I cannot think
   meanly of an art which engaged the
      heads and hands of the ladies
   of England, and gave to the
      tapestried hall of elder
   days fame little inferior
      to what now waits on a gallery of paintings."

   

   Passing over Holbein, Sir Antonio Moore, Vandyke, Lely, Kneller, and
Thornhill, we come to the lives of Hogarth--Wilson--Reynolds and Gainsborough--from
which we select a few characteristic anecdotes and sketches.

In noticing Hogarth's early life, Mr. Cunningham has thrown some discredit on a book, which
on its publication, made not a little chat among artists:--

"Of those early days I find this brief notice in Smith's Life of Nollekens the sculptor. 'I have
several times heard Mr. Nollekens observe, that he had frequently seen Hogarth, when a young man,
saunter round Leicester Fields with his master's sickly child hanging its head over his shoulder.'
It is more amusing to read such a book than safe to quote it. Hogarth had ceased to have a
master for seventeen years, was married to Jane Thornhill, kept his carriage, and was in the full
blaze of his reputation, when Nollekens was born."

Among Hogarth's early labours are his Illustrations of Hudibras, published in 1726. These were
seventeen plates; and we have lately seen in the possession of Mr. Britton, the architect, eleven
original paintings illustrative of Butler's witty poem, and attributed
to Hogarth.

From the notices of Hogarth's portraits we select the
following:--

"Hogarth's Portrait of Henry Fielding, executed after
death from recollection, is remarkable as being the only likeness
extant of the prince of English novelists. It has various histories.
According to Murphy, Fielding had made many promises to sit to Hogarth,
for whose genius he had a high esteem, but died without fulfilling
them; a lady accidentally cut a profile with her scissars, which recalled
Fielding's face so completely to Hogarth's memory, that he took up
the outline, corrected and finished it and made a capital likeness.
The world is seldom satisfied with a common account of any thing that
interests it--more especially as a marvellous one is easily manufactured.
The following, then, is the second history. Garrick, having dressed
himself in a suit of Fielding's clothes, presented himself unexpectedly
before the artist, mimicking the step, and assuming the look of their
deceased friend. Hogarth was much affected at first, but, on recovering,
took his pencil, and drew the portrait. For those who love a soberer
history, the third edition is ready. Mrs. Hogarth, when questioned
concerning it, said, that she remembered the affair well; her husband
began the picture--and finished it--one evening in his own house,
and sitting by her side.

"Captain Coram, the projector of the Foundling
Hospital, sat for his portrait to Hogarth, and it is one of the best
he ever painted. There is a natural dignity and great benevolence
expressed in a face which, in the original, was rough and forbidding.
This worthy man, having laid out his fortune and impaired his health
in acts of charity and mercy, was reduced to poverty in his old age.
An annuity of a hundred pounds was privately purchased, and when it
was presented to him, he said, 'I did not waste the wealth which I
possessed in self-indulgence or vain expense, and am not ashamed to
own that in my old age I am poor.'

"The last which I shall notice
of this class of productions, is the portrait of the celebrated demagogue
John Wilkes. This singular performance originated in a quarrel with
that witty libertine, and his associate Churchill the poet: it immediately
followed an article, from the pen of Wilkes, in the North Briton,
which insulted Hogarth as a man, and traduced him as an artist. It
is so little of a caricature, that Wilkes good humouredly observes
somewhere in his correspondence, 'I am growing every day more and
more like my portrait by Hogarth.' The terrible scourge of the satirist
fell bitterly upon the personal and moral deformities of the man.
Compared with his chastisement the hangman's whip is but a proverb,
and the pillory a post of honour. He might hope oblivion from the
infamy of both; but from Hogarth there was no escape. It was little
indeed that the artist had to do, to brand and emblazon him with the
vices of his nature--but with how much discrimination that little
is done! He took up the correct portrait, which Walpole upbraids him
with skulking into a court of law to obtain, and in a few touches
the man sank, and the demon of hypocrisy and sensuality sat in his
stead. It is a fiend, and yet it is Wilkes still. It is said that
when he had finished this remarkable portrait, the former friendship
of Wilkes overcame him, and he threw it into the fire, from which
it was saved by the interposition of his wife."

All the criticisms
on Hogarth's moral pictures have an air of originality and freshness
of mind, which is so attractive, as to make us regret that we have
not room for them. In proof of this, only let the reader turn to Mr.
Cunningham's remarks on the Harlot and Rake's Progress, at pages 98
and 99. His descriptions too of the satirical pictures are extremely
ludicrous, and in effect second only to painting itself. The following
anecdote of the celebrated March to Finchley is curious, though well
known:--

"The original painting was, on the publication of the print,
disposed of by a kind of lottery.
Would his head have been safe with you for his associate?  Your associates see many gusts in
your heart.  Do they ever see your eyes red because of your sin?  Did you ever weep so much
as one good tear-drop for pure sin?  One true tear: not because your sins have found you out,
but for secret sins that you know can never find you out in this world?  And, still better,
do you ever weep in secret places not for sin, but for sinfulness--which is a very different
matter?  Do you ever weep to yourself and to God alone over your incurably wicked heart?  If
not, then weep for that with all your might, night and day.  No mortal man has so much cause
to weep as you have.  Go to God on the spot, on every spot, and say with Bishop Andrewes, who
is both Mr. Desires-awake and Mr. Wet- eyes in one, say with that deep man in his Private Devotions,
say: 'I need more grief, O God; I plainly need it.  I can sin much, but I cannot correspondingly
repent.  O Lord, give me a molten heart.  Give me tears; give me a fountain of tears.  Give
me the grace of tears.  Drop down, ye heavens, and bedew the dryness of my heart.  Give me,
O Lord, this saving grace.  No grace of all the graces were more welcome to me.  If I may not
water my couch with my tears, nor wash Thy feet with my tears, at least give me one or two
little tears that Thou mayest put into Thy bottle and write in Thy book!'  If your heart is
hard, and your eyes dry, make something like that your continual prayer.

2.  'A poor-man,' said Mr. Desires-awake, about his associate.  The quantity of sorrow he has,
does it not mean withal the quantity of sympathy he has, and the quantity of faculty and of
victory he shall yet have?  Our sorrow is the inverted image of our nobleness.  The depth of
our despair measures what capability and height of claim we have to hope.  Black smoke, as
of Tophet, filling all your universe, it can yet by true heart-energy become flame, and the
brilliancy of heaven.  Courage!'

   'This is the angel of the earth,
   And she is always weeping.'

3.  'A poor man, and a man of a broken spirit, and yet one that can speak well to a petition.'
Yes; and you will see how true that eulogy of Mr. Wet-eyes is if you will run over in your
mind the outstanding instances of successful petitioners in the Scriptures.  As you come down
the Old and the New Testaments you will be astonished and encouraged to find how prevailing
a fountain of tears always is with God.  David with his swimming bed; Jeremiah with his head
waters; Mary Magdalene over His feet with her welling eyes; Peter's bitter cry all his life
long as often as he heard a cock crow, and so on.  So on through a multitude whose names are
written in heaven, and who went up to heaven all the way with inconsolable sorrow because of
their sins.  They took words and turned to the Lord; but,--better than the best words,--they
took tears, or rather, their tears took them.  The best words, the words that the Holy Ghost
Himself teacheth, if they are without tears, will avail nothing.  Even inspired words will
not pass through; while, all the time, tears, mere tears, without words, are omnipotent with
God.  Words weary Him, while tears overcome and command Him.  He inhabits the tears of Israel.
It is the same with ourselves.  Tears move us.  Tears melt us.  We cannot resist tears.  Even
counterfeit tears, we cannot be sure that they are not true.  And that is the main reason why
our Lord is so good at speaking to a petition.  It is because His whole heart, and all the
moving passions of His heart, are in His intercessory office.  It is because He still remembers
in the skies His tears, His agonies, and cries.  It is because He is entered into the holiest
with His own tears as well as with His own blood.  And it is because He will remain and abide
before the Father the Man of Sorrows till our last petition is answered, and till God has wiped
the last tear from our eyes.  When He was in the coasts of Caesarea-Philippi, our Lord felt
a great curiosity to find out who the people thereabouts took Him to be.  And it must have
touched His heart to be told that some men had insight enough to insist that He was the prophet
Jeremiah come back again to weep over Jerusalem. He is Elias, said some.  No; He is John the
Baptist risen from the dead, said others.  No, no; said some men who saw deeper than their
neighbours. His head is waters, and His eyes are a fountain of tears.  Do you not see that
He so often escapes into a lodge in the wilderness to weep for our sins?  No; He is neither
John nor Elijah; He is Jeremiah come back again to weep over Jerusalem!  And even an apostle,
looking back at the beginning of our Lord's priesthood on earth, says that He was prepared
for His office by prayers and supplications, and with strong crying and tears.  From all that,
then, let us learn and lay to heart that if we would have one to speak well to our petitions,
the Man of Sorrows is that one.  And then, as His remembrancers on our behalf, let us engage
all those among our friends who have the same grace of tears.  But, above all, let us be men
of tears ourselves.  For all the tears and all the intercessions of our great High Priest,
and all the importunings of our best friends to boot, will avail us nothing if our own eyes
are dry.

4.  'Clear as tears' is a Persian proverb when they would praise their purest spring water.
But Mr. Wet-eyes has from henceforth spoiled the point of that proverb for us.  'I see,' he
said, 'dirt in mine own tears, and filthiness in the bottom of my prayers.'  Mr. Wet-eyes is
hopeless. Mr. Wet-eyes is intolerable.  Mr. Wet-eyes would weary out the patience of a saint.
There is no satisfying or pacifying or ever pleasing this morbose Mr. Wet-eyes.  The man is
absolutely insufferable.  Why, prayers and tears that the most and best of God's people cannot
attain to are spurned and spat upon by Mr. Wet-eyes.  The man is beside himself with his tears.
For, tears that would console and assure us for a long season after them, he will weep over
them as we scarce weep over our worst sins. His closet always turns all his comeliness to corruption.
He comes out of his closet after all night in it with his psalm-book wrung to pulp, and with
all his righteousnesses torn to filthy rags; till all men escape Mr. Wet-eyes' society--all
men except Mr. Desires-awake.  I will go out on your errand now, said Mr. Desires-awake, if
you will send Mr. Wet-eyes with me.  I gave you a specimen of one of Mr. Wet-eyes' prayers
in the introduction to this discourse, and you did not discover much the matter with it, did
you?  You did not discover much filthiness in the bottom of that prayer, did you?  I am sure
you did not.  Ah! but that is because you have not yet got Mr. Wet-eyes' eyes.  When you get
his eyes; when you turn and employ upon yourselves and upon your tears and upon your prayers
his always-wet eyes,--then you will begin to understand and love and take sides with this inconsolable
soul, and will choose his society rather than that of any other man--as often, at any rate,
as you go out to the Prince's pavilion door.

5.  But, I pray Thee, take not offence at the unqualifiedness of Thy servant.' Take good note
of that uncommon expression, 'unqualifiedness,' in Mr. Wet- eyes' confession, all of you who
are attending to what is being said.  Lay 'unqualifiedness' to heart.  Learn how to qualify
yourselves before you begin to pray.  In his fine comment on the 137th Psalm, Matthew Henry
discourses delightfully on what he calls 'deliberate tears.'  Look up that raciest of commentators,
and see what he there says about the deliberate tears of the captives in Babylon.  It was the
lack of sufficient deliberation in his tears that condemned and alarmed Mr. Wet- eyes that
day.  He felt now that he had not deliberated and qualified himself properly before coming
to the Prince's pavilion.  Do not take up your time or your thoughts with mere curiosities,
either in your Bible or in any other good book, says A Kempis.  Read such things rather as
may yield compunction to your heart.  And again, give thyself to compunction, and thou shalt
gain much devotion thereby.  Mr. Wet-eyes, good and true soul, was afraid that he had not qualified
himself enough by compunctious reading and self-recollection.  The sincere, he sobbed out,
do often beget hypocrites!  'Our hearts are so deceitful in the matter of repentance,' says
Jeremy Taylor, 'that the masters of the spiritual life are fain to invent suppletory arts and
stratagems to secure the duty.' Take not offence at the lack of all such suppletory arts and
stratagems in thy servant, said poor Wet-eyes.  All which would mean in the most of us: Take
not offence at my rawness and ignorance in the spiritual life, and especially in the life of
inward devotion.  Do not count up against me the names and the numbers and the prices of my
poems, and plays, and novels, and newspapers, and then the number of my devotional books. Compare
not my outlay on my body and on this life with my outlay on my soul and on the life to come.
Oh, take not mortal offence at the shameful and scandalous unqualifiedness of Thy miserable
servant.  My father and my mother read the books of the soul, but they have left behind them
a dry-eyed reprobate in me!  Say that to-night as you look around on the grievous famine of
the suppletory arts and stratagems of repentance and reformation in your heathenish bedroom.

Spiritual preaching; real face to face, inward, verifiable, experimental, spiritual preaching;
preaching to a heart in the agony of its sanctification; preaching to men whose whole life
is given over to making them a new heart--that kind of preaching is scarcely ever heard in
our day.  There is great intellectual ability in the pulpit of our day, great scholarship,
great eloquence, and great earnestness, but spiritual preaching, preaching to the spirit--'wet-eyed'
preaching--is a lost art. At the same time, if that living art is for the present overlaid
and lost, the literature of a deeper spiritual day abides to us, and our spiritually-minded
people are not confined to us, they are not dependent on us.  Well, this is the Communion week
with us yet once more.  Will you not, then, make it the beginning of some of the suppletory
arts and stratagems of the spiritual life with yourselves?  I cannot preach as I would like
on such subjects, but I can tell you who could, and who, though dead, yet speak by their immortal
books.  You have the wet-eyed psalms; but they are beyond the depth of most people.  Their
meaning seems to us on the surface, and we all read and sing them, but let us not therefore
think that we understand them.  I cannot compel you to read the books, and to read little else
but the books, that would in time, and by God's blessing, lead you into the depths of the psalms;
but I can wash my hands so far in making their names so many household words among my people.
The Way to Christ, the Imitation of Christ, the Theologia Germanica, Tauler's Sermons, the
Mortification of Sin, and Indwelling Sin in Believers, the Saint's Rest, the Holy Living and
Dying, the Privata Sacra, the Private Devotions, the Serious Call, the Christian Perfection,
the Religious Affections, and such like. All that, and you still unqualified!  All that, and
your eyes still dry!

CHAPTER XX--MR. HUMBLE THE JURYMAN, AND MISS HUMBLE-MIND THE SERVANT-MAID

   'Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.'--Our Lord.

   'Be clothed with humility.'--Peter.

   'God's chiefest saints are the least in their own eyes.'--A Kempis.

   'Without humility all our other virtues are but vices.'--Pascal.

   'Humility does not consist in having a worse opinion of ourselves than
   we deserve.'--Law.

   'Humility lies close upon the heart, and its tests are exceedingly
   delicate and subtle.'--Newman.

Our familiar English word 'humility' comes down to us from the Latin root humus, which means
the earth or the ground.  Humility, therefore, is that in the mind and in the heart of a man
which is low down even to the very earth.  A humble-minded man may not have learning enough
to know the etymology of the name which best describes his character, but the divine nature
which is in him teaches him to look down, to walk meekly and softly, and to speak seldom, and
always in love.  For humility, while it takes its lowly name from earth, all the time has its
true nature from heaven.  Humility is full of all meekness, modesty, submissiveness, teachableness,
sense of inability, sense of unworthiness, sense of ill- desert.  Till, with that new depth
and new intensity that the Scriptures and religious experience have given to this word, as
to so many other words, humility, in the vocabulary of the spiritual life, has come to be applied
to that low estimate of ourselves which we come to form and to entertain as we are more and
more enlightened about God and about ourselves; about the majesty, glory, holiness, beauty,
and blessedness of the divine nature, and about our own unspeakable evil, vileness, and misery
as sinners.  And, till humility has come to rank in Holy Scripture, and in the lives and devotions
of all God's saints, as at once the deepest root and the ripest fruit of all the divine graces
that enter into, and, indeed, constitute the life of God in the heart of man. Humility, evangelical
humility, sings Edwards in his superb and seraphic poem the Religious Affections,--evangelical
humility is the sense that the true Christian has of his own utter insufficiency, despicableness,
and odiousness, a sense which is peculiar to the true saint.  But to compensate the true saint
for this sight and sense of himself, he has revealed to him an accompanying sense of the absolutely
transcendent beauty of the divine nature and of all divine things; a sight and a sense that
quite overcome the heart and change to holiness all the dispositions and inclinations and affections
of the heart.  The essence of evangelical humility, says Edwards, consists in such humility
as becomes a creature in himself exceeding sinful, but at the same time, under a dispensation
of grace, and this is the greatest and most essential thing in all true religion.

1.  Well, then, our Mr. Humble was a juryman in Mansoul, and his name and his nature eminently
fitted him for his office.  I never was a juryman; but, if I were, I feel sure I would come
home from the court a far humbler man than I went up to it.  I cannot imagine how a judge can
remain a proud man, or an advocate, or a witness, or a juryman, or a spectator, or even a policeman.
I am never in a criminal court that I do not tremble with terror all the time.  I say to myself
all the time,--there stands John Newton but for the preventing grace of God.  'I will not sit
as a judge to try General Boulanger, because I hate him,' said M. Renault in the French Senate.
Mr. Humble himself could not have made a better speech to the bench than that when his name
was called to be sworn.  Let us all remember John Newton and M. Renault when we would begin
to write or to speak about any arrested, accused, found-out man. Let other men's arrests, humiliations,
accusations, and sentences only make us search well our own past, and that will make us ever
humbler and ever humbler men ourselves; ever more penitent men, and ever more prayerful men.

2.  And then Miss Humble-mind, his only daughter, was a servant-maid. There is no office so
humble but that a humble mind will not put on still more humility in it.  What a lesson in
humility, not Peter only got that night in the upper room, but that happy servant-maid also
who brought in the bason and the towel.  Would she ever after that night grumble and give up
her place in a passion because she had been asked to do what was beneath her to do?  Would
she ever leave that house for any wages?  Would she ever see that bason without kissing it?
Would that towel not be a holy thing ever after in her proud eyes?  How happy that house would
ever after that night be, not so much because the Lord's Supper had been instituted in it,
as because a servant was in it who had learned humility as she went about the house that night.
Let all our servants hold up their heads and magnify their office.  Their Master was once a
servant, and He left us all, and all servants especially, an example that they should follow
in His steps.  Peter, whose feet were washed that night, never forgot that night, and his warm
heart always warmed to a servant when he saw her with her bason and her towels, till he gave
her half a chapter to herself in his splendid First Epistle.  'Servants, be subject,' he said,
till his argument rose to a height above which not even Paul himself ever rose.  Servant-maids,
you must all have your own half-chapter out of First Peter by heart.

3.  But I have as many students of one kind or other here to-night as I have maid-servants,
and they will remember where a great student has said that knowledge without love but puffeth
a student up.  Now, the best knowledge for us all, and especially so for a student, is to know
himself: his own ignorance, his own foolishness, his blindness of mind, and, especially, his
corruption of heart.  For that knowledge will both keep him from being puffed up with what
he already knows, and it will also put him and keep him in the way of knowing more.  Self-knowledge
will increase humility, and all the past masters both of science and of religion will tell
him that humility is the certain note of the true student.  You who are students all know The
Advancement of Learning, just as the servants sitting beside you all know the second chapter
of First Peter.  Well, your master Verulam there tells you, and indeed on every page of his,
that it is only to a humble, waiting, childlike temper that nature, like grace, will ever reveal
up her secrets.  'There is small chance of truth at the goal when there is not a childlike
humility at the starting-post.'  Well, then, all you students who would fain get to the goal
of science, make the Church of Christ your starting-post. Come first and come continually to
the Christian school to learn humility, and then, as long as your talents, your years, and
your opportunities hold out, both truth and goodness will open up to you at every step.  Every
step will be a goal, and at every goal a new step will open up.  And God's smile and God's
blessing, and all good men's love and honour and applause will support and reward you in your
race.  And, humble-minded to the truth herself, be, at the same time, humble-minded toward
all who like yourself are seeking to know and to do the truth.  A lately deceased student of
nature was a pattern to all students as long as he waited on truth in his laboratory; and even
as long as he remained at his desk to tell the world what he and other students had discovered
in their search.  But when any other student in his search after truth was compelled to cross
that hitherto so exemplary student, he immediately became as insolent as if he had been the
greatest boor in the country. Till, as he spat out scorn at all who differed from him we always
remembered this in A Kempis--'Surely, an humble husbandman that serveth God is better than
a proud philosopher that, neglecting himself, laboureth to understand the course of the heavens.
It is great wisdom and perfection to esteem nothing of ourselves, and to think always well
and highly of others.'  Students of arts, students of philosophy, students of law, students
of medicine, and especially, students of divinity, be humble men.  Labour in humility even
more than in your special science.  Humility will advance you in your special science; while,
all the time, and at the end of time, she will be more to you than all the other sciences taken
together.  And since I have spoken of A Kempis, take this motto for all your life out of A
Kempis, as the great and good Fenelon did, and it will guide you to the goal: Ama nescia et
pro nihilo reputari.

4.  But of all the men in the whole world it is ministers who should simply, as Peter says,
be clothed with humility, and that from head to foot.  And, first as divinity students, and
then as pastors and preachers, we who are ministers have advantages and opportunities in this
respect quite peculiar and private to ourselves.  For, while other students are spending their
days and their nights on the ancient classics of Greece and Rome, the student who is to be
a minister is buried in the Psalms, in the Gospels, and in the Epistles.  While the student
of law is deep in his commentaries and his cases, the student of divinity is deep in the study
of experimental religion.  And while the medical student is full of the diseases of animals
and of men, the theological student is absorbed in the holiness of the divine nature, and in
the plague of the human heart, and, especially, he is drowned deeper every day in his own.
And he who has begun a curriculum like that and is not already putting on a humility beyond
all other men had better lose no more time, but turn himself at once to some other way of making
his bread.  The word of God and his own heart,--yes; what a sure school of evangelical humility
to every evangelically-minded student is that!  And, then, after that, and all his days, his
congregational communion-roll and his visiting-book. Let no minister who would be found of
God clothed and canopied over with humility ever lose sight of his communion-roll and pastoral
visitation- book.  I defy any minister to keep those records always open before him and yet
remain a proud man, a self-respecting, self-satisfied, self-righteous man.  For, what secret
histories of his own folly, neglect, rashness, offensiveness, hot-headedness, self-seeking,
self-pleasing vanity, now puffed up over one man, now cast down and full of gloom over another,
what self-flattery here, and what resentment and retaliation there; and so on, as only his
own eyes and his Divine Master's eye can read between every diary line.  What shame will cover
that minister as with a mantle when he thinks what the Christian ministry might be made, and
then takes home to himself what he has made it!  Let any minister shut himself in with his
communion-roll and his visiting- book before each returning communion season, and there will
be one worthy communicant at least in the congregation: one who will have little appetite all
that week for any other food but the broken Body and the shed Blood of his Redeemer.  But these
are professional matters that the outside world has nothing to do with and would not understand.
Only, let all young men who would have evangelical humility absolutely secured and sealed to
them,--let them come and be ministers.  Just as all young men who would have any satisfaction
in life, any sense of work well done and worthy of reward, any taste of a goal attained and
an old age earned, let them take to anything in all this world but the evangelical pulpit and
its accompanying pastorate.

5.  But humility is not a grace of the pulpit and the pastorate only.  It is not those who
are separated by the Holy Ghost to study the word of God and their own hearts all their life
long only, who are called to put on humility.  All men are called to that grace.  There is
no acceptance with God for any man without that grace.  There is no approach to God for any
man without it.  All salvation begins and ends in it.  Would you, then, fain possess it?  Would
you, then, fain attain to it?  Then let there be no mystery and no mistake made about it. 
Would any man here fain get down to that deep valley where God's saints walk in the sweet shade
and lie down in green pastures?  Well, I warrant him that just before him, and already under
his eye, there is a flight of steps cut in the hill, which steps, if he will take them, will,
step after step, take him also down to that bottom.  The whole face of this steep and slippery
world is sculptured deep with such submissive steps.  Indeed, when a man's eyes are once turned
down to that valley, there is nothing to be seen anywhere in all this world but downward steps.
Look whichever way you will, there gleams out upon you yet another descending stair.  Look
back at the way you came up.  But take care lest the sight turns you dizzy.  Look at any spot
you once crossed on your way up, and, lo! every foot-print of yours has become a descending
step.  You sink down as you look, broken down with shame and with horror and with remorse.
There are people, some still left in this world, and some gone to the other world, people whom
you dare not think of lest you should turn sick and lose hold and hope. There are places you
dare not visit: there are scenes you dare not recall.  Lucifer himself would be a humble angel
with his wings over his face if he had a past like yours, and would often enough return to
look at it.  And, then, not the past only, but at this present moment there are people and
things placed close beside you, and kept close beside you, and you close beside them, on divine
purpose just to give you continual occasion and offered opportunity to practise humility. 
They are kept close beside you just on purpose to humiliate you, to cut out your descending
steps, to lend you their hand, and to say to you: Keep near us.  Only keep your eye on us,
and we will see you down!  And then, if you are resolute enough to look within, if you are
able to keep your eye on what goes on in your own heart like heart--beats, then, already, I
know where you are.  You are under all men's feet.  You are ashamed to lift up your eyes to
meet other men's eyes.  You dare not take their honest hands.  You could tell Edwards himself
things about humiliation now that would make his terribly searching and humbling book quite
tame and tasteless.

Come, then, O high-minded man, be sane, be wise.  If you were up on a giddy height, and began
to see that certain death was straight and soon before you, what would you do?  You know what
you would do.  You would look with all your eyes for such steps as would take you safest down
to the solid ground.  You would welcome any hand stretched out to help you. You would be most
attentive and most obedient and most thankful to any one who would assure you that this is
the right way down.  And you would keep on saying to yourself--Once I were well down, no man
shall see me up here again.  Well, my brethren, humiliation, humility, is to be learned just
in the same way, and it is to be learned in no other way.  He who would be down must just come
down.  That is all.  A step down, and another step down, and another, and another, and already
you are well down.  A humble act done to-day, a humble word spoken to-morrow; humiliation after
humiliation accepted every day that you would at one time have spurned from you with passion;
and then your own vile, hateful, unbearable heart-all that is ordained of God to bring you
down, down to the dust; and this last, your own heart, will bring you down to the very depths
of hell.  And thus, after all your other opportunities and ordinances of humility are embraced
and exhausted, then the plunges, the depths, the abysses of humility that God will open up
in your own heart will all work in you a meetness for heaven and a ripeness for its glory,
that shall for ever reward you for all that degradation and shame and self-despair which have
been to you the sure way and the only way to everlasting life.

CHAPTER XXI--MASTER THINK-WELL, THE LATE AND ONLY SON OF OLD MR. MEDITATION

   'As he thinketh in his heart, so is he.'--A Proverb.

It was a truly delightful sight to see old Mr. Meditation and his only son, our little Think-well,
out among the woods and hedgerows of a summer afternoon.  Little Think-well was the son of
his father's old age.  That dry tree used to say to himself that if ever he was intrusted with
a son of his own, he would make his son his most constant and his most confidential companion
all his days.  And so he did.  The eleventh of Deuteronomy had become a greater and greater
text to that childless man as he passed the mid-time of his days. And thou shalt write them
upon the doorposts of thine house and upon thy gates.'  And thus it was that, as the little
lad grew up, there was no day of all the seven that he so much numbered and waited for as was
that sacred day on which his father was free to take little Think-well by the hand and lead
him out to talk to him.  'No,' said an Edinburgh boy to his mother the other day--'No, mother,'
he said, 'I have no liking for these Sunday papers with their poor stories and their pictures.
I am to read the Bible stories and the Bible biographies first.'  He is not my boy.  I wish
my boys were all like him.  'And Plutarch on week-days for such a boy,' I said to his mother.
How to keep a decent shred of the old sanctification on the modern Sabbath-day is the anxious
inquiry of many fathers and mothers among us.  My friend with her manly-minded boy, and Mr.
Meditation with little Think-well had no trouble in that matter.

         'And once I said,
   As I remember, looking round upon those rocks
   And hills on which we all of us were born,
   That God who made the Great Book of the world
   Would bless such piety;--
   Never did worthier lads break English bread:
   The finest Sunday that the autumn saw,
   With all its mealy clusters of ripe nuts,
   Could never keep those boys away from church,
   Or tempt them to an hour of Sabbath breach,
   Leonard and James!'

Think-well and that mother's son.

Old Mr. Meditation, the father, was sprung of a poor but honest and industrious stock in the
city.  He had not had many talents or opportunities to begin with, but he had made the very
best of the two he had.  And then, when the two estates of Mr. Fritter-day and Mr. Let-good-
slip were sequestered to the crown, the advisers of the crown handed over those two neglected
estates to Mr. Meditation to improve them for the common good, and after him to his son, whose
name we know.  The steps of a good man are ordered of the Lord, and He delighteth in his way.
I have been young and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging bread.

Now, this Think-well old Mr. Meditation had by Mrs. Piety, and she was the daughter of the
old Recorder.   'I am Thy servant,' said Mrs. Piety's son on occasion all his days--'I am Thy
servant and the son of Thine handmaid.'  And at that so dutiful acknowledgment of his a long
procession of the servants of God pass up before our eyes with their sainted mothers leaning
on the arms of their great sons.  The Psalmist and his mother, the Baptist and his mother,
our Lord and His mother, the author of the Fourth Gospel and his mother, Paul's son and successor
in the gospel and his mother and grandmother, the author of The Confessions and his mother;
and, in this noble connection, I always think of Halyburton and his good mother.  And in this
ennobling connection you will all think of your own mother also, and before we go any further
you will all say, I also, O Lord, am Thy servant and the son of Thine handmaid.  'Fathers and
mothers handle children differently,' says Jeremy Taylor.  And then that princely teacher of
the Church of Christ Catholic goes on to tell us how Mrs. Piety handled her little Think-well
which she had borne to Mr. Meditation.  After other things, she said this every night before
she took sleep to her tired eyelids, this: 'Oh give me grace to bring him up.  Oh may I always
instruct him with diligence and meekness; govern him with prudence and holiness; lead him in
the paths of religion and justice; never provoking him to wrath, never indulging him in folly,
and never conniving at an unworthy action. Oh sanctify him in his body, soul, and spirit. 
Let all his thoughts be pure and holy to the Searcher of hearts; let his words be true and
prudent before men; and may he have the portion of the meek and the humble in the world to
come, and all through Jesus Christ our Lord!'  How could a son get past a father and a mother
like that?  Even if, for a season, he had got past them, he would be sure to come back.  Only,
their young Think-well never did get past his father and his mother.

There was not so much word of heredity in his day; but without so much of the word young Think-well
had the whole of the thing.  And as time went on, and the child became more and more the father
of the man, it was seen and spoken of by all the neighbours who knew the house, how that their
only child had inherited all his father's head, and all his mother's heart, and then that he
had reverted to his maternal grandfather in his so keen and quick sense of right and wrong.
All which, under whatever name it was held, was a most excellent outfit for our young gentleman.
His old father, good natural head and all, had next to no book-learning. He had only two or
three books that he read a hundred times over till he had them by heart.  And as he sighed
over his unlettered lot he always consoled himself with a saying he had once got out of one
of his old books.  The saying of some great authority was to this effect, that 'an old and
simple woman, if she loves Jesus, may be greater than our great brother Bonaventure.'  He did
not know who Bonaventure was, but he always got a reproof again out of his name.  Think-well,
to his father's immense delight, was a very methodical little fellow, and his father and he
had orderly little secrets that they told to none.  Little secret plans as to what they were
to read about, and think about, and pray about on certain days of the week and at certain hours
of the day and the night.  You must not call the father an old pedant, for the fact is, it
was the son who was the pedant if there was one in that happy house.  The two intimate friends
had a word between them they called agenda.  And nobody but themselves knew where they had
borrowed that uncouth word, what language it was, or what it meant.  Only in the old man's
tattered pocket-book there were things like this found by his minister after his death. Indeed,
in a museum of such relics this is still to be read under a glass case, and in old Mr. Meditation's
ramshackle hand: 'Monday, death; Tuesday, judgment; Wednesday, heaven; Thursday, hell; Friday,
my past life back to my youth; Saturday, the passion of my Saviour; Lord's day, creation, salvation,
and my own.--M.'  And then, on an utterly illegible page, this: 'Jesus, Thy life and Thy words
are a perpetual sermon to me. I meditate on Thee all the day.  Make my memory a vessel of election.
Let all my thoughts be plain, honest, pious, simple, prudent, and charitable, till Thou art
pleased to draw the curtain and let me see Thyself, O Eternal Jesu!'  If I had time I could
tell you more about Think-well's quaint old father.  But the above may be better than nothing
about the rare old gentleman. 

From the beginning misdeeds are punished, not merely as wrongs done to society, but as wrong
done to the gods and as wrong-doing for which the community collectively is responsible to the
gods. Justice from the beginning is not individual resentment, but "public action taken for
the public safety." It is not, as Mr. Hobhouse calls it, "revenge guided and limited by custom."
It is the customary action of the community taken to avert divine vengeance. The action taken
assumes in extreme cases the form of the death penalty; but its usual form of action is that of
taboo.

If the origin of justice is to be sought in something that is not justice, if justice in particular
and morality in general are to be treated as having been evolved out of something which was in
a way different {230} from them and yet in a way must have contained them, inasmuch as they came
forth from it, we shall do well to look for that something, not in the unhistorical, unreal
abstraction of an imaginary individual, apart from society, but in society itself when it is as
yet not clearly conscious of the justice and morality at work within it. Such a stage in the
development of society is, I think, to be discerned.

We have seen that, "at almost, if not quite, the lowest stages" of human development, there
is something which, according to Mr. Hobhouse, corresponds "roughly to our own administration
of justice" (I, 81). But this rough justice implies conscious, deliberate action on the part
of the community. It implies that the community as such makes some sort of enquiry into what
can be the cause of the misfortunes which are befalling it; and that, having found out the person
responsible, it deliberately takes the steps it deems necessary for putting itself right with
the supernatural power that has sent the sickness or famine. Now, such conscious, purposive,
deliberate action may and probably does take place at almost the lowest stage of development
of society; but not, we may surmise, at quite the lowest. What eventually is done {231} consciously
and deliberately is probably done in the first place much more summarily
and automatically.

And--in quite the lowest stage of social development--it is by means of the action of taboo
that summary and automatic punishment for breaches of the custom of the community is inflicted.
Its action is automatic and immediate: merely to come in contact with the forbidden thing is to become
tabooed yourself; and so great is the horror and dread of such contact, even if made unwittingly,
that it is capable of causing, when discovered, death. Like the justice, however, of which it
is the forerunner, it does not result always in death, nor does it produce that effect in most
cases. But what it does do is to make the offender himself taboo and as infectious as the
thing that rendered him taboo. Here, too, the action of taboo, in excommunicating the offender,
anticipates, or rather foreshadows, the action of justice when it excludes the guilty person from
the community and makes of him an outlaw. Again, in the rough justice found at almost, though
not quite, the lowest stages, the earliest offences of which official notice, so to speak,
is taken, are offences for which the punishment--disease or famine, etc.--falls on the community
as a whole, because the {232} community, in the person of one of its members, has offended as
a whole against heaven. In the earlier stage of feeling, also, which survives where taboo prevails,
it is the community as a whole which may be infected, and which must suffer if the offender is
allowed to spread the infection; it is the community, as a whole, which is concerned to thrust out
the guilty person--every one shuns him because he is taboo. Thus, in this the earliest stage,
the offender against the custom of the community is outlawed just as effectively as in later
stages of social development. But no formal sentence is pronounced; no meeting of the men
or the elders of the community is held to try the offender; no reason is given or sought why
the offence should thus be punished. The operation of taboo is like that of the laws of nature:
the man who eats poisonous food dies with no reason given. A reason may eventually be found by science,
and is eventually discovered, though the process of discovery is slow, and many mistakes are
made, and many false reasons are given before the true reason is found. So, too, the true reason
for the prohibition of many of the things, which the community feels to be forbidden and pronounced
to be taboo, is found, with the progress of society--when it does {233} progress, which is not
always--to be that they are immoral and irreligious, though here, too, many mistakes are made before
true morality and true religion are found. But at the outset no reason is given: the things are
simply offensive to the community and are tabooed as such. We, looking back at that stage
in the evolution of society, can see that amongst the things thus offensive and tabooed are some
which, in later stages, are equally offensive, but are now forbidden for a reason that can
be formulated and given, viz. that they are offences against the law of morality and the law of
God. That reason, at the outset of society, may scarcely have been consciously present to the
mind of man: progress, in part at least, has consisted in the discovery of the reasons of things.
But that man did from the beginning avoid some of the things which are forbidden by morality and
religion, and that those things were taboo to him, is beyond the possibility of doubt. Nor can
it be doubted that in the prohibition and punishment of them there was inchoate justice and inchoate
religion. Such prohibition was due to the collective action and expressed the collective feeling
of the community as a whole. And it is from such social action and feeling that {234} justice,
I suggest, has been evolved--not from the feeling of resentment experienced by the individual
as an individual. Personal resentment and personal revenge may have stimulated justice to action.
But, by the hypothesis we have been examining, they were not justice.

Neither have they been transformed into justice: they still exist
as something distinct from justice and capable of perverting it.

   
   

The form which justice takes in the period which is almost, but not quite, the lowest stage
of human evolution is the sense of the collective responsibility of the community for all its
actions, that is to say, for the acts of all its members. And that responsibility in its earliest
shape is felt to be a responsibility to heaven, to the supernatural powers that send disease
and famine upon the community. In those days no man sins to himself alone, just as, in still
earlier days, no man could break a taboo without becoming a source of danger to the whole community.
The wrong-doer has offended against the supernatural powers and has brought down calamity upon the
community. He is therefore punished, directly as an offender against the god of the community,
and indirectly for having involved the {235} community in suffering. In Dr. Westermarck's words
(I, 194), there is "genuine indignation against the offender, both because he rebels against
God, and because he thereby exposes the whole community to supernatural dangers." But though society
for many long centuries continues to punish rebellion against God, still in the long run it
ceases, or tends to cease, doing so. Its reason for so ceasing is interpreted differently by different
schools of thought.

      On the one hand, it is said
   in derision, let the gods punish offences against the gods--the implication
being that there are no such offences to punish, because there is
no god.

On the other hand, it is said, "I will repay, saith the Lord"--the implication being that man
may not assume to be the minister of divine vengeance. If, then, we bear in mind that the fact
may be interpreted in either of these different ways, we shall not fall into the fallacy of imagining
that the mere existence of the fact suffices to prove either interpretation to be true. Yet
this fallacy plays its part in lending fictitious support to the doctrine that morality is in
no wise dependent upon religion. The offences now punished by law, it is argued, are no longer
punished as offences against religion, but solely as offences {236} against the good of the community.
To this argument the reply is that men believe the good of the community to be the will of God, and
do not believe murder, theft, adultery, etc., to be merely offences against man's laws. Overlooking
this fact, which is fatal to the doctrine that morality is in no wise dependent on religion,
the argument we are discussing proceeds to maintain that the basis for the enforcement of
morality by the law is recognised by every one who knows anything of the philosophy of law to
be what is good for the community and its members: fraud and violence are punished as such,
and not because they are offences against this or that religion. The fact that the law no
longer punishes them as offences against God suffices to show that it is only as offences against
humanity that there is any sense, or ever was any sense, in punishing them. Religion may have
reënforced morality very usefully at one time, by making out that moral misdeeds were offences
against God, but such arguments are not now required.

The good and the well-being of humanity is in itself sufficient argument. Humanitarianism is
taking the place of religion, and by so doing is demonstrating that morality is, as it always
has been, {237} independent of religion; and that in truth religion has built upon it, not it
upon religion. As Höffding puts it (p. 328): "Religious faith ... assumes an independent human
ethic developed historically under the practical influence of the ethical feeling of man."
That is to say, morality is in Höffding's view independent of religion, and prior to religion,
both as a matter of logic and of history. As a matter of history--of the history of religion--this
seems to me, for the reasons already given, to be contrary to the facts as they are known. The
real reason for maintaining that morality is and must be--and must have been--independent of
religion, seems to me to be a philosophical reason. I may give it in Höffding's own words:
"What other aims and qualities," he asks (p. 324), "could man attribute to his gods or conceive
as divine, but those which he has learnt from his own experience to recognise as the highest?" The
answer expected to the question plainly is not merely that it is from experience that man learns,
but that man has no experience of God from which he could learn. The answer given by Mr. Hobhouse,
in the concluding words of his Morals in Evolution is that "the collective wisdom" of man "is
all that we directly know of the Divine." {238} Here, too, no direct access to God is allowed
to be possible to man. It is from his experience of other men--perhaps even of himself and
his own doings--that man learns all he knows of God: but he has himself no experience of God.
Obviously, then, from this humanitarian point of view, what a man goes through in his religious
moments is not experience, and we are mistaken if we imagine that it was experience; it is only
a misinterpretation of experience. It is on the supposition that we are mistaken, on the assumption
that we make a misinterpretation, that the argument is built to prove that morality is and must
be independent of religion. Argument to show, or proof to demonstrate, that we had not the
experience, or, that we mistook something else for it, is, of course, not forthcoming. But
if we hold fast to our conviction, we are told that we are fleeing "to the bosom of faith."

Until
some better argument is produced, we may be well content not merely to flee but to rest there.

{239}

CHRISTIANITY

The
subject dealt with in this lecture will be the place of Christianity in the evolution of religion;
and I shall approach it by considering the place of religion in the evolution of humanity.
It will be therefore advisable, indeed necessary, for me to consider what is meant by evolution;
and I wish to begin by explaining the point of view from which I propose to approach the three ideas
of evolution, of the evolution of humanity and the evolution of religion.

The individual exists, and can only exist, in society. Society cannot exist without individuals
as members thereof; and the individual cannot exist save in society. From this it follows that from
one point of view the individual may be regarded as a means--a means by which society attains
its end or purpose: every one of us has his place or function in society; and society thrives
according as each member performs his function and discharges his duty. From another point
of view {240} the individual may be regarded as an end. If man is a social animal, if men live
in society, it is because so alone can a man do what is best for
himself: it is by means of society that he realises his end.

It is then from this proposition, viz. that the individual is both a means and an end, that I
wish to approach the idea of evolution.

I will begin by calling attention to the fact that that proposition is true both statically,
that is to say, is true of the individual's position in a community, and is also true dynamically,
that is to say, is true of his place in the process of evolution. On the former point, that
the proposition is true statically, of the position of the individual in the community, I need
say but little. In moral philosophy it is the utilitarian school which has particularly insisted
upon this truth. That school has steadily argued that, in the distribution of happiness or
of the good, every man is to count as one, and nobody to count as more than one--that is to say,
in the community the individual is to be regarded as the end. The object to be aimed at is not
happiness in general and no one's happiness in particular, but the happiness of each and every individual.
It is the individual and his happiness which is the {241} end, for the sake of which society
exists and to which it is the means; otherwise the individual might derive no benefit from society.
But if the truth that the individual is an end as well as a means is recognised by moral philosophy,
that truth has also played at least an equally important part in
political philosophy.

It is the very breath of the cry for liberty, equality, and fraternity,--a cry wrung out from
the heart of man by the system of oppression which denied that the ordinary citizen had a right
to be anything but a means for procuring enjoyment to the members of the ruling class. The truth
that any one man--whatever his place in society, whatever the colour of his skin--has as much
right as any other to be treated as an end and that no man was merely a means to the enjoyment
or happiness or well-being of another, was the charter for the emancipation of slaves. It is
still the magna charta for the freedom of every member of the human race. No man is or can
be a chattel--a thing existing for no other purpose than to subserve the interests of its owner
and to be a means to his ends. But though from the truth that the individual is in himself an
end as well as a means, it follows that all men have the right to {242} freedom, it does not follow
as a logical inference that all men are equal as means--as means to the material happiness or to
the moral improvement of society.

I need not further dwell upon the fact that statically as regards the relations of men to one another
in society at any moment, the truth is fully recognised that the individual is not merely a means
to the happiness or well-being of others, but is also in himself an end. But when we consider
the proposition dynamically, when we wish to find out the part it has played as one of the
forces at work in evolution, we find that its truth has been far from fully recognised--partly perhaps
because utilitarianism dates from a time when evolution, or the bearing of it, was not understood.
But the truth is at least of as great importance dynamically as it is statically. And on one
side, its truth and the importance of its truth has been fully developed:
that the individual is a means to an end beyond him; and that, dynamically,
he has been and is a factor in evolution, and as a factor merely a
means and nothing else--all this has been worked out fully, if not
to excess.

The other side of the truth, the fact that the individual is always an end, has, however, {243}
been as much neglected by the scientific evolutionist as it was by the slave-driver: he has been
liable to regard men as chattels, as instruments by which the work of evolution is carried
on. The work has got to be done (by men amongst other animals and things), things have to be evolved,
evolution must go on. But, why? and for whom? with what purpose and for whose benefit? with what
end? are questions which science leaves to be answered by those people who are foolish enough
to ask them.
  The gentry, the officers,
the soldiers, and all in place, observed their orders.  What more could be said of any governorship
of any town than that?  The Heavenly Court itself, out of which Governor God's-peace had come
down, was not better governed than that.  Harmony, quietness, joy, and health.  No; the New
Jerusalem itself will not surpass that. 'And this lasted all that summer.'

CHAPTER XXIII--THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF MANSOUL, AND MR. CONSCIENCE ONE OF HER PARISH MINISTERS

   'The Highest Himself shall establish her.'--David.

The princes of this world establish churches sometimes out of piety and sometimes out of policy.
Sometimes their motive is the good of their people and the glory of God, and sometimes their
sole motive is to buttress up their own Royal House, and to have a clergy around them on whom
they can count.  Prince Emmanuel had His motive, too, in setting up an establishment in Mansoul.
As thus: When this was over, the Prince sent again for the elders of the town and communed
with them about the ministry that He intended to establish in Mansoul.

Now, I will not enter to-night on the abstract benefits of such an Establishment.  I will rather
take one of the ministers who was presented to one of the parishes of Mansoul, and shall thus
let you see how that State Church worked out practically in one of its ministers at any rate.
And the preacher and pastor I shall so take up was neither the best minister in the town nor
the worst; but, while a long way subordinate to the best, he was also by no means the least.
The Reverend Mr. Conscience was our parish minister's name; his people sometimes called him
The Recorder.

1.  Well, then, to begin with, the Rev. Mr. Conscience was a native of the same town in which
his parish church now stood.  I am not going to challenge the wisdom of the patron who appointed
his protege to this particular living; only, I have known very good ministers who never got
over the misfortune of having been settled in the same town in which they had been born and
brought up.  Or, rather, their people never got over it.  One excellent minister, especially,
I once knew, whose father had been a working man in the town, and his son had sometimes assisted
his father before he went to college, and even between his college sessions, and the people
he afterwards came to teach could never get over that.  It was not wise in my friend to accept
that presentation in the circumstances, as the event abundantly proved.  For, whenever he had
to take his stand in his pulpit or in his pastorate against any of their evil ways, his people
defended themselves and retaliated on him by reminding him that they knew his father and his
mother, and had not forgotten his own early days.  No doubt, in the case of Emmanuel and Mansoul
and its minister, there were counterbalancing considerations and advantages both to minister
and people; but it is not always so; and it was not so in the case of my unfortunate friend.

Forasmuch, so ran the Prince's presentation paper, as he is a native of the town of Mansoul,
and thus has personal knowledge of all the laws and customs of the corporation, therefore he,
the Prince, presented Mr. Conscience.  That is to say, every man who is to be the minister
of a parish should make his own heart and his own life his first parish.  His own vineyard
should be his first knowledge and his first care.  And then out of that and after that he will
be able to speak to his people, and to correct, and counsel, and take care of them.  In Thomas
Boston's Memoirs we continually come on entries like this: 'Preached on Ps. xlii. 5, and mostly
on my own account.'  And, again, we read in the same invaluable book for parish ministers,
that its author did not wonder to hear that good had been done by last Sabbath's sermon, because
he had preached it to himself and had got good to himself out of it before he took it to the
pulpit.  Boston kept his eye on himself in a way that the minister of Mansoul himself could
not have excelled.  Till, not in his pulpit work only, but in such conventional, commonplace,
and monotonous exercises as his family worship, he so read the Scriptures and so sang the psalms
that his family worship was continually yielding him fruit as well as his public ministry.
As our family worship and our public ministry will do, too, when we have the eye and the heart
and the conscience that Thomas Boston had.  'I went to hear a preacher,' said Pascal, 'and
I found a man in the pulpit.'  Well, the parish minister of Mansoul was a man, and so was the
parish minister of Ettrick.  And that was the reason that the people of Simprin and Ettrick
so often thought that Boston had them in his eye.  Good pastor as he was, he could not have
everybody in his eye.  But he had himself in his eye, and that let him into the hearts and
the homes of all his people.  He was a true man, and thus a true minister.

2.  Both Boston and the minister of Mansoul were well-read men also; so, indeed, in as many
words, their fine biographies assure us.  But that is just another way of saying what has been
said about those two ministers over and over again already.  William Law never was a parish
minister. The English Crown of that day would not trust him with a parish.  But what was the
everlasting loss of some parish in England has become the everlasting gain of the whole Church
of Christ.  Law's enforced seclusion from outward ministerial activity only set him the more
free to that inward activity which has been such a blessing to so many, and to so many ministers
especially.  And as to this of every minister being well read, that master in Israel says:
'Above all, let me tell you that the book of books to you is your own heart, in which are written
and engraven the deepest lessons of divine instruction.  Learn, therefore, to be deeply attentive
to the presence of God in your own hearts, who is always speaking, always instructing, always
illuminating the heart that is attentive to Him.'  Jonathan Edwards called the poor parish
minister of Ettrick 'a truly great divine.'  But Law goes on to say, 'A great divine is but
a cant expression unless it signifies a man greatly advanced in the divine life.  A great divine
is one whose own experience and example are a demonstration of the reality of all the graces
and virtues of the gospel.  No divine has any more of the gospel in him than that which proves
itself by the spirit, the actions, and the form of his life: the rest is but hypocrisy, not
divinity.'  Let all our parish ministers, then, give themselves to this kind of reading.  Let
them all aim at a doctor's degree in the divinity of their own hearts.

3.  We are done at last, and we are done for ever, in Scotland, with patrons and with presenters;
but I daresay our most Free Church people would be quite willing to surrender their dear-bought
franchise if the old plan could even yet be made to work in all their parishes as it worked
in Mansoul.  For not only was the presented minister in this case a well-read man; he was also,
what the best of the Scottish people have always loved and honoured, a man, as this history
testifies, with a tongue as bravely hung as he had a head filled with judgment.  In Scotland
we like our minister to have a tongue bravely hung, even when that is proved to our own despite.
When any minister, parish minister or other, is seen to tune his pulpit, our respect for him
is gone.  The Presbyterian pulpit has been proverbially hard to tune, and it will be an ill
day when it becomes easy.  'Here lies a man who had a brow for every good cause.'  So it was
engraven over one of Boston's elders.  And so is it always: like priest, like people in the
matter of the hang of the minister's tongue and in the boldness of the elder's brow.

'Bravely hung' is an ancient and excellent expression which has several shades of meaning in
Bunyan.  But in the present instance its meaning is modified and fixed by judgment.  A bravely
hung tongue; at the same time the parish minister of Mansoul's tongue was not a loosely-hung
tongue.  It was not a blustering, headlong, scolding, untamed tongue.  The pulpit of Mansoul
was tuned with judgment.  He who filled that pulpit had a head filled with judgment.  The ground
of judgment is knowledge, and the minister of Mansoul was a man of knowledge.  It was his early
and ever- increasing knowledge of himself, and thus of other men; and then it was his excellent
judgment as to the use he was to make of that knowledge; it was his sound knowledge what to
say, when to say it, and how to say it,--it was all this that decided his Prince to make him
the minister of Mansoul.  How excellent and how rare a gift is judgment--judgment in counsel,
judgment in speech, and judgment in action!  'I am very little serviceable with reference to
public management,' writes the parish minister of Ettrick, 'being exceedingly defective in
ecclesiastical prudence; but the Lord has given me a pulpit gift, not unacceptable: and who
knows what He may do with me in that way?'  Who knows, indeed!  Now, there are many parish
ministers who have a not unacceptable pulpit gift, and yet who are not content with that, but
are always burying that gift in the earth and running away from it to attempt a public management
in which they are exceedingly and conspicuously defective.  Now, why do they do that?  Is their
pulpit and their parish not sphere and opportunity enough for them?  Mine is a small parish,
said Boston, but then it is mine.  And a small parish may both rear and occupy a truly great
divine. Let those ministers, then, who are defective in ecclesiastical prudence not be too
much cast down.  Ecclesiastical prudence is not in every case the highest kind of prudence.
The presbytery, the synod, and the assembly are not any minister's first or best sphere.  Every
minister's first and best sphere is his parish.  And the presbytery is not the end of the parish.
The parish, the pastorate, and the pulpit are the end of both presbytery and synod and assembly.

4.  But there was one thing about the parish pulpit of Mansoul that always overpowered the
people.  They could not always explain it even to themselves what it was that sometimes so
terrified them, and, sometimes, again, so enthralled them.  They would say sometimes that their
minister was more than a mere man; that he was a prophet and a seer, and that his Master seemed
sometimes to stand and speak again in His servant.  And 'seer' was not at all an inappropriate
name for their minister, so far as I can collect out of some remains of his that I have seen
and some testimonies that I have heard.  There was something awful and overawing, something
seer-like and supernatural, in the pulpit of Mansoul.  Sometimes the iron chains in which the
preacher climbed up into the pulpit, and in which he both prayed and preached, struck a chill
to every heart; and sometimes the garment of salvation in which he shone carried all their
hearts captive.  Some Sabbath mornings they saw it in his face and heard it in his voice that
he had been on his bed in hell all last night; and then, next Sabbath, those who came back
saw him descending into his pulpit from his throne in heaven.  The people, when the sermon
was done, were scarce able to go to their homes, or to betake themselves to their employments
the whole week after.  They were so sermon-smitten that they knew not what to do. With these
things he also charged all the lords and gentry of Mansoul to the almost distracting of them.'
It was Sabbaths like that that made the people of Mansoul call their minister a seer.

5.  And, then, there was another thing that I do not know how better to describe than by calling
it the true catholicity, the true humility, and the true hospitality of the man.  It is true
he had no choice in the matter, for in setting up a standing ministry in Mansoul Emmanuel had
done so with this reservation and addition.  We have His very words.  'Not that you are to
have your ministers alone,' He said.  'For my four captains, they can, if need be, and if they
be required, not only privately inform, but publicly preach both good and wholesome doctrine,
that, if heeded, will do thee good in the end.'  Which, again, reminds me of what Oliver Cromwell
wrote to the Honourable Colonel Hacker at Peebles.  I pray you to receive Captain Empson lovingly.'

6.  The standing ministry in Mansoul was endowed also; but I cannot imagine what the court
of teinds would make of the instrument of endowment.  As it has been handed down to us, that
old ecclesiastical instrument reads more like a lesson in the parish minister's class for the
study of Mysticism than a writing for a learned lord to adjudicate upon.

(1)  Now, there are at least three lessons taught us here.  There is, to begin with, a lesson
to all those congregations who are about to choose a minister.  Let all those congregations,
then, who have had devolved on them the powers of the old patrons,--let them make their election
on the same principles that the Prince of Mansoul patronised.  Let them choose a probationer
who, young though he must be, has the making of a seer in him.  Let them listen for the future
seer in his most stammering prayers. Somewhere, even in one service, his conscience will make
itself heard, if he has a conscience.  Rather remain ten years vacant than call a minister
who has no conscience.  The parish minister of Mansoul sometimes seemed to be all conscience,
and it was this that made his head so full of judgment, his tongue so full of a brave boldness,
and his heart so full of holy love.  Your minister may be an anointed bishop, he may be a gowned
and hooded doctor, he may be a king's chaplain, he may be the minister of the largest and the
richest and the most learned parish in the city, but, unless he strikes terror and pain into
your conscience every Sabbath, unless he makes you tremble every Sabbath under the eye and
the hand of God, he is no true minister to you.  As Goodwin says, he is a wooden cannon.  As
Leighton says, he is a mountebank for a minister.

(2)  The second lesson is to all those who are politically enfranchised, and who hold a vote
for a member of Parliament.  Now, crowds of candidates and their canvassers will before long
be at your door besieging it and begging you for your vote for or against an Established church.
Well, before Parliament is dissolved, and the canvass commences, look you well into your own
heart and ask yourself whether or no the Church of Christ has yet been established there. 
Ask if Jesus Christ, the Head of the Church, has yet set up His throne there, in your heart.
Ask your conscience if His laws are recognised and obeyed there.  Ask also if His blood has
been sprinkled there, and since when.  And, if not, then it needs no seer to tell you what
sacrilege, what profanity it is for you to touch the ark of God: to speak, or to vote, or to
lift a finger either for or against any church whatsoever.  Intrude your wilful ignorance and
your wicked passions anywhere else.  March up boldly and vote defiantly on questions of State
that you never read a sober line about, and are as ignorant about as you are of Hebrew; but
beware of touching by a thousand miles the things for which the Son of God laid down His life.
Thrust yourself in, if you must, anywhere else, but do not thrust yourself and your brutish
stupidity and your fiendish tempers into the things of the house of God.  And the anger of
the Lord was kindled against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died
by the ark of God.

(3)  There is a third lesson here, but it is a lesson for ministers, and I shall take it home
to myself.

In our soft and self-indulgent day the very word 'to fast' has become an out-of-date and an
obsolete word.  We never have occasion to employ that word in the living language of the present
day.  The men of the next generation will need to have it explained to them what the Fast-days
of their fathers were: when they were instituted, how they were observed, and why they were
abrogated and given up.  If your son should ever ask you just what the Fast-days of your youth
were like, you will do him a great service, and he may live to recover them, if you will answer
him in this way.  Show him how to take his Cruden and how to make a picture to his opening
mind of the Fast-days of Scripture.  And tell him plainly for what things in fathers and in
sons those fasts were ordained of God.  And then for the Fast-days of the Puritan period let
him read aloud to you this powerful passage in the Holy War.  Public preaching and public prayer
entered largely into the fasting of the Prophetical and the Puritan periods; and John Bunyan,
after Joel, has told us some things about the Fast-day preaching of his day that it will be
well for us, both preachers and people, to begin with, and to lay well to heart.

1.  In the first place, the preaching of that Fast-day was 'pertinent' and to the point.  William
Law, that divine writer for ministers, warns ministers against going off upon Euroclydon and
the shipwrecks of Paul when Christ's sheep are looking up to them for their proper food.  What,
he asks, is the nature, the direction, and the strength of that Mediterranean wind to him who
has come up to church under the plague of his own heart and under the heavy hand of God?  You
may be sure that Boanerges did not lecture that Fast-day forenoon in Mansoul on Acts xxvii.
14.  We would know that, even if we were not told what his text that forenoon was.  His text
that never-to-be-forgotten Fast-day forenoon was in Luke xiii.  He then showed also by whose
authority this sentence was pronounced.  Sidney Smith says that whatever else a sermon may
be or may not be, it must be interesting if it is to do any good.  Now, pertinent preaching
is always interesting preaching.  Nothing interests men like themselves.  And pertinent preaching
is just preaching to men about themselves,--about their interests, their losses and their gains,
their hopes and their fears, their trials and their tribulations.  Boanerges took both his
text and his treatment of his text from his Master, and we know how pertinently The Master
preached.  His preaching was with such pertinence that the one half of His hearers went home
saying, Never man spake like this man, while the other half gnashed at Him with their teeth.
Our Lord never lectured on Euroclydon.  He knew what was in man and He lectured and preached
accordingly.  And if we wish to have praise of our best people, and of Him whose people they
are, let us look into our own hearts and preach.  That will be pertinent to our people which
is first pertinent to ourselves.  Weep yourself, said an old poet to a new beginner; weep yourself
if you would make me weep.  'For my own part,' said Thomas Shepard to some ministers from his
death-bed, 'I never preached a sermon which, in the composing, did not cost me prayers, with
strong cries and tears.  I never preached a sermon from which I had not first got some good
to my own soul.'

   'His office and his name agree;
   A shepherd that and Shepard he.'

And many such entries as these occur in Thomas Boston's golden journal: 'I preached in Ps.
xlii. 5, and mostly on my own account.'  Again: 'Meditating my sermon next day, I found advantage
to my own soul, as also in delivering it on the Sabbath.'  And again: 'What good this preaching
has done to others I know not, yet I think myself will not the worse of it.'

2.  The preaching of that Fast-day was with great authority also.  'There was such power and
authority in that sermon,' reports one who was present, 'that the like had seldom been seen
or heard.'  Authority also was one of the well-remembered marks of our Lord's preaching.  And
no wonder, considering who He was.  But His ministers, if they are indeed His ministers, will
be clothed by Him with something even of His supreme authority.  'Conscience is an authority,'
says one of the most authoritative preachers that ever lived.  'The Bible is an authority;
such is the Church; such is antiquity; such are the words of the wise; such are hereditary
lessons; such are ethical truths; such are historical memories; such are legal saws and state
maxims; such are proverbs; such are sentiments, presages, and prepossessions.'  Now, the well-equipped
preacher will from time to time plant his pulpit on all those kinds of authority, as this kind
is now pertinent and then that, and will, with such a variety and accumulation of authority,
preach to his people. Thomas Boston preached at a certain place with such pertinence and with
such authority that it was complained of him by one of themselves that he 'terrified even the
godly.'  Let all our young preachers who would to old age continue to preach with interest,
with pertinence, and with terrifying authority, among other things have by heart The Memoirs
of Thomas Boston, 'that truly great divine.'

3.  A third thing, and, as some of the people who heard it said of it, the best thing about
that sermon was that--'He did not only show us our sin, but he did visibly tremble before us
under the sense of his own.' Now I know this to be a great difficulty with some young ministers
who have got no help in it at the Divinity Hall.  Are they, they ask, to be themselves in the
pulpit?  How far may they be themselves, and how far may they be not themselves?  How far are
they to be seen to tremble before their people because of their own sins, and how far are they
to bear themselves as if they had no sin?  Must they keep back the passions that are tearing
their own hearts, and fill the forenoon with Euroclydon and other suchlike sea-winds?  How
far are they to be all gown and bands in the pulpit, and how far sackcloth and ashes?  One
half of their people are like Pascal in this, that they like to see and hear a man in his pulpit;
but, then, the other half like only to see and hear a proper preacher.  And so truly had this
preacher kept the Fast-day that the Communion-day was down upon him before he was ready for
it.  He was still deep among his sins when all his people were fast putting on their beautiful
garments.  He was ready with the letter of his action-sermon, but he was not equal to the delivery
of it.  His colleague, accordingly, whose sense of sin was less acute that day, took the public
worship, while the Fast-day preacher still lay sick in his closet at home and wrote thus on
the ground: 'I am no more worthy to be called Thy son,' he wrote.  'Behold me here, Lord, a
poor, miserable sinner, weary of myself, and afraid to look up to Thee.  Wilt Thou heal my
sores?  Wilt Thou take out the stains?  Wilt Thou deliver me from the shame?  Wilt Thou rescue
me from this chain of sin?  Cut me not off in the midst of my sins.  Let me have liberty once
again to be among Thy redeemed ones, eating and drinking at Thy table.  But, O my God, to-day
I am an unclean worm, a dead dog, a dead carcass, deservedly cast out from the society of Thy
saints.  But oh, suffer me so much as to look to the place where Thy people meet and where
Thine honour dwelleth.  Reject not the sacrifice of a broken heart, but come and speak to me
in my secret place.  O God, let me never see such another day as this is.  Let me never be
again so full of guilt as to have to run away from Thy presence and to flee from before Thy
people.'  He printed more than that, in blood and in tears, before God that Communion-morning,
but that is enough for my purpose.  Now, would you choose a dead dog like that to be your minister?
To baptize and admit your children and to marry them when they grow up?  To mount your pulpits
every Sabbath-day, and to come to your houses every week-day?  Not, I feel sure, if you could
help it!  Not if you knew it!  Not if there was a minister of proper pulpit manners and a well-ordered
mind within a Sabbath-day's journey!  'Like priest like people,' says Hosea.  'The congregation
and the minister are one,' says Dr. Parker.  'There are men we could not sit still and hear;
they are not the proper ministers for us.  There are other men we could hear always, because
they are our kith and our kin from before the foundation of the world.'  Happy the hearer who
has hit on a minister like the minister of Mansoul, and who has discovered in him his everlasting
kith and kin.  And happy the minister who, owning kith and kin with Boanerges, has two or three
or even one member in his congregation who likes his minister best when he likes himself worst.

But what about the fasting all this time?  Was it all preaching, and was there no fasting?
Well, we do not know much about the fasting of the prophets and the apostles, but the Puritans
sometimes made their people almost forget about fasting, and about eating and drinking too,
they so took possession of their people with their incomparable preaching.  I read, for instance,
in Calamy's Life of John Howe that on the public Fast-days, it was Howe's common way to begin
about nine in the morning and to continue reading, preaching, and praying till about four in
the afternoon.  Henry Rogers almost worships John Howe, but John Howe's Fast- days pass his
modern biographers patience; till, if you would see a nineteenth-century case made out against
a seventeenth-century Fast-day, you have only to turn to the author of The Eclipse of Faith
on the author of Delighting in God.  And, no doubt, when we get back our Fast- days, we shall
leave more of the time to reading pertinent books at home and to secret fasting and to secret
prayer, and shall enjoin our preachers, while they are pertinent and authoritative in their
sermons, not to take up the whole day with their sermons even at their best.  And then, as
to fasting, discredited and discarded as it is in our day, there are yet some very good reasons
for desiring its return and reinstatement among us.  Very good reasons, both for health and
for holiness.  But it is only of the latter class of reasons that I would fain for a few words
at present speak.  Well, then, let it be frankly said that there is nothing holy, nothing saintly,
nothing at all meritorious in fasting from our proper food.  It is the motive alone that sanctifies
the means.  It is the end alone that sanctifies the exercise.  If I fast to chastise myself
for my sin; if I fast to reduce the fuel of my sin; if I fast to keep my flesh low; if I fast
to make me more free for my best books, for my most inward, spiritual, mystical books--for
my Kempis, and my Behmen, and my Law, and my Leighton, and my Goodwin, and my Bunyan, and my
Rutherford, and my Jeremy Taylor, and my Shepard, and my Edwards, and suchlike; if I fast for
the ends of meditation and prayer; if I fast out of sympathy with my Bible, and my Saviour,
and my latter end, and my Father's house in heaven--then, no doubt, my fasting will be acceptable
with God, as it will certainly be an immediate means of grace to my sinful soul.  These altars
will sanctify many such gifts.  For, who that knows anything at all about himself, about his
own soul, and about the hindrances and helps to its salvation from sin; who that ever read
a page of Scripture properly, or spent half an hour in that life which is hidden in God--who
of such will deny or doubt that fasting is superseded or neglected to the sure loss of the
spiritual life, to the sensible lowering of the religious tone and temper, and to the increase
both of the lusts of the flesh and of the mind?  It may perhaps be that the institution of
fasting as a church ordinance has been permitted to be set aside in order to make it more than
ever a part of each earnest man's own private life. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry,
and that thou bring the outcast to thy house?'  Let us believe that the form of the Fast-day
has been removed out of the way that the spirit may return and fashion a new form for itself.
And in the belief that that is so, let us, while parting with our fathers' Fast-days with real
regret--as with their pertinent and pungent preaching--let us meantime lay in a stock of their
pertinent and pungent books, and set apart particular and peculiar seasons for their sin-subduing
and grace-strengthening study.

The short is this.  The one real substance and true essence of all fasting is self-denial.
And we can never get past either the supreme and absolute duty of that, or the daily and hourly
call to that, as long as we continue to read the New Testament, to live in this life, and to
listen to the voice of conscience, and to the voice of God speaking to us in the voice of conscience.
Without strict and constant self-denial, no man, whatever his experiences or his pretensions,
is a disciple of Jesus Christ, and secret fasting is one of the first, the easiest, and the
most elementary exercises of New Testament self-denial.  And, besides, the lusts of our flesh
and the lusts of our minds are so linked and locked and riveted together that if one link is
loosened, or broken, or even struck at, the whole thrall is not yet thrown off indeed, but
it is all shaken; it has all received a staggering blow.  So much is this the case that one
single act of self-denial in the region of the body will be felt for freedom throughout the
whole prison-house of the soul.  And a victory really won over a sensual sin is already a challenge
sounded to our most spiritual sin.  And it is this discovery that has given to fasting the
place it has held in all the original, resolute, and aggressive ages of the Church.  With little
or nothing in their Lord's literal teaching to make His people fast, they have been so bent
on their own spiritual deliverance, and they have heard and read so much about the deliverances
both of body and of soul that have been attained by fasting and its accompaniments, that they
have taken to it in their despair, and with results that have filled them in some instances
with rapture, and in all instances with a good conscience and with a good hope.  You would
wonder, even in these degenerate days,--you would be amazed could you be told how many of your
own best friends in their stealthy, smiling, head-anointing, hypocritical way deny themselves
this and that sweetness, this and that fatness, this and that softness, and are thus attaining
to a strength, a courage, and a self-conquest that you are getting the benefit of in many ways
without your ever guessing the price at which it has all been purchased.  Now, would you yourself
fain be found among those who are in this way being made strong and victorious inwardly and
spiritually?  Would you?  Then wash your face and anoint your head; and, then, not denying
it before others, deny it in secret to yourself--this and that sweet morsel, this and that
sweet meat, this and that glass of such divine wine. Unostentatiously, ungrudgingly, generous-heartedly,
and not ascetically or morosely, day after day deny yourself even in little unthought-of things,
and one of the very noblest laws of your noblest life shall immediately claim you as its own.
That stealthy and shamefaced act of self-denial for Christ's sake and for His cross's sake
will lay the foundation of a habit of self-denial; ere ever you are aware of what you are doing
the habit will consolidate into a character; and what you begin little by little in the body
will be made perfect in the soul; till what you did, almost against His command and altogether
without His example, yet because you did it for His sake and in His service, will have placed
you far up among those who have forsaken all, and themselves also, to follow Jesus Christ,
Son of Man and Son of God.  Only, let this always be admitted, and never for a moment forgotten,
that all this is said by permission and not of commandment.  Our Lord never fasted as we fast.
He had no need.  And He never commanded His disciples to fast.  He left it to themselves to
find out each man his own case and his own cure.  Let no man, therefore, take fasting in any
of its degrees, or times, or occasions, on his conscience who does not first find it in his
heart.  At the same time this may be said with perfect safety, that he who finds it in his
heart and then lays it on his conscience to deny himself anything, great or small, for Christ's
sake, and for the sake of his own salvation,--he will never repent it.  No, he will never repent
it.

CHAPTER XXV--A FEAST-DAY IN MANSOUL

   'He brought me into his banqueting house.'--The Song.

Emmanuel's feast-day in the Holy War excels in beauty and in eloquence everything I know in
any other author on the Lord's Supper.  The Song of Solomon stands alone when we sing that
song mystically--that is to say, when we pour into it all the love of God to His Church in
Israel and all Israel's love to God, and then all our Lord's love to us and all our love back
again to Him in return.  But outside of Holy Scripture I know nothing to compare for beauty,
and for sweetness, and for quaintness, and for tenderness, and for rapture, with John Bunyan's
account of the feast that Prince Emmanuel made for the town of Mansoul.  They drank also of
the water that was made wine, and, altogether, they were very merry and at home with their
Prince.  There was music also all the time at the table, and man did eat angels' food, and
had honey given him out of the rock.  And then the table was entertained with some curious
and delightful riddles that were made upon the King Himself, upon Emmanuel His Son, and upon
His wars and doings with Mansoul; till, altogether, the state of transportation the people
were in with their entertainment cannot be told by the very best of pens.

1.  Now, the beginning of it all was, and the best of it all was, that Emmanuel Himself made
the feast.  Mansoul did not feast her Deliverer; it was her Deliverer who feasted her.  Mansoul,
in good sooth, had nothing that she had not first and last received, and it was far more true
and seemly and fit in every way that her Prince Himself should in His own way and at His own
expense seal and celebrate the deliverance, the freedom, the life, the peace, and the joy of
Mansoul.  And, besides, what had Mansoul to set before her Prince; or, for the matter of that,
before herself?  Mansoul had nothing of herself.  Mansoul was not sufficient of herself for
a single day.  And how, then, should she propose to feast a Prince?  No, no! the thing was
impossible.  It was Emmanuel's feast from first to last.  Just as it was at the Lord's table
in this house this morning.  You did not spread the table this morning for your Lord.  You
did not make ready for your Saviour and then invite Him in.  He invited you.  He said, This
is My Body broken for you, and This is My Blood shed for you; drink ye all of it.  And had
any one challenged you at the fence door and asked you how one who could not pay his own debts
or provide himself a proper meal even for a single day, could dare to sit down with such a
company at such a feast as that, you would have told him that he had not seen half your hunger
and your nakedness; but that it was just your very hunger and nakedness and homelessness that
had brought you here; or, rather, it was all that that had moved the Master of the feast to
send for you and to compel you to come here.  There was nothing in your mind and in your mouth
more all this day than just that this is the Lord's Supper, and that He had sent for you and
had invited you, and had constrained and compelled you to come and partake of it.  It was the
Lord's Table to-day, and it will be still and still more His table on that great Communion-Day
when all our earthly communions shall be accomplished and consummated in heaven.

2.  All that Mansoul did in connection with that great feast was to prepare the place where
Diabolus at one time had held his orgies and carried on his excesses.  Her Prince, Emmanuel,
did all the rest; but He left it to Mansoul to make the banqueting-room ready.  When our Lord
would keep His last passover with His disciples, He said to Peter and John, Go into the city,
and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water, and he will show you a large upper
room furnished and prepared. There is some reason to believe that that happy man had been expecting
that message and had done his best to be ready for it.  And now he was putting the last touch
to his preparations by filling the water-pots of his house with fresh water; little thinking,
happy man, that as long as the world lasts that water will be holy water in all men's eyes,
and shall teach humility to all men's hearts.  And, my brethren, you know that all you did
all last week against to-day was just to prepare the room.  For the room all last week and
all this day was your own heart, and not and never this house of stone and lime made with men's
hands.  You swept the inner and upper room of your own heart.  You swept it and garnished its
walls and its floors as much as in you lay.  He, whose the supper really was, told you that
He would bring with Him what was to be eaten and drunken to-day, while you were to prepare
the place.  And, next to the very actual feast itself, and, sometimes, not next to it but equal
to it, and even before it and better than it, were those busy household hours you spent, like
the man with the pitcher, making the room ready.  In plain English, you had a communion before
the Communion as you prepared your hearts for the Communion.  I shall not intrude into your
secret places and secret seasons with Christ before His open reception of you to- day.  But
it is sure and certain that, just as you in secret entertained Him in your mother's house and
in the chambers of her that bare you, just in that measure did He say to you openly before
all the watchmen that go about the city and before all the daughters of Jerusalem, Eat, O friends;
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.  Yes; do you not think that the man with the pitcher
had his reward?  He had his own thoughts as he furnished, till it was quite ready, his best
upper room and carried in those pitchers of water, and handed down to his children in after
days the perquisite-skin of the paschal lamb that had been supped on by our Lord and His disciples
in his honoured house that night.  Yes; was it not amazing to behold that in that very place
where sometimes Diabolus had his abode, and had entertained his Diabolonians, the Prince of
princes should sit eating and drinking with His friends?  Was it not truly amazing?

3.  The fields of Mansoul yielded their own proper fruits, and fruits that were not to be despised.
But they were not the proper fruits for that day, neither could they be placed upon that table.
They are good enough fruits for their purpose, and as far as they go, and for so long as they
last and are in their season.  But our souls are such that they outlive their own best fruits;
their hunger and their thirst outlast all that can be harvested in from their own fields. 
And thus it is that He who made Mansoul at first, and who has since redeemed her, has out of
His own great goodness provided food convenient for her.  He knows with what an outlandish
life He has quickened Mansoul, and it is only the part of a faithful Creator to provide for
His creature her proper nourishment.  What is it? asked the children of Israel at one another
when they saw a small round thing, as small as hoarfrost, upon the ground.  For they wist not
what it was.  And Moses said, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer for every
man, according to the number of your persons.  And the house of Israel called the name thereof
Manna, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey.  He gave them of the corn of heaven
to eat, and man did eat in the wilderness angels' food.  Your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness, and are dead; but this is the bread of which if any man eat he shall not die. 
And the bread that I will give is My Flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.  And
so outlandish, so supernatural, and so full of heavenly wonder and heavenly mystery was that
bread, that the Jews strove among themselves over it, and could not understand it. But, by
His goodness and His truth to us this day, we have again, to our spiritual nourishment and
growth in grace, eaten the Flesh and drunk the Blood of the Son of God; a meat that, as He
who Himself is that meat has said of it, is meat indeed and drink indeed--as, indeed, we have
the witness in ourselves this day that it is.  They drank also of the water that was made wine,
and were very merry with Him all that day at His table.  And all their mirth was the high mirth
of heaven; it was a mirth and a gladness without sin, without satiety, and without remorse.

4.  There was music also all the while at the table, and the musicians were not those of the
country of Mansoul, but they were the masters of song come down from the court of the King.
'I love the Lord,' they sang in the supper room over the paschal lamb--'I love the Lord because
He hath heard my voice and my supplication.  Because He hath inclined His ear unto me, therefore
will I call upon Him as long as I live.  What shall I render to the Lord,' they challenged
one another, 'for all His benefits towards me?  I will take the cup of salvation, and will
call upon the name of the Lord.'  'Sometimes imagine,' says a great devotional writer with
a great imagination--'Sometimes imagine that you had been one of those that joined with our
blessed Saviour as He sang an hymn.  Strive to imagine to yourself with what majesty He looked.
Fancy that you had stood by Him surrounded with His glory.  Think how your heart would have
been inflamed, and what ecstasies of joy you would have then felt when singing with the Son
of God!  Think again and again with what joy and devotion you would have then sung had this
really been your happy state; and what a punishment you would have thought it to have then
been silent. And let that teach you how to be affected with psalms and hymns of thanksgiving.'
Yes; and it is no imagination; it was our own experience only this morning and afternoon to
join in a music that was never made in this world, but which was as outlandish as was the meat
which we ate while the music was being made.

   'Bless, O my soul, the Lord thy God,
      And not forgetful be
   Of all His gracious benefits
      He hath bestow'd on thee.

   Who with abundance of good things
      Doth satisfy thy mouth;
   So that, ev'n as the eagle's age,
      Renewed is thy youth.'

The 103rd Psalm was never made in this world.  Musicians far other than those native to Mansoul
made for us our Lord's-Table Psalm.

5.  And then, the riddles that were made upon the King Himself, and upon Emmanuel His Son,
and upon Emmanuel's wars and all His other doings with Mansoul.  And when Emmanuel would expound
some of those riddles Himself, oh! how they were lightened!  They saw what they never saw!
They could not have thought that such rarities could have been couched in so few and such ordinary
words.  Yea, they did gather that the things themselves were a kind of portraiture, and that,
too, of Emmanuel Himself.  This, they would say, this is the Lamb! this is the Sacrifice! this
is the Rock! this is the Door! and this is the Way! with a great many other things.  At Gaius's
supper-table they sat up over their riddles and nuts and sweetmeats till the sun was in the
sky.  And it would be midnight and morning if I were to show you the answers to the half of
the riddles. Take one, for an example, and let it be one of the best for the communion- day.
'In one rare quality of the orator,' says Hugh Miller, writing about his adored minister, Alexander
Stewart of Cromarty, 'Mr. Stewart stood alone.  Now, into this perilous, but singularly elective
department, Mr. Stewart could enter with safety and at will.  We heard him, scarce a twelvemonth
since, deliver a discourse of singular power on the sin-offering as minutely described by the
divine penman in Leviticus.  He described the slaughtered animal--foul with dust and blood,
its throat gashed across, its entrails laid open and steaming in its impurity to the sun--a
vile and horrid thing, which no one could look on without disgust, nor touch without defilement.
The picture appeared too vivid; its introduction too little in accordance with a just taste.
But this pulpit-master knew what he was all the time doing.  This is the SACRIFICE!  This is
the DOOR!  This is EMMANUEL, GOD WITH US, and made sin for us!

6.  In one of his finest chapters, Thomas A Kempis tells us in what way we are to communicate
mystically: that is to say, how we are to keep on communicating at all times, and in all places,
without the intervention of the consecrated sacramental elements.  And John Bunyan, the sweetest
and most spiritual of mystics, has all that, too, in this same supreme passage.  Every day
was a feast-day now, he tells us.  So much so that when the elders and the townsmen did not
come to Emmanuel, He would send in much plenty of provisions to them.  Yea, such delicates
would He send them, and therewith would so cover their tables, that whosoever saw it confessed
that the like could not be seen in any other kingdom.  That is to say, my fellow-communicants,
there is nothing that we experienced and enjoyed in this house this day that we may not experience
and enjoy again to-morrow and every day in our own house at home.  All the mystics worth the
noble name will tell you that all true communicating is always performed and experienced in
the prepared heart, and never in any upper room, or church, or chapel, or new heaven, or new
earth.  The prepared heart of every worthy communicant is the true upper room; it is the true
banqueting chamber; it is the true and the only house of wine.  Our Father's House itself,
with its supper-table covered with the new wine of the Kingdom--the best of it all will still
be within you.  Prepare yourselves within yourselves, then, O departing and dispersing communicants.
Prepare, and keep yourselves always prepared.  And as often as you so prepare yourselves your
Prince will come to you every day, and will cat and drink with you, till He makes every day
on earth a day of heaven already to you.  See if He will not; for, again and again, He who
keeps all His promises says that He will.

The Plantagenet kings of ancient England had white and scarlet for their livery; white and
green was the livery of the Tudors; the Stuarts wore red and yellow; while blue and scarlet
colours adorn to-day the House of Hanover.  And the Prince of the kings of the earth, He has
his royal colours also, and His servants have their badge of honour and their blazon also.
Then said the Prince, This, O Mansoul, is My livery, and this is the badge by which Mine are
known from the servants of others.  Yea, this livery is that which I grant to all them that
are Mine, and without which no man is permitted to see My face.  Wear this livery, therefore,
for My sake, and, also, if you would be known by the world to be Mine. But now can you think
how Mansoul shone!  For Mansoul was fair as the sun, clear as the moon, and terrible as an
army with banners.

White, then, and whiter than snow, is the very livery of heaven.  A hundred shining Scriptures
could be quoted to establish that.  My beloved, sings the spouse in the Song, is white and
ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely.  Then, again, David in his penitence
sings, Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
And what is it that sets Isaiah at the head of all the prophets?  The angel, also, who rolled
away the stone from the door of the sepulchre was clothed in a long white garment. Another
evangelist says that his countenance was like lightning and his raiment white as snow, and
for fear of him the keepers did quake, and became as dead men.  But before that we read that
Jesus was transfigured before Peter and James and John on the Mount, and that His face did
shine as the sun, and His raiment was white as the light.  And, then, the whole Book of Revelation
is written with a pen dipped in heavenly light.  The whole book is glistening with the whitest
light till we cannot read it for the brightness thereof.  And if we did need that shining text
to be explained to us, to whom could we better go for its explanation than just to John Bunyan?
Yea, therefore it is that their good works stand in such a place.'  'Nor must we think it strange,'
says John Howe, in his Blessedness of the Righteous, 'that all the requisites to our salvation
are not found together in one text of Scripture.  I conceive that imputed righteousness is
not here meant, but that righteousness which is truly subjected in a child of God and descriptive
of him.  The righteousness of Him whom we adore as made sin for us that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him, that righteousness has a much higher sphere peculiar and appropriate
to itself.  Though this of which we now speak is necessary also to be both had and understood.'
Emmanuel's livery, then, is the righteousness of the saints.  Emmanuel puts that righteousness
upon all His saints; while, at the same time, they put it on themselves; they work it out for
themselves, and for themselves they keep it clean.  They work it out, put it on, and keep it
clean, and yet, all the time, it is not they that do it, but it is Emmanuel that doeth it all
in them.  The truth is, you must all become mystics before you will admit all the strange truth
that is told about Emmanuel's livery.  For both heaven and earth unite in this wonderful livery.
Nature and grace unite in it.  It is woven by the gospel on the loom of the law--till, to tell
you all that is true about it, I neither can nor will I.  Albert Bengel tells us that the court
of heaven has its own jealous and scrupulous etiquette; and our court journalist and historian,
John Bunyan, has supplied his favoured readers with the very card of etiquette that was issued
along with Mansoul's coat of livery, and it is more than time that we had attended to that card.

1.  The first item then in that etiquette-card ran in these set terms: 'First, wear these white
robes daily, day by day, lest you should at some time appear to others as if you were none
of Mine.--Signed, EMMANUEL.'

Now, we put on anew every morning the garments that we are to wear every new day.  We have
certain pieces of clothing that we wear in the morning; we have certain pieces that we wear
when we are at our work; and, again, we have certain other pieces that we put on when we go
abroad in the afternoon; and, yet again, certain other pieces that we array ourselves in when
we go out into society in the evening.  After a night in which Mercy could not sleep for blessing
and praising God, they all rose in the morning with the sun; but the Interpreter would have
them tarry a while, for, said he, you must orderly go from hence.  Then said he to the damsel,
Take them, and have them into the garden to the bath.  Then Innocent the damsel took them,
and had them into the garden, and brought them to the bath.  Then they went in and washed,
yea, they and the boys and all, and they came out of that bath, not only clean and sweet, but
also much enlivened and much strengthened in their joints.  So when they came in they looked
fairer a deal than when they went out.  Now, therefore, they began to esteem each other better
than themselves.  For, You are fairer than I am, said one; and, You are more comely than I
am, said another.  The children also stood amazed to see into what fashion they had been brought.
William Law--I thank God, I think, every day I live for that good day to me on which He introduced
me to His gifted and saintly servant--well, William Law used every morning after his bath in
the morning to put on his livery, piece by piece, in order, and with special prayer.  The first
piece that he put on, and he put it on every new morning next his heart to wear it all the
day next his heart, was gratitude to God.  And it was a real, feeling, active, and operative
gratitude that he so put on.  On each new morning as it came, that good man was full of new
gratitude to God.  For the sun new from his Almighty Maker's hands he had gratitude.  For his
house over his head he had gratitude.  For his Bible and his spiritual books he had gratitude.
For his opportunities of reading and study, as also for ten o'clock in the morning when the
widows and orphans of King's Cliffe came to his window, and so on.  A grateful heart feeds
itself to a still greater gratitude on everything that comes to it.  So it was with William
Law, till he wakened the maids in the rooms below with his psalms and his hymns as he went
into his vestry and put on his singing robes so early every morning.  And then, after his morning
hours of study and devotion, Law had a piece of livery that he always put on and never came
downstairs to breakfast without it.  Other men might put on other pieces; he always clothed
himself next to gratitude with humility.  Men differ, good men differ, and Emmanuel's livery-men
differ in what they put on, at what time, and in what order.  But that was William Law's way.
You will learn more of his way, and you will be helped to find out a like way for yourselves,
if you will become students of his incomparable books.  You will find how he put on charity,
1 Cor. thirteenth chapter; and then how, over all, he put on the will of God; till, thus equipped
and thus accoutred, he was able to say, as it has seldom been said since it was first said,
'I put on righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was to me as a robe and as a diadem.
As for the women's vestry in the Interpreter's House, Matthew Henry saw the thirty-first chapter
of the Proverbs hung up on that vestry wall, and Christiana making her morning toilet before
it with Mercy beside her.  Who would find a virtuous woman, let him look before that looking-glass
for her, and he will be sure to find her and her daughters and her daughters-in- law putting
on their white raiment there.

2.  'Secondly, keep your garments always white; for if they be soiled, it is a dishonour to
Me.  I have a few names even in Sardis which have not defiled their garments, and they shall
walk with Me in white, for they are worthy.'  Even in Sardis, with every street and every house
full of soil and dishonour to the name of Christ, even in Sardis Emmanuel had some of whom
He could boast Himself.  Would you not immensely like at the last day to be one of those some
in Sardis?  Shall it not be splendid when Sardis comes up for judgment to be among those few
names that Emmanuel shall then read out of His book, and when, at their few names, two or three
men shall step out into the light in His livery?  Some of you are in Sardis at this moment.
Some of you are in a city, or in a house in a city, where it is impossible to keep your garments
clean.  And yet, no; nothing is impossible to Emmanuel and His true livery-men.  Even in that
house where you are, Emmanuel will say over you, I have one there who is thankful to My Father
and to Me; thankful to singing every morning where there is little, as men see, to sing for.
There is one in that house humble, where humility itself would almost become high-minded. 
And meek, where Moses himself would have lost his temper.  And submissive, where rebelliousness
would not have been without excuse.  Mark these few men for Mine, says Emmanuel.  Mark them
with the inkhorn for Mine.  For they shall surely be Mine in that day, and they shall walk
with Me in white, for they are worthy.

3.  'Wherefore gird your garments well up from the ground.'  A well-dressed man, a well-dressed
woman, is a beautiful sight. And whereas morality and religion only condemn the end aimed at by magic,
and only condemn it when it is anti-social, science slowly shows that magic as a means to any end
is superfluous and silly.

{102}

Science, however, shows this but slowly; and if we wish to understand how it is that the belief
in the magician's power has survived for thousands of years down to the present moment amongst
numerous peoples, we must remember that his equipment and apparatus are not limited to purely
nonsensical notions. On the contrary, in his stock of knowledge, carefully handed down, are
many truths and facts not generally known; and they are the most efficacious articles of his
stock in trade.

If now, in conclusion, we look once more at the subject of magic and look at it from the practical
point of view of the missionary, we shall see that there are several conclusions which may
be of use to him. In the first place, his attitude to magic will be hostile, and in his hostility
to it he will find the best starting-point for his campaign against it to be in the fact that
everywhere magic is felt, to a greater {103} or less extent, to be anti-social, and is condemned
both by the moral sentiments and the religious feeling of the community. It is felt to be
essentially wicked; and in warring against it the missionary will be championing the cause
of those who know it to be wrong but who simply dare not defy it. The fact that defiance is
not ventured on is essential to the continuance of the tyranny; and what is necessary, if it
is to be defied, is an actual concrete example of the fact that when defied it is futile.

Next, where magic is practised for social purposes, where it mimics science or religion and survives
in virtue of its power of "protective colouring," it is in fact superfluous and silly; and
where the natives themselves are beginning to recognise that the magic which is supposed,
for instance, to raise the southeast trade wind won't act at the wrong season, it should not
be difficult to get them to see that it is unnecessary at the right season. The natural process
which tends thus to get rid of magic may be accelerated by the sensible
missionary; and some knowledge of science will be found in this, as
in other matters, an indispensable part of his training.

Finally,
the missionary may rest assured in the conviction that his flank will
not be turned by the {104} science of religion. The idea that religion
was preceded by and evolved out of magic may have been entertained
by some students of the science of religion in the past, and may not
yet have been thrown off by all. But it holds no place now in the
science of religion.  Before
it be too late, I again counsel thee!

5.  But the Prince Emmanuel is persuaded better things of all His livery- men, though He thus
speaks to them to put them on their guard.  Yes, sternly and severely and threateningly as
He sometimes speaks, yet, in spite of Himself, His real grace always breaks through at the
last.  And, accordingly, his fifth command runs thus: But, it runs, if you should sully them,
if you should defile them, the which I am greatly unwilling that you should, then speed you
to that which is written in My law, that yet you may stand, and not fall before Me and before
My throne.  Always know this, that I have provided for thee an open fountain to wash thy garments
in.  Look, therefore, that you wash often in that fountain, and go not for an hour in defiled
garments.

CHAPTER XXVII--MANSOUL'S MAGNA CHARTA

   'A better covenant.'--Paul.

Magna Charta is a name very dear to the hearts of the English people. For, ever since that
memorable day on which that noble instrument was extorted from King John at the point of the
sword, England has been the pioneer to all the other nations of the earth in personal freedom,
in public righteousness, in domestic stability, and in foreign influence and enterprise.  Runnymede
is a red-letter spot, and 1215 is a red-letter year, not only in the history of England, but
in the history of the whole modern world.  The keystone of all sound constitutional government
was laid at that place on that date, and by that great bridge not England only, but after England
the whole civilised world has passed over from ages of bondage and oppression and injustice
into a new world of personal liberty and security, public equity and good faith, loyalty and
peace. All that has since been obtained, whether on the battle-field or on the floor of Parliament,
has been little more than a confirmation of Magna Charta or an authoritative comment upon Magna
Charta.  And if every subsequent law were to be blotted out, yet in Magna Charta the foundations
would still remain of a great state and a free people.  'Here commences,' says Macaulay, 'the
history of the English nation.'

Now, after the Prince of Peace had subjugated the rebellious city of Mansoul, He promulgated
a proclamation and appointed a day wherein He would renew their Charter.  Yea, a day wherein
he would renew and enlarge their Charter, mending several faults in it, so that the yoke of
Mansoul might be made yet more easy to bear.  And this He did without any desire of theirs,
even of His own frankness and nobleness of mind.  So when He had sent for and seen their old
Charter, He laid it by and said, Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish
away.  I do give them also My Testament, with all that is therein contained, for their everlasting
comfort and consolation.  Fourthly, I do give, grant, and bestow upon them freely, the world
and all that is therein for their true good; yea, all the benefits of life and death, of things
present and things to come.  To them and to their right seed after them, I hereby bestow all
these grants, privileges, and royal immunities.  All this is but a lean epitome of what was
that day laid down in letters of gold and engraven on their doors and their castle gates. 
And what joy, what comfort, what consolation, think you, did now possess every heart in Mansoul!

Our constitutional authors and commentators are wont to take Magna Charta clause by clause,
and word by word, and letter by letter.  They linger lovingly and proudly over every jot and
tittle of that splendid instrument.  And you will indulge me this Communion night of all nights
of the year if I expatiate still more lovingly and proudly on that great Covenant which our
Lord has sealed to us again to-day, and has written again to-day on the walls of our hearts.
Moses made haste as soon as the old Charter was read over to him, and nothing shall delay us
till we have feasted our eyes, and our ears, and our hearts to-night on the contents of this
our new and better covenant.

1.  The first article of our Magna Charta is free, full, and everlasting forgiveness of all
the wrongs, injuries, and offences we have ever done against God, against our Saviour, against
our neighbour, and against ourselves.  The English nobles extorted their Charter from their
tyrannical king with their sword at his throat, and after he had signed it, he cast himself
on the ground and gnawed sticks and stones in his fury, so mad was he at the men who had so
humiliated him.  'They have set four-and-twenty kings over my head,' he gnashed out.  How different
was it with our Charter!  For when we were yet enemies it was already drawn out in our name.
And after we had been subdued it would never have entered our fearful hearts to ask for such
an instrument.  And, even now, after we have entered into its liberty, how slow we are to believe
all that is written in our great Charter, and read to us every day out of it. And who shall
cast a stone at us for not easily believing all that is so written and read?  It is not so
easy as you would think to believe in free forgiveness for all the wrongs, injuries, and offences
we have ever done.  When you try to believe it about yourselves, you will find how hard it
is to accept that covenant and always to keep your feet firm upon it.  That the forgiveness
is absolutely free is its first great difficulty.  If it had cost us all we could ever do or
suffer, both in this world and in the world to come, then we could have come to terms with
our Prince far more easily; but that our forgiveness should be absolutely free, it is that
that so staggers us.  When I was a little boy I was once wandering through the streets of a
large city seeing the strange sights. The next difference between fetichism and polytheism, according
to Höffding, is that the gods of polytheism have developed that personality which is not indeed
absolutely wanting in the spirits of fetichism but can hardly be said to be properly {131}
there. "The transition," he says, "from momentary and special gods to gods which can properly
be called personal is one of the most important transitions in the history of religion. It denotes
the transition from animism to polytheism" (p. 145).  But on the strength
of that one word I mounted the steps and rang the bell, and asked the porter if I could see
the museum.  He told me that the cost of admission was such and such.  Little as it was, it
was too much for me, and I came down the steps feeling that the Latin writing above the door
had entirely deceived me.  It has not been the last time that my bad Latin has brought me to
shame and confusion of face.  But Latin, or Greek, or only English, or not even English, there
is no deception and no confusion here.  Forgiveness is really of free grace.  It costs absolutely
nothing, the door is open; or, if it is not open, then knock, and it shall be opened, without
money and without price.

'Free and full.'  I could imagine a free forgiveness which was not also full.  I could imagine
a charter that would have run somehow thus: Free forgiveness and full, up to a firmly fixed
limit. After quoting Walpole's description of Hogarth's Sigismunda, in which he says--

"To add to the disgust raised by such vulgar expression, her fingers were blooded by her lover's
heart, that lay before her like that of a sheep for her dinner;--"  Indeed, it is no imagination.  I have felt oftener than once that I was at
last across that black line, and gone and lost for ever.  But no--

   'While the lamp holds on to burn,
   The greatest sinner may return.'

'Free, full, and everlasting.'  Pope Innocent the Third came to the rescue of King John and
issued a Papal bull revoking and annulling Magna Charta.  But neither king, nor pope, nor devil
can revoke or annul our new Covenant.  It is free, full, and everlasting.  If God be for us,
who can be against us?  Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

