My scout, Card, was exceedingly useful while encamped near Murfreesboro, making several trips
to East Tennessee within the enemy's lines to collect information as to the condition of the
loyal people there, and to encourage them with the hope of early liberation.  He also brought
back from each trip very accurate statements as to the strength and doings of the Confederate
army, fixing almost with certainty its numbers and the locations of its different divisions,
and enabling my engineer-officer--Major Morhardt--to construct good maps of the country in
our front.  On these dangerous excursions Card was always accompanied by one of his brothers,
the other remaining with me to be ready for duty if any accident occurred to those who had
gone out, or in case I wanted to communicate with them.  In this way we kept well posted, although
the intelligence these men brought was almost always secured at the risk of their lives.

Early in the spring, before the Tullahoma campaign began, I thought it would be practicable,
by sending out a small secret expedition of but three or four men, to break the Nashville and
Chattanooga railroad between Chattanooga and the enemy's position at Tullahoma by burning the
bridges in Crow Creek valley from its head to Stevenson, Alabama, and then the great bridge
across the Tennessee River at Bridgeport.  Feeling confident that I could persuade Card to
undertake the perilous duty, I broached the contemplated project to him, and he at once jumped
at the opportunity of thus distinguishing himself, saying that with one of his brothers and
three other loyal East Tennesseeans, whose services he knew could be enlisted, he felt sure
of carrying out the idea, so I gave him authority to choose his own assistants.  In a few days
his men appeared at my headquarters, and when supplied with money in notes of the State Bank
of Tennessee, current everywhere as gold in those days, the party, composed of Card, the second
brother, and the three East Tennesseeans, started on their precarious enterprise, their course
being directed first toward the Cumberland Mountains, intending to strike the Nashville and
Chattanooga railroad somewhere above Anderson's station.  They expected to get back in about
fifteen days, but I looked for some knowledge of the progress of their adventure before the
expiration of that period, hoping to hear through Confederate sources prisoners and the like-of
the destruction of the bridges.  I waited in patience for such news, but none came, and as
the time Card had allotted himself passed by, I watched anxiously for his return, for, as there
was scarcely a doubt that the expedition had proved a failure, the fate of the party became
a matter of deep concern to Card's remaining brother and to me.  Finally this brother volunteered
to go to his father's house in East Tennessee to get tidings of the party, and I consented,
for the probabilities were that some of them had made their way to that point, or at least
that some information had reached there about them.  As day after day went by, the time fixed
for this brother's return came round, yet he also remained out; but some days after the lad
was due Card himself turned up accompanied by the brother he had taken with him, soon explained
his delay in getting back, and gave me the story of his adventures while absent.

After leaving my camp, his party had followed various byways across the Cumberland Mountains
to Crow Creek Valley, as instructed; but when nearing the railroad above Anderson's Station,
they were captured by some guerrillas prowling about that vicinity, and being suspected of
disloyalty to the Confederacy, were carried to Chattanooga and imprisoned as Yankee spies.
Their prospects now were decidedly discouraging, for death stared them in the face. Fortunately,
however, some delays occurred relative to the disposition that should be made of them, and
they, meanwhile, effected their escape from their jailors by way of one of the prison windows,
from which they managed to displace a bar, and by a skiff, in the darkness of night, crossed
the Tennessee River a little below Chattanooga.  From this point the party made their way back
to my camp, traveling only at night, hiding in the woods by day, and for food depending on
loyal citizens that Card had become acquainted with when preaching and peddling.

Card's first inquiry after relating his story was for the youngest brother, whom he had left
with me.  I told him what I had done, in my anxiety about himself, and that more than sufficient
time had elapsed for his brother's return.  His reply was: "They have caught him.  The poor
fellow is dead."  His surmise proved correct; for news soon came that the poor boy had been
captured at his father's house, and hanged.  The blow to Card was a severe one, and so hardened
his heart against the guerrillas in the neighborhood of his father's home--for he knew they
were guilty of his brother's murder--that it was with difficulty I could persuade him to continue
in the employment of the Government, so determined was he to avenge his brother's death at
the first opportunity.  Finally, however, I succeeded in quieting the almost uncontrollable
rage that seemed to possess him, and he remained with me during the Tullahoma and Chickamauga
campaigns; but when we reached Knoxville the next winter, he took his departure, informing
me that he was going for the bushwhackers who had killed his brother.  A short time after he
left me, I saw him at the head of about thirty well-armed East Tennesseeans--refugees.  They
were determined-looking men, seeking revenge for the wrongs and sufferings that had been put
upon them in the last two years, and no doubt wreaked their vengeance right and left on all
who had been in any way instrumental in persecuting them.

The feeding of our army from the base at Louisville was attended with a great many difficulties,
as the enemy's cavalry was constantly breaking the railroad and intercepting our communications
on the Cumberland River at different points that were easily accessible to his then superior
force of troopers.  The accumulation of reserve stores was therefore not an easy task, and
to get forage ahead a few days was well-nigh impossible, unless that brought from the North
was supplemented by what we could gather from the country.  Corn was abundant in the region
to the south and southwest of Murfreesboro', so to make good our deficiences in this respect,
I employed a brigade about once a week in the duty of collecting and bringing in forage, sending
out sometimes as many as a hundred and fifty wagons to haul the grain which my scouts had previously
located.  In nearly every one of these expeditions the enemy was encountered, and the wagons
were usually loaded while the skirmishers kept up a running fire, Often there would occur a
respectable brush, with the loss on each side of a number of killed and wounded.  The officer
in direct command always reported to me personally whatever had happened during the time he
was out--the result of his reconnoissance, so to speak, for that war the real nature of these
excursions--and on one occasion the colonel in command, Colonel Conrad, of the Fifteenth Missouri,
informed me that he got through without much difficulty; in fact, that everything had gone
all right and been eminently satisfactory, except that in returning he had been mortified greatly
by the conduct of the two females belonging to the detachment and division train at my headquarters.
These women, he said, had given much annoyance by getting drunk, and to some extent demoralizing
his men.  To say that I was astonished at his statement would be a mild way of putting it,
and had I not known him to be a most upright man and of sound sense, I should have doubted
not only his veracity, but his sanity. Inquiring who they were and for further details, I was
informed that there certainly were in the command two females, that in some mysterious manner
had attached themselves to the service as soldiers; that one, an East Tennessee woman, was
a teamster in the division wagon-train and the other a private soldier in a cavalry company
temporarily attached to my headquarters for escort duty.  While out on the foraging expedition
these Amazons had secured a supply of "apple-jack" by some means, got very drunk, and on the
return had fallen into Stone River and been nearly drowned.  After they had been fished from,
the water, in the process of resuscitation their sex was disclosed, though up to this time
it appeared to be known only to each other.  The story was straight and the circumstance clear,
so, convinced of Conrad's continued sanity, I directed the provost-marshal to bring in arrest
to my headquarters the two disturbers of Conrad's peace of mind, After some little search the
East Tennessee woman was found in camp, somewhat the worse for the experiences of the day before,
but awaiting her fate content idly smoking a cob-pipe.  She was brought to me, and put in duress
under charge of the division surgeon until her companion could be secured. To the doctor she
related that the year before she had "refugeed" from East Tennessee, and on arriving in Louisville
assumed men's apparel and sought and obtained employment as a teamster in the quartermaster's
department.  Her features were very large, and so coarse and masculine was her general appearance
that she would readily have passed as a man, and in her case the deception was no doubt easily
practiced.  Next day the "she dragoon" was caught, and proved to be a rather prepossessing
young woman, and though necessarily bronzed and hardened by exposure, I doubt if, even with
these marks of campaigning, she could have deceived as readily as did her companion. The green
banks, sloping into the water, are sometimes decked with box-trees of uncommon size, sometimes
clothed with natural orchards, in which the cherries, pears, pomegranates, and other fruits, growing
in their indigenous soil, possess a flavour indescribably exquisite. The bold eminences are crowned
with superb forests or majestic ruins, which alternately rule the
scenes of this devoted country, from the water's edge to the summit
of the mountains.

The moral and political condition of the country contrasts forcibly with the flourishing aspect
of nature. At Sinope there is no commerce, and the Greeks having, in consequence, deserted the
place, the population is at present below 5,000. This city, once the capital of the great Mithridates,
enjoys natural advantages, which, but for the barbarism of the Turkish government, would soon
raise it into commercial eminence. It has a deep and capacious harbour--the finest timber in
the world grows in its vicinity--and the district of the interior, with which it immediately
communicates, is one of the most productive and industrious in Asiatic Turkey. Amasia, the
ancient capital of Cappadocia, Tokat, and Costambol, are rich and populous towns. Near the last
is held an annual fair, commencing fifteen days before the feast
of Ramadan, and which is said to be attended by at least fifty thousand
merchants, from all parts of the east.

From the nature of the country in which it is situated, M. Rottiers is disposed to believe
that Sinope holds out peculiarly strong inducements to European enterprise. He also had an opportunity
of observing, that its defences were gone totally to ruin, and significantly remarks, that
it could not possibly withstand a coup de main. Amastra, a great and wealthy city while possessed
by the Genoese in the middle ages, is now a wretched village, occupied by a few Turkish families,
whose whole industry consists in making a few toys and articles of wooden ware. It stands on
a peninsula, which appears to have been formerly an island, and the Isthmus uniting it to
the mainland is wholly composed, according to the account of Mr. Eton, who surveyed part of this
coast, of fragments of columns and marble friezes.

* * * * *

GEORGIAN WINE.  Success was immediate and complete,
and pursuit of the routed forces continued through Unionville, until we fell upon and drove
in the Confederate outposts at Shelbyville.  Here the enemy was taken by surprise evidently,
which was most fortunate for us, otherwise the consequences might have been disastrous.  Minty
captured in the charge about fifty prisoners and a few wagons and mules, and thus enabled me
to load my train with corn, and send it back to Murfreesboro' unmolested.  In this little fight
the sabre was freely used by both sides, and I do not believe that during the whole war I again
knew of so large a percentage of wounds by that arm in proportion to the numbers engaged.

That night I encamped at Eagleville, and next day reported to Granger at Franklin, arriving
in the midst of much excitement prevailing on account of the loss of Coburn's brigade, which
had been captured the day before a little distance south of that point, while marching to form
a junction with a column that had been directed on Columbia from Murfreesboro'.  Shortly after
Coburn's capture General Granger had come upon the scene, and the next day he advanced my division
and Minty's troops directly on Spring Hill, with a view to making some reprisal; but Van Dorn
had no intention of accommodating us, and retired from Spring Hill, offering but little resistance.
He continued to fall back, till finally he got behind Duck River, where operations against
him ceased; for, in consequence of the incessant rains of the season, the streams had become
almost impassable. Later, I returned by way of Franklin to my old camp at Murfreesboro', passing
over on this march the ground on which the Confederate General Hood met with such disaster
the following year in his attack on Stanley's corps.

My command had all returned from the Franklin expedition to Murfreesboro' and gone into camp
on the Salem pike by the latter part of March, from which time till June it took part in only
the little affairs of outposts occurring every now and then on my own front.  In the meanwhile
General Rosecrans had been materially reinforced by the return of sick and wounded men; his
army had become well disciplined, and was tolerably supplied; and he was repeatedly pressed
by the authorities at Washington to undertake offensive operations.

During the spring and early summer Rosecrans resisted, with a great deal of spirit and on various
grounds, these frequent urgings, and out of this grew up an acrimonious correspondence and
strained feeling between him and General Halleck.  Early in June, however, stores had been
accumulated and other preparations made for a move forward, Resecrans seeming to have decided
that he could safely risk an advance, with the prospect of good results.  Before finally deciding,
he called upon most of his corps and division commanders for their opinions on certain propositions
which he presented, and most of them still opposed the projected movement, I among the number,
reasoning that while General Grant was operating against Vicksburg, it was better to hold Bragg
in Middle Tennessee than to push him so far back into Georgia that interior means of communication
would give the Confederate Government the opportunity of quickly joining a part of his force
to that of General Johnson in Mississippi.

At this stage, and in fact prior to it, Rosecrans seemed to manifest special confidence in
me, often discussing his plans with me independent of the occasions on which he formally referred
them for my views.  I recollect that on two different occasions about this time he unfolded
his designs to me in this informal way, outlining generally how he expected ultimately to force
Bragg south of the Tennessee River, and going into the details of the contemplated move on
Tullahoma.  His schemes, to my mind, were not only comprehensive, but exact, and showed conclusively,
what no one doubted then, that they were original with him. What everybody went on saying I do
not know, but my own thoughts, as I looked down the closing lines of this superb gallery, now
in a half-ruined state, were very melancholy, on life and death, family pride, and the pride
of wealth, and the pride of genius, all so perishable.

To MRS. EDGEWORTH.
CANTERBURY, April 21.

I wrote to your dear father the history of
our visit to Mr. Wren's at Wroxall Abbey, and Kenilworth, and Warwick,
and Stratford-upon-Avon, and our pleasant three hours at Oxford.  In my opinion, then, based on a clear recollection
of various occurrences growing out of our intimacy, he conceived the plan of the Tullahoma
campaign and the one succeeding it; and is therefore entitled to every credit that attended
their execution, no matter what may be claimed for others.

On the 23d of June Bragg was covering his position north of Duck River with a front extending
from McMinnville, where his cavalry rested, through Wartrace and Shelbyville to Columbia, his
depot being at Tullahoma.  Rosecrans, thinking that Bragg would offer strong resistance at
Shelbyville--which was somewhat protected by a spur of low mountains or hills, offshoots of
the Cumberland Mountains --decided to turn that place; consequently, he directed the mass of
the Union army on the enemy's right flank, about Manchester.

On the 26th of June McCook's corps advanced toward Liberty Gap, my divisions marching on the
Shelbyville pike.  I had proceeded but a few miles when I encountered the enemy's pickets,
who fell back to Christiana, about nine miles from Murfreesboro'.  Here I was assailed pretty
wickedly by the enemy's sharpshooters and a section of artillery, but as I was instructed to
do nothing more than cover the road from Eagleville, over which Brannan's division was to approach
Christiana, I made little reply to this severe annoyance, wishing to conceal the strength of
my force.  As soon as the head of Brannan's column arrived I marched across-country to the
left, and encamped that night at the little town of Millersburg, in the vicinity of Liberty
Gap.  I was directed to move from Millersburg, on Hoover's Gap--a pass in the range of hills
already referred to, through which ran the turnpike from Murfreesboro' to Manchester--but heavy
rains had made the country roads almost impassable, and the last of my division did not reach
Hoover's Gap till the morning of June 27, after its abandonment by the enemy.  Continuing on
to Fairfield, the head of my column met, south of that place, a small force of Confederate
infantry and cavalry, which after a slight skirmish Laiboldt's brigade drove back toward Wartrace.
The next morning I arrived at Manchester, where I remained quiet for the day.  Early on the
29th I marched by the Lynchburg road for Tullahoma, where the enemy was believed to be in force,
and came into position about six miles from the town.

By the 31st the whole army had been concentrated, in spite of many difficulties, and though,
on account of the heavy rains that had fallen almost incessantly since we left Murfreesboro',
its movements had been slow and somewhat inaccurate, yet the precision with which it took up
a line of battle for an attack on Tullahoma showed that forethought and study had been given
to every detail.  The enemy had determined to fall back from Tullahoma at the beginning of
the campaign, however, and as we advanced, his evacuation had so far progressed that when,
on July 1.  We reached the earthworks thrown. up early in the year for the defense of the place,
he had almost wholly disappeared, carrying off all his stores and munitions of war except some
little subsistence and eleven pieces of artillery.  A strong rearguard remained to cover the
retreat, and on my front the usual encounters between advancing and retreating forces took
place. Just before reaching the intrenchments on the Lynchburg road, I came upon an open space
that was covered by a network of fallen trees and underbrush, which had been slashed all along
in front of the enemy's earthworks.  This made our progress very difficult, but I shortly became
satisfied that there were only a few of the enemy within the works, so moving a battalion of
cavalry that had joined me the day before down the road as rapidly as the obstructions would
permit, the Confederate pickets quickly departed, and we gained possession of the town.  Three
siege guns, four caissons, a few stores, and a small number of prisoners fell into my hands.

That same evening orders were issued to the army to push on from Tullahoma in pursuit, for,
as it was thought that we might not be able to cross Elk River on account of its swollen condition,
we could do the enemy some damage by keeping close as possible at his heels. I marched on the
Winchester road at 3 o'clock on the 2d of July and about 8 o'clock reached Elk River ford.
The stream was for the time truly an impassable torrent, and all hope of crossing by the Winchester
ford had to be abandoned.  Deeming that further effort should be made, however, under guidance
of Card, I turned the head of my column in the direction of Alisona, marching up the river
and nearly parallel with it till I came to Rock Creek.  With a little delay we got across Rock
Creek, which was also much swollen, and finding a short distance above its mouth a ford on
Elk River that Card said was practicable, I determined to attempt it: Some of the enemy's cavalry
were guarding this ford, but after a sharp little skirmish my battalion of cavalry crossed
and took up a strong position on the other bank.  The stream was very high and the current
very swift, the water, tumbling along over its rocky bed in an immense volume, but still it
was fordable for infantry if means could be devised by which the men could keep their feet. The
Georgians have not yet learned to keep their wine in casks, without which it is vain to look
for any improvements in its manufacture. Yet the mountains abound in the requisite materials,
and only a few coopers are requisite to make the commencement. The consumption of wine in Georgia,
and above all at Tiflis, is prodigiously great. From the prince to the peasant the ordinary
ration of a Georgian, if we may believe M. Gamba, is one tonque, (equal to five bottles and
a half of Bordeaux) per day.


By this time it was clear that Bragg intended to fall back behind the Tennessee River, and
our only chance of accomplishing anything of importance was to smash up his rear-guard before
it crossed the Cumberland Mountains, and in pursuance of this idea I was directed to attack
such of his force as was holding on to Winchester.  At 4 o'clock on the morning of July 2 I
moved on that town, and when we got close to it directed my mounted troops to charge a small
force of Confederate cavalry that was picketing their front.  The Confederates resisted but
little, and our men went with them in a disorderly chase through the village to Boiling Fork,
a small stream about half a mile beyond.  Here the fleeing pickets, rallying behind a stronger
force, made a stand, and I was directed by McCook to delay till I ascertained if Davis's division,
which was to support me, had made the crossing of Elk River, and until I could open up communication
with Brannan's division, which was to come in on my left at Decherd. As soon as I learned that
Davis was across I pushed on, but the delay had permitted the enemy to pull his rear-guard
up on the mountain, and rendered nugatory all further efforts to hurt him materially, our only
returns consisting in forcing him to relinquish a small amount of transportation and forage
at the mouth of the pass just beyond Cowan, a station on the line of the Nashville and Chattanooga
railroad.

At Cowan, Colonel Watkins, of the Sixth Kentucky Cavalry, reported to me with twelve hundred
mounted men.  Having heard during the night that the enemy had halted on the mountain near
the University--an educational establishment on the summit--I directed Watkins to make a reconnoissance
and find out the value of the information.  He learned that Wharton's brigade of cavalry was
halted at the University to cover a moderately large force of the enemy's infantry which had
not yet got down the mountain on the other side, so I pushed Watkins out again on the 5th,
supporting him by a brigade of infantry, which I accompanied myself.  We were too late, however,
for when we arrived at the top of the mountain Wharton had disappeared, and though Watkins
pursued to Bridgeport, he was able to do nothing more, and on his return reported that the
last of the enemy had crossed the Tennessee River and burned the railroad bridge.

Nothing further could now be done, so I instructed Watkins to rejoin the division at Cowan,
and being greatly fatigued by the hard campaigning of the previous ten days, I concluded to
go back to my camp in a more comfortable way than on the back of my tired horse. In his retreat
the enemy had not disturbed the railway track at all, and as we had captured a hand-car at
Cowan, I thought I would have it brought up to the station near the University to carry me
down the mountain to my camp, and, desiring company, I persuasively invited Colonel Frank T.
Sherman to ride with me. I have seen Mr. Stewart--very, very weak--he cannot walk without an arm to
lean on.

BOWOOD, Nov. 4, 1818.
The newspapers have told you the dreadful catastrophe--the death,
and the manner of the death, of that great and good man, Sir Samuel
Romilly. My dearest mother, there seems no end of horrible calamities.
There is no telling how it has been felt in this house. I did not
know till now that Mr. Dugald Stewart had been so very intimate with
Sir Samuel, and so very much attached to him--forty years his friend:
he has been dreadfully shocked.  We
had not gone very far before night overtook us, and we then began to realize the dangers surrounding
us, for there we were alone and helpless, tramping on in the darkness over an unknown railroad
track in the enemy's country, liable on the one hand to go tumbling through some bridge or
trestle, and on the other, to possible capture or death at the hands of the guerrillas then
infesting these mountains.  Just after dark we came to a little cabin near the track, where
we made bold to ask for water, notwithstanding the fact that to disclose ourselves to the inmates
might lead to fatal consequences.  The water was kindly given, but the owner and his family
were very much exercised lest some misfortune might befall us near their house, and be charged
to them, so they encouraged us to move on with a frankness inspired by fear of future trouble
to themselves.

At every turn we eagerly hoped to meet the hand-car, but it never came, and we jolted on from
tie to tie for eleven weary miles, reaching Cowan after midnight, exhausted and sore in every
muscle from frequent falls on the rough, unballasted road-bed.  Inquiry. developed that the
car had been well manned, and started to us as ordered, and nobody could account for its non-arrival.
Further investigation next day showed, however, that when it reached the foot of the mountain,
where the railroad formed a junction, the improvised crew, in the belief no doubt that the
University was on the main line instead of near the branch to Tracy City, followed the main
stem until it carried them clear across the range down the Crow Creek Valley, where the party
was captured.

I had reason to remember for many a day this foolish adventure, for my sore bones and bruised
muscles, caused me physical suffering until I left the Army of the Cumberland the next spring;
but I had still more reason to feel for my captured men, and on this account I have never ceased
to regret that I so thoughtlessly undertook to rejoin my troops by rail, instead of sticking
to my faithful horse.

CHAPTER XV.

ORDERED TO OCCUPY BRIDGEPORT--A SPY--THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA --GENERAL THOMAS--TREATED TO
COFFEE--RESULTS OF THE BATTLE.

The Tullahoma campaign was practically closed by the disappearance of the enemy from the country
north of the Tennessee River.  Middle Tennessee was once more in the possession of the National
troops, and Rosecrans though strongly urged from Washington to continue on, resisted the pressure
until he could repair the Nashville and Chattanooga railroad, which was of vital importance
in supplying his army from its secondary base at Nashville. At present the grapes are gathered
and pressed without any care, and the process of fermentation is so unskilfully managed, that
the wine rarely keeps till the following vintage. The skins of animals are the vessels in which
it is kept.


The enemy had meanwhile concentrated most of his forces at Chattanooga for the twofold purpose
of holding this gateway of the Cumberland Mountains, and to assume a defensive attitude which
would enable him to take advantage of such circumstances as might arise in the development
of the offensive campaign he knew we must make.  The peculiar topography of the country was
much to his advantage, and while we had a broad river and numerous spurs and ridges of the
Cumberland Mountains to cross at a long distance from our base, he was backed up on his depots
of supply, and connected by interior lines of railway with the different armies of the Confederacy,
so that he could be speedily reinforced.

Bridgeport was to be ultimately a sub-depot for storing subsistence supplies, and one of the
points at which our army would cross the Tennessee, so I occupied it on July 29 with two brigades,
retaining one at Stevenson, however, to protect that railway junction from raids by way of
Caperton's ferry.  By the 29th of August a considerable quantity of supplies had been accumulated,
and then began a general movement of our troops for crossing the river.  As there were not
with the army enough pontoons to complete the two bridges required, I was expected to build
one of them of trestles; and a battalion of the First Michigan Engineers under Colonel Innis
was sent me to help construct the bridge.  Early on the 3ist I sent into the neighboring woods
about fifteen hundred men with axes and teams, and by nightfall they had delivered on the riverbank
fifteen hundred logs suitable for a trestle bridge.  Flooring had been shipped to me in advance
by rail, but the quantity was insufficient, and the lack had to be supplied by utilizing planking
and weather-boarding taken from barns and houses in the surrounding country.  The next day
Innis's engineers, with the assistance of the detail that had felled the timber, cut and half-notched
the logs, and put the bridge across; spanning the main channel, which was swimming deep, with
four or five pontoons that had been sent me for this purpose. On the 2d and 3d of September
my division crossed on the bridge in safety, though we were delayed somewhat because of its
giving way once where the pontoons joined the trestles.  We were followed by a few detachments
from other commands, and by nearly all the transportation of McCook's corps.

After getting to the south side of the Tennessee River I was ordered to Valley Head, where
McCook's corps was to concentrate. The methods employed to produce this diseased state of the animals
are as disgusting to rational taste as revolting to humanity. The geese are crammed with fat
food, deprived of drink, kept in an intolerably hot atmosphere, and fastened by the feet (we
have heard of nailing) to the shelves of the fattening cribs. The celebrated Strasburg pies,
which are esteemed so great a delicacy that they are often sent as
presents to distant places, are enriched with these diseased livers. The march of McCook's
corps from Valley Head to Alpine was in pursuance of orders directing it to advance on Summerville,
the possession of which place would further threaten the enemy's communications, it being assumed
that Bragg was in full retreat south, as he had abandoned Chattanooga on the 8th.  This assumption
soon proved erroneous, however, and as we, while in Broomtown Valley, could not communicate
directly with Thomas's corps, the scattered condition of the army began to alarm us all, and
McCook abandoned the advance to Summerville, ordering back to the summit of Lookout Mountain
such of the corps trains as had got down into Broomtown Valley.

But before this I had grown uneasy in regard to the disjointed situation of our army, and,
to inform myself of what was going on, determined to send a spy into the enemy's lines.  In
passing Valley Head on the 10th my scout Card, who had been on the lookout for some one capable
to undertake the task, brought me a Union man with whom he was acquainted, who lived on Sand
Mountain, and had been much persecuted by guerrillas on account of his loyal sentiments.  He
knew the country well, and as his loyalty was vouched for I asked him to go into the enemy's
camp, which I believed to be near Lafayette, and, bring me such information as he could gather.
He said such a journey would be at the risk of his life, and that at best he could not expect
to remain in that section of country if he undertook it, but that he would run all the chances
if I would enable him to emigrate to the West at the end c f the "job," which I could do by
purchasing the small "bunch" of stock he owned on the mountain.  To this I readily assented,
and he started on the delicate undertaking.  He penetrated the enemy's lines with little difficulty,
but while prosecuting his search for information was suspected, and at once arrested and placed
under guard.  From this critical situation he escaped; however, making his way through the
enemy's picket-line in the darkness by crawling on his belly and deceiving the sentinels by
imitating the grunts of the half-wild, sand-colored hogs with which the country abounded. 
He succeeded in reaching Rosecrans's headquarters finally, and there gave the definite information
that Bragg intended to fight, and that he expected to be reinforced by Longstreet.

