Transcriber's Note: This book
is a compilation of previously | |published works and therefore contains some inconsistencies. VII

LONDON: GEORGE BELL AND SONS PORTUGAL ST. LINCOLN'S INN, W. C. CAMBRIDGE: DEIGHTON, BELL &
CO. NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO. BOMBAY: A. H. WHEELER & CO.

In 12 volumes, 5s. each. XI. LITERARY ESSAYS. Edited by TEMPLE SCOTT.
  With Portrait.                              [In the press.

  VOL. XII. FULL BIBLIOGRAPHY AND INDEX TO COMPLETE
  WORKS. Together with an Essay on the Portraits of
  Swift, by the HON. SIR FREDERICK FALKINER, K. C. With two
  Portraits.                                  [In the press.

SOME PRESS OPINIONS

     "An adequate edition of Swift--the whole of Swift, and nothing but
     Swift--has long been one of the pressing needs of students of
     English literature. Mr. Temple Scott, who is preparing the new
     edition of Swift's Prose Works, has begun well, his first volume is
     marked by care and knowledge. He has scrupulously collated his
     texts with the first or the best early editions, and has given
     various readings in the footnotes.... Mr. Temple Scott may well be
     congratulated on his skill and judgment as a commentator.... He has
     undoubtedly earned the gratitude of all admirers of our greatest
     satirist, and all students of vigorous, masculine, and exact
     English."--Athenæum.

     "The volume is an agreeable one to hold and to refer to, and the
     notes and apparatus are, on the whole, exact. A cheap and handy
     reprint, which we can conscientiously recommend."--Saturday
     Review.

     "From the specimen now before us we may safely predict that Mr.
     Temple Scott will easily distance both Roscoe and Scott. He
     deserves the gratitude of all lovers of literature for enabling
     Swift again to make his bow to the world in so satisfactory and
     complete a garb."--Manchester Guardian.

     "Mr. Temple Scott's introductions and notes are excellent in all
     respects, and this edition of Swift is likely to be one most
     acceptable to scholars."--Notes and Queries.

     "The new Bohn's Library edition of the prose works of Jonathan
     Swift is a venture which proves itself the more welcome as each
     instalment is issued.... This edition is likely long to remain the
     standard edition."--Literary World.

     "'Bohn's Libraries' need no push, and the magnificent edition of
     'The Prose Works of Jonathan Swift,' edited by Mr. Temple Scott, is
     in every respect worthy of that great collection of classics. It is
     an ideal edition, edited by an ideal editor, beautifully printed,
     handsomely bound, and ridiculously cheap. I have no hesitation in
     saying that this edition supersedes all its forerunners."--Star.

     "We have nothing but praise for the editing, annotating, printing,
     and general production. Indeed, now that the set has advanced so
     far, we can safely pronounce the opinion that all other editions of
     Swift must give place to it, and that no serious student of the
     politics of the eighteenth century can afford to be without these
     volumes.... A superb edition."--Irish Times.

     "Edited with exhaustive care, and produced in excellent style. This
     is not only the best, it is the only edition of Swift."--Pall
     Mall Gazette.

     "There could hardly be a more acceptable addition to Bohn's
     Standard Library than a new edition of Swift's Prose Works. The
     text is well printed, and the volume is of convenient size. The
     edition deserves to be popular, since Swift is a writer who will
     always be read, while this edition will bring him within reach of a
     number of new readers."--Scotsman.

     "The time is now ripe for a definite edition. This, of which the
     first volume lies before us, promises to fulfil all the conditions
     of a scholarly and satisfying work.... The edition is a genuine
     gain to English literature."--Birmingham Post.

     "The publishers of Bohn's Libraries will earn the thanks of a wide
     circle of readers by their undertaking to produce a popular and
     collected edition of the prose works of Swift.... So far as one
     may judge from a first instalment, the present edition seems to
     fulfil the requirements of popularity and accuracy as well as could
     be desired.... The edition promises to be one of the most valuable
     and welcome items in those classic 'Libraries' which have done so
     much to bring good literature, in worthy form, within the reach of
     the British public."--Glasgow Herald.

     "We are indebted to the proprietors of the Bohn Libraries for
     various literary enterprises, but it is questionable indeed if they
     have issued lately a work more acceptable, or likely to become more
     popular, than 'The Prose Works of Jonathan Swift.' No better
     edition of it could be desired. Mr. Temple Scott is editing the
     volumes with the greatest care."--Belfast News Letter.

     "No more welcome reprint has appeared for some time past than the
     new edition, complete and exact so far as it was possible to make
     it, of Swift's 'Journal to Stella.'"--Morning Post.

     "By far the most satisfactory text yet printed of the wonderful
     'Journal to Stella.'"--Newcastle Daily Chronicle.

     "The 'Journal to Stella' has long stood in need of editing, far
     more than any other of Swift's works. It abounds in references to
     persons great and small, to political and social 'occurrents,' to
     ephemeral publications; and to identify and explain all these
     demands an editor steeped in the history, literature, broadsides
     and press news of the time of the Harley administration. Mr.
     Ryland's present edition will satisfy all but the few who dream of
     an ideal."--Athenæum.

     "The immortal 'Journal to Stella,' one of the works most
     indispensable to a knowledge of the life and literature of the
     early part of the eighteenth century. We know of no shape in which
     the Journal is published so convenient for perusal as this. The
     notes are short and serviceable, and there is a full
     index."--Notes and Queries.

     "At last we have a well-printed, carefully edited text of Swift's
     famous Journal in a single, handy, and cheap volume. The present
     edition will, we hope, encourage many timid souls, who have been
     awed by the formidable array of Scott, Sheridan, or Hawkesworth's
     editions, to make the acquaintance of the most interesting,
     charming, and tender journal that ever man kept for a woman's
     eye."--St. James's Gazette.

     "Mr. Dennis is quite justified in his boast of now first giving us
     a complete and trustworthy text [of 'Gulliver's
     Travels']."--Manchester Guardian.

     "The number of useless reprints of Gulliver, based on Hawkesworth's
     untrustworthy edition, and mostly expurgated besides, is so great
     that we owe double thanks to Mr. Dennis, since he has not shirked
     the trouble of collating the five earliest editions, and has given
     us again at last--as far as is possible in the present case--the
     complete and authentic text of the original."--PROF. MAX
     FÖRSTER in Anglia.

     "An ideal text of 'Gulliver's Travels.'"--Literary World.

     "The best and most scholarly edition of 'Gulliver's
     Travels.'"--University Correspondent. The
Harley Administration had fallen never to rise again. Harley himself was
a prisoner in the Tower, and Bolingbroke a voluntary exile in France,
and an open adherent of the Pretender. Swift came to Dublin to be met by
the jeers of the populace, the suspicion of the government officials,
and the polite indifference of his clerical colleagues. He had time
enough now in which to reflect and employ his brain powers. For several
years he kept himself altogether to his duties as Dean of the Cathedral
of St. Patrick's, only venturing his pen in letters to dear friends in
England--to Pope, Atterbury, Lady Howard. His private relations with
Miss Hester Vanhomrigh came to a climax, also, during this period, and
his peculiar intimacy with "Stella" Johnson took the definite shape in
which we now know it.

He found himself in debt to his predecessor, Sterne, for a large and comfortless house and
for the cost of his own installation into his office. The money he was to have received (£1,000)
to defray these expenses, from the last administration, was now, on its fall, kept back from
him. Swift had these encumbrances to pay off and he had his Chapter to see to. He did both
in characteristic fashion. By dint of almost penurious saving he accomplished the former and
the latter he managed autocratically and with good sense. His connection with Oxford and Bolingbroke
had been of too intimate a nature for those in power to ignore him. Indeed, his own letters
to Knightley Chetwode[1] show us that he was in great fear of arrest. But there is now no doubt
that the treasonable relations between Harley and St. John and the Pretender were a great surprise
to Swift when they were discovered. He himself had always been an ardent supporter of the Protestant
succession, and his writings during his later period in Ireland constantly emphasize this attitude
of his--almost too much so.

The condition of Ireland as Swift found it in 1714, and as he had known of it even before that
time, was of a kind to rouse a temper like his to quick and indignant expression. Even as early
as the spring of 1716 we find him unable to restrain himself, and in his letter to Atterbury
of April 18th we catch the spirit which, four years later, showed itself in "The Proposal for
the Universal Use of Irish Manufactures" and the "Drapier's Letters," and culminated in 1729
in the terrible "Modest Proposal for Preventing the Children of Poor People from being a Burthen
to their Parents." To Atterbury he wrote:

"I congratulate with England for joining with us here in the fellowship of slavery. It is not
so terrible a thing as you imagine: we have long lived under it: and whenever you are disposed
to know how to behave yourself in your new condition, you need go no further than me for a
director. But, because we are resolved to go beyond you, we have transmitted a bill to England,
to be returned here, giving the Government and six of the Council power for three years to
imprison whom they please for three months, without any trial or examination: and I expect
to be among the first of those upon whom this law will be executed."

Writing to Archdeacon Walls[2] (May 5th, 1715) of the people in power, he said:

"They shall be deceived as far as my power reaches, and shall not find me altogether so great
a cully as they would willingly make me."

