This is the only country where a unified air service has been adopted. In war the arrangement
was successful. Against its continuance in peace the Army and Navy urge that, with the best
of wills, there is a great difference between having an integral branch of a service to work
with other services and having to deal with an independent organization, and argue increased
cost, duplication, competition and disjointed action. There is no doubt that the liaison of
the General, Naval and Air Staffs must be closened, and if co-operation with the senior services
was really becoming less satisfactory, a return to the old system should be considered amongst
other alternatives, but I do not think that it should be so. It must also be remembered that,
although air co-operation is vital to naval and military operations, it is fortunately unlikely
that there will be another war for a long time and, meanwhile, the growing essential, independent
strategic action would be irretrievably impaired by the reabsorption of the Air into the Army
and Navy.

On the other hand, even apart from supply, such a reversion would also cause much duplication,
e.g. training. The solution and the correct and logical outcome of the unification of the Air
service is the close grouping of the three arms in a Ministry of Defence, and this, even in
face of the obvious practical difficulties, should be adopted and co-ordination thus increased
step by step. Apart from Supply, some of the services in which this could be effected are the
medical, education, chaplains, mobilization stores, transport, works and buildings, accounting,
communications, ordnance and national factories. A modified scheme might also be studied in
which, under a Ministry of Defence, the Army and Navy each had tactical air units of seconded
personnel for artillery co-operation, spotting and reconnaissance, and the Air Ministry dealt
with supply, research, initial training and reserves, civil aviation and an independent air force.

One of many good examples of the necessity of co-ordination is afforded by the position of
the aircraft supply services at the beginning of the war and their development. We have already
seen that there were some eight private firms manufacturing aircraft in a small way and there
was practically speaking no engine industry at all. For the Royal Flying Corps, the War Office
had relied largely on the Royal Aircraft Factory, and, although the methods of control adopted
had many advantages, there was in them a tendency to retard private enterprise and development.
The Admiralty, on the other hand, had assisted by dealing almost entirely with firms for Royal
Naval Air Service supply. The conditions in France fortunately were very much better than those
in this country, and for the first year or two French factories helped us out with both machines
and engines. By the end of the war we had the largest and most efficient aircraft industry
in the world. There were no less than seventy-six great factories turning out vast numbers
of complete aeroplanes, in addition to thirty-three manufacturing complete engines and over
3,000 turning out spares and equipment. Such expansion is not possible within a few weeks,
it took a long time to arrive at this position, and it causes one very seriously to think what
would have happened had France not been our ally, and points the moral which has been mentioned
of the necessity for a thriving aircraft and engine industry in peace. During the war Germany
also had a very large number of firms engaged on this work.

THE MACHINE AND ENGINE.

The general differences between service and civil requirements in aircraft fall under the headings
of ceiling, load and speed. For service purposes very much higher ceiling and greater climb
and speed are required and the design is much affected by the condensed nature of the load.
For peace purposes, besides the primary advantage of speed which the air has over other forms
of transport, regularity must be ensured and the correct ratio between speed, duration and
load-carrying power determined. Great ceiling, man[oe]uvrability and climb are not required.

However great the speed and load, there is no value in air transport, whether for passengers
or mails or goods, unless it is safe and also compares favourably from an economic point of
view with the older methods. Without these the public cannot be expected to utilize air transport,
nor is there any inducement to surrender mails and freight for carriage by air. Every endeavour
compatible with economy is made, as far as the equipment of aerodromes and the organization
of the routes are concerned, to render air navigation as safe as possible, yet, though both
safety and economy of running have been improved, much remains to be done. Safety depends largely
on engine reliability, fire prevention and the capacity of the machine to land in small spaces.

Though neither roads nor rails have to be laid and aircraft possess the great advantages of
mobility and point to point transit, the initiation and maintenance of an air service is a
very complex and costly matter. The utilization of converted war machines is no longer sufficient
and those specially designed for commercial work are beginning to make their appearance. Such
are the Handley Page W.8, the Vickers, the D.H.18 and 34, and the Bristol 10-seater.

The first two are twin-engine and the last three single-engine machines. Opinions differ as
to the relative advantages of the twin and single-engine type. The first and running costs
of the single engine are lower, but the twin has greater power and carrying capacity, while
most pilots prefer to have a surplus of power over and above that required for normal flight.
For these reasons, and because of the psychological effect on insurance companies and on passengers,
the twin engine will probably remain in use for large commercial machines, until long-lived
and economic engines of more than 500 horse-power are available. On the other hand, where extra
power is not required, the twin-engine is not safer than the single-engine machine; no existing
twin-engine commercial aeroplane can maintain its height and land safely with only one engine
running. Experiments have been made, especially in Germany, on the multi-engined machine with
all the engines in the fuselage, but its advantages have so far been counterbalanced by loss
of efficiency due to transmission gearing and shaft drives to the propellers and the vibration
and weight of the gearing.

High-powered engines are very expensive to run and every effort has therefore to be made by
aerodynamic efficiency to carry more useful load with less horse-power. Improvement is being
made in this direction; thus the D.H.18 carries eight passengers at 56 horse-power per passenger,
the D.H.32 is designed for the same number at 45 horse-power each, and the D.H.34 for ten passengers
at 45 horse-power each.

The two best German commercial machines, the Junkers and the Fokker, have a comparatively low
horse-power and a low fuel load, but greater attention has been paid to the design of the machines,
which are monoplanes with cantilever wings, offering less resistance to the air than our biplanes.
One of the most difficult problems is to evolve a high-lift wing which does not impair the
aircraft's speed in the air. For commercial machines we must aim at the largest possible commercial
load, the smallest possible fuel load and, consequently, an engine which uses fuel economically
and, conversely, a lighter fuel. The development of the engine is receiving constant attention,
as are also various safety devices, among which may be mentioned those guarding against fire
and those varying the lift of wings so as to lower the landing speed and thus decrease the
dangers attendant upon forced landings.

In addition to the high initial cost of machines and engines, their maintenance also requires
the greatest care. Detailed investigation must be made into all serious accidents. This is
now compulsory under the new Air Navigation Act, and the fitness of pilots is ensured by periodical
medical examination.

Apart from the weather, the safety of an aircraft depends upon its engine, and perhaps even
more upon the installation and accessibility of engines and their adjuncts, such as the petrol,
oil, water and ignition systems. During the earlier stages of the war the average life of an
engine before complete overhaul was necessary was, of stationary engines, from 50 to 60 hours,
and of rotary engines, about 15 hours. To-day these figures stand at 200 hours and upwards
and from 50 to 60 hours respectively. For commercial purposes this must be further increased
to 300-500 hours as a normal working period.

There are two schools of thought with regard to the efficiency, reliability and the economy
of engines. One school advocates using a light power plant per horse-power, run normally at
about half its maximum; the other favours a plant of greater weight, more solid construction
and greater efficiency, running at nearly its full horse-power. The former is more expensive
in primary cost and upkeep, but allows a higher performance and provides reserve horse-power
for emergency; the latter is cheaper, but involves a certain risk owing to lack of surplus
power. We have hitherto shown a tendency to adopt the former method, the Germans the latter.
For commercial purposes a compromise will probably be found to be best.

Apart from the initial outlay on "air stock," the maintenance, overhead, fuel, insurance and
depreciation charges are very heavy. These are much affected by such items as simplicity of
design, strength against wear and tear, ease of assembly and interchangeability of parts, easily
removable engines, increase in durability by the use of metal construction for parts of the
machine and the propeller, the elimination of rubber joints, substitution of air for water
cooling, facilities for loading and unloading in a commercial machine, simple and efficient
navigational instruments and self-starter. Every improvement, however small, will assist to
reduce running costs. Then revenue must be increased and the comfort of passengers, as, for
instance, ventilation, warmth, luggage capacity and, more than all, a reduction of noise has
to be carefully considered or they will not travel a second time by air. An effective engine
silencer is at last well on the way. It is obvious what a great advantage this attainment will
be both for service and civil purposes. Roughly speaking, a high-powered engine without a silencer
is audible at a distance of some seven miles and at a height of 13,000 feet at night time,
though these distances are reduced by about a third by day when normal ground noises exist.
The bulk of noise is caused by the exhaust, the propeller and mechanical noises in the engine.

I cannot leave this subject without emphasizing the value of research, both abstract and concrete.
But, though it is the keystone of progress, its results must largely depend on the amount of
flying done. It is clear that for economic reasons new designs can only thoroughly be tried
out by commercial use, and therefore again that real progress is dependent on commercial activity.

The advance of civil aviation is bound to be slower than was that of war aviation. But, as
war experience improved old and evolved new types, so will peace requirements and experience
shape the type and design of aircraft and engine best suited to its purposes. Although a good
deal has under the circumstances already been achieved in peace, much remains to be done. Gradually,
however, with a modicum of research, improvements in the factors already mentioned and the
reduction of initial cost and maintenance expenses, air transport for mails, passengers and
goods will take its place as a normal commercial public utility service, and the increased
speed of communication will assist in the general development of trade.

AIR SERVICES: BRITISH, CONTINENTAL AND IMPERIAL.

International civil flying commenced officially on August 26th, 1919, and gradually expanded,
both in the United Kingdom and on the Continent, especially during the summer of 1920. France,
aided by considerable subsidies, conducted services from Paris to London, Brussels and Strasburg,
from Toulouse to Montpelier and across Spain to Casablanca in Morocco; Belgium, from Brussels
to London and Paris; Holland, from Amsterdam to London; Germany, in spite of the restrictions
placed upon her, entered the field as a competitor and her aircraft flew regularly from Berlin
to Copenhagen and Bremen, and from Bremen to Amsterdam. On the American Continent, the United
States Post Office ran mail services from New York to Washington, Chicago, and San Francisco,
with extensions from Chicago, St. Paul, Minneapolis, and St. Louis.

For reasons which I shall give, there were no internal services in the United Kingdom, but
there were four companies operating air lines from London to Paris, one of which held the contract
for the carriage of mails. There were also air mail services between London and Brussels and
Amsterdam. The mileage flown and the number of passengers and the weight of goods carried were
considerable, while the number of letters steadily increased, especially on the Amsterdam service;
and an efficiency of 76 per cent., 94 per cent., and 84 per cent. was obtained on the London-Paris,
London-Brussels, and London-Amsterdam services respectively.

It must be remembered that these results were obtained without any direct assistance on the
part of the State, such as was given by the French Government to air-transport companies in
the form of subsidies. British economic policy is traditionally opposed to subsidies, believing
that enterprise can be healthily built up on private initiative. Therefore, until 1921 civil
aviation had to content itself with the indirect assistance of the State, which consisted mainly
in the adjustment of international flying; the laying-out and equipment of aerodromes on the
air routes; the provision of wireless communication and meteorological information; research
and the collection and issue of general information concerning aviation.

This indirect assistance, however, proved inadequate to maintain the progress achieved during
1920, and therefore the maintenance of air services by means of temporary direct financial
assistance had to be arranged.

I have already pointed out the difficulty against which commercial aviation has to contend
in regard to the geographical features and position of the United Kingdom. Its comparatively
small size, the propinquity of industrial centres, our efficient day and night express railway
services, especially those running north and south, lessen the value of aircraft's superior
speed and militate against the operation of successful internal air services. Possible exceptions
might include amphibian services between London and Dublin, accelerating the delivery of mails
five or six hours; between Glasgow and Belfast, where the Clyde and the harbour of Belfast
could be used as terminals; or between London and the Channel Islands. I may point out in parenthesis
that the development of alighting stations on rivers passing through the centres of towns is
important, as a great deal of time is at present wasted in reaching the aerodromes necessarily
situated some miles outside large centres of population.

Our immediate opportunities of development near home are therefore afforded by the air services
to Paris, Brussels, and Amsterdam; but even here the saving in time is not great, and our position
is unfavourable compared to that of the United States, where the Post Office saves two days
in the delivery of mails by air between New York and San Francisco; or compared to that of
Germany, where Berlin is within a 350-mile radius of Copenhagen, Cologne, Munich, Warsaw, and
Vienna, which is itself in an advantageous situation as the junction for a South European system
extending to the Balkan States and the Near East.

The ultimate use of the air, however, is not exemplified by a few passengers flying daily between
London and the Continent any more than by a few squadrons of fighting craft. In a decade or
two overhead transit will become the main factor in the express delivery of passengers, mails,
and goods. It is the one means left to the Empire of speeding up world-communication to an
extent as yet unrealized. For the price of a battleship a route to Australia could be organized,
the value of which would be beyond computation.

The British Empire as a whole offers vast fields for expansion. In Africa, Canada, and Australia
are found the great distances suitable to the operation of aircraft, the wide undeveloped areas
through which air transport may prove more economic than the construction of railways, and
the trans-oceanic routes over which travel by steamship has reached, and in many cases passed,
its economic maximum speed. Air transport, careless whether the route be over land or sea,
unhampered by foreign frontiers, gives the Empire precisely those essential powers of direct,
supple, and speedy intercommunication which ship and rail have already shown us to be vital.

Here again the geographical position of England presents a difficult problem. England is divided
from the rest of the Empire by a wide expanse, either of ocean or foreign territory. Egypt,
the starting-point for air routes to India, Australia, and South Africa, may be described as
the centre of a circle of which England is on the circumference; and it may be some years before
an aeroplane can complete the journey between England and Egypt with only Malta as a stopping-place.

The future of long-distance oceanic air routes may depend upon the airship. Lighter-than-air
craft, mainly for reasons of cost and vulnerability, did not receive such an impetus from the
war as did the aeroplane, but the modern airship has claims for use over distances exceeding
1,000 miles. It can fly by night with even greater ease than by day; fog is no deterrent; engine
trouble does not bring it down; and it can take advantage of prevailing winds. It would reduce
the sea journey from England to Karachi from 22 to 5 days; from England to Johannesburg from
21 to 7 days; and from England to Perth from 32 to 10-1/2 days. Its achievements have already
been considerable. In November, 1917, the German L.57 flew from Constantinople to East Africa
and back--a distance of 4,000 miles--in 96 hours; in June, 1919, the R.34 flew from East Fortune
to Danzig and back in 57 hours; and in July it crossed the Atlantic, was moored out in America
for four days, and returned, a total distance of 8,000 miles, in the flying time of 108 hours
for the outward and 75 hours for the homeward journey.

Before and during the war Germany gained wide experience in the design, construction, and handling
of airships. It is probable that as soon as the peace terms and financial position permit she
will begin to establish this form of transport on a commercial basis. In accordance with the
Peace Treaty, and the Ultimatum of the London Conference of 1921, the construction of aircraft
of all kinds is at present forbidden, but Germany is fostering airship development by the means
left at her disposal. Her scientists are probing the constructional problems connected with
large airships, while efforts are being made, by financial and other assistance, to maintain
her technical staffs and airship bases in existence. At the same time German commercial interests
are negotiating with foreign countries with a view to the development of airships abroad, and
plans are being discussed for an airship service between Spain and Argentina.

The United States, France, and Italy are all interesting themselves, either financially or
constructionally, in the future of airship development.

In Great Britain we have made great strides, particularly in the construction of small types,
and our practical air experience in lighter-than-air craft, during the war, is the greatest
in the world. With a view to carrying out the experiments necessary further to demonstrate
the capacity of airships for commercial long-distance flights, a few months ago the Department
of Civil Aviation took over all airship material surplus to service requirements. The main
object was to test the practicability and value of mooring airships to a mast. Up to the present,
a principal factor militating against the economic operation of airships has been the large
and expensive personnel required for handling them on the ground, especially in stormy weather.
The mooring-mast experiments have had considerable success and airships have been moored in
high winds and over long periods with the assistance of a very small personnel.

The Government has decided, however, though recognizing their potentialities for speeding up
communications between the various Dominions and the Mother Country, that the operation of
airships cannot be carried out by the State on account of the present financial position.

Recognizing the limitations of Home services and those to the Continent, it was for the purpose
of directing attention to the Imperial aspect of civil aviation that the great demonstration
flights were organized in which Alcock flew the Atlantic in a Vickers "Vimy," Scott crossed
to the United States and back in the R.34, Ross-Smith flew from England to Australia, and van
Ryneveld from London to the Cape.

These flights necessitated, too, considerable ground organization in laying out aerodromes,
as the following report on one in Africa vividly illustrates: "If aerodromes are left unattended
for one year," it says, "practically all the work would have to be undertaken afresh, particularly
in Rhodesia. The growth of vegetation is enormous, especially during the rains, and grass will
grow to a height of eleven feet in six months; and trees stumped two feet below the surface
will throw out suckers and replant themselves within a month after the rains have started....
It is most important that rough drains should be traced.... I have just started planting Doub
grass. This grass gives an ideal surface for landing, kills other grasses, and possesses deep
interlacing roots which will bind the entire surface of the aerodromes, making it permanent
and free from washaways and the formation of sluits."

