Passing out of the silent church into the warm light of eventide, by steep alleys and by stony
footpaths we gradually mount upwards towards the ruined castle that commands a lofty position
with an all-embracing view of the bay and its encircling mountains. The crumbling fragment
of the old palace of Salerno differs but little in appearance from any one of those innumerable
dilapidated piles of the Middle Ages with which Southern Italy is so thickly studded, yet coming
fresh from visiting Guiscard’s cathedral and Hildebrand’s last resting-place, we find it comparatively
easy to conjure up some recollections of its past, so as to invest its crumbling red-hued walls
with a spell of interest. These broken apertures were surely once the windows through which
the dying Pope must have wearily glanced upon the sun-smitten waves and violet-shadowed hills
that we behold to-day; here in this embrasure, long despoiled of its marble seat, must have
brooded the fierce and unscrupulous Sigilgaita, thinking of how best to rid herself of her
step-son Bohemond, in order that her own children might inherit their father’s realms. The
ghosts of princes and popes are around us, yet the only living inhabitant of the roofless castle
is the ragged little goat-herd, whose unsavoury charges are cropping the short grass that covers
the site of the banqueting hall, where Norman knights and Italian barons once caroused in the
crusading days of long ago. We seat ourselves on the dry sward in a sun-warmed angle of the
ruins, where an almond tree that has sprouted from the rubble sends down from time to time
upon our heads a tiny shower of pale pink blossoms at the bidding of the soft evening breeze.
At our feet are masses of the dark shiny leaves of the wild arum, and rank grass which is plentifully
starred with tall-stemmed crimson-petalled daisies and the mauve wind-flowers that are drowsily
closing their cups at the approach of night. The little goat-herd eyes us solemnly, but—strange
and welcome to relate—shows no inclination to pester the signori. The soft murmuring of the
distant sea, the subdued hum of the city far below us and the drowsy buzzing of the bees in
the almond and ivy bloom close at hand combine to strengthen the golden chain of imagination.
As we sit basking in the peaceful beauty of the scene around us and serenely conscious of its
glorious past, one of our party suddenly remembers in a welcome flash of inspiration that this
deserted courtyard has been made the scene of one of Boccaccio’s most famous tales. It is a
story that many writers of succeeding ages have endeavoured to imitate in prose or verse, but
this fictitious love-tragedy between a princess and a page at Salerno has a simple charm and
dignity in its original setting that only the master-hand of the Tuscan author could impart.
The scene of the novel of Guiscard and Ghismonda is laid, as we have said, at this very spot,
and as the hero, the heroine and the villain of the tale have Norman names, we may be allowed
to conjecture that this graceful story, which Boccaccio puts into the mouth of the lady Fiammetta,
was founded upon some actual but half-forgotten family scandal in the annals of the mighty
but self-made House of Hauteville.

                               * * * * * *

Once upon a time there reigned in Salerno the Prince Tancred, who was a widower, and the father
of an only daughter, Ghismonda, Duchess of Capua. The Duchess, who was considered one of the
most beautiful, accomplished and virtuous princesses of her day, had been early married to
the Duke of Capua, but on his death after a very few years of matrimony had been left a childless
widow. Being still very young, the Princess Ghismonda was now taken back to his court by her
father, who jealously guarded her and seemed unwilling for her to be remarried. Living in rooms
that over-looked the courtyard of the palace, the Duchess, who found time hang on her hands
somewhat heavily, used to spend hours daily in watching the lords and pages of her father’s
household passing and repassing the quadrangle below, and amongst the many well-favoured youths
a certain page named Guiscard found most favour in her sight. Now Guiscard, who had thus all
unwittingly attracted Ghismonda’s attention and finally won her heart, was a young Norman of
no great lineage and of small means, but being discreet, upright and sensible-minded, had obtained
a high place in Prince Tancred’s estimation. Skilfully questioning her maids of honour without
exciting their suspicions, the Princess gained all she wished to know concerning Guiscard’s
position and attainments, and it was not long before she found means of conveying the secret
of her affection to the youth, who in fact had already fallen head over ears in love with the
beautiful Duchess who so often leaned from the casement above. She now sent him a letter hidden
in a pair of bellows, wherein she explained to him the existence of a secret passage, long
disused, that led from a hollow in the hillside below the castle walls up to her own apartment.
Over-joyed at receiving this missive, the infatuated page took the first occasion, as we may
well imagine, to make use of this friendly clue, and before many hours had passed after receiving
the letter, the young man, flushed and triumphant, was standing in the chamber of his beloved
mistress, who had meanwhile taken every necessary preparation for receiving her lover in secret.
Many a time were the pair able to meet thus without awakening the least suspicion in the minds
of Prince Tancred or of the maids of honour, and all would doubtless have gone well for an
indefinite period of time, but for a most unforeseen accident. It appears that one morning
the old Prince of Salerno, wishing to confer with his daughter on some matter of state, came
to her private apartment, and on learning that she had gone out riding settled himself upon
a couch that stood within a curtained alcove, and whilst waiting for her return fell sound
asleep. After some hours of repose the prince was suddenly roused from his heavy slumber by
the sound of two voices in the room, that of his daughter and of a strange man. Peeping stealthily
through the folds of the draperies, he now beheld to his fury and amazement the Duchess alone
with his page Guiscard. But the descendant of Robert the Wiseacre well knew how to temper vengeance
with dissimulation. Dreading the scandal that would follow an open exposure, the Prince, in
spite of his years and the stiffness of his joints, contrived to quit the chamber unperceived
by means of a convenient window. That very night the unsuspecting Guiscard was seized by his
sovereign’s orders and thrust into a foul dungeon of the palace, whither Tancred himself descended
to question his prisoner and to reprove him violently for his base ingratitude. But the unhappy
page could only make repeated answer: “Sire, love hath greater powers than you or I!” On the
following morning Tancred proceeded to visit the Duchess, still ignorant of her paramour’s
fate, and in a voice strangled with the conflicting emotions of paternal love and desired vengeance
bitterly upbraided his erring child. “Daughter, I had such an opinion of your modesty and virtue,
that I could never have believed, had I not seen it with mine own eyes, that you would have
violated either, even so much as in thought. The recollection of this will make the pittance
of life that is left very grievous to me. As you were determined to act in that manner, would
to Heaven you had made choice of a person more suitable to your own quality; but this Guiscard
is one of the meanest persons about my court. This gives me such concern, that I scarce know
what to do. As for him, he was secured by my order last night, and his fate is determined.
But with regard to yourself, I am influenced by two different motives: on one side, the tenderest
regard that a father can have for a child; and on the other, the justest vengeance for the
great folly you have committed. One pleads strongly in your behalf; and the other would excite
me to do an act contrary to my nature. But before I come to a resolution, I would fain hear
what you have to say for yourself.”

Seeing clearly from her father’s words that her secret had been discovered and that her lover
was in prison, the intrepid Ghismonda, a true daughter of the high-spirited House of Hauteville,
assuming a composure she was very far from feeling, made a dignified appeal on behalf of Guiscard
and herself.

“Father, it is not my purpose either to deny or to entreat; for as the one can avail me nothing,
so I intend the other shall be of little service. I will by no means bespeak your love and
tenderness towards me; but shall first, by an open confession, endeavour to vindicate myself,
and thus do what the greatness of my soul prompts me to. It is most true that I have loved,
and do still love Guiscard; and whilst I live, which will not be long, shall continue to love
him; and if such a thing as love be after death, I shall never cease to love him.... It appears
from what you say, that you would have been less incensed if I had made choice of a nobleman,
and you bitterly reproach me for having condescended to a man of low condition. In this you
speak according to vulgar prejudice, and not according to truth; nor do you perceive that the
fault you blame is not mine, but Fortune’s, who often exalts the unworthy, and leaves the worthiest
in low estate. But, not to dwell on such considerations, look a little into first principles,
and you will see that we are all formed of the same material and by the same hand. The first
difference amongst mankind, who are all born equal, was made by virtue; they who were virtuous
were deemed noble, and the rest were all accounted otherwise. Though this law, therefore, may
have been obscured by contrary custom, yet is it discarded neither by nature nor good manners.
If you regard only the worth and virtue of your courtiers, and consider that of Guiscard, you
will find him the only noble person, and these others a set of poltroons. With regard to his
worth and valour, I appeal to yourself. Who ever commended man more for anything that was praise-worthy
than you have commended him? And deservedly, in my judgment; but if I was deceived, it was
by following your opinion. If you say, then, that I have had an affair with a person base and
ignoble, I deny it; if with a poor one, it is to your shame to have let such merit go unrewarded.
Now concerning your last doubt, namely how you are to deal with me: use your pleasure. If you
are disposed to commit an act of cruelty, I shall say nothing to prevent such a resolution.
But this I must apprise you of; that unless you do the same to me, which you either have done,
or mean to do to Guiscard, mine own hands shall do it for you. If you mean to act with severity,
cut us off both together, if it appear to you that we have deserved it.”

The Duchess’ able defence of her choice of Guiscard and her democratic views of society were
hardly likely to influence the proud tyrant of Salerno, although his house was sprung from
a plebeian stock of Normandy. Ignoring her plea and arguments, Tancred left his daughter alone
with her grief, and proceeded to the cells below to give the order for Guiscard’s immediate
death by strangling. But Tancred’s fury was by no means appeased by the page’s death, for tearing
the unhappy youth’s heart from the warm and still quivering body, the brutal prince had the
bleeding flesh placed in a golden covered cup, which he bade his chamberlain deliver to Ghismonda,
with these cruel words: “Your father sends this present to comfort you with what was most dear
to you; even as he was comforted by you in what was most dear to him.” With a calm countenance
and with a gracious word of thanks, the Princess accepted the gift, and on removing the cover
and realising the contents of the cup, said with meaning to the bearer of this gruesome present:
“My father has done very wisely; such a heart as this requires no worse a sepulchre than one
of gold.” Then after lamenting for a while over her lover’s fate, Ghismonda filled the goblet
with a draught of poison that she had already prepared in anticipation of her father’s vengeance,
and quaffed its contents. After this she lay down upon her bed, clasping the cup to her bosom,
whereupon her maids, all ignorant of the cause of their mistress’ conduct, ran terrified to
call Prince Tancred, who arrived in time to witness his unhappy daughter’s death agony. Now
that it was too late, the Prince was stricken with remorse and began loudly to bewail the violence
of his late anger. “Sire,” said the dying Princess, “save those tears against worse fortune
that may happen, for I want them not. Who but yourself would mourn for a thing of your own
doing?” Then dropping her tone of irony, she made one last request of her weeping and repentant
father, that her own and Guiscard’s bodies might be honourably interred within the same tomb.
Thus perished by her own hand the beautiful Princess Ghismonda of Salerno, Duchess of Capua,
urged to the fell deed by a parent’s inexorable cruelty. And it is some slight consolation
to the sad ending of the story to learn that Tancred did at least carry out his daughter’s
dying entreaty, for the bodies of Ghismonda and Guiscard were duly laid in one grave amidst
the pomp of religion and the cold comfort of a public mourning.(7)

                               * * * * * *

But the sun has long since sunk below the horizon, and the chill dews of night are falling
round us. Hastily we leave the old palace of the princes of Salerno to the solitary occupation
of the bats and owls, to seek warmth and cheerfulness in our inn upon the Marina.

                                CHAPTER IX

                  PAESTUM AND THE GLORY THAT WAS GREECE

In these days of easy travelling there lies a choice of two routes to Paestum and its temples:
one by driving thither direct from La Cava or Salerno, in the mode of our forefathers; and
the other by taking the train to the little junction of Battipaglia, and thence proceeding
southward by the coast line to the station of Pesto itself, that stands almost within a stone’s
throw of the chief gate of Poseidonia. A third, and perhaps a preferable way, consists in using
the railway beyond Battipaglia to Eboli, a town of no little interest in the upper valley of
the Silarus, and thence driving along the base of the rocky hills that enclose the maritime
plain and through the oak wood of Persano that was brigand-haunted within living memory. But
though the scenery between Eboli and Paestum undoubtedly owns more charm and variety than the
marshy flats can boast, yet the strange loneliness of the sea-girt level has a fascination
of its own, which will appeal strongly to all lovers of pristine undisturbed nature. For the
larger portion of these Lucanian plains still remains uncultivated, so that thickets of fragrant
wild myrtle and lentisk, of coronella and of white-blossomed laurustinus, stud the landscape;
whilst the open ground is thickly covered with masses of hardy but gay flowering weeds. The
great star-thistles run to seed unchecked by the scythe, and the belled cerinthia and the glaucous-leaved
tall yellow mulleins seem to thrive heartily on the barren soil. Boggy ground alternates with
patches of dry stony earth, and in early summer every little pool of water affords sustenance
to coarse-scented white water-lilies, and clumps of the yellow iris that are over-shadowed
by masses of tall graceful reeds. These arundini, which are to be found near every water-course
or pool throughout Italy, are characteristic of the country with their broad grey leaves, their
heads of pink feathery bloom, and their mournful whispering answers to the question of every
passing breeze; elegant in their growth, they are also beloved by the practical peasant who
utilizes their long slender stems for a variety of purposes in his domestic economy. For the
reeds, stripped of their foliage, support his tender young vines and make good frame-work whereon
to train his peas and tomatoes; the longest canes of all, moreover, serve well as handles for
the long feather brushes which are used so extensively in all Italian households. Other floral
denizens of the plain are the great rank porri, or wild leeks, conspicuous with their bright
green curling leaves issuing from globe-like roots above the ground, and of course, the asphodel,
the plant of Death. For the asphodel is pre-eminently the flower of Southern Italy and of Sicily,
since it presents a fit emblem of a departed grandeur that is still impressive in its decay.
How beautiful to the eye appear the dark grey-green sword-like leaves from the centre of which
up-shoots the tall branching stem with its clusters of delicate pink-striped blossoms, that
show so lovely yet smell so vile! Apart from its fetid odour, the asphodel is a thing of intense
beauty, so that a long line of these plants in full bloom, covering some ridge of orange-coloured
tufa or the velvety-grey crest of some ancient wall, with their spikes of starry flowers standing
out distinct like floral candelabra against the clear blue of a southern sky, makes an impression
upon the beholder that will ever be gratefully remembered.

But flowers and shrubs are not the only occupants of the Poseidonian plain, for as we proceed
on our way towards the Temples, we notice in the drier pastures large herds of the long-horned
dove-coloured cattle of the country, whilst in marshy places our interest is aroused by the
sight of great shaggy buffaloes of sinister mien. The buffalo has long been acclimatized in
Italy, though its original home seems to have been the trackless marshes of the Tigris and
Euphrates. The conquering Arabs first introduced these uncouth Eastern cattle into Sicily,
whence they were imported into Italy by the Norman kings of Naples. In spite of its malevolent
nature and the poor quality of its flesh and hide, the buffalo came to be extensively bred
in the Pontine and Lucanian marshes, where the moisture of the soil and the unwholesome air
always affected the native herds unfavourably. For hours together these fierce untameable beasts
love to lie amidst the swampy reed-beds, wallowing up to their flanks in slimy malodorous mud
and seemingly impervious to the ceaseless attacks of the local wasps and gad-flies, which try
in vain to penetrate with their barbed stings the thick hairy covering of defence. Perchance
between Battipaglia and Paestum we may encounter a herd of these shaggy beeves being driven
by a peasant on horse-back, with his pungolo or small lance in hand: a human being that in
his goat-skin breeches and with his luxuriant untrimmed locks, seems to our eyes only one degree
less savage and unkempt than the fierce beasts he guides. As cultivation has made progress
of recent years and the unhealthy marshes of the coast line are being gradually drained, the
numbers of buffalo tend to decrease, whilst the native Italian oxen are being introduced once
more into the newly reclaimed pastures. That former arch-enemy of the cattle in the days of
Vergil seems to have disappeared: that “flying pest,” the asilo of the Romans and the aestrum
of the Greeks, which in antique times was wont to drive the grazing herds frantic with terror
and pain, until the valley of the Tanager and the Alburnian woods re-echoed with the agonised
lowing of the poor tortured creatures. And speaking of noxious insects, a general belief prevails
in Italy that their bite—as well as that of snakes and scorpions—becomes more acute and dangerous
when the sun enters into the sign of Lion, so that human beings, as well as defenceless cattle,
must carefully avoid all chances of being bitten during the months of July and August.

Before our goal can be reached it is necessary for us to cross the broad willow-fringed stream
of the Sele, the Silarus of antiquity, which according to the testimony of Silius Italicus
once possessed the property of petrifying wood. In the distant days of the eighteenth century,
the traveller to Paestum had to endure amidst other difficulties and dangers of the road the
disagreeable business of being ferried across the Sele, which was then bridgeless. Owing to
the malaria and the loneliness of the spot, the acting of ferryman over this river was not
an agreeable post, and Count Stolberg, a German dilettante who has left some memories of his
Italian wanderings, relates how a feeble dismal soured old man, a veritable Charon of the upper
air, had great difficulty in conveying himself, his horse and his servant across the swollen
stream. The old man’s age and misery aroused the Count’s compassion, so that he asked him why
he continued thus to perform a task at once so arduous and so distasteful. “Sir,” replied the
boatman, “I would gladly be excused, but that my master compels me to undertake this work.”
“And who, pray, is this tyrant of a master of yours?” indignantly enquired the Count. “Sir,
it is my Lord Poverty!” grimly answered the old ferryman, as he pocketed the Teuton’s fee.
Times have changed with regard to the necessity of a ferry over the Sele, but to judge from
the appearance of the people and from the accounts in the journals, we much doubt if my Lord
Poverty’s sway has been much weakened in these parts.

At length we reach the tiny hamlet and station of Pesto, surrounded by its groves of mournful
eucalyptus trees, and if we visit the station itself, we cannot help noticing the fine gauze
net-work over every window and door, also the veiled faces and be-gloved hands of the station-master
and his facchini. It is not difficult to gauge the reason of the eucalyptus trees at Pesto,
an alien importation like the buffalo, for these native trees of Australia have been planted
here with the avowed object of reducing the malaria, for which the place is only too renowned.
Scientists have positively declared that the mosquitoes which rise in clouds from the poisonous
swamps at sunset are directly responsible for this terrible form of ague, and a paternal Government
has accordingly introduced gum-trees to improve the quality of the air, and has presented gloves,
veils and fine lattice work to its servants in the hope of protecting them from the bites of
these tiny pestilence-bearing insects. We do not wish to dispute the wisdom of modern bacteriologists,
but somehow we have no great faith in this elaborate scheme for battling with Nature; and indeed
not a few persons who have studied the matter declare that though the reeking marshes are certainly
productive of malaria in themselves (so much so that it is dangerous to linger amidst the ruined
temples of an evening), yet these spiteful little creatures are at least innocent of innoculating
humanity with this particular disease. Moreover, a plausible idea that is now largely held
insists that the recent spread of cultivation over the Lucanian Plain is itself largely responsible
for the increase of malaria; it is the up-turning of the germ-impregnated earth that has lain
fallow for centuries, say the supporters of this theory, which awakens and sets free the slumbering
demon of fever in the soil, so that the speeding of the plough on the Neapolitan coast must
inevitably mean also the spreading of this fell and mysterious sickness. Let us therefore give
the devil his due: the mosquito is a hateful and persistent foe, and his sting is both painful
and disfiguring, but do not let us accuse him of carrying malaria until the case can be better
proved against him. But enough of fevers and doctors’ saws! Let us turn our willing eyes towards
the three great temples that confront us close at hand. Before however proceeding to inspect
these great monuments of Grecian art and civilization, which rank amongst the most venerable
as well as the most beautiful relics of antiquity, it is only meet that we should carry with
us into their ruined halls a few grains of historical knowledge, whereby our sense of reality
and our appreciation of their greatness and splendour may be increased.

