    Shad were abundant in the Rivanna at my earliest recollection, say
    prior to 1800. They penetrated into the mountains to breed. I have
    heard the old people, when I was young, speak of their descending
    the rivers in continuous streams in the fall, as large as a man's
    hand. The old ones so weak, that if they were forced by the current
    against a rock they got off with difficulty. Six miles north of
    Charlottesville three hundred were caught in one night with a bush
    seine. A negro told me he had caught seventeen in a trap at one
    time. I recollect the negroes bringing them to my mother
    continually. An entry of land near Charlottesville about 1735
    crossed the Rivanna for two or three acres as a fishing shore. The
    dams absolutely stopped them, but they had greatly declined before
    their erection. In 1810 every sluice in the falls at Richmond was
    plied day and night by float seines. I never heard of rockfish
    above the falls, and supposed they were confined to Tidewater....
    Rockfish were hunted on the Eastern Shore on horseback with spears.
    The large fish coming to feed on the creek shores, overflowed by
    the tide, showed themselves in the shallow water by a ripple before
    them. They were ridden on behind and forced into water too shallow
    for them to swim well, and were speared. I inferred from this fact
    that they confined themselves to the Tidewater. When young, I have
    heard the old people speak of an abundance of other fish. The
    supposition was that the clearing of the country, and consequent
    muddying of the streams, had destroyed them.

    By sluicing the dams, and prohibiting fishing in sluices, or
    trapping, or anything that should bar their progress, I do not see
    why the shad should not return.

The shad have never returned to the up-country. But they still visit the vast inland waters
below the Fall line, sometimes so abundantly that the price declines, as it did so recently
as 1956, to where the fishermen can scarcely make a profit. Other fish referred to by the first
Virginians continue to return, and will do so as long as our outreaching civilization does
not deprive them of the natural conditions they need for survival.

The years closely following the Revolution brought profound readjustment in American commerce.
Observations on whaling, a minor but vital home industry, filled many pages of a 1788 communication
of Thomas Jefferson to John Jay, one of his confreres in the shaping of national policy. After
sketching the uses of whale oil, its economic position and its history, he took up the particular
problem facing the people of Nantucket, perhaps the foremost whalers in America. As long as
they had been subjects of the British Empire they had been able to sell their oil duty-free
in England. Now as aliens they must pay the same tariff charged other foreign traders. This
meant the difference between a profitable and unprofitable enterprise. A few Nantucket seamen
had even transferred to Nova Scotia in order to become British citizens again and thus receive
exemption from whale-oil import duty. This trend alarmed the French in particular, who could
visualize thousands of the United States' best sailors going over to their enemies the English.
The remedy was suggested: make France the most attractive market for U.S. whale oil. At the
same time, English whaling had been government subsidized and could undercut competition.

The international chess game went briskly on, to the concern of Jefferson and the well-wishers
of the infant Union. Before the Revolution England had fewer than 100 vessels whaling, while
America had more than 300. But by 1788 England had 314 and America 80. Such was the result
of the conflict, aided by the bounty paid by Britain to its own whalers. Jefferson hoped that
the United States producers could develop a market in France, in part, by bartering oil for
the essential work clothes which hitherto had been bought for cash in England. But he warned
that without some kind of subsidy American whalers could neither compete with foreign countries
nor make a living commensurate with other pursuits. The growing nation's sea-faring men would
decrease to the point where the country's sea power would be in question.

As Secretary of State in 1791, Jefferson reported to Congress on the two principal American
fisheries of the day, both oceanic. "The cod and whale fisheries," he began, "carried on by
different persons, from different ports, in different vessels, in different seas, and seeking
different markets, agree in one circumstance, as being as unprofitable to the adventurer as
important to the public." Once prosperous, he said, they were now in embarrassing decline.

He traced the history of the cod fisheries back to 1517, in which year as many as 50 European
ships were reported fishing off the Newfoundland banks at one time. In 1577 there were 150
French vessels, 100 Spanish and 50 Portuguese. The British limped far behind with 15. The French
gradually took over as they claimed more and more territory in the region. Other nations dropped
out, except England, whose cod fleet at the beginning of the seventeenth century had increased
to about 150 vessels. These in due course were largely supplanted by the New England colonists.
When France lost Newfoundland to England in 1713 the English and Colonial fisheries spurted
ahead. By 1755 their fleets and catches equaled those of the French, and in 1768 passed them.
Jefferson's statistics present an impressive picture of the fishing activity of that time and
place, especially when compared with the unorganized Chesapeake fisheries just then coming of age.

In 1791 he said there were 259 French vessels totaling 24,422 tons and employing 9,722 seamen.
Their catch: 20 million pounds that year. There were 665 American vessels with 25,650 tonnage,
4,405 seamen and a catch of around 40 million pounds. England's ships, tonnage and men were
not given. However, her estimated catch nearly equaled that of France and America combined.
Thus the Northern fishing grounds in their palmy days accounted for well over 100 million pounds
of cod a year.

It is worth remarking that the size of today's New England cod fishery is not radically different
from the pre-Revolutionary one described by Jefferson. Boats, men and catch remain about the
same on the average.

Turning to the whaling industry, Jefferson noted that Americans did not enter it until 1715,
although he credited the Biscayans and Basques of Southern Europe with prosecuting it in the
15th century and leading the way to the fishing grounds off Newfoundland. Whales were sought
in both the North and South Atlantic. The figures for the American Colonies in 1771 as given
by Jefferson were 304 vessels engaged, totaling 27,800 tons, navigated by 4,059 men.

They were in for a difficult time in 1791. The Revolution halted their activities and deprived
them of their markets. Re-establishing this fishery was a prime concern of Jefferson.

It is significant that in his painstaking consideration of the nation's fisheries he, a Virginian,
apparently found no cause to deal with those of his own Chesapeake bay. They were one day nevertheless
to outstrip many times over both the volume and value of American cod and whale fisheries together.

The evidence is that Jefferson was more interested in fish at Monticello than anywhere else.
But there the interest was personal, not national. In his so-called Farm Book, or plantation
record, he often mentions fish. A note on slave labor reads: "A barrel of fish costing $7.
goes as far with the laborers as 200 ponds of pork costing $14." This was in all probability
Virginia salt-herring, which had finally reached the status of a staple during the latter half
of the 18th century. An 1806 memorandum to his overseer runs: "Fish is always to be got in
Richmond ... and to be dealt out to the hirelings, laborers, workmen, and house servants of
all sorts as has been usual." In 1812 a bill for fish, which he terms "indeed very high and
discouraging, but the necessity of it is still stronger," lists the species no doubt in chief
demand: "Twelve barrels herrings, $75. and one barrel of shads, $6.50." These were salted and
shipped in from Tidewater fisheries like George Washington's at Mt. Vernon.

For fresh fish Jefferson and his neighbors could look to their adjacent rivers. In fact, so
greatly did they rely on them that it was with feelings akin to consternation that he wrote
his friend William D. Meriwether in 1809 that a neighbor, Mr. Ashlin, proposed to erect a dam
which was sure to inconvenience the watermen of the vicinity. Furthermore, "to this then add
the removal of our resort for fresh fish ... and the deprivation of all the intermediate inhabitants
who now catch them at their door." He was not on too firm ground in objecting, however. He
had a dam of his own across the Rivanna river which had been there since 1757.

He decided to build a fish pond in his garden. As he described it in 1808 it was little larger
than an aquarium, 40 cubic yards contents, probably for water lilies and goldfish. It was the
first of several fish ponds, constructed, no doubt, with both beauty and utility in mind. A
note in his Weather Memorandum Book under date April 1812 tells us: "The two fish ponds on
the Colle branch were 40 days work to grub, clean and make the dams."

A series of letters in 1812 to friends who he thought might supply him with live fish, particularly
carp, for stocking, all run very much on the order of this one to Captain Mathew Wills:

    I return you many thanks for the fish you have been so kind as to
    send me, and still more for your aid in procuring the carp, and you
    will further oblige me by presenting my thanks to Capt. Holman &
    Mr. Ashlin. I have found too late, on enquiry that the cask sent
    was an old and foul one, and I have no doubt that must have been
    the cause of the death of the fish. The carp, altho it cannot live
    the shortest time out of water, yet is understood to bear
    transportation in water the best of any fish whatever. The
    obtaining breeders for my pond being too interesting to be
    abandoned, I have had a proper smack made, such as is regularly
    used for transporting fish, to be towed after the boat, and have
    dispatched the bearer with it without delay, as the season is
    passing away. I have therefor again to solicit your patronage, as
    well as Captain Holman's in obtaining a supply of carp. I think a
    dozen would be enough and would therefore wish him to come away as
    soon as he can get that number.

From that time on his ponds came in for periodic mention, as when one was broken up by flood
waters in 1814. But despite setbacks he kept faith in them as good food-producing adjuncts
of a farm, thus anticipating the U.S. Department of Agriculture's modern food-fish pond-development
program by more than a century.

As is likely to be the case with experimenters, Jefferson's efforts at fish propagation do
not appear to have been overwhelmingly successful. At any rate, there is much more frequent
reference in his records to putting fish in his ponds than taking them out. So far as he was
concerned, it may be said that results were less important than example. Like all great leaders
he was an originator and investigator, confining himself to the basic things that insure man's
sustenance and contribute to his happiness, not the least of which is fishing.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Archer, Gabriel. A Relation of the Discovery of Our River From James Forte into the Maine,
Made by Captain Christopher Newport. Worcester, 1860.

Beverley, Robert. The History and Present State of Virginia. London, 1705.

Brown, Alexander. The Genesis of the United States. Boston, 1890. 2 vols.

Burnaby, Andrew. Travels Through the Middle Settlements in North America in the Years 1759-1760.
London, 1798.

Byrd, William. Natural History of Virginia. Ed. and tr. by R. C. Beatty and W. J. Mulloy. Richmond,
1940.

Chastellux, François J. Travels in North America in the Years 1780, 1781, and 1782. London, 1787.

Cresswell, Nicholas. The Journal, 1774-77. Ed. by Lincoln McVeagh. New York, 1924.

De Vries, David P. Voyages From Holland to America, 1632-1644. New York, 1857.

Durand, --. A Huguenot exile in Virginia. Ed. by Gilbert Chinard. New York, 1934.

Fithian, Philip V. Journal and Letters, 1773-1774. Ed. by Hunter D. Farish. Williamsburg, 1943.

Force, Peter. Tracts and Other Papers. Washington, 1836-46. 4 vols.

Glover, Thomas. An Account of Virginia. London, 1676.

Hamilton, Stanislaus M., ed. Letters to Washington and Accompanying Papers. Boston, 1898-1901.
5 vols.

Hamor, Ralph. Notes of Virginian affaires of the Government of Sir Thomas Gates and of Sir
Thomas Dale till 1614. Glasgow, 1906.

---- A True Discourse of the Present State of Virginia. London, 1614.

Hariot, Thomas. Narrative of the First English Plantation of Virginia. London, 1893.

Hart, Albert B. American History Told by Contemporaries. New York, 1908. 4 vols.

Hening, William W. The Statutes at Large of Virginia. 1809-1823. 13 vols.

Jefferson, Thomas. The Complete Jefferson. Ed. by Saul K. Padover. New York, 1943.

---- Thomas Jefferson's Farm Book. Ed. by Edwin M. Betts. Princeton. 1953.

---- Thomas Jefferson's Garden Book, 1766-1824. Ed. by Edwin M. Betts. Philadelphia, 1944.

Lee, Richard Henry. Letters of Richard Henry Lee. Ed. by James C. Ballagh. New York, 1914. 2 vols.

Middleton, Arthur P. Tobacco Coast. Ed. by George C. Mason. Newport News, 1953.

Neill, Edward. Virginia Vetusta. Albany, 1885.

Newport, Christopher. A Description of the Now-discovered River and Country of Virginia, 1607.
Worcester, 1860.

Pearson, John C. The Fish and Fisheries of Colonial Virginia. In William and Mary College Quarterly,
1942-3. Williamsburg.

Purchas, Samuel. His Pilgrimes. Glasgow, 1906. 20 vols.

Royall, Anne.

Smith, John. Travels and Works of Captain John Smith. Ed. by Edward Arber. Edinburgh, 1910. 2 vols.

Strachey, William. The Historie of Travaile Into Virginia Britannia. London, 1849.

Swem, E. G. Virginia Historical Index. Roanoke, 1934-6. 2 vols.

Virginia. Calendar of Virginia State Papers. Richmond, 1875-1893. 11 vols.

Virginia Fish Commissioners. Annual Report for the Year 1875. Richmond, 1875.

Virginia Company. The Records. Ed. by S. M. Kingsbury. Washington, 1906-1935. 4 vols.

Washington, George. The Writings of George Washington. Ed. by J. C. Fitzpatrick. Washington.
39 vols.

Whitelaw, Ralph T. Virginia's Eastern Shore. Ed. by George C. Mason. Richmond, 1951. 2 vols.

Manuscripts

Mercer Papers, Virginia Historical Society, Richmond.

Washington, Lund. Letters. Unpublished, at Mt. Vernon.