Such seemed to be the voice of this queer, kindly, satiric personality. London generally falls
into the arms of those who flout her; and Mariette, with his militant Catholicism, and his
contempt for our governing ideals, became the fashion. As for Anderson, the contact with English
Ministers and men of affairs had but carried on the generous process of development that Nature
had designed for a strong man. Whereas in Mariette the vigorous, self-confident English world--based
on the Protestant idea--produced a bitter and profound irritation, Anderson seemed to find
in that world something ripening and favouring that brought out all the powers--the intellectual
powers at least--of his nature. He did his work admirably; left the impression of a "coming
man" on a great many leading persons interested in the relations between England and Canada;
and when as often happened Elizabeth and he found themselves at the same dinner-table, she
would watch the changes in him that a larger experience was bringing about, with a heart half
proud, half miserable. As for his story, which was very commonly known, in general society,
it only added to his attractions. Mothers who were under no anxieties lest he might want to
marry their daughters, murmured the facts of his unlucky provenance to each other, and then
the more eagerly asked him to dinner.

Meanwhile, for Elizabeth life was one long debate, which left her often at night exhausted
and spiritless. The shock of their first meeting at Martindale, when all her pent-up yearning
and vague expectation had been met and crushed by the silent force of the man's unaltered will,
had passed away. She understood him better. The woman who is beloved penetrates to the fact
through all the disguises that a lover may attempt. Elizabeth knew well that Anderson had tones
and expressions for her that no other woman could win from him; and looking back to their conversation
at the Glacier House, she realised, night after night, in the silence of wakeful hours, the
fulness of his confession, together with the strength of his recoil from any pretension to
marry her.

Yes, he loved her, and his mere anxiety--now, and as things stood--to avoid any extension or
even repetition of their short-lived intimacy, only betrayed the fact the more eloquently.
Moreover, he had reason, good reason, to think, as she often passionately reminded herself,
that he had touched her heart, and that had the course been clear, he might have won her.

But--the course was not clear. From many signs, she understood how deeply the humiliation of
the scene at Sicamous had entered into a proud man's blood. Others might forget; he remembered.
Moreover, that sense of responsibility--partial responsibility at least--for his father's guilt
and degradation, of which he had spoken to her at Glacier, had, she perceived, gone deep with
him. It had strengthened a stern and melancholy view of life, inclining him to turn away from
personal joy, to an exclusive concern with public duties and responsibilities.

And this whole temper had no doubt been increased by his perception of the Gaddesdens' place
in English society. He dared not--he would not--ask a woman so reared in the best that England
had to give, now that he understood what that best might be, to renounce it all in favour of
what he had to offer. He realised that there was a generous weakness in her own heart on which
he might have played. But he would not play; his fixed intention was to disappear as soon as
possible from her life; and it was his honest hope that she would marry in her own world and
forget him. In fact he was the prey of a kind of moral terror that here also, as in the case
of his father, he might make some ghastly mistake, pursuing his own will under the guise of
love, as he had once pursued it under the guise of retribution--to Elizabeth's hurt and his
own remorse.

All this Elizabeth understood, more or less plainly. Then came the question--granted the situation,
how was she to deal with it? Just as he surmised that he could win her if he would, she too
believed that were she merely to set herself to prove her own love and evoke his, she could
probably break down his resistance. A woman knows her own power. Feverishly, Elizabeth was
sometimes on the point of putting it out, of so provoking and appealing to the passion she
divined, as to bring him, whether he would or no, to her feet.

But she hesitated. She too felt the responsibility of his life, as of hers. Could she really
do this thing--not only begin it, but carry it through without repentance, and without recoil?

She made herself look steadily at this English spectacle with its luxurious complexity, its
concentration within a small space of all the delicacies of sense and soul, its command of
a rich European tradition, in which art and literature are living streams springing from fathomless
depths of life. Could she, whose every fibre responded so perfectly to the stimulus of this
environment, who up till now--but for moments of revolt--had been so happy and at ease in it,
could she wrench herself from it--put it behind her--and adapt herself to quite another, without,
so to speak, losing herself, and half her value, whatever that might be, as a human being?

As we know, she had already asked herself the question in some fashion, under the shadow of
the Rockies. But to handle it in London was a more pressing and poignant affair. It was partly
the characteristic question of the modern woman, jealous, as women have never been before in
the world's history, on behalf of her own individuality. But Elizabeth put it still more in
the interests of her pure and passionate feeling for Anderson. He must not--he should not--run
any risks in loving her!

On a certain night early in December, Elizabeth had been dining at one of the great houses
of London. Anderson too had been there. The dinner party, held in a famous room panelled with
full-length Vandycks, had been of the kind that only London can show; since only in England
is society at once homogeneous enough and open enough to provide it. In this house, also, the
best traditions of an older regime still prevailed, and its gatherings recalled--not without
some conscious effort on the part of the hostess--the days of Holland House, and Lady Palmerston.
To its smaller dinner parties, which were the object of so many social ambitions, nobody was
admitted who could not bring a personal contribution. Dukes had no more claim than other people,
but as most of the twenty-eight were blood-relations of the house, and some Dukes are agreeable,
they took their turn. Cabinet Ministers, Viceroys, Ambassadors, mingled with the men of letters
and affairs. There was indeed a certain old-fashioned measure in it all. To be merely notorious--even
though you were amusing--was not passport enough. The hostess--a beautiful tall woman, with
the brow of a child, a quick intellect, and an amazing experience of life--created round her
an atmosphere that was really the expression of her own personality; fastidious, and yet eager;
cold, and yet steeped in intellectual curiosities and passions. Under the mingled stimulus
and restraint of it, men and women brought out the best that was in them. The talk was good,
and nothing--neither the last violinist, nor the latest danseuse--was allowed to interfere
with it. And while the dress and jewels of the women were generally what a luxurious capital
expects and provides, you might often find some little girl in a dyed frock--with courage,
charm and breeding--the centre of the scene.

Elizabeth in white, and wearing some fine jewels which had been her mother's, had found herself
placed on the left of her host, with an ex-Viceroy of India on her other hand. Anderson, who
was on the opposite side of the table, watched her animation, and the homage that was eagerly
paid her by the men around her. Those indeed who had known her of old were of opinion that
whereas she had always been an agreeable companion, Lady Merton had now for some mysterious
reason blossomed into a beauty. Some kindling change had passed over the small features. Delicacy
and reserve were still there, but interfused now with a shimmering and transforming brightness,
as though some flame within leapt intermittently to sight.

Elizabeth more than held her own with the ex-Viceroy, who was a person of brilliant parts,
accustomed to be flattered by women. She did not flatter him, and he was reduced in the end
to making those efforts for himself, which he generally expected other people to make for him.
Elizabeth's success with him drew the attention of several other persons at the table besides
Anderson. The ex-Viceroy was a bachelor, and one of the great partis of the day. What could
be more fitting than that Elizabeth Merton should carry him off, to the discomfiture of innumerable
intriguers?

After dinner, Elizabeth waited for Anderson in the magnificent gallery upstairs where the guests
of the evening party were beginning to gather, and the musicians were arriving. When he came
she played her usual fairy godmother's part; introducing him to this person and that, creating
an interest in him and in his work, wherever it might be useful to him. It was understood that
she had met him in Canada, and that he had been useful to the poor delicate brother. No other
idea entered in. That she could have any interest in him for herself would have seemed incredible
to this world looking on.

"I must slip away," said Anderson, presently, in her ear; "I promised to look in on Philip
if possible. And to-morrow I fear I shall be too busy."

And he went on to tell her his own news of the day--that the Conference would be over sooner
than he supposed, and that he must get back to Ottawa without delay to report to the Canadian
Ministry. That afternoon he had written to take his passage for the following week.

It seemed to her that he faltered in telling her; and, as for her, the crowd of uniformed or
jewelled figures around them became to her, as he spoke, a mere meaningless confusion. She
was only conscious of him, and of the emotion which at last he could not hide.

She quietly said that she would soon follow him to Portman Square, and he went away. A few
minutes afterwards, Elizabeth said good-night to her hostess, and emerged upon the gallery
running round the fine Italianate hall which occupied the centre of the house. Hundreds of
people were hanging over the balustrading of the gallery, watching the guests coming and going
on the marble staircase which occupied the centre of the hall.

Elizabeth's slight figure slowly descended.

"Pretty creature!" said one old General, looking down upon her. "You remember--she was a Gaddesden
of Martindale. She has been a widow a long time now. Why doesn't someone carry her off?"

Meanwhile Elizabeth, as she went down, dreamily, from step to step, her eyes bent apparrently
upon the crowd which filled all the spaces of the great pictorial house, was conscious of one
of those transforming impressions which represent the sudden uprush and consummation in the
mind of some obscure and long-continued process.

