"Everybody soon will know him," answered the Captain. "I think I heard that he's going to stand
for some place in the Duke's interest. He don't look the sort of fellow I like; but he's got
money and he comes here, and he's good looking,--and therefore he'll be a success." In answer
to this the Major only grunted. The Major was a year or two older than the Captain, and therefore
less willing even than his friend to admit the claims of new comers to social honours.

Just at this moment the Duchess walked across the ground up to the shooters, accompanied by
Mrs. Finn and Lady Chiltern. She had not been seen in the gardens before that day, and of course
a little concourse was made round her. The Major and the Captain, who had been driven away
by the success of Ferdinand Lopez, returned with their sweetest smiles. Mr. Boffin put down
his treatise on the nature of Franchises, which he was studying in order that he might lead
an opposition against the Ministry next Session, and even Sir Timothy Beeswax, who had done
his work with Sir Orlando, joined the throng.

"Now I do hope," said the Duchess, "that you are all shooting by the new code. That is, and
is to be, the Gatherum Archery Code, and I shall break my heart if anybody rebels."

"There are one or two men," said Major Pountney very gravely, "who won't take the trouble to
understand it."

"Mr. Lopez," said the Duchess, pointing with her finger at our friend, "are you that rebel?"

"I fear I did suggest--" began Mr. Lopez.

"I will have no suggestions,--nothing but obedience. Here are Sir Timothy Beeswax and Mr. Boffin,
and Sir Orlando Drought is not far off; and here is Mr. Rattler, than whom no authority on
such a subject can be better. Ask them whether in other matters suggestions are wanted."

"Of course not," said Major Pountney.

"Now, Mr. Lopez, will you or will you not be guided by a strict and close interpretation of
the Gatherum Code? Because, if not, I'm afraid we shall feel constrained to accept your resignation."

"I won't resign, and I will obey," said Lopez.

"A good ministerial reply," said the Duchess. "I don't doubt but that in time you'll ascend
to high office and become a pillar of the Gatherum constitution. How does he shoot, Miss Thrift?"

"He will shoot very well indeed, Duchess, if he goes on and practises," said Angelica, whose
life for the last seven years had been devoted to archery. Major Pountney retired far away
into the park, a full quarter of a mile off, and smoked a cigar under a tree. Was it for this
that he had absolutely given up a month to drawing out this code of rules, going backwards
and forwards two or three times to the printers in his desire to carry out the Duchess's wishes?
"Women are so d---- ungrateful!" he said aloud in his solitude, as he turned himself on the
hard ground. "And some men are so d---- lucky!" This fellow, Lopez, had absolutely been allowed
to make a good score off his own intractable disobedience. 

Hence, when Audoin, after overcoming the Gepidae, was requested by the Lombards to dine with
his son Alboin, his partner in the victory, he refused; for, says he, "you know it is not customary
with us for a king's son to dine with his father, until he has received arms from the king of
another country."--Warnefrid, De gestis Langobardorum, i. 23.

[86] An allusion to the toga virilis of the Romans. The German youth were presented with the shield
and spear probably at twelve or fifteen years of age. This early initiation into the business
of arms gave them that warlike character for which they were so celebrated. Thus, Seneca (Epist.
46) says, "A native of Germany brandishes, while yet a boy, his slender javelin."
 Poor Duchess! 'Tis pitiful
to think that after such Herculean labours she should injure the cause by one slight unconsidered
word, more, perhaps, than she had advanced it by all her energy.

During this time the Duke was at the Castle, but he showed himself seldom to his guests,--so
acting, as the reader will I hope understand, from no sense of the importance of his own personal
presence, but influenced by a conviction that a public man should not waste his time. He breakfasted
in his own room, because he could thus eat his breakfast in ten minutes. He read all the papers
in solitude, because he was thus enabled to give his mind to their contents. Life had always
been too serious to him to be wasted. Every afternoon he walked for the sake of exercise, and
would have accepted any companion if any companion had especially offered himself. But he went
off by some side-door, finding the side-door to be convenient, and therefore when seen by others
was supposed to desire to remain unseen. "I had no idea there was so much pride about the Duke,"
Mr. Boffin said to his old colleague, Sir Orlando. "Is it pride?" asked Sir Orlando. "It may
be shyness," said the wise Boffin. "The two things are so alike you can never tell the difference.
But the man who is cursed by either should hardly be a Prime Minister."

It was on the day after this that Sir Orlando thought that the moment had come in which it
was his duty to say that salutary word to the Duke which it was clearly necessary that some
colleague should say, and which no colleague could have so good a right to say as he who was
the Leader of the House of Commons. He understood clearly that though they were gathered together
then at Gatherum Castle for festive purposes, yet that no time was unfit for the discussion
of State matters. Does not all the world know that when in autumn the Bismarcks of the world,
or they who are bigger than Bismarcks, meet at this or that delicious haunt of salubrity, the
affairs of the world are then settled in little conclaves, with greater ease, rapidity, and
certainty than in large parliaments or the dull chambers of public offices? Emperor meets Emperor,
and King meets King, and as they wander among rural glades in fraternal intimacy, wars are
arranged, and swelling territories are enjoyed in anticipation. Sir Orlando hitherto had known
all this, but had hardly as yet enjoyed it. He had been long in office, but these sweet confidences
can of their very nature belong only to a very few. But now the time had manifestly come.

It was Sunday afternoon, and Sir Orlando caught the Duke in the very act of leaving the house
for his walk. There was no archery, and many of the inmates of the Castle were asleep. There
had been a question as to the propriety of Sabbath archery, in discussing which reference had
been made to Laud's book of sports, and the growing idea that the National Gallery should be
opened on the Lord's-day. But the Duchess would not have the archery. "We are just the people
who shouldn't prejudge the question," said the Duchess. The Duchess with various ladies, with
the Pountneys and Gunners, and other obedient male followers, had been to church. None of the
Ministers had of course been able to leave the swollen pouches which are always sent out from
London on Saturday night, probably,--we cannot but think,--as arranged excuses for such defalcation,
and had passed their mornings comfortably dozing over new novels. The Duke, always right in
his purpose but generally wrong in his practice, had stayed at home working all the morning,
thereby scandalising the strict, and had gone to church alone in the afternoon, thereby offending
the social. The church was close to the house, and he had gone back to change his coat and
hat, and to get his stick. But as he was stealing out of the little side-gate, Sir Orlando
was down upon him. "If your Grace is going for a walk, and will admit of company, I shall be
delighted to attend you," said Sir Orlando. The Duke professed himself to be well pleased,
and in truth was pleased. He would be glad to increase his personal intimacy with his colleagues
if it might be done pleasantly.

They had gone nearly a mile across the park, watching the stately movements of the herds of
deer, and talking of this and that trifle, before Sir Orlando could bring about an opportunity
for uttering his word. At last he did it somewhat abruptly. "I think upon the whole we did
pretty well last Session," he said, standing still under an old oak-tree.

"Pretty well," re-echoed the Duke.

"And I suppose we have not much to be afraid of next Session?"

"I am afraid of nothing," said the Duke.

"But--;" then Sir Orlando hesitated. The Duke, however, said not a word to help him on. Sir
Orlando thought that the Duke looked more ducal than he had ever seen him look before. Sir
Orlando remembered the old Duke, and suddenly found that the uncle and nephew were very like
each other. But it does not become the Leader of the House of Commons to be afraid of any one.
"Don't you think," continued Sir Orlando, "we should try and arrange among ourselves something
of a policy? I am not quite sure that a ministry without a distinct course of action before
it can long enjoy the confidence of the country. Take the last half century. There have been
various policies, commanding more or less of general assent; free trade--." Here Sir Orlando
gave a kindly wave of his hand, showing that on behalf of his companion he was willing to place
at the head of the list a policy which had not always commanded his own assent;--"continued
reform in Parliament, to which I have, with my whole heart, given my poor assistance." The
Duke remembered how the bathers' clothes were stolen, and that Sir Orlando had been one of
the most nimble-fingered of the thieves. "No popery, Irish grievances, the ballot, retrenchment,
efficiency of the public service, all have had their time."

"Things to be done offer themselves, I suppose, because they are in themselves desirable; not
because it is desirable to have something to do."

"Just so;--no doubt. But still, if you will think of it, no ministry can endure without a policy.
During the latter part of the last Session it was understood that we had to get ourselves in
harness together, and nothing more was expected from us; but I think we should be prepared
with a distinct policy for the coming year. I fear that nothing can be done in Ireland."

"Mr. Finn has ideas--."

"Ah, yes;--well, your Grace. Mr. Finn is a very clever young man certainly; but I don't think
we can support ourselves by his plan of Irish reform." Sir Orlando had been a little carried
away by his own eloquence and the Duke's tameness, and had interrupted the Duke. The Duke again
looked ducal, but on this occasion Sir Orlando did not observe his countenance. "For myself,
I think, I am in favour of increased armaments. I have been applying my mind to the subject,
and I think I see that the people of this country do not object to a slightly rising scale
of estimates in that direction. Of course there is the county suffrage--"

"I will think of what you have been saying," said the Duke.

"As to the county suffrage--"

"I will think it over," said the Duke. "You see that oak. That is the largest tree we have
here at Gatherum; and I doubt whether there be a larger one in this part of England." The Duke's
voice and words were not uncourteous, but there was something in them which hindered Sir Orlando
from referring again on that occasion to county suffrages or increased armaments.

CHAPTER XXI

The Duchess's New Swan

When the party had been about a week collected at Gatherum Castle, Ferdinand Lopez had manifestly
become the favourite of the Duchess for the time, and had, at her instance, promised to remain
there for some further days. He had hardly spoken to the Duke since he had been in the house,--but
then but few of that motley assembly did talk much with the Duke. Gunner and Pountney had gone
away,--the Captain having declared his dislike of the upstart Portuguese to be so strong that
he could not stay in the same house with him any longer, and the Major, who was of stronger
mind, having resolved that he would put the intruder down. "It is horrible to think what power
money has in these days," said the Captain. The Captain had shaken the dust of Gatherum altogether
from his feet, but the Major had so arranged that a bed was to be found for him again in October,--for
another happy week; but he was not to return till bidden by the Duchess. "You won't forget;--now
will you, Duchess?" he said, imploring her to remember him as he took his leave. "I did take
a deal of trouble about the code;--didn't I?" "They don't seem to me to care for the code,"
said the Duchess, "but, nevertheless, I'll remember."

"Who, in the name of all that's wonderful, was that I saw you with in the garden?" the Duchess
said to her husband one afternoon.

"It was Lady Rosina De Courcy, I suppose."

"Heaven and earth!--what a companion for you to choose."

"Why not?--why shouldn't I talk to Lady Rosina De Courcy?"

"I'm not jealous a bit, if you mean that. I don't think Lady Rosina will steal your heart from
me. But why you should pick her out of all the people here, when there are so many would think
their fortunes made if you would only take a turn with them, I cannot imagine."

"But I don't want to make any one's fortune," said the Duke; "and certainly not in that way."

"What could you be saying to her?"

"She was talking about her family. I rather like Lady Rosina. She is living all alone, it seems,
and almost in poverty. Perhaps there is nothing so sad in the world as the female scions of
a noble but impoverished stock."

"Nothing so dull, certainly."

"People are not dull to me, if they are real. I pity that poor lady. She is proud of her blood
and yet not ashamed of her poverty."

"Whatever might come of her blood, she has been all her life willing enough to get rid of her
poverty. It isn't above three years since she was trying her best to marry that brewer at Silverbridge.
I wish you could give your time a little to some of the other people."

"To go and shoot arrows?"

"No;--I don't want you to shoot arrows. You might act the part of host without shooting. Can't
you walk about with anybody except Lady Rosina De Courcy?"

"I was walking about with Sir Orlando Drought last Sunday, and I very much prefer Lady Rosina."

"There has been no quarrel?" asked the Duchess sharply.

"Oh dear, no."

"Of course he's an empty-headed idiot. Everybody has always known that. And he's put above
his place in the House. But it wouldn't do to quarrel with him now."

"I don't think I am a quarrelsome man, Cora. I don't remember at this moment that I have ever
quarrelled with anybody to your knowledge. But I may perhaps be permitted to--"

"Snub a man, you mean. Well, I wouldn't even snub Sir Orlando very much, if I were you; though
I can understand that it might be both pleasant and easy."

"I wish you wouldn't put slang phrases into my mouth, Cora. If I think that a man intrudes
upon me, I am of course bound to let him know my opinion."

"Sir Orlando has--intruded!"

"By no means. He is in a position which justifies his saying many things to me which another
might not say. But then, again, he is a man whose opinion does not go far with me, and I have
not the knack of seeming to agree with a man while I let his words pass idly by me."

"That is quite true, Plantagenet."

"And, therefore, I was uncomfortable with Sir Orlando, while I was able to sympathise with
Lady Rosina."

"What do you think of Ferdinand Lopez?" asked the Duchess, with studied abruptness.

"Think of Mr. Lopez! I haven't thought of him at all. Why should I think of him?"

"I want you to think of him. I think he's a very pleasant fellow, and I'm sure he's a rising man."

"You might think the latter, and perhaps feel sure of the former."

"Very well. Then, to oblige you, I'll think the latter and feel sure of the former. I suppose
it's true that Mr. Grey is going on this mission to Persia?" Mr. Grey was the Duke's intimate
friend, and was at this time member for the neighbouring borough of Silverbridge.

"I think he will go. I've no doubt about it. He is to go after Christmas."

"And will give up his seat?"

The Duke did not answer her immediately. It had only just been decided,--decided by his friend
himself,--that the seat should be given up when the journey to Persia was undertaken. Mr. Grey,
somewhat in opposition to the Duke's advice, had resolved that he could not be in Persia and
do his duty in the House of Commons at the same time. But this resolution had only now been
made known to the Duke, and he was rather puzzled to think how the Duchess had been able to
be so quick upon him. He had, indeed, kept the matter back from the Duchess, feeling that she
would have something to say about it, which might possibly be unpleasant, as soon as the tidings
should reach her. "Yes," he said, "I think he will give up his seat. That is his purpose, though
I think it is unnecessary."

"Let Mr. Lopez have it."

"Mr. Lopez!"

"Yes;--he is a clever man, a rising man, a man that is sure to do well, and who will be of
use to you. Just take the trouble to talk to him. It is assistance of that kind that you want.
You Ministers go on shuffling the old cards till they are so worn out and dirty that one can
hardly tell the pips on them."

"I am one of the dirty old cards myself," said the Duke.

"That's nonsense, you know. A man who is at the head of affairs as you are can't be included
among the pack I am speaking of. What you want is new blood, or new wood, or new metal, or
whatever you may choose to call it. Take my advice and try this man. He isn't a pauper. It
isn't money that he wants."

"Cora, your geese are all swans."

"That's not fair. I have never brought to you a goose yet. My swans have been swans. Who was
it brought you and your pet swan of all, Mr. Grey, together? I won't name any names, but it
is your swans have been geese."

"It is not for me to return a member for Silverbridge." When he said this, she gave him a look
which almost upset even his gravity, a look which was almost the same as asking him whether
he would not--"tell that to the marines." "You don't quite understand these things, Cora,"
he continued. "The influence which owners of property may have in boroughs is decreasing every
day, and there arises the question whether a conscientious man will any longer use such influence."

"I don't think you'd like to see a man from Silverbridge opposing you in the House."

"I may have to bear worse even than that."

"Well;--there it is. The man is here and you have the opportunity of knowing him. Of course
I have not hinted at the matter to him. If there were any Palliser wanted the borough I wouldn't
say a word. What more patriotic thing can a patron do with his borough than to select a man
who is unknown to him, not related to him, a perfect stranger, merely for his worth?"

"But I do not know what may be the worth of Mr. Lopez."

"I will guarantee that," said the Duchess. Whereupon the Duke laughed, and then left her.

The Duchess had spoken with absolute truth when she told her husband that she had not said
a word to Mr. Lopez about Silverbridge, but it was not long before she did say a word. On that
same day she found herself alone with him in the garden,--or so much alone as to be able to
speak with him privately. He had certainly made the best use of his time since he had been
at the Castle, having secured the good-will of many of the ladies, and the displeasure of most
of the men. "You have never been in Parliament, I think," said the Duchess.

"I have never even tried to get there."

"Perhaps you dislike the idea of that kind of life."

"No, indeed," he said. "So far from it, that I regard it as the highest kind of life there
is in England. A seat in Parliament gives a man a status in this country which it has never
done elsewhere."

"Then why don't you try it?"

"Because I've got into another groove. I've become essentially a city man,--one of those who
take up the trade of making money generally." 

The depilation is effected with two fibre threads twisted round each
other, the hair to be extracted being inserted between the threads.

Anyone can do this, and there is no ceremony connected with it.

Nose-piercing. The septa of the noses of both men and women are pierced
at or after the age of 15 or 18, and either before or after marriage.

This is done for men by men, and for women by women.

There is no special person whose duty it is to do it, but he or she must be one who knows the
incantations which are required. There is no restriction as to diet or otherwise placed upon
the operator prior to the operation, but there is a day's food restriction
imposed upon the person whose nose is to be pierced.

Two instruments are used for the operation, one being a piercing instrument made of pig bone and
sharpened, and the other being a small wooden plug, also sharpened. The operator first visibly,
but silently, engages in two incantations, during the former of which he holds up the thumb
and first finger of his right hand, and during the latter of which he holds up the two instruments.
He then with the thumb and first finger of his right hand holds the
septum of the nose of the person to be operated upon, whom I will
call the "patient," and with the left hand pierces the septum with
the bone instrument.

He next inserts the wooden plug into the hole, so as to make it larger,
and leaves the plug there.

Then he takes a blade of grass, which he also inserts through the hole, by the side of the
plug, and, holding the grass by the two ends, he makes it rotate round and round the plug. This
is a painful process, which frequently causes tears and cries from the patient. He then probably
goes through the same process with various other patients, as it is the custom to operate on
several persons at the same time.

The patients are then all lodged in houses built for the purpose,
one house being for men and one for women.

 "You may have heard of the family," he said.

"I have heard of the Whartons of course, and know that there is a baronet,--but I know nothing
more of them. He is not a man of large property, I think."

"My Miss Wharton,--the one I would fain call mine,--is the daughter of a London barrister.
He, I believe, is rich."

"Then she will be an heiress."

"I suppose so;--but that consideration has had no weight with me. I have always regarded myself
as the architect of my own fortune, and have no wish to owe my material comfort to a wife."

"Sheer love!" suggested the Duchess.

"Yes, I think so. It's very ridiculous; is it not?"

"And why does the rich barrister object?"

"The rich barrister, Duchess, is an out and out old Tory, who thinks that his daughter ought
to marry no one but an English Tory. I am not exactly that."

"A man does not hamper his daughter in these days by politics, when she is falling in love."

"There are other cognate reasons. He does not like a foreigner. Now I am an Englishman, but
I have a foreign name. He does not think that a name so grandly Saxon as Wharton should be
changed to one so meanly Latin as Lopez."

"The lady does not object to the Latinity?"

"I fancy not."

"Or to the bearer of it?"

"Ah;--there I must not boast. But in simple truth there is only the father's ill-will between us."

"With plenty of money on both sides?" asked the Duchess. Lopez shrugged his shoulders. A shrug
at such a time may mean anything, but the Duchess took this shrug as signifying that the question
was so surely settled as to admit of no difficulty. "Then," said the Duchess, "the old gentleman
may as well give way at once. Of course his daughter will be too many for him." In this way
the Duchess of Omnium became the fast friend of Ferdinand Lopez.

CHAPTER XXII

St. James's Park

Towards the end of September Everett Wharton and Ferdinand Lopez were in town together, and
as no one else was in town,--so at least they both professed to say,--they saw a good deal
of each other. Lopez, as we know, had spent a portion of the preceding month at Gatherum Castle,
and had made good use of his time, but Everett Wharton had been less fortunate. He had been
a little cross with his father, and perhaps a little cross with all the Whartons generally,
who did not, he thought, make quite enough of him. In the event of "anything happening" to
that ne'er-do-well nephew, he himself would be the heir; and he reflected not unfrequently
that something very probably might happen to the nephew. He did not often see this particular
cousin, but he always heard of him as being drunk, overwhelmed with debt and difficulty, and
altogether in that position of life in which it is probable that something will "happen." There
was always of course the danger that the young man might marry and have a child;--but in the
meantime surely he, Everett Wharton, should have been as much thought of on the banks of the
Wye as Arthur Fletcher. He had been asked down to Wharton Hall,--but he had been asked in a
way which he had not thought to be flattering and had declined to go. Then there had been a
plan for joining Arthur Fletcher in a certain shooting, but that had failed in consequence
of a few words between himself and Arthur respecting Lopez. Arthur had wanted him to say that
Lopez was an unpardonable intruder,--but he had taken the part of Lopez, and therefore, when
the time came round, he had nothing to do with the shooting. He had stayed in town till the
middle of August, and had then started by himself across the continent with some keen intention
of studying German politics; but he had found perhaps that German politics do not manifest
themselves in the autumn, or that a foreign country cannot be well studied in solitude,--and
he had returned.

Late in the summer, just before his father and sister had left town, he had had some words
with the old barrister. There had been a few bills to be paid, and Everett's allowance had
been insufficient. It often was insufficient, and then ready money for his German tour was
absolutely necessary. Mr. Wharton might probably have said less about the money had not his
son accompanied his petition by a further allusion to Parliament. "There are some fellows at
last really getting themselves together at the Progress, and of course it will be necessary
to know who will be ready to come forward at the next general election."

"I think I know one who won't," said the father, "judging from the manner in which he seems
at present to manage his own money affairs." There was more severity in this than the old man
had intended, for he had often thought within his own bosom whether it would not be well that
he should encourage his son to stand for some seat. And the money that he had now been asked
to advance had not been very much,--not more, in truth, than he expected to be called upon
to pay in addition to the modest sum which he professed to allow his son. He was a rich man,
who was not in truth made unhappy by parting with his money. But there had been, he thought,
an impudence in the conjoint attack which it was his duty to punish. Therefore he had given
his son very little encouragement.

"Of course, sir, if you tell me that you are not inclined to pay anything beyond the allowance
you make me, there is an end of it."

"I rather think that you have just asked me to pay a considerable sum beyond your allowance,
and that I have consented." Everett argued the matter no further, but he permitted his mind
to entertain an idea that he was ill-used by his father. The time would come when he would
probably be heir not only to his father's money, but also to the Wharton title and the Wharton
property,--when his position in the country would really be, as he frequently told himself,
quite considerable. Was it possible that he should refrain from blaming his father for not
allowing him to obtain, early in life, that parliamentary education which would fit him to
be an ornament to the House of Commons, and a safeguard to his country in future years?

Now he and Lopez were at the Progress together, and they were almost the only men in the club.
Lopez was quite contented with his own present sojourn in London. He had not only been at Gatherum
Castle but was going there again. And then he had brilliant hopes before him,--so brilliant
that they began, he thought, to assume the shape of certainties. He had corresponded with the
Duchess, and he had gathered from her somewhat dubious words that the Duke would probably accede
to her wishes in the matter of Silverbridge. The vacancy had not yet been declared. Mr. Grey
was deterred, no doubt by certain high State purposes, from applying for the stewardship of
the Chiltern Hundreds, and thereby releasing himself from his seat in Parliament, and enabling
himself to perform, with a clear conscience, duties in a distant part of the world which he
did not feel to be compatible with that seat. The seekers after seats were, no doubt, already
on the track; but the Duchess had thought that as far as the Duke's good word went, it might
possibly be given in favour of Mr. Lopez. The happy aspirant had taken this to be almost as
good as a promise. There were also certain pecuniary speculations on foot, which could not
be kept quite quiet even in September, as to which he did not like to trust entirely to the
unaided energy of Mr. Sextus Parker, or to the boasted alliance of Mr. Mills Happerton. Sextus
Parker's whole heart and soul were now in the matter, but Mr. Mills Happerton, an undoubted
partner in Hunky and Sons, had blown a little coldly on the affair. But in spite of this Ferdinand
Lopez was happy. Was it probable that Mr. Wharton should continue his opposition to a marriage
which would make his daughter the wife of a member of Parliament and of a special friend of
the Duchess of Omnium?

He had said a word about his own prospects in reference to the marriage, but Everett had been
at first too full of his own affairs to attend much to a matter which was comparatively so
trifling. "Upon my word," he said, "I am beginning to feel angry with the governor, which is
a kind of thing I don't like at all."

"I can understand that when he's angry with you, you shouldn't like it."

"I don't mind that half so much. He'll come round. However unjust he may be now, at the moment,
he's the last man in the world to do an injustice in his will. I have thorough confidence in
him. But I find myself driven into hostility to him by a conviction that he won't let me take
any real step in life, till my life has been half frittered away."

"You're thinking of Parliament."

"Of course I am. I don't say you ain't an Englishman, but you are not quite enough of an Englishman
to understand what Parliament is to us."

"I hope to be,--some of these days," said Lopez.

"Perhaps you may. I won't say but what you may get yourself educated to it when you've been
married a dozen years to an English wife, and have half-a-dozen English children of your own.
But, in the meantime, look at my position. I am twenty-eight years old."

"I am four years your senior."

"It does not matter a straw to you," continued Everett. "But a few years are everything with
me. I have a right to suppose that I may be able to represent the county,--say in twenty years.
I shall probably then be the head of the family and a rich man. Consider what a parliamentary
education would be to me! And then it is just the life for which I have laid myself out, and
in which I could make myself useful. You don't sympathise with me, but you might understand me."

"I do both. I think of going into the House myself."

"You!"

"Yes; I do."

"You must have changed your ideas very much then within the last month or two."

"I have changed my ideas. My one chief object in life is, as you know, to marry your sister;
and if I were a Member of Parliament I think that some difficulties would be cleared away."

"But there won't be an election for the next three years at any rate," said Everett Wharton,
staring at his friend. "You don't mean to keep Emily waiting for a dissolution?"

"There are occasional vacancies," said Lopez.

"Is there a chance of anything of that kind falling in your way?"

"I think there is. I can't quite tell you all the particulars because other people are concerned,
but I don't think it improbable that I may be in the House before--; well, say in three months'
time."

"In three months' time!" exclaimed Everett, whose mouth was watering at the prospects of his
friend. "That is what comes from going to stay with the Prime Minister, I suppose." Lopez shrugged
his shoulders. "Upon my word I can't understand you," continued the other. "It was only the
other day you were arguing in this very room as to the absurdity of a parliamentary career,--pitching
into me, by George, like the very mischief, because I had said something in its favour,--and
now you are going in for it yourself in some sort of mysterious way that a fellow can't understand."
It was quite clear that Everett Wharton thought himself ill-used by his friend's success.

"There is no mystery;--only I can't tell people's names."

"What is the borough?"

"I cannot tell you that at present."

"Are you sure there will be a vacancy?"

"I think I am sure."

"And that you will be invited to stand?"

"I am not sure of that."

"Of course anybody can stand whether invited or not."

"If I come forward for this place I shall do so on the very best interest. Don't mention it.
I tell you because I already regard my connection with you as being so close as to call upon
me to tell you anything of that kind."

"And yet you do not tell me the details."

"I tell you all that I can in honour tell."

Everett Wharton certainly felt aggrieved by his friend's news, and plainly showed that he did
so. It was so hard that if a stray seat in Parliament were going a-begging, it should be thrown
in the way of this man who didn't care for it, and couldn't use it to any good purpose, instead
of in his own way! Why should any one want Ferdinand Lopez to be in Parliament? Ferdinand Lopez
had paid no attention to the great political questions of the Commonwealth. He knew nothing
of Labour and Capital, of Unions, Strikes, and Lock-outs. But because he was rich, and, by
being rich, had made his way among great people, he was to have a seat in Parliament! As for
the wealth, it might be at his own command also,--if only his father could be got to see the
matter in a proper light. And as for the friendship of great people,--Prime Ministers, Duchesses,
and such like,--Everett Wharton was quite confident that he was at any rate as well qualified
to shine among them as Ferdinand Lopez. He was of too good a nature to be stirred to injustice
against his friend by the soreness of this feeling. He did not wish to rob his friend of his
wealth, of his Duchesses, or of his embryo seat in Parliament. But for the moment there came
upon him a doubt whether Ferdinand was so very clever, or so peculiarly gentlemanlike or in
any way very remarkable, and almost a conviction that he was very far from being good-looking.

They dined together, and quite late in the evening they strolled out into St. James's Park.
There was nobody in London, and there was nothing for either of them to do, and therefore they
agreed to walk round the park, dark and gloomy as they knew the park would be. Lopez had seen
and had quite understood the bitterness of spirit by which Everett had been oppressed, and
with that peculiarly imperturbable good humour which made a part of his character bore it all,
even with tenderness. He was a man, as are many of his race, who could bear contradictions,
unjust suspicions, and social ill-treatment without a shadow of resentment, but who, if he
had a purpose, could carry it out without a shadow of a scruple. Everett Wharton had on this
occasion made himself very unpleasant, and Lopez had borne with him as an angel would hardly
have done; but should Wharton ever stand in his friend's way, his friend would sacrifice him
without compunction. As it was, Lopez bore with him, simply noting in his own mind that Everett
Wharton was a greater ass than he had taken him to be. It was Wharton's idea that they should
walk round the park, and Lopez for a time had discouraged the suggestion. "It is a wretchedly
dark place at night, and you don't know whom you may meet there."

"You don't mean to say that you are afraid to walk round St. James's Park with me, because
it's dark!" said Wharton.

"I certainly should be afraid by myself, but I don't know that I am afraid with you. But what's
the good?"

"It's better than sitting here doing nothing, without a soul to speak to. I've already smoked
half-a-dozen cigars, till I'm so muddled I don't know what I'm about. It's so hot one can't
walk in the day, and this is just the time for exercise." Lopez yielded, being willing to yield
in almost anything at present to the brother of Emily Wharton; and, though the thing seemed
to him to be very foolish, they entered the park by St. James's Palace, and started to walk
round it, turning to the right and going in front of Buckingham Palace. As they went on Wharton
still continued his accusation against his father and said also some sharp things against Lopez
himself, till his companion began to think that the wine he had drunk had been as bad as the
cigars. "I can't understand your wanting to go into Parliament," he said. "What do you know
about it?"

"If I get there, I can learn like anybody else, I suppose."

"Half of those who go there don't learn. They are, as it were, born to it, and they do very
well to support this party or that."

"And why shouldn't I support this party,--or that?"

"I don't suppose you know which party you would support,--except that you'd vote for the Duke,
if, as I suppose, you are to get in under the Duke's influence. If I went into the House I
should go with a fixed and settled purpose of my own."

"I'm not there yet," said Lopez, willing to drop the subject.

"It will be a great expense to you, and will stand altogether in the way of your profession.
As far as Emily is concerned, I should think my father would be dead against it."

"Then he would be unreasonable."

"Not at all, if he thought you would injure your professional prospects. It is a d---- piece
of folly; that's the long and the short of it."

This certainly was very uncivil, and it almost made Lopez angry. But he had made up his mind
that his friend was a little the worse for the wine he had drunk, and therefore he did not
resent even this. "Never mind politics and Parliament now," he said, "but let us get home.
I am beginning to be sick of this. It's so awfully dark, and whenever I do hear a step, I think
somebody is coming to rob us. Let us get on a bit."

"What the deuce are you afraid of?" said Everett. They had then come up the greater part of
the length of the Birdcage Walk, and the lights at Storey's Gate were just visible, but the
road on which they were then walking was very dark. The trees were black over their head, and
not a step was heard near them. At this time it was just midnight. Now, certainly, among the
faults which might be justly attributed to Lopez, personal cowardice could not be reckoned.
On this evening he had twice spoken of being afraid, but the fear had simply been that which
ordinary caution indicates; and his object had been that of hindering Wharton in the first
place from coming into the park, and then of getting him out of it as quickly as possible.

"Come along," said Lopez.

"By George, you are in a blue funk," said the other. "I can hear your teeth chattering." Lopez,
who was beginning to be angry, walked on and said nothing. It was too absurd, he thought, for
real anger, but he kept a little in front of Wharton, intending to show that he was displeased.
"You had better run away at once," said Wharton.

"Upon my word, I shall begin to think that you're tipsy," said Lopez.

"Tipsy!" said the other. "How dare you say such a thing to me? You never in your life saw me
in the least altered by any thing I had drunk."

Lopez knew that at any rate this was untrue. "I've seen you as drunk as Cloe before now," said he.

"That's a lie," said Everett Wharton.

"Come, Wharton," said the other, "do not disgrace yourself by conduct such as that. Something
has put you out, and you do not know what you are saying. I can hardly imagine that you should
wish to insult me."

"It was you who insulted me. You said I was drunk. When you said it you knew it was untrue."

Lopez walked on a little way in silence, thinking over this most absurd quarrel. Then he turned
round and spoke. "This is all the greatest nonsense I ever heard in the world. I'll go on and
go to bed, and to-morrow morning you'll think better of it. But pray remember that under no
circumstances should you call a man a liar, unless on cool consideration you are determined
to quarrel with him for lying, and determined also to see the quarrel out."

"I am quite ready to see this quarrel out."

"Good night," said Lopez, starting off at a quick pace. They were then close to the turn in
the park, and Lopez went on till he had nearly reached the park front of the new offices. As
he had walked he had listened to the footfall of his friend, and after a while had perceived,
or had thought that he had perceived, that the sound was discontinued. It seemed to him that
Wharton had altogether lost his senses;--the insult to himself had been so determined and so
absolutely groundless! He had striven his best to conquer the man's ill-humour by good-natured
forbearance, and had only suggested that Wharton was perhaps tipsy in order to give him some
excuse. But if his companion were really drunk, as he now began to think, could it be right
to leave him unprotected in the park? The man's manner had been strange the whole evening,
but there had been no sign of the effect of wine till after they had left the club. But Lopez
had heard of men who had been apparently sober, becoming drunk as soon as they got out into
the air. It might have been so in this case, though Wharton's voice and gait had not been those
of a drunken man. At any rate, he would turn back and look after him; and as he did turn back,
he resolved that whatever Wharton might say to him on this night he would not notice. He was
too wise to raise a further impediment to his marriage by quarrelling with Emily's brother.

As soon as he paused he was sure that he heard footsteps behind him which were not those of
Everett Wharton. Indeed, he was sure that he heard the footsteps of more than one person. He
stood still for a moment to listen, and then he distinctly heard a rush and a scuffle. He ran
back to the spot at which he had left his friend, and at first thought that he perceived a
mob of people in the dusk. But as he got nearer, he saw that there were a man and two women.
Wharton was on the ground, on his back, and the man was apparently kneeling on his neck and
head while the women were rifling his pockets. Lopez, hardly knowing how he was acting, was
upon them in a moment, flying in the first place at the man, who had jumped up to meet him
as he came. He received at once a heavy blow on his head from some weapon, which, however,
his hat so far stopped as to save him from being felled or stunned, and then he felt another
blow from behind on the ear, which he afterwards conceived to have been given him by one of
the women. But before he could well look about him, or well know how the whole thing had happened,
the man and the two women had taken to their legs, and Wharton was standing on his feet leaning
against the iron railings.

The whole thing had occupied a very short space of time, and yet the effects were very grave.
At the first moment Lopez looked round and endeavoured to listen, hoping that some assistance
might be near,--some policeman, or, if not that, some wanderer by night who might be honest
enough to help him. But he could hear or see no one, In this condition of things it was not
possible for him to pursue the ruffians, as he could not leave his friend leaning against the
park rails. It was at once manifest to him that Wharton had been much hurt, or at any rate
incapacitated for immediate exertion, by the blows he had received;--and as he put his hand
up to his own head, from which in the scuffle his hat had fallen, he was not certain that he
was not severely hurt himself. Lopez could see that Wharton was very pale, that his cravat
had been almost wrenched from his neck by pressure, that his waistcoat was torn open and the
front of his shirt soiled,--and he could see also that a fragment of the watch-chain was hanging
loose, showing that the watch was gone. "Are you hurt much?" he said, coming close up and taking
a tender hold of his friend's arm. Wharton smiled and shook his head, but spoke not a word.
He was in truth more shaken, stunned, and bewildered than actually injured. The ruffian's fist
had been at his throat, twisting his cravat, and for half a minute he had felt that he was
choked. As he had struggled while one woman pulled at his watch and the other searched for
his purse,--struggling, alas! unsuccessfully,--the man had endeavoured to quiet him by kneeling
on his chest, strangling him with his own necktie, and pressing hard on his gullet. It is a
treatment which, after a few seconds of vigorous practice, is apt to leave the patient for
a while disconcerted and unwilling to speak. "Say a word if you can," whispered Lopez, looking
into the other man's face with anxious eyes.

At the moment there came across Wharton's mind a remembrance that he had behaved very badly
to his friend, and some sort of vague misty doubt whether all this evil had not befallen him
because of his misconduct. But he knew at the same time that Lopez was not responsible for
the evil, and dismayed as he had been, still he recalled enough of the nature of the struggle
in which he had been engaged, to be aware that Lopez had befriended him gallantly. He could
not even yet speak; but he saw the blood trickling down his friend's temple and forehead, and
lifting up his hand, touched the spot with his fingers. Lopez also put his hand up, and drew
it away covered with blood. "Oh," said he, "that does not signify in the least. I got a knock,
I know, and I am afraid I have lost my hat, but I'm not hurt."

"Oh, dear!" The word was uttered with a low sigh. Then there was a pause, during which Lopez
supported the sufferer. "I thought that it was all over with me at one moment."

"You will be better now."

"Oh, yes. My watch is gone!"

"I fear it is," said Lopez.

"And my purse," said Wharton, collecting his strength together sufficiently to search for his
treasures. "I had eight £5 notes in it."

"Never mind your money or your watch if your bones are not broken."

"It's a bore all the same to lose every shilling that one has." Then they walked very slowly
away towards the steps at the Duke of York's column, Wharton regaining his strength as he went,
but still able to progress but leisurely. Lopez had not found his hat, and, being covered with
blood, was, as far as appearances went, in a worse plight than the other. At the foot of the
steps they met a policeman, to whom they told their story, and who, as a matter of course,
was filled with an immediate desire to arrest them both. To the policeman's mind it was most
distressing that a bloody-faced man without a hat, with a companion almost too weak to walk,
should not be conveyed to a police-station. But after ten minutes' parley, during which Wharton
sat on the bottom step and Lopez explained all the circumstances, he consented to get them
a cab, to take their address, and then to go alone to the station and make his report. That
the thieves had got off with their plunder was only too manifest. Lopez took the injured man
home to the house in Manchester Square, and then returned in the same cab, hatless, to his
own lodgings.

As he returned he applied his mind to think how he could turn the events of the evening to
his own use. He did not believe that Everett Wharton was severely hurt. Indeed there might
be a question whether in the morning his own injury would not be the most severe. But the immediate
effect on the flustered and despoiled unfortunate one had been great enough to justify Lopez
in taking strong steps if strong steps could in any way benefit himself. Would it be best to
publish this affair on the house-tops, or to bury it in the shade, as nearly as it might be
buried? He had determined in his own mind that his friend certainly had been tipsy. In no other
way could his conduct be understood. And a row with a tipsy man at midnight in the park is
not, at first sight, creditable. But it could be made to have a better appearance if told by
himself, than if published from other quarters. The old housekeeper at Manchester Square must
know something about it, and would, of course, tell what she knew, and the loss of the money
and the watch must in all probability be made known. Before he had reached his own door he
had quite made up his mind that he himself would tell the story after his own fashion.

And he told it, before he went to bed that night. He washed the blood from his face and head,
and cut away a part of the clotted hair, and then wrote a letter to old Mr. Wharton at Wharton
Hall. And between three and four o'clock in the morning he went out and posted his letter in
the nearest pillar, so that it might go down by the day mail and certainly be preceded by no
other written tidings. The letter which he sent was as follows:--

   DEAR MR. WHARTON,

   I regret to have to send you an account of a rather
   serious accident which has happened to Everett. I am now
   writing at 3 A.M., having just taken him home, and it
   occurred at about midnight. You may be quite sure that
   there is no danger or I should have advertised you by
   telegram.

   There is nothing doing in town, and therefore, as the
   night was fine, we, very foolishly, agreed to walk round
   St. James's Park late after dinner. It is a kind of thing
   that nobody does;--but we did it. When we had nearly got
   round I was in a hurry, whereas Everett was for strolling
   slowly, and so I went on before him. But I was hardly two
   hundred yards in front of him before he was attacked by
   three persons, a man and two women. The man I presume
   came upon him from behind, but he has not sufficiently
   collected his thoughts to remember exactly what occurred.
   I heard the scuffle and of course turned back,--and was
   luckily in time to get up before he was seriously hurt.
   I think the man would otherwise have strangled him. I am
   sorry to say that he lost both his watch and purse.

   He undoubtedly has been very much shaken, and altogether
   "knocked out of time," as people say. Excuse the phrase,
   because I think it will best explain what I want you to
   understand. The man's hand at his throat must have stopped
   his breathing for some seconds. He certainly has received
   no permanent injury, but I should not wonder if he should
   be unwell for some days. I tell you all exactly as it
   occurred, as it strikes me that you may like to run up to
   town for a day just to look at him. But you need not do so
   on the score of any danger. Of course he will see a doctor
   to-morrow. There did not seem to be any necessity for
   calling one up to-night. We did give notice to the police
   as we were coming home, but I fear the ruffians had ample
   time for escape. He was too weak, and I was too fully
   employed with him, to think of pursuing them at the time.

   Of course he is at Manchester Square.

   Most faithfully yours,

   FERDINAND LOPEZ.

He did not say a word about Emily, but he knew that Emily would see the letter and would perceive
that he had been the means of preserving her brother; and, in regard to the old barrister himself,
Lopez thought that the old man could not but feel grateful for his conduct. He had in truth
behaved very well to Everett. He had received a heavy blow on the head in young Wharton's defence,--of
which he was determined to make good use, though he had thought it expedient to say nothing
about the blow in his letter. Surely it would all help. Surely the paternal mind would be softened
towards him when the father should be made to understand how great had been his service to
the son. That Everett would make little of what had been done for him he did not in the least
fear. Everett Wharton was sometimes silly but was never ungenerous.

In spite of his night's work Lopez was in Manchester Square before nine on the following morning,
and on the side of his brow he bore a great patch of black plaster. "My head is very thick,"
he said laughing, when Everett asked after his wound. "But it would have gone badly with me
if the ruffian had struck an inch lower. I suppose my hat saved me, though I remember very
little. Yes, old fellow, I have written to your father, and I think he will come up. It was
better that it should be so."

"There is nothing the matter with me," said Everett.

"One didn't quite know last night whether there was or no. At any rate his coming won't hurt
you. It's always well to have your banker near you, when your funds are low."

Then after a pause Everett made his apology,--"I know I made a great ass of myself last night."

"Don't think about it."

"I used a word I shouldn't have used, and I beg your pardon."

"Not another word, Everett. Between you and me things can't go wrong. We love each other too well."

CHAPTER XXIII

Surrender

The letter given in the previous chapter was received at Wharton Hall late in the evening of
the day on which it was written, and was discussed among all the Whartons that night. Of course
there was no doubt as to the father's going up to town on the morrow. The letter was just such
a letter as would surely make a man run to his son's bedside. Had the son written himself it
would have been different; but the fact that the letter had come from another man seemed to
be evidence that the poor sufferer could not write. Perhaps the urgency with which Lopez had
sent off his dispatch, getting his account of the fray ready for the very early day mail, though
the fray had not taken place till midnight, did not impress them sufficiently when they accepted
this as evidence of Everett's dangerous condition. At this conference at Wharton very little
was said about Lopez, but there was a general feeling that he had behaved well. "It was very
odd that they should have parted in the park," said Sir Alured. "But very lucky that they should
not have parted sooner," said John Fletcher. If a grain of suspicion against Lopez might have
been set afloat in their minds by Sir Alured's suggestion, it was altogether dissipated by
John Fletcher's reply;--for everybody there knew that John Fletcher carried common sense for
the two families. Of course they all hated Ferdinand Lopez, but nothing could be extracted
from the incident, as far as its details were yet known to them, which could be turned to his
injury.

While they sat together discussing the matter in the drawing-room Emily Wharton hardly said
a word. She uttered a little shriek when the account of the affair was first read to her, and
then listened with silent attention to what was said around her. When there had seemed for
a moment to be a doubt,--or rather a question, for there had been no doubt,--whether her father
should go at once to London, she had spoken just a word. "Of course you will go, papa." After
that, she said nothing till she came to him in his own room. "Of course I will go with you
to-morrow, papa."

"I don't think that will be necessary."

"Oh, yes. Think how wretched I should be."

"I would telegraph to you immediately."

"And I shouldn't believe the telegraph. Don't you know how it always is? Besides we have been
more than the usual time. We were to go to town in ten days, and you would not think of returning
to fetch me. Of course I will go with you. I have already begun to pack my things, and Jane
is now at it." Her father, not knowing how to oppose her, yielded, and Emily before she went
to bed had made the ladies of the house aware that she also intended to start the next morning
at eight o'clock.

During the first part of the journey very little was said between Mr. Wharton and Emily. There
were other persons in the carriage, and she, though she had determined in some vague way that
she would speak some words to her father before she reached their own house, had still wanted
time to resolve what those words should be. But before she had reached Gloucester she had made
up her mind, and going on from Gloucester she found herself for a time alone with her father.
She was sitting opposite to him, and after conversing for a while she touched his knee with
her hand. "Papa," she said, "I suppose I must now have to meet Mr. Lopez in Manchester Square?"

"Why should you have to meet Mr. Lopez in Manchester Square?"

"Of course he will come there to see Everett. After what has occurred you can hardly forbid
him the house. He has saved Everett's life."

"I don't know that he has done anything of the kind," said Mr. Wharton, who was vacillating
between different opinions. He did in his heart believe that the Portuguese whom he so hated
had saved his son from the thieves, and he also had almost come to the conviction that he must
give his daughter to the man,--but at the same time he could not as yet bring himself to abandon
his opposition to the marriage.

"Perhaps you think the story is not true."

"I don't doubt the story in the least. Of course one man sticks to another in such an affair,
and I have no doubt that Mr. Lopez behaved as any English gentleman would."

"Any English gentleman, papa, would have to come afterwards and see the friend he had saved.
Don't you think so?"

"Oh, yes;--he might call."

"And Mr. Lopez will have an additional reason for calling,--and I know he will come. Don't
you think he will come?"

"I don't want to think anything about it," said the father.

"But I want you to think about it, papa. Papa, I know you are not indifferent to my happiness."

"I hope you know it."

"I do know it. I am quite sure of it. And therefore I don't think you ought to be afraid to
talk to me about what must concern my happiness so greatly. As far as my own self and my own
will are concerned I consider myself given away to Mr. Lopez already. Nothing but his marrying
some other woman,--or his death,--would make me think of myself otherwise than as belonging
to him. I am not a bit ashamed of owning my love--to you; nor to him, if the opportunity were
allowed me. I don't think there should be concealment about anything so important between people
who are dear to each other. I have told you that I will do whatever you bid me about him. If
you say that I shall not speak to him or see him, I will not speak to him or see him--willingly.
You certainly need not be afraid that I should marry him without your leave."

"I am not in the least afraid of it."

"But I think you should think over what you are doing. And I am quite sure of this,--that you
must tell me what I am to do in regard to receiving Mr. Lopez in Manchester Square." Mr. Wharton
listened attentively to what his daughter said to him, shaking his head from time to time as
though almost equally distracted by her passive obedience and by her passionate protestations
of love; but he said nothing. When she had completed her supplication he threw himself back
in his seat and after a while took his book. It may be doubted whether he read much, for the
question as to his girl's happiness was quite as near his heart as she could wish it to be.

It was late in the afternoon before they reached Manchester Square, and they were both happy
to find that they were not troubled by Mr. Lopez at the first moment. Everett was at home and
in bed, and had not indeed as yet recovered from the effect of the man's knuckles at his windpipe;
but he was well enough to assure his father and sister that they need not have disturbed themselves
or hurried their return from Herefordshire on his account. "To tell the truth," said he, "Ferdinand
Lopez was hurt worse than I was."

"He said nothing of being hurt himself," said Mr. Wharton.

"How was he hurt?" asked Emily in the quietest, stillest voice.

"The fact is," said Everett, beginning to tell the whole story after his own fashion, "if he
hadn't been at hand then, there would have been an end of me. We had separated, you know,--"

"What could make two men separate from each other in the darkness of St. James's Park?"

"Well,--to tell the truth, we had quarrelled. I had made an ass of myself. You need not go
into that any further, except that you should know that it was all my fault. Of course it wasn't
a real quarrel,"--when he said this Emily, who was sitting close to his bed-head, pressed his
arm under the clothes with her hand,--"but I had said something rough, and he had gone on just
to put an end to it."

"It was uncommonly foolish," said old Wharton. "It was very foolish going round the park at
all at that time of night."

"No doubt, sir;--but it was my doing. And if he had not gone with me, I should have gone alone."
Here there was another pressure. "I was a little low in spirits, and wanted the walk."

"But how is he hurt?" asked the father.

"The man who was kneeling on me and squeezing the life out of me jumped up when he heard Lopez
coming, and struck him over the head with a bludgeon. I heard the blow, though I was pretty
well done for at the time myself. I don't think they hit me, but they got something round my
neck, and I was half strangled before I knew what they were doing. Poor Lopez bled horribly,
but he says he is none the worse for it." Here there was another little pressure under the
bed-clothes; for Emily felt that her brother was pleading for her in every word that he said.

About ten on the following morning Lopez came and asked for Mr. Wharton. He was shown into
the study, where he found the old man, and at once began to give his account of the whole concern
in an easy, unconcerned manner. He had the large black patch on the side of his head, which
had been so put on as almost to become him. But it was so conspicuous as to force a question
respecting it from Mr. Wharton. "I am afraid you got rather a sharp knock yourself, Mr. Lopez?"

"I did get a knock, certainly;--but the odd part of it is that I knew nothing about it till
I found the blood in my eyes after they had decamped. But I lost my hat, and there is a rather
long cut just above the temple. It hasn't done me the slightest harm. The worst of it was that
they got off with Everett's watch and money."

"Had he much money?"

"Forty pounds!" And Lopez shook his head, thereby signifying that forty pounds at the present
moment was more than Everett Wharton could afford to lose. Upon the whole he carried himself
very well, ingratiating himself with the father, raising no question about the daughter, and
saying as little as possible of himself. He asked whether he could go up and see his friend,
and of course was allowed to do so. A minute before he entered the room Emily left it. They
did not see each other. At any rate he did not see her. But there was a feeling with both of
them that the other was close,--and there was something present to them, almost amounting to
conviction, that the accident of the park robbery would be good for them.

"He certainly did save Everett's life," Emily said to her father the next day.

"Whether he did or not, he did his best," said Mr. Wharton.

"When one's dearest relation is concerned," said Emily, "and when his life has been saved,
one feels that one has to be grateful even if it has been an accident. I hope he knows, at
any rate, that I am grateful."

The old man had not been a week in London before he knew that he had absolutely lost the game.
Mrs. Roby came back to her house round the corner, ostensibly with the object of assisting
her relatives in nursing Everett,--a purpose for which she certainly was not needed; but, as
the matter progressed, Mr. Wharton was not without suspicion that her return had been arranged
by Ferdinand Lopez. She took upon herself, at any rate, to be loud in the praise of the man
who had saved the life of her "darling nephew,"--and to see that others also should be loud
in his praise. In a little time all London had heard of the affair, and it had been discussed
out of London. Down at Gatherum Castle the matter had been known, or partly known,--but the
telling of it had always been to the great honour and glory of the hero. Major Pountney had
almost broken his heart over it, and Captain Gunner, writing to his friend from the Curragh,
had asserted his knowledge that it was all a "got-up thing" between the two men. The "Breakfast
Table" and the "Evening Pulpit" had been loud in praise of Lopez; but the "People's Banner,"
under the management of Mr. Quintus Slide, had naturally thrown much suspicion on the incident
when it became known to the Editor that Ferdinand Lopez had been entertained by the Duke and
Duchess of Omnium. "We have always felt some slight doubts as to the details of the affair
said to have happened about a fortnight ago, just at midnight, in St. James's Park. We should
be glad to know whether the policemen have succeeded in tracing any of the stolen property,
or whether any real attempt to trace it has been made." This was one of the paragraphs, and
it was hinted still more plainly afterwards that Everett Wharton, being short of money, had
arranged the plan with the view of opening his father's purse. But the general effect was certainly
serviceable to Lopez. Emily Wharton did believe him to be a hero. Everett was beyond measure
grateful to him,--not only for having saved him from the thieves, but also for having told
nothing of his previous folly. Mrs. Roby always alluded to the matter as if, for all coming
ages, every Wharton ought to acknowledge that gratitude to a Lopez was the very first duty
of life. The old man felt the absurdity of much of this, but still it affected him. When Lopez
came he could not be rough to the man who had done a service to his son. And then he found
himself compelled to do something. He must either take his daughter away, or he must yield.
But his power of taking his daughter away seemed to be less than it had been. There was an
air of quiet, unmerited suffering about her, which quelled him. And so he yielded.

It was after this fashion. Whether affected by the violence of the attack made on him, or from
other cause, Everett had been unwell after the affair, and had kept his room for a fortnight.
During this time Lopez came to see him daily, and daily Emily Wharton had to take herself out
of the man's way, and hide herself from the man's sight. This she did with much tact and with
lady-like quietness, but not without an air of martyrdom, which cut her father to the quick.
"My dear," he said to her one evening, as she was preparing to leave the drawing-room on hearing
his knock, "stop and see him if you like it."

"Papa!"

"I don't want to make you wretched. If I could have died first, and got out of the way, perhaps
it would have been better."

"Papa, you will kill me if you speak in that way! If there is anything to say to him, do you
say it." And then she escaped.

Well! It was an added bitterness, but no doubt it was his duty. If he did intend to consent
to the marriage, it certainly was for him to signify that consent to the man. It would not
be sufficient that he should get out of the way and leave his girl to act for herself as though
she had no friend in the world. The surrender which he had made to his daughter had come from
a sudden impulse at the moment, but it could not now be withdrawn. So he stood out on the staircase,
and when Lopez came up on his way to Everett's bedroom, he took him by the arm and led him
into the drawing-room. "Mr. Lopez," he said, "you know that I have not been willing to welcome
you into my house as a son-in-law. There are reasons on my mind,--perhaps prejudices,--which
are strong against it. They are as strong now as ever. But she wishes it, and I have the utmost
reliance on her constancy."

"So have I," said Lopez.

"Stop a moment, if you please, sir. In such a position a father's thought is only as to his
daughter's happiness and prosperity. It is not his own that he should consider. I hear you
well spoken of in the outer world, and I do not know that I have a right to demand of my daughter
that she should tear you from her affections, because--because you are not just such as I would
have her husband to be. You have my permission to see her." Then, before Lopez could say a
word, he left the room, and took his hat and hurried away to his club.

As he went he was aware that he had made no terms at all;--but then he was inclined to think
that no terms should be made. There seemed to be a general understanding that Lopez was doing
well in the world,--in a profession of the working of which Mr. Wharton himself knew absolutely
nothing. He had a large fortune at his own bestowal,--intended for his daughter,--which would
have been forthcoming at the moment and paid down on the nail, had she married Arthur Fletcher.
The very way in which the money should be invested and tied up and made to be safe and comfortable
to the Fletcher-cum-Wharton interests generally, had been fully settled among them. But now
this other man, this stranger, this Portuguese, had entered in upon the inheritance. But the
stranger, the Portuguese, must wait. Mr. Wharton knew himself to be an old man. She was his
child, and he would not wrong her. But she should have her money closely settled upon herself
on his death,--and on her children, should she then have any. It should be done by his will.
He would say nothing about money to Lopez, and if Lopez should, as was probable, ask after
his daughter's fortune, he would answer to this effect. Thus he almost resolved that he would
give his daughter to the man without any inquiry as to the man's means. The thing had to be
done, and he would take no further trouble about it. The comfort of his life was gone. His
home would no longer be a home to him. His daughter could not now be his companion. The sooner
that death came to him the better, but till death should come he must console himself as well
as he could by playing whist at the Eldon. It was after this fashion that Mr. Wharton thought
of the coming marriage between his daughter and her lover.

"I have your father's consent to marry your sister," said Ferdinand immediately on entering
Everett's room.

"I knew it must come soon," said the invalid.

"I cannot say that it has been given in the most gracious manner,--but it has been given very
clearly. I have his express permission to see her. Those were his last words."

Then there was a sending of notes between the sick-room and the sick man's sister's room. Everett
wrote and Ferdinand wrote, and Emily wrote,--short lines each of them,--a few words scrawled.
The last from Emily was as follows:--"Let him go into the drawing-room. E. W." And so Ferdinand
went down, to meet his love,--to encounter her for the first time as her recognised future
husband and engaged lover. Passionate, declared, and thorough as was her love for this man,
the familiar intercourse between them had hitherto been very limited. There had been little,--we
may perhaps say none,--of that dalliance between them which is so delightful to the man and
so wondrous to the girl till custom has staled the edge of it. He had never sat with his arm
round her waist. He had rarely held even her hand in his for a happy recognised pause of a
few seconds. He had never kissed even her brow. And there she was now, standing before him,
all his own, absolutely given to him, with the fullest assurance of love on her part, and with
the declared consent of her father. Even he had been a little confused as he opened the door,--even
he, as he paused to close it behind him, had had to think how he would address her, and perhaps
had thought in vain. But he had not a moment for any thought after entering the room. Whether
it was his doing or hers he hardly knew; but she was in his arms, and her lips were pressed
to his, and his arm was tight round her waist, holding her close to his breast. It seemed as
though all that was wanting had been understood in a moment, and as though they had lived together
and loved for the last twelve months with the fullest mutual confidence. And she was the first
to speak:--

"Ferdinand, I am so happy! Are you happy?"

"My love; my darling!"

"You have never doubted me, I know,--since you first knew it."

"Doubted you, my girl!"

"That I would be firm! And now papa has been good to me, and how quickly one's sorrow is over.
I am yours, my love, for ever and ever. You knew it before, but I like to tell you. I will
be true to you in everything! Oh, my love!"

He had but little to say to her, but we know that for "lovers lacking matter, the cleanliest
shift is to kiss." In such moments silence charms, and almost any words are unsuitable except
those soft, bird-like murmurings of love which, sweet as they are to the ear, can hardly be
so written as to be sweet to the reader.

CHAPTER XXIV

The Marriage

The engagement was made in October, and the marriage took place in the latter part of November.
When Lopez pressed for an early day,--which he did very strongly,--Emily raised no difficulties
in the way of his wishes. The father, foolishly enough, would at first have postponed it, and
made himself so unpleasant to Lopez by his manner of doing this, that the bride was driven
to take her lover's part. As the thing was to be done, what was to be gained by delay? It could
not be made a joy to him; nor, looking at the matter as he looked at it, could he make a joy
even of her presence during the few intervening weeks. Lopez proposed to take his bride into
Italy for the winter months, and to stay there at any rate through December and January, alleging
that he must be back in town by the beginning of February;--and this was taken as a fair plea
for hastening the marriage.

When the matter was settled, he went back to Gatherum Castle, as he had arranged to do with
the Duchess, and managed to interest her Grace in all his proceedings. She promised that she
would call on his bride in town, and even went so far as to send her a costly wedding present.
"You are sure she has got money?" said the Duchess.

"I am not sure of anything," said Lopez,--"except this, that I do not mean to ask a single
question about it. If he says nothing to me about money, I certainly shall say nothing to him.
My feeling is this, Duchess; I am not marrying Miss Wharton for her money. The money, if there
be any, has had nothing to do with it. But of course it will be a pleasure added if it be there."
The Duchess complimented him, and told him that this was exactly as it should be.

But there was some delay as to the seat for Silverbridge. Mr. Grey's departure for Persia had
been postponed,--the Duchess thought only for a month or six weeks. The Duke, however, was
of opinion that Mr. Grey should not vacate his seat till the day of his going was at any rate
fixed. The Duke, moreover, had not made any promise of supporting his wife's favourite. "Don't
set your heart upon it too much, Mr. Lopez," the Duchess had said; "but you may be sure I will
not forget you." Then it had been settled between them that the marriage should not be postponed,
or the proposed trip to Italy abandoned, because of the probable vacancy at Silverbridge. Should
the vacancy occur during his absence, and should the Duke consent, he could return at once.
All this occurred in the last week or two before his marriage.

There were various little incidents which did not tend to make the happiness of Emily Wharton
complete. She wrote to her cousin Mary Wharton, and also to Lady Wharton;--and her father wrote
to Sir Alured; but the folk at Wharton Hall did not give in their adherence. Old Mrs. Fletcher
was still there, but John Fletcher had gone home to Longbarns. The obduracy of the Whartons
might probably be owing to these two accidents. Mrs. Fletcher declared aloud, as soon as the
tidings reached her, that she never wished to see or hear anything more of Emily Wharton. "She
must be a girl," said Mrs. Fletcher, "of an ingrained vulgar taste." Sir Alured, whose letter
from Mr. Wharton had been very short, replied as shortly to his cousin. "Dear Abel,--We all
hope that Emily will be happy, though of course we regret the marriage." The father, though
he had not himself written triumphantly, or even hopefully,--as fathers are wont to write when
their daughters are given away in marriage,--was wounded by the curtness and unkindness of
the baronet's reply, and at the moment declared to himself that he would never go to Herefordshire
any more. But on the following day there came a worse blow than Sir Alured's single line. Emily,
not in the least doubting but that her request would be received with the usual ready assent,
had asked Mary Wharton to be one of her bridesmaids. It must be supposed that the answer to
this was written, if not under the dictation, at any rate under the inspiration, of Mrs. Fletcher.
It was as follows:--

   DEAR EMILY,

   Of course we all wish you to be very happy in your
   marriage, but equally of course we are all disappointed.
   We had taught ourselves to think that you would have bound
   yourself closer with us down here, instead of separating
   yourself entirely from us.

   Under all the circumstances mamma thinks it would not be
   wise for me to go up to London as one of your bridesmaids.

   Your affectionate Cousin,

   MARY WHARTON.

This letter made poor Emily very angry for a day or two. "It is as unreasonable as it is ill-natured,"
she said to her brother.

"What else could you expect from a stiff-necked, prejudiced set of provincial ignoramuses?"

"What Mary says is not true. She did not think that I was going to bind myself closer with
them, as she calls it. I have been quite open with her, and have always told her that I could
not be Arthur Fletcher's wife."

"Why on earth should you marry to please them?"

"Because they don't know Ferdinand they are determined to insult him. It is an insult never
to mention even his name. And to refuse to come to my marriage! The world is wide and there
is room for us and them; but it makes me unhappy,--very unhappy,--that I should have to break
with them." And then the tears came into her eyes. It was intended, no doubt, to be a complete
breach, for not a single wedding present was sent from Wharton Hall to the bride. But from
Longbarns,--from John Fletcher himself,--there did come an elaborate coffee-pot, which, in
spite of its inutility and ugliness, was very valuable to Emily.

But there was one other of her old Herefordshire friends who received the tidings of her marriage
without quarrelling with her. She herself had written to her old lover.

   MY DEAR ARTHUR,

   There has been so much true friendship and affection
   between us that I do not like that you should hear
   from any one but myself the news that I am going to be
   married to Mr. Lopez. We are to be married on the 28th of
   November,--this day month.

   Yours affectionately,

   EMILY WHARTON.

To this she received a very short reply;--

   DEAR EMILY,

   I am as I always have been.

   Yours,

   A. F.

He sent her no present, nor did he say a word to her beyond this; but in her anger against
the Herefordshire people she never included Arthur Fletcher. She pored over the little note
a score of times, and wept over it, and treasured it up among her inmost treasures, and told
herself that it was a thousand pities. She could talk, and did talk, to Ferdinand about the
Whartons, and about old Mrs. Fletcher, and described to him the arrogance and the stiffness
and the ignorance of the Herefordshire squirearchy generally; but she never spoke to him of
Arthur Fletcher,--except in that one narrative of her past life, in which, girl-like, she told
her lover of the one other lover who had loved her.

But these things of course gave a certain melancholy to the occasion which perhaps was increased
by the season of the year,--by the November fogs, and by the emptiness and general sadness
of the town. And added to this was the melancholy of old Mr. Wharton himself. After he had
given his consent to the marriage he admitted a certain amount of intimacy with his son-in-law,
asking him to dinner, and discussing with him matters of general interest,--but never, in truth,
opening his heart to him. Indeed, how can any man open his heart to one whom he dislikes? At
best he can only pretend to open his heart, and even this Mr. Wharton would not do. And very
soon after the engagement Lopez left London and went to the Duke's place in the country. His
objects in doing this and his aspirations in regard to a seat in Parliament were all made known
to his future wife,--but he said not a word on the subject to her father; and she, acting under
his instructions, was equally reticent. "He will get to know me in time," he said to her, "and
his manner will be softened towards me. But till that time shall come, I can hardly expect
him to take a real interest in my welfare."

When Lopez left London not a word had been said between him and his father-in-law as to money.
Mr. Wharton was content with such silence, not wishing to make any promise as to immediate
income from himself, pretending to look at the matter as though he should say that, as his
daughter had made for herself her own bed, she must lie on it, such as it might be. And this
silence certainly suited Ferdinand Lopez at the time. To tell the truth of him,--though he
was not absolutely penniless, he was altogether propertyless. He had been speculating in money
without capital, and though he had now and again been successful, he had also now and again
failed. He had contrived that his name should be mentioned here and there with the names of
well-known wealthy commercial men, and had for the last twelve months made up a somewhat intimate
alliance with that very sound commercial man, Mr. Mills Happerton. But his dealings with Mr.
Sextus Parker were in truth much more confidential than those with Mr. Mills Happerton, and
at the present moment poor Sexty Parker was alternately between triumph and despair as things
went this way or that.

It was not, therefore, surprising that Ferdinand Lopez should volunteer no statements to the
old lawyer about money, and that he should make no inquiries. He was quite confident that Mr.
Wharton had the wealth which was supposed to belong to him, and was willing to trust to his
power of obtaining a fair portion of it as soon as he should in truth be Mr. Wharton's son-in-law.
Situated as he was, of course he must run some risk. And then, too, he had spoken of himself
with a grain of truth when he had told the Duchess that he was not marrying for money. Ferdinand
Lopez was not an honest man or a good man. He was a self-seeking, intriguing adventurer, who
did not know honesty from dishonesty when he saw them together. But he had at any rate this
good about him, that he did love the girl whom he was about to marry. He was willing to cheat
all the world,--so that he might succeed, and make a fortune, and become a big and a rich man;
but he did not wish to cheat her. It was his ambition now to carry her up with him, and he
thought how he might best teach her to assist him in doing so,--how he might win her to help
him in his cheating, especially in regard to her own father. For to himself, to his own thinking,
that which we call cheating was not dishonesty. To his thinking there was something bold, grand,
picturesque, and almost beautiful in the battle which such a one as himself must wage with
the world before he could make his way up in it. He would not pick a pocket, or turn a false
card, or, as he thought, forge a name. That which he did, and desired to do, took with him
the name of speculation. When he persuaded poor Sexty Parker to hazard his all, knowing well
that he induced the unfortunate man to believe what was false, and to trust what was utterly
untrustworthy, he did not himself think that he was going beyond the lines of fair enterprise.
Now, in his marriage, he had in truth joined himself to real wealth. [104] The year of Rome
836, A.D. 83.

[105] The eastern parts of Scotland, north of the Firth of Forth, where now are the counties
of Fife, Kinross, Perth, Angus, &c.

[106] This legion, which had been weakened by many engagements, was afterwards recruited, and
then called Gemina. Its station at this affair is supposed by Gordon to have been Lochore in Fifeshire.
Mr. Pennant rather imagines the place of the attack to have been Comerie in Perthshire.

[107] For an account of these people see Manners of the Germans, c. 32.

[108] Mr. Pennant had a present made him in Skye, of a brass sword and a denarius found in that
island. Might they not have been lost by some of these people in one of their landings?

[109] The Rhine.

[110] This extraordinary expedition, according to Dio, set out from
the western side of the island. They therefore must have coasted all
that part of Scotland, must have passed the intricate navigation through
the Hebrides, and the dangerous strait of Pentland Firth, and, after
coming round to the eastern side, must have been driven to the mouth
of the Baltic Sea, Here they lost their ships; and, in their attempt
to proceed homeward by land, were seized as pirates, part by the Suevi,
and the rest by the Frisii.

[111] The year of Rome 837, A.D. 84.

[112]
The scene of this celebrated engagement is by Gordon (Itin. Septent.)
supposed to be in Strathern, near a place now called the Kirk of Comerie,
where are the remains of two Roman camps.
And so I paid it."

"You have taken them, then?" said Mr. Wharton.

"Is it all settled?" said Emily, almost with disappointment.

"I have paid the money, and I have so far taken them. But it is by no means settled. You have
only to say you don't like them, and you shall never be asked to put your foot in them again."

"But I do like them," she whispered to him.

"The truth is, sir, that there is not the slightest difficulty in parting with them. So that
when the chance came in my way I thought it best to secure the thing. It had all to be done,
so to say, in an hour. My friend,--as far as he was a friend, for I don't know much about him,--wanted
the money and wanted to be off. So here they are, and Emily can do as she likes." Of course
the rooms were regarded from that moment as the home for the next twelve months of Mr. and
Mrs. Ferdinand Lopez.

And then they were married. The marriage was by no means a gay affair, the chief management
of it falling into the hands of Mrs. Dick Roby. Mrs. Dick indeed provided not only the breakfast,--or
saw rather that it was provided, for of course Mr. Wharton paid the bill,--but the four bridesmaids
also, and all the company. They were married in the church in Vere Street, then went back to
the house in Manchester Square, and within a couple of hours were on their road to Dover. Through
it all not a word was said about money. At the last moment,--when he was free from fear as
to any questions about his own affairs,--Lopez had hoped that the old man would say something.
"You will find so many thousand pounds at your bankers';"--or, "You may look to me for so many
hundreds a year." But there was not a word. The girl had come to him without the assurance
of a single shilling. In his great endeavour to get her he had been successful. As he thought
of this in the carriage, he pressed his arm close round her waist. If the worst were to come
to the worst, he would fight the world for her. But if this old man should be stubborn, close-fisted,
and absolutely resolved to bestow all his money upon his son because of this marriage,--ah!--how
should he be able to bear such a wrong as that?

Half-a-dozen times during that journey to Dover he resolved to think nothing further about
it, at any rate for a fortnight; and yet, before he reached Dover, he had said a word to her.
"I wonder what your father means to do about money? He never told you?"

"Not a word."

"It is very odd that he should never have said anything."

"Does it matter, dear?"

"Not in the least. But of course I have to talk about everything to you;--and it is odd."

CHAPTER XXV

The Beginning of the Honeymoon

On the morning of his marriage, before he went to the altar, Lopez made one or two resolutions
as to his future conduct. The first was that he would give himself a fortnight from his marriage
day in which he would not even think of money. He had made certain arrangements, in the course
of which he had caused Sextus Parker to stare with surprise and to sweat with dismay, but which
nevertheless were successfully concluded. Bills were drawn to run over to February, and ready
money to a moderate extent was forthcoming, and fiscal tranquillity was insured for a certain
short period. The confidence which Sextus Parker had once felt in his friend's own resources
was somewhat on the decline, but he still believed in his friend's skill and genius, and, after
due inquiry, he believed entirely in his friend's father-in-law. Sextus Parker still thought
that things would come round. Ferdinand,--he always now called his friend by his Christian
name,--Ferdinand was beautifully, seraphically confident. And Sexty, who had been in a manner
magnetised by Ferdinand, was confident too--at certain periods of the day. He was very confident
when he had had his two or three glasses of sherry at luncheon, and he was often delightfully
confident with his cigar and brandy-and-water at night. But there were periods in the morning
in which he would shake with fear and sweat with dismay.

But Lopez himself, having with his friend's assistance arranged his affairs comfortably for
a month or two, had, as a first resolution, promised himself a fortnight's freedom from all
carking cares. His second resolution had been that at the end of the fortnight he would commence
his operations on Mr. Wharton. Up to the last moment he had hoped,--had almost expected,--that
a sum of money would have been paid to him. Even a couple of thousand pounds for the time would
have been of great use to him;--but no tender of any kind had been made. Not a word had been
said. Things could not of course go on in that way. He was not going to play the coward with
his father-in-law. Then he bethought himself how he would act if his father-in-law were sternly
to refuse to do anything for him, and he assured himself that in such circumstances he would
make himself very disagreeable to his father-in-law. And then his third resolution had reference
to his wife. She must be instructed in his ways. She must learn to look at the world with his
eyes. She must be taught the great importance of money,--not in a griping, hard-fisted, prosaic
spirit; but that she might participate in that feeling of his own which had in it so much that
was grand, so much that was delightful, so much that was picturesque. He would never ask her
to be parsimonious,--never even to be economical. He would take a glory in seeing her well
dressed and well attended, with her own carriage and her own jewels. But she must learn that
the enjoyment of these things must be built upon a conviction that the most important pursuit
in the world was the acquiring of money. And she must be made to understand, first of all,
that she had a right to at any rate a half of her father's fortune. He had perceived that she
had much influence with her father, and she must be taught to use this influence unscrupulously
on her husband's behalf.

We have already seen that under the pressure of his thoughts he did break his first resolution
within an hour or two of his marriage. It is easy for a man to say that he will banish care,
so that he may enjoy to the full the delights of the moment. But this is a power which none
but a savage possesses,--or perhaps an Irishman. We have learned the lesson from the divines,
the philosophers, and the poets. Post equitem sedet atra cura. Thus was Ferdinand Lopez mounted
high on his horse,--for he had triumphed greatly in his marriage, and really felt that the
world could give him no delight so great as to have her beside him, and her as his own. But
the inky devil sat close upon his shoulders. Where would he be at the end of three months if
Mr. Wharton would do nothing for him,--and if a certain venture in guano, to which he had tempted
Sexty Parker, should not turn out the right way? He believed in the guano and he believed in
Mr. Wharton, but it is a terrible thing to have one's whole position in the world hanging upon
either an unwilling father-in-law or a probable rise in the value of manure! And then how would
he reconcile himself to her if both father-in-law and guano should go against him, and how
should he endure her misery?

The inky devil had forced him to ask the question even before they had reached Dover. "Does
it matter?" she had asked. Then for the time he had repudiated his solicitude, and had declared
that no question of money was of much consequence to him,--thereby making his future task with
her so much the more difficult. After that he said nothing to her on the subject on that their
wedding day,--but he could not prevent himself from thinking of it. Had he gone to the depth
of ruin without a wife, what would it have mattered? For years past he had been at the same
kind of work,--but while he was unmarried there had been a charm in the very danger. And as
a single man he had succeeded, being sometimes utterly impecunious, but still with a capacity
of living. Now he had laden himself with a burden of which the very intensity of his love immensely
increased the weight. As for not thinking of it, that was impossible. Of course she must help
him. Of course she must be taught how imperative it was that she should help him at once. "Is
there anything troubles you?" she said, as she sat leaning against him after their dinner in
the hotel at Dover.

"What should trouble me on such a day as this?"

"If there is anything, tell it me. I do not mean to say now, at this moment,--unless you wish
it. Whatever may be your troubles, it shall be my greatest happiness, as it is my first duty,
to lessen them if I can."

The promise was very well. It all went in the right direction. It showed him that she was at
any rate prepared to take a part in the joint work of their life. But, nevertheless, she should
be spared for the moment. "When there is trouble, you shall be told everything," he said, pressing
his lips to her brow, "but there is nothing that need trouble you yet." He smiled as he said
this, but there was something in the tone of his voice which told her that there would be trouble.

When he was in Paris he received a letter from Parker, to whom he had been obliged to intrust
a running address, but from whom he had enforced a promise that there should be no letter-writing
unless under very pressing circumstances. The circumstances had not been pressing. The letter
contained only one paragraph of any importance, and that was due to what Lopez tried to regard
as fidgety cowardice on the part of his ally. "Please to bear in mind that I can't and won't
arrange for the bills for £1500 due 3rd February." That was the paragraph. Who had asked him
to arrange for these bills? And yet Lopez was well aware that he intended that poor Sexty should
"arrange" for them, in the event of his failure to make arrangements with Mr. Wharton.

At last he was quite unable to let the fortnight pass by without beginning the lessons which
his wife had to learn. As for that first intention as to driving his cares out of his own mind
for that time, he had long since abandoned even the attempt. It was necessary to him that a
considerable sum of money should be extracted from the father-in-law, at any rate before the
end of January, and a week or even a day might be of importance. They had hurried on southwards
from Paris, and before the end of the first week had passed over the Simplon, and were at a
pleasant inn on the shores of Como. Everything in their travels had been as yet delightful
to Emily. This man, of whom she knew in truth so little, had certain good gifts,--gifts of
intellect, gifts of temper, gifts of voice and manner and outward appearance,--which had hitherto
satisfied her. A husband who is also an eager lover must be delightful to a young bride. And
hitherto no lover could have been more tender than Lopez. Every word and every act, every look
and every touch, had been loving. Had she known the world better she might have felt, perhaps,
that something was expected where so much was given. Perhaps a rougher manner, with some little
touch of marital self-assertion, might be a safer commencement of married life,--safer to the
wife as coming from her husband. Arthur Fletcher by this time would have asked her to bring
him his slippers, taking infinite pride in having his little behests obeyed by so sweet a servitor.
That also would have been pleasant to her had her heart in the first instance followed his
image; but now also the idolatry of Ferdinand Lopez had been very pleasant.

But the moment for the first lesson had come. "Your father has not written to you since you
started?" he said.

"Not a line. He has not known our address. He is never very good at letter-writing. I did write
to him from Paris, and I scribbled a few words to Everett yesterday."

"It is very odd that he should never have written to me."

"Did you expect him to write?"

"To tell you the truth, I rather did. Not that I should have dreamed of his corresponding with
me had he spoken to me on a certain subject. But as, on that subject, he never opened his mouth
to me, I almost thought he would write."

"Do you mean about money?" she asked in a very low voice.

"Well;--yes; I do mean about money. Things hitherto have gone so very strangely between us.
Sit down, dear, till we have a real domestic talk."

"Tell me everything," she said, as she nestled herself close to his side.

"You know how it was at first between him and me. He objected to me violently,--I mean openly,
to my face. But he based his objection solely on my nationality,--nationality and blood. As
to my condition in the world, fortune, or income, he never asked a word. That was strange."

"I suppose he thought he knew."

"He could not have thought he knew, dearest. But it was not for me to force the subject upon
him. You can see that."

"I am sure whatever you did was right, Ferdinand."

"He is indisputably a rich man,--one who might be supposed to be able and willing to give an
only daughter a considerable fortune. Now I certainly had never thought of marrying for money."
Here she rubbed her face upon his arm. "I felt that it was not for me to speak of money. If
he chose to be reticent, I could be so equally. Had he asked me, I should have told him that
I had no fortune, but was making a large though precarious income. It would then be for him
to declare what he intended to do. That would, I think, have been preferable. As it is we are
all in doubt. In my position a knowledge of what your father intends to do would be most valuable
to me."

"Should you not ask him?"

"I believe there has always been a perfect confidence between you and him?"

"Certainly,--as to all our ways of living. But he never said a word to me about money in his life."

"And yet, my darling, money is most important."

"Of course it is. I know that, Ferdinand."

"Would you mind asking?" She did not answer him at once, but sat thinking. And he also paused
before he went on with his lesson. But, in order that the lesson should be efficacious, it
would be as well that he should tell her as much as he could even at this first lecture. "To
tell you the truth, this is quite essential to me at present,--very much more than I had thought
it would be when we fixed the day for our marriage." Her mind within her recoiled at this,
though she was very careful that he should not feel any such motion in her body. "My business
is precarious."

"What is your business, Ferdinand?" Poor girl! That she should have been allowed to marry a
man, and then have to ask such a question!

"It is generally commercial. I buy and sell on speculation. The world, which is shy of new
words, has not yet given it a name. I am a good deal at present in the South American trade."
She listened, but received no glimmering of an idea from his words. "When we were engaged everything
was as bright as roses with me."

"Why did you not tell me this before,--so that we might have been more prudent?"

"Such prudence would have been horrid to me. But the fact is that I should not now have spoken
to you at all, but that since we left England I have had letters from a sort of partner of
mine. In our business things will go astray sometimes. It would be of great service to me if
I could learn what are your father's intentions."

"You want him to give you some money at once."

"It would not be unusual, dear,--when there is money to be given. But I want you specially
to ask him what he himself would propose to do. He knows already that I have taken a home for
you and paid for it, and he knows--. But it does not signify going into that."

"Tell me everything."

"He is aware that there are many expenses. Of course if he were a poor man there would not
be a word about it. I can with absolute truth declare that had he been penniless it would have
made no difference as to my suit to you. But it would possibly have made some difference as
to our after plans. He is a thorough man of the world, and he must know all that. I am sure
he must feel that something is due to you,--and to me as your husband. But he is odd-tempered,
and, as I have not spoken to him, he chooses to be silent to me. Now, my darling, you and I
cannot afford to wait to see who can be silent the longest."

"What do you want me to do?"

"To write to him."

"And ask him for money?"

"Not exactly in that way. I think you should say that we should be glad to know what he intends
to do, also saying that a certain sum of money would at present be of use to me."

"Would it not be better from you? I only ask, Ferdinand. I never have even spoken to him about
money, and of course he would know that you had dictated what I said."

"No doubt he would. It is natural that I should do so. I hope the time may come when I may
write quite freely to your father myself, but hitherto he has hardly been courteous to me.
I would rather that you should write,--if you do not mind it. Write your own letter, and show
it me. If there is anything too much or anything too little I will tell you."

And so the first lesson was taught. The poor young wife did not at all like the lesson. Even
within her own bosom she found no fault with her husband. But she began to understand that
the life before her was not to be a life of roses. The first word spoken to her in the train,
before it reached Dover, had explained something of this to her. She had felt at once that
there would be trouble about money. And now, though she did not at all understand what might
be the nature of those troubles, though she had derived no information whatever from her husband's
hints about the South American trade, though she was as ignorant as ever of his affairs, yet
she felt that the troubles would come soon. But never for a moment did it seem to her that
he had been unjust in bringing her into troubled waters. They had loved each other, and therefore,
whatever might be the troubles, it was right that they should marry each other. There was not
a spark of anger against him in her bosom;--but she was unhappy.

He demanded from her the writing of the letter almost immediately after the conversation which
has been given above, and of course the letter was written,--written and recopied, for the
paragraph about the money was, of course, at last of his wording. And she could not make the
remainder of the letter pleasant. The feeling that she was making a demand for money on her
father ran through it all. But the reader need only see the passage in which Ferdinand Lopez
made his demand,--through her hand.

"Ferdinand has been speaking to me about my fortune." It had gone much against the grain with
her to write these words, "my fortune." "But I have no fortune," she said. He insisted however,
explaining to her that she was entitled to use these words by her father's undoubted wealth.
And so, with an aching heart, she wrote them. "Ferdinand has been speaking to me about my fortune.
Of course, I told him that I knew nothing, and that as he had never spoken to me about money
before our marriage, I had never asked about it. He says that it would be of great service
to him to know what are your intentions; and also that he hopes you may find it convenient
to allow him to draw upon you for some portion of it at present. He says that £3000 would be
of great use to him in his business." That was the paragraph, and the work of writing it was
so distasteful to her that she could hardly bring herself to form the letters. It seemed as
though she were seizing the advantage of the first moment of her freedom to take a violent
liberty with her father.

"It is altogether his own fault, my pet," he said to her. "I have the greatest respect in the
world for your father, but he has allowed himself to fall into the habit of keeping all his
affairs secret from his children; and, of course, as they go out into the world, this secrecy
must in some degree be invaded. 13. The Germans transact no business, public or private, without
being armed: [84] but it is not customary for any person to assume arms till the state has approved
his ability to use them.

Then, in the midst of the assembly, either one of the chiefs, or
the father, or a relation, equips the youth with a shield and javelin.

[85] These are to them the manly gown; [86] this is the first honor conferred on youth: before
this they are considered as part of a household; afterwards, of the state. The dignity of chieftain
is bestowed even on mere lads, whose descent is eminently illustrious,
or whose fathers have performed signal services to the public; they
are associated, however, with those of mature strength, who have already
been declared capable of service; nor do they blush to be seen in
the rank of companions.



CHAPTER XXVI

The End of the Honeymoon

Mrs. Lopez had begged her father to address his reply to her at Florence, where,--as she explained
to him,--they expected to find themselves within a fortnight from the date of her writing.
They had reached the lake about the end of November, when the weather had still been fine,
but they intended to pass the winter months of December and January within the warmth of the
cities. That intervening fortnight was to her a period of painful anticipation. She feared
to see her father's handwriting, feeling almost sure that he would be bitterly angry with her.
During this time her husband frequently spoke to her about the letter,--about her own letter
and her father's expected reply. It was necessary that she should learn her lesson, and she
could only do so by having the subject of money made familiar to her ears. It was not a part
of his plan to tell her anything of the means by which he hoped to make himself a wealthy man.
The less she knew of that the better. But the fact that her father absolutely owed to him a
large amount of money as her fortune could not be made too clear to her. He was very desirous
to do this in such a manner as not to make her think that he was accusing her,--or that he
would accuse her if the money were not forthcoming. But she must learn the fact, and must be
imbued with the conviction that her husband would be the most ill-treated of men unless the
money were forthcoming. "I am a little nervous about it too," said he, alluding to the expected
letter;--"not so much as to the money itself, though that is important; but as to his conduct.
If he chooses simply to ignore us after our marriage he will be behaving very badly." She had
no answer to make to this. She could not defend her father, because by doing so she would offend
her husband. And yet her whole life-long trust in her father could not allow her to think it
possible that he should behave ill to them.

On their arrival at Florence he went at once to the post-office, but there was as yet no letter.
The fortnight, however, which had been named had only just run itself out. They went on from
day to day inspecting buildings, looking at pictures, making for themselves a taste in marble
and bronze, visiting the lovely villages which cluster on the hills round the city,--doing
precisely in this respect as do all young married couples who devote a part of their honeymoon
to Florence;--but in all their little journeyings and in all their work of pleasure the inky
devil sat not only behind him but behind her also. The heavy care of life was already beginning
to work furrows on her face. She would already sit, knitting her brow, as she thought of coming
troubles. Would not her father certainly refuse? And would not her husband then begin to be
less loving and less gracious to herself?

Every day for a week he called at the post-office when he went out with her, and still the
letter did not come. "It can hardly be possible," he said at last to her, "that he should decline
to answer his own daughter's letter."

"Perhaps he is ill," she replied.

"If there were anything of that kind Everett would tell us."

"Perhaps he has gone back to Herefordshire?"

"Of course his letter would go after him. I own it is very singular to me that he should not
write. It looks as though he were determined to cast you off from him altogether because you
have married against his wishes."

"Not that, Ferdinand;--do not say that!"

"Well; we shall see."

And on the next day they did see. He went to the post-office before breakfast, and on this
day he returned with a letter in his hand. She was sitting waiting for him with a book in her
lap, and saw the letter at once. "Is it from papa?" she said. He nodded his head as he handed
it to her. "Open it and read it, Ferdinand. I have got to be so nervous about it, that I cannot
do it. It seems to be so important."

"Yes;--it is important," he said with a grim smile, and then he opened the letter. She watched
his face closely as he read it, and at first she could tell nothing from it. Then, in that
moment, it first occurred to her that he had a wonderful command of his features. All this,
however, lasted but half a minute. Then he chucked the letter, lightly, in among the tea-cups,
and coming to her took her closely in his arms and almost hurt her by the violence of his repeated
kisses.

"Has he written kindly?" she said, as soon as she could find her breath to speak.

"By George, he's a brick after all. I own I did not think it. My darling, how much I owe you
for all the trouble I have given you."

"Oh, Ferdinand! if he has been good to you I shall be so happy."

"He has been awfully good. Ha, ha, ha!" And then he began walking about the room as he laughed
in an unnatural way. "Upon my word it is a pity we didn't say four thousand, or five. Think
of his taking me just at my word. It's a great deal better than I expected; that's all I can
say. And at the present moment it is of the utmost importance to me."

All this did not take above a minute or two, but during that minute or two she had been so
bewildered by his manner as almost to fancy that the expressions of his delight had been ironical.
He had been so unlike himself as she had known him that she almost doubted the reality of his
joy. But when she took the letter and read it, she found that his joy was true enough. The
letter was very short, and was as follows:--

   MY DEAR EMILY,

   What you have said under your husband's instruction about
   money, I find upon consideration to be fair enough. I
   think he should have spoken to me before his marriage; but
   then again perhaps I ought to have spoken to him. As it
   is, I am willing to give him the sum he requires, and I
   will pay £3000 to his account, if he would tell me where
   he would have it lodged. Then I shall think I have done
   my duty by him. What I shall do with the remainder of any
   money that I may have, I do not think he is entitled to
   ask.

   Everett is well again, and as idle as ever. Your aunt Roby
   is making a fool of herself at Harrogate. I have heard
   nothing from Herefordshire. Everything is very quiet and
   lonely here.

   Your affectionate father,

   A. WHARTON.

As he had dined at the Eldon every day since his daughter had left him, and had played on an
average a dozen rubbers of whist daily, he was not justified in complaining of the loneliness
of London.

The letter seemed to Emily herself to be very cold, and had not her husband rejoiced over it
so warmly she would have considered it to be unsatisfactory. No doubt the £3000 would be given;
but that, as far as she could understand her father's words, was to be the whole of her fortune.
She had never known anything of her father's affairs or of his intentions, but she had certainly
supposed that her fortune would be very much more than this. She had learned in some indirect
way that a large sum of money would have gone with her hand to Arthur Fletcher, could she have
brought herself to marry that suitor favoured by her family. And now, having learned, as she
had learned, that money was of vital importance to her husband, she was dismayed at what seemed
to her to be parental parsimony. But he was overjoyed,--so much so that for a while he lost
that restraint over himself which was habitual to him. He ate his breakfast in a state of exultation,
and talked,--not alluding specially to this £3000,--as though he had the command of almost
unlimited means. He ordered a carriage and drove her out, and bought presents for her,--things
as to which they had both before decided that they should not be bought because of the expense.
"Pray don't spend your money for me," she said to him. "It is nice to have you giving me things,
but it would be nicer to me even than that to think that I could save you expense."

But he was not in a mood to be denied. "You don't understand," he said. "I don't want to be
saved from little extravagances of this sort. Owing to circumstances, your father's money was
at this moment of importance to me;--but he has answered to the whip and the money is there,
and that trouble is over. We can enjoy ourselves now. Other troubles will spring up, no doubt,
before long."

She did not quite like being told that her father had "answered to the whip,"--but she was
willing to believe that it was a phrase common among men to which it would be prudish to make
objection. There was, also, something in her husband's elation which was distasteful to her.
Could it be that reverses of fortune with reference to moderate sums of money, such as this
which was now coming into his hands, would always affect him in the same way? Was it not almost
unmanly, or at any rate was it not undignified? And yet she tried to make the best of it, and
lent herself to his holiday mood as well as she was able. "Shall I write and thank papa?" she
said that evening.

"I have been thinking of that," he said. "You can write if you like, and of course you will.
But I also will write, and had better do so a post or two before you. As he has come round
I suppose I ought to show myself civil. What he says about the rest of his money is of course
absurd. I shall ask him nothing about it, but no doubt after a bit he will make permanent arrangements."
Everything in the business wounded her more or less. She now perceived that he regarded this
£3000 only as the first instalment of what he might get, and that his joy was due simply to
this temporary success. And then he called her father absurd to her face. For a moment she
thought that she would defend her father; but she could not as yet bring herself to question
her husband's words even on such a subject as that.

He did write to Mr. Wharton, but in doing so he altogether laid aside that flighty manner which
for a while had annoyed her. He thoroughly understood that the wording of the letter might
be very important to him, and he took much trouble with it. It must be now the great work of
his life to ingratiate himself with this old man, so that, at any rate at the old man's death,
he might possess at least half of the old man's money. He must take care that there should
be no division between his wife and her father of such a nature as to make the father think
that his son ought to enjoy any special privilege of primogeniture or of male inheritance.
And if it could be so managed that the daughter should, before the old man's death, become
his favourite child, that also would be well. He was therefore very careful about the letter,
which was as follows:--

   MY DEAR MR. WHARTON,

   I cannot let your letter to Emily pass without thanking
   you myself for the very liberal response made by you to
   what was of course a request from myself. Let me in the
   first place assure you that had you, before our marriage,
   made any inquiry about my money affairs, I would have told
   you everything with accuracy; but as you did not do so
   I thought that I should seem to intrude upon you, if I
   introduced the subject. It is too long for a letter, but
   whenever you may like to allude to it, you will find that
   I will be quite open with you.

   I am engaged in business which often requires the use of
   a considerable amount of capital. It has so happened that
   even since we were married the immediate use of a sum of
   money became essential to me to save me from sacrificing a
   cargo of guano which will be of greatly increased value in
   three months' time, but which otherwise must have gone for
   what it would now fetch. Your kindness will see me through
   that difficulty.

   Of course there is something precarious in such a
   business as mine;--but I am endeavouring to make it less
   so from day to day, and hope very shortly to bring it
   into that humdrum groove which best befits a married man.
   Should I ask further assistance from you in doing this,
   perhaps you will not refuse it if I can succeed in making
   the matter clear to you. As it is I thank you sincerely
   for what you have done. I will ask you to pay the £3000
   you have so kindly promised, to my account at Messrs.
   Hunky and Sons, Lombard Street. They are not regular
   bankers, but I have an account there.

   We are wandering about and enjoying ourselves mightily in
   the properly romantic manner. Emily sometimes seems to
   think that she would like to give up business, and London,
   and all sublunary troubles, in order that she might settle
   herself for life under an Italian sky. But the idea does
   not generally remain with her very long. Already she is
   beginning to show symptoms of home sickness in regard to
   Manchester Square.

   Yours always most faithfully,

   FERDINAND LOPEZ.

To this letter Lopez received no reply;--nor did he expect one. Between Emily and her father
a few letters passed, not very long; nor, as regarded those from Mr. Wharton, were they very
interesting. In none of them, however, was there any mention of money. But early in January
Lopez received a most pressing,--we might almost say an agonising letter from his friend Parker.
The gist of the letter was to make Lopez understand that Parker must at once sell certain interests
in a coming cargo of guano,--at whatever sacrifice,--unless he could be certified as to that
money which must be paid in February, and which he, Parker, must pay, should Ferdinand Lopez
be at that moment unable to meet his bond. The answer sent to Parker shall be given to the reader.

   MY DEAR OLD AWFULLY SILLY, AND ABSURDLY IMPATIENT FRIEND,

   You are always like a toad under a harrow, and that
   without the slightest cause. I have money lying at Hunky's
   more than double enough for the bills. Why can't you trust
   a man? If you won't trust me in saying so, you can go to
   Mills Happerton and ask him. But, remember, I shall be
   very much annoyed if you do so,--and that such an inquiry
   cannot but be injurious to me. If, however, you won't
   believe me, you can go and ask. At any rate, don't meddle
   with the guano. We should lose over £1000 each of us, if
   you were to do so. By George, a man should neither marry,
   nor leave London for a day, if he has to do with a fellow
   so nervous as you are. As it is I think I shall be back
   a week or two before my time is properly up, lest you
   and one or two others should think that I have levanted
   altogether.

   I have no hesitation in saying that more fortunes are lost
   in business by trembling cowardice than by any amount of
   imprudence or extravagance. My hair stands on end when you
   talk of parting with guano in December because there are
   bills which have to be met in February. Pluck up your
   heart, man, and look around, and see what is done by men
   with good courage.

   Yours always,

   FERDINAND LOPEZ.

These were the only communications between our married couple and their friends at home with
which I need trouble my readers. Nor need I tell any further tales of their honeymoon. If the
time was not one of complete and unalloyed joy to Emily,--and we must fear that it was not,--it
is to be remembered that but very little complete and unalloyed joy is allowed to sojourners
in this vale of tears, even though they have been but two months married. In the first week
in February they appeared in the Belgrave mansion, and Emily Lopez took possession of her new
home with a heart as full of love for her husband as it had been when she walked out of the
church in Vere Street, though it may be that some of her sweetest illusions had already been
dispelled.

CHAPTER XXVII

The Duke's Misery

We must go back for a while to Gatherum Castle and see the guests whom the Duchess had collected
there for her Christmas festivities. The hospitality of the Duke's house had been maintained
almost throughout the autumn. Just at the end of October they went to Matching, for what the
Duchess called a quiet month,--which, however, at the Duke's urgent request became six weeks.
But even here the house was full all the time, though from deficiency of bedrooms the guests
were very much less numerous. But at Matching the Duchess had been uneasy and almost cross.
Mrs. Finn had gone with her husband to Ireland, and she had taught herself to fancy that she
could not live without Mrs. Finn. And her husband had insisted upon having round him politicians
of his own sort, men who really preferred work to archery, or even to hunting, and who discussed
the evils of direct taxation absolutely in the drawing-room. The Duchess was assured that the
country could not be governed by the support of such men as these, and was very glad to get
back to Gatherum,--whither also came Phineas Finn with his wife, and the St. Bungay people,
and Barrington Erle, and Mr. Monk, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, with Lord and Lady Cantrip,
and Lord and Lady Drummond,--Lord Drummond being the only representative of the other or coalesced
party. And Major Pountney was there, having been urgent with the Duchess,--and having fully
explained to his friend Captain Gunner that he had acceded to the wishes of his hostess only
on the assurance of her Grace that the house would not be again troubled by the presence of
Ferdinand Lopez. Such assurances were common between the two friends, but were innocent, as,
of course, neither believed the other. And Lady Rosina was again there,--with many others.
The melancholy poverty of Lady Rosina had captivated the Duke. "She shall come and live here,
if you like," the Duchess had said in answer to a request from her husband on his new friend's
behalf,--"I've no doubt she will be willing." The place was not crowded as it had been before;
but still about thirty guests sat down to dinner daily, and Locock, Millepois, and Mrs. Pritchard
were all kept hard at work. Nor was our Duchess idle. She was always making up the party,--meaning
the coalition,--doing something to strengthen the buttresses, writing little letters to little
people, who, little as they were, might become big by amalgamation. "One has always to be binding
one's fagot," she said to Mrs. Finn, having read her Æsop not altogether in vain. "Where should
we have been without you?" she had whispered to Sir Orlando Drought when that gentleman was
leaving Gatherum at the termination of his second visit. She had particularly disliked Sir
Orlando, and was aware that her husband had on this occasion been hardly as gracious as he
should have been, in true policy, to so powerful a colleague. Her husband had been peculiarly
shy of Sir Orlando since the day on which they had walked together in the park,--and, consequently,
the Duchess had whispered to him. "Don't bind your fagot too conspicuously," Mrs. Finn had
said to her. Then the Duchess had fallen to a seat almost exhausted by labour, mingled with
regrets, and by the doubts which from time to time pervaded even her audacious spirit. "I'm
not a god," she said, "or a Pitt, or an Italian with a long name beginning with M., that I
should be able to do these things without ever making a mistake. And yet they must be done.
And as for him,--he does not help me in the least. He wanders about among the clouds of the
multiplication table, and thinks that a majority will drop into his mouth because he does not
shut it. Can you tie the fagot any better?" "I think I would leave it untied," said Mrs. Finn.
"You would not do anything of the kind. You'd be just as fussy as I am." And thus the game
was carried on at Gatherum Castle from week to week.

"But you won't leave him?" This was said to Phineas Finn by his wife a day or two before Christmas,
and the question was intended to ask whether Phineas thought of giving up his place.

"Not if I can help it."

"You like the work."

"That has but little to do with the question, unfortunately. I certainly like having something
to do. I like earning money."

"I don't know why you like that especially," said the wife, laughing.

"I do at any rate,--and, in a certain sense, I like authority. But in serving with the Duke
I find a lack of that sympathy which one should have with one's chief. He would never say a
word to me unless I spoke to him. And when I do speak, though he is studiously civil,--much
too courteous,--I know that he is bored. He has nothing to say to me about the country. When
he has anything to communicate, he prefers to write a minute for Warburton, who then writes
to Morton,--and so it reaches me."

"Doesn't it do as well?"

"It may do with me. There are reasons which bind me to him, which will not bind other men.
Men don't talk to me about it, because they know that I am bound to him through you. But I
am aware of the feeling which exists. You can't be really loyal to a king if you never see
him,--if he be always locked up in some almost divine recess."

"A king may make himself too common, Phineas."

"No doubt. A king has to know where to draw the line. But the Duke draws no intentional line
at all. He is not by nature gregarious or communicative, and is therefore hardly fitted to
be the head of a ministry."

"It will break her heart if anything goes wrong."

"She ought to remember that Ministries seldom live very long," said Phineas. "But she'll recover
even if she does break her heart. She is too full of vitality to be much repressed by any calamity.
Have you heard what is to be done about Silverbridge?"

"The Duchess wants to get it for this man, Ferdinand Lopez."

"But it has not been promised yet?"

"The seat is not vacant," said Mrs. Finn, "and I don't know when it will be vacant. I think
there is a hitch about it,--and I think the Duchess is going to be made very angry."

Throughout the autumn the Duke had been an unhappy man. While the absolute work of the Session
had lasted he had found something to console him; but now, though he was surrounded by private
secretaries, and though dispatch-boxes went and came twice a day, though there were dozens
of letters as to which he had to give some instruction,--yet, there was in truth nothing for
him to do. It seemed to him that all the real work of the Government had been filched from
him by his colleagues, and that he was stuck up in pretended authority,--a kind of wooden Prime
Minister, from whom no real ministration was demanded. His first fear had been that he was
himself unfit;--but now he was uneasy, fearing that others thought him to be unfit. There was
Mr. Monk with his budget, and Lord Drummond with his three or four dozen half rebellious colonies,
and Sir Orlando Drought with the House to lead and a ship to build, and Phineas Finn with his
scheme of municipal Home Rule for Ireland, and Lord Ramsden with a codified Statute Book,--all
full of work, all with something special to be done. But for him,--he had to arrange who should
attend the Queen, what ribbons should be given away, and what middle-aged young man should
move the address. He sighed as he thought of those happy days in which he used to fear that
his mind and body would both give way under the pressure of decimal coinage.

But Phineas Finn had read the Duke's character rightly in saying that he was neither gregarious
nor communicative, and therefore but little fitted to rule Englishmen. He had thought that
it was so himself, and now from day to day he was becoming more assured of his own deficiency.
He could not throw himself into cordial relations with the Sir Orlando Droughts, or even with
the Mr. Monks. But, though he had never wished to be put into his present high office, now
that he was there he dreaded the sense of failure which would follow his descent from it. It
is this feeling rather than genuine ambition, rather than the love of power or patronage or
pay, which induces men to cling to place. The absence of real work, and the quantity of mock
work, both alike made the life wearisome to him; but he could not endure the idea that it should
be written in history that he had allowed himself to be made a fainéant Prime Minister, and
then had failed even in that. History would forget what he had done as a working Minister in
recording the feebleness of the Ministry which would bear his name.

The one man with whom he could talk freely, and from whom he could take advice, was now with
him, here at his Castle. He was shy at first even with the Duke of St. Bungay, but that shyness
he could generally overcome, after a few words. But though he was always sure of his old friend's
sympathy and of his old friend's wisdom, yet he doubted his old friend's capacity to understand
himself. The young Duke felt the old Duke to be thicker-skinned than himself and therefore
unable to appreciate the thorns which so sorely worried his own flesh. "They talk to me about
a policy," said the host. They were closeted at this time in the Prime Minister's own sanctum,
and there yet remained an hour before they need dress for dinner.

"Who talks about a policy?"

"Sir Orlando Drought especially." For the Duke of Omnium had never forgotten the arrogance
of that advice given in the park.

"Sir Orlando is of course entitled to speak, though I do not know that he is likely to say
anything very well worth the hearing. What is his special policy?"

"If he had any, of course, I would hear him. It is not that he wants any special thing to be
done, but he thinks that I should get up some special thing in order that Parliament may be
satisfied."

"If you wanted to create a majority that might be true. Just listen to him and have done with it."

"I cannot go on in that way. I cannot submit to what amounts to complaint from the gentlemen
who are acting with me. Nor would they submit long to my silence. I am beginning to feel that
I have been wrong."

"I don't think you have been wrong at all."

"A man is wrong if he attempts to carry a weight too great for his strength."

"A certain nervous sensitiveness, from which you should free yourself as from a disease, is
your only source of weakness. Think about your business as a shoemaker thinks of his. Do your
best, and then let your customers judge for themselves. Caveat emptor. A man should never endeavour
to price himself, but should accept the price which others put on him,--only being careful
that he should learn what that price is. Your policy should be to keep your government together
by a strong majority. After all, the making of new laws is too often but an unfortunate necessity
laid on us by the impatience of the people. A lengthened period of quiet and therefore good
government with a minimum of new laws would be the greatest benefit the country could receive.
When I recommended you to comply with the Queen's behest I did so because I thought that you
might inaugurate such a period more certainly than any other one man." This old Duke was quite
content with a state of things such as he described. He had been a Cabinet Minister for more
than half his life. He liked being a Cabinet Minister. He thought it well for the country generally
that his party should be in power,--and if not his party in its entirety, then as much of his
party as might be possible. He did not expect to be written of as a Pitt or a Somers, but he
thought that memoirs would speak of him as a useful nobleman,--and he was contented. He was
not only not ambitious himself, but the effervescence and general turbulence of ambition in
other men was distasteful to him. Loyalty was second nature to him, and the power of submitting
to defeat without either shame or sorrow had become perfect with him by long practice. He would
have made his brother Duke such as he was himself,--had not his brother Duke been so lamentably
thin-skinned.

"I suppose we must try it for another Session?" said the Duke of Omnium with a lachrymose voice.

"Of course we must,--and for others after that, I both hope and trust," said the Duke of St.
Bungay, getting up. "If I don't go up-stairs I shall be late, and then her Grace will look
at me with unforgiving eyes."

On the following day after lunch the Prime Minister took a walk with Lady Rosina De Courcy.
He had fallen into a habit of walking with Lady Rosina almost every day of his life, till the
people in the Castle began to believe that Lady Rosina was the mistress of some deep policy
of her own. For there were many there who did in truth think that statecraft could never be
absent from a minister's mind, day or night. But in truth Lady Rosina chiefly made herself
agreeable to the Prime Minister by never making any most distant allusion to public affairs.
It might be doubted whether she even knew that the man who paid her so much honour was the
Head of the British Government as well as the Duke of Omnium. She was a tall, thin, shrivelled-up
old woman,--not very old, fifty perhaps, but looking at least ten years more,--very melancholy,
and sometimes very cross. She had been notably religious, but that was gradually wearing off
as she advanced in years. The rigid strictness of Sabbatarian practice requires the full energy
of middle life. She had been left entirely alone in the world, with a very small income, and
not many friends who were in any way interested in her existence. But she knew herself to be
Lady Rosina De Courcy, and felt that the possession of that name ought to be more to her than
money and friends, or even than brothers and sisters. "The weather is not frightening you,"
said the Duke. Snow had fallen, and the paths, even where they had been swept, were wet and sloppy.

"Weather never frightens me, your Grace. I always have thick boots;--I am very particular about
that;--and cork soles."

"Cork soles are admirable."

"I think I owe my life to cork soles," said Lady Rosina enthusiastically. "There is a man named
Sprout in Silverbridge who makes them. Did your Grace ever try him for boots?"

"I don't think I ever did," said the Prime Minister.

"Then you had better. He's very good and very cheap too. Those London tradesmen never think
they can charge you enough. I find I can wear Sprout's boots the whole winter through and then
have them resoled. I don't suppose you ever think of such things?"

"I like to have my feet dry."

"I have got to calculate what they cost." They then passed Major Pountney, who was coming and
going between the stables and the house, and who took off his hat and who saluted the host
and his companion with perhaps more flowing courtesy than was necessary. "I never have found
out what that gentleman's name is yet," said Lady Rosina.

"Pountney, I think. I believe they call him Major Pountney."

"Oh, Pountney! There are Pountneys in Leicestershire. Perhaps he is one of them?"

"I don't know where he comes from," said the Duke,--"nor, to tell the truth, where he goes
to." Lady Rosina looked up at him with an interested air. "He seems to be one of those idle
men who get into people's houses heaven knows why, and never do anything."

"I suppose you asked him?" said Lady Rosina.

"The Duchess did, I dare say."

"How odd it would be if she were to suppose that you had asked him."

"The Duchess, no doubt, knows all about it." Then there was a little pause. "She is obliged
to have all sorts of people," said the Duke apologetically.

"I suppose so,--when you have so many coming and going. I am sorry to say that my time is up
to-morrow, so that I shall make way for somebody else."

"I hope you won't think of going, Lady Rosina,--unless you are engaged elsewhere. We are delighted
to have you."

"The Duchess has been very kind, but--"

"The Duchess, I fear, is almost too much engaged to see as much of her guests individually
as she ought to do. To me your being here is a great pleasure."

"You are too good to me,--much too good. But I shall have stayed out my time, and I think,
Duke, I will go to-morrow. I am very methodical, you know, and always act by rule. I have walked
my two miles now, and I will go in. If you do want boots with cork soles mind you go to Sprout's.
Dear me; there is that Major Pountney again. That is four times he has been up and down that
path since we have been walking here."

Lady Rosina went in, and the Duke turned back, thinking of his friend and perhaps thinking
of the cork soles of which she had to be so careful and which were so important to her comfort.
It could not be that he fancied Lady Rosina to be clever, nor can we imagine that her conversation
satisfied any of those wants to which he and all of us are subject. But nevertheless he liked
Lady Rosina, and was never bored by her. She was natural, and she wanted nothing from him.
When she talked about cork soles she meant cork soles. And then she did not tread on any of
his numerous corns. As he walked on he determined that he would induce his wife to persuade
Lady Rosina to stay a little longer at the Castle. In meditating upon this he made another
turn in the grounds, and again came upon Major Pountney as that gentleman was returning from
the stables. "A very cold afternoon," he said, feeling it to be ungracious to pass one of his
own guests in his own grounds without a word of salutation.

"Very cold indeed, your Grace,--very cold." The Duke had intended to pass on, but the Major
managed to stop him by standing in the pathway. The Major did not in the least know his man.
He had heard that the Duke was shy, and therefore thought that he was timid. He had not hitherto
been spoken to by the Duke,--a condition of things which he attributed to the Duke's shyness
and timidity. But, with much thought on the subject, he had resolved that he would have a few
words with his host, and had therefore passed backwards and forwards between the house and
the stables rather frequently. "Very cold, indeed, but yet we've had beautiful weather. I don't
know when I have enjoyed myself so much altogether as I have at Gatherum Castle." The Duke
bowed, and made a little but a vain effort to get on. "A splendid pile!" said the Major, stretching
his hand gracefully towards the building.

"It is a big house," said the Duke.

"A noble mansion;--perhaps the noblest mansion in the three kingdoms," said Major Pountney.
"I have seen a great many of the best country residences in England, but nothing that at all
equals Gatherum." Then the Duke made a little effort at progression, but was still stopped
by the daring Major. "By-the-by, your Grace, if your Grace has a few minutes to spare,--just
half a minute,--I wish you would allow me to say something." The Duke assumed a look of disturbance,
but he bowed and walked on, allowing the Major to walk by his side. "I have the greatest possible
desire, my Lord Duke, to enter public life."

"I thought you were already in the army," said the Duke.

"So I am;--was on Sir Bartholomew Bone's staff in Canada for two years, and have seen as much
of what I call home service as any man going. One of my chief objects is to take up the army."

"It seems that you have taken it up."

"I mean in Parliament, your Grace. I am very fairly off as regards private means, and would
stand all the racket of the expense of a contest myself,--if there were one. But the difficulty
is to get a seat, and, of course, if it can be privately managed, it is very comfortable."
The Duke looked at him again,--this time without bowing. But the Major, who was not observant,
rushed on to his destruction. "We all know that Silverbridge will soon be vacant. Let me assure
your Grace that if it might be consistent with your Grace's plans in other respects to turn
your kind countenance towards me, you would find that you would have a supporter than whom
none would be more staunch, and perhaps I may say, one who in the House would not be the least
useful!" That portion of the Major's speech which referred to the Duke's kind countenance had
been learned by heart, and was thrown trippingly off the tongue with a kind of twang. The Major
had perceived that he had not been at once interrupted when he began to open the budget of
his political aspirations, and had allowed himself to indulge in pleasing auguries. "Nothing
ask and nothing have," had been adopted as the motto of his life, and more than once he had
expressed to Captain Gunner his conviction that,--"By George, if you've only cheek enough,
there is nothing you cannot get." On this emergency the Major certainly was not deficient in
cheek. "If I might be allowed to consider myself your Grace's candidate, I should indeed be
a happy man," said the Major.

"I think, sir," said the Duke, "that your proposition is the most unbecoming and the most impertinent
that ever was addressed to me." The Major's mouth fell, and he stared with all his eyes as
he looked up into the Duke's face. "Good afternoon," said the Duke, turning quickly round and
walking away. The Major stood for a while transfixed to the place, and, cold as was the weather,
was bathed in perspiration. A keen sense of having "put his foot into it" almost crushed him
for a time. Then he assured himself that, after all, the Duke "could not eat him," and with
that consolatory reflection he crept back to the house and up to his own room.

To put the man down had of course been an easy task to the Duke, but he was not satisfied with
that. To the Major it seemed that the Duke had passed on with easy indifference;--but in truth
he was very far from being easy. The man's insolent request had wounded him at many points.
It was grievous to him that he should have as a guest in his own house a man whom he had been
forced to insult. It was grievous to him that he himself should not have been held in personal
respect high enough to protect him from such an insult. It was grievous to him that he should
be openly addressed,--addressed by an absolute stranger,--as a borough-mongering lord, who
would not scruple to give away a seat in Parliament as seats were given away in former days.
And it was especially grievous to him that all these misfortunes should have come upon him
as a part of the results of his wife's manner of exercising his hospitality. If this was to
be Prime Minister he certainly would not be Prime Minister much longer! Had any aspirant to
political life ever dared so to address Lord Brock, or Lord De Terrier, or Mr. Mildmay, the
old Premiers whom he remembered? He thought not. They had managed differently. They had been
able to defend themselves from such attacks by personal dignity. And would it have been possible
that any man should have dared so to speak to his uncle, the late Duke? He thought not. As
he shut himself up in his own room he grieved inwardly with a deep grief. After a while he
walked off to his wife's room, still perturbed in spirit. The perturbation had indeed increased
from minute to minute. He would rather give up politics altogether and shut himself up in absolute
seclusion than find himself subject to the insolence of any Pountney that might address him.
With his wife he found Mrs. Finn. Now for this lady personally he entertained what for him
was a warm regard. In various matters of much importance he and she had been brought together,
and she had, to his thinking, invariably behaved well. And an intimacy had been established
which had enabled him to be at ease with her,--so that her presence was often a comfort to
him. But at the present moment he had not wished to find any one with his wife, and felt that
she was in his way. "Perhaps I am disturbing you," he said in a tone of voice that was solemn
and almost funereal.

"Not at all," said the Duchess, who was in high spirits. "I want to get your promise now about
Silverbridge. Don't mind her. Of course she knows everything." To be told that any body knew
everything was another shock to him. "I have just got a letter from Mr. Lopez." Could it be
right that his wife should be corresponding on such a subject with a person so little known
as this Mr. Lopez? "May I tell him that he shall have your interest when the seat is vacant?"

"Certainly not," said the Duke, with a scowl that was terrible even to his wife. "I wished
to speak to you, but I wished to speak to you alone."

"I beg a thousand pardons," said Mrs. Finn, preparing to go.

"Don't stir, Marie," said the Duchess; "he is going to be cross."

"If Mrs. Finn will allow me, with every feeling of the most perfect respect and sincerest regard,
to ask her to leave me with you for a few minutes, I shall be obliged. And if, with her usual
hearty kindness, she will pardon my abruptness--" Then he could not go on, his emotion being
too great; but he put out his hand, and taking hers raised it to his lips and kissed it. The
moment had become too solemn for any further hesitation as to the lady's going. The Duchess
for a moment was struck dumb, and Mrs. Finn, of course, left the room.

"In the name of heaven, Plantagenet, what is the matter?"

"Who is Major Pountney?"

"Who is Major Pountney! How on earth should I know? He is--Major Pountney. He is about everywhere."

"Do not let him be asked into any house of mine again. But that is a trifle."

"Anything about Major Pountney must, I should think, be a trifle. Have tidings come that the
heavens are going to fall? Nothing short of that could make you so solemn."

"In the first place, Glencora, let me ask you not to speak to me again about the seat for Silverbridge.
I am not at present prepared to argue the matter with you, but I have resolved that I will
know nothing about the election. As soon as the seat is vacant, if it should be vacated, I
shall take care that my determination be known in Silverbridge."

"Why should you abandon your privileges in that way? It is sheer weakness."

"The interference of any peer is unconstitutional."

"There is Braxon," said the Duchess energetically, "where the Marquis of Crumber returns the
member regularly, in spite of all their Reform bills; and Bamford, and Cobblersborough;--and
look at Lord Lumley with a whole county in his pocket, not to speak of two boroughs! What nonsense,
Plantagenet! Anything is constitutional, or anything is unconstitutional, just as you choose
to look at it." It was clear that the Duchess had really studied the subject carefully.

"Very well, my dear, let it be nonsense. I only beg to assure you that it is my intention,
and I request you to act accordingly. And there is another thing I have to say to you. I shall
be sorry to interfere in any way with the pleasure which you may derive from society, but as
long as I am burdened with the office which has been imposed upon me, I will not again entertain
any guests in my own house."

"Plantagenet!"

"You cannot turn the people out who are here now; but I beg that they may be allowed to go
as the time comes, and that their places may not be filled by further invitations."

"But further invitations have gone out ever so long ago, and have been accepted. You must be
ill, my dear."

"Ill at ease,--yes. At any rate let none others be sent out." Then he remembered a kindly purpose
which he had formed early in the day, and fell back upon that. "I should, however, be glad
if you would ask Lady Rosina De Courcy to remain here." The Duchess stared at him, really thinking
now that something was amiss with him. "The whole thing is a failure and I will have no more
of it. It is degrading me." Then without allowing her a moment in which to answer him, he marched
back to his own room.

But even here his spirit was not as yet at rest. That Major must not go unpunished. Though
he hated all fuss and noise he must do something. So he wrote as follows to the Major:--

   The Duke of Omnium trusts that Major Pountney will not
   find it inconvenient to leave Gatherum Castle shortly.
   Should Major Pountney wish to remain at the Castle over
   the night, the Duke of Omnium hopes that he will not
   object to be served with his dinner and with his breakfast
   in his own room. A carriage and horses will be ready for
   Major Pountney's use, to take him to Silverbridge, as soon
   as Major Pountney may express to the servants his wish to
   that effect.

   Gatherum Castle, -- December, 18--.

This note the Duke sent by the hands of his own servant, having said enough to the man as to
the carriage and the possible dinner in the Major's bedroom, to make the man understand almost
exactly what had occurred. A note from the Major was brought to the Duke while he was dressing.
The Duke having glanced at the note threw it into the fire; and the Major that evening eat
his dinner at the Palliser Arms Inn at Silverbridge.

CHAPTER XXVIII

The Duchess Is Much Troubled

It is hardly possible that one man should turn another out of his house without many people
knowing it; and when the one person is a Prime Minister and the other such a Major as Major
Pountney, the affair is apt to be talked about very widely. The Duke of course never opened
his mouth on the subject, except in answer to questions from the Duchess; but all the servants
knew it. "Pritchard tells me that you have sent that wretched man out of the house with a flea
in his ear," said the Duchess.

"I sent him out of the house, certainly."

"He was hardly worth your anger."

"He is not at all worth my anger;--but I could not sit down to dinner with a man who had insulted
me."

"What did he say, Plantagenet? I know it was something about Silverbridge." To this question
the Duke gave no answer, but in respect to Silverbridge he was stern as adamant. Two days after
the departure of the Major it was known to Silverbridge generally that in the event of there
being an election the Duke's agent would not as usual suggest a nominee. There was a paragraph
on the subject in the County paper, and another in the London "Evening Pulpit." The Duke of
Omnium,--that he might show his respect to the law, not only as to the letter of the law, but
as to the spirit also,--had made it known to his tenantry in and round Silverbridge generally
that he would in no way influence their choice of a candidate in the event of an election.
But these newspapers did not say a word about Major Pountney.

The clubs of course knew all about it, and no man at any club ever knew more than Captain Gunner.
Soon after Christmas he met his friend the Major on the steps of the new military club, The
Active Service, which was declared by many men in the army to have left all the other military
clubs "absolutely nowhere." "Halloa, Punt!" he said, "you seem to have made a mess of it at
last down at the Duchess's."

"I wonder what you know about it."

"You had to come away pretty quick, I take it."

"Of course I came away pretty quick." So much as that the Major was aware must be known. There
were details which he could deny safely, as it would be impossible that they should be supported
by evidence, but there were matters which must be admitted. "I'll bet a fiver that beyond that
you know nothing about it."

"The Duke ordered you off, I take it."

"After a fashion he did. There are circumstances in which a man cannot help himself." This
was diplomatical, because it left the Captain to suppose that the Duke was the man who could
not help himself.

"Of course I was not there," said Gunner, "and I can't absolutely know, but I suppose you had
been interfering with the Duchess about Silverbridge. Glencora will bear a great deal,--but
since she has taken up politics, by George, you had better not touch her there." At last it
came to be believed that the Major had been turned out by the order of the Duchess, because
he had ventured to put himself forward as an opponent to Ferdinand Lopez, and the Major felt
himself really grateful to his friend the Captain for this arrangement of the story. [181] Namely,
the Ansibarii and Tubantes. The Ansibarii or Amsibarii are thought by Alting to have derived their
name from their neighborhood to the river Ems (Amisia); and the. Tubantes, from their frequent change
of habitation, to have been called Tho Benten. or the wandering troops, and to have dwelt where
now is Drente in Over-Issel. Among these nations, Furstenburg (Monum. Paderborn.) enumerates
the Ambrones, borderers upon the river Ambrus, now Emmeren.

[182] The Frieslanders. The lesser Frisii were settled on this side, the greater, on the other,
of the Flevum (Zuyderzee).

[183] In the time of the Romans this country was covered by vast meres, or lakes; which were
made still larger by frequent inundations of the sea. Of these, one so late as 1530 overwhelmed
seventy-two villages; and another, still more terrible, in 1569, laid under water great part of
the sea-coast of Holland, and almost all Friesland, in which alone 20,000 persons were drowned.

[184]
Wherever the land seemed to terminate, and it appeared impossible to proceed further, maritime
nations have feigned pillars of Hercules. Those celebrated by the Frisians must have been at the
extremity of Friesland, and not in Sweden and the Cimmerian promontory, as Rudbeck supposes.

[185] Drusus, the brother of Tiberius, and father of Germanicus, imposed a tribute on the Frisians,
as mentioned in the Annals, iv. 72, and performed other eminent services in Germany; himself styled
Germanicus.

[186] The Chauci extended along the seacoast from the Ems to the Elbe (Albis); whence they bordered
on all the fore-mentioned nations, between which and the Cherusci they came round to the Catti.
The Chauci were distinguished into Greater and Lesser. The Greater, according to Ptolemy,
inhabited the country between the Weser and the Elbe; the Lesser, that between the Weser and Ems;
but Tacitus (Annals xi. 19) seems to reverse this order. Alting supposes the Chauci had their
name from Kauken, signifying persons eminent for valor and fidelity, which agrees with the character
Tacitus gives them. Others derive it from Kauk, an owl, with a reference to the enmity of that animal
to cats (Catti). Others, from Kaiten, daws, of which there are great numbers on their coast.
Pliny has admirably described the country and manners of the maritime Chauci, in his account of
people who live without any trees or fruit-bearing vegetables: --"In the North are the nations
of Chauci, who are divided into Greater and Lesser. Here, the ocean, having a prodigious flux
and reflux twice in the space of every day and night, rolls over an immense tract, leaving it a matter
of perpetual doubt whether it is part of the land or sea. In this spot, the wretched natives, occupying
either the tops of hills, or artificial mounds of turf, raised out of reach of the highest tides,
build their small cottages; which appear like sailing vessels when the water covers the circumjacent
ground, and like wrecks when it has retired. Here from their huts they pursue the fish, continually
flying from them with the waves. They do not, like their neighbors, possess cattle, and feed
on milk; nor have they a warfare to maintain against wild beasts,
for every fruit of the earth is far removed from them.

With flags and seaweed they twist cordage for their fishing-nets. For fuel they use a kind of
mud, taken up by hand, and dried, rather in the wind than the sun:
with this earth they heat their food, and warm their bodies, stiffened
by the rigorous north. Their only drink is rain-water collected in
ditches at the thresholds of their doors. Yet this miserable people,
if conquered to-day by the Roman arms, would call themselves slaves.
Thus it is that fortune spares many to their own punishment."--Hist. But this did not suit the
new ambition of the Duchess. She had so fed her mind with daring hopes that she could not bear
that it should "die out." She had arranged a course of things in her own mind by which she
should come to be known as the great Prime Minister's wife; and she had, perhaps unconsciously,
applied the epithet more to herself than to her husband. She, too, wished to be written of
in memoirs, and to make a niche for herself in history. And now she was told that she was to
let it "die out!"

"I suppose he is a little bilious," Barrington Erle had said. "Don't you think he'll forget
all about it when he gets up to London?" The Duchess was sure that her husband would not forget
anything. He never did forget anything. "I want him to be told," said the Duchess, "that everybody
thinks that he is doing very well. I don't mean about politics exactly, but as to keeping the
party together. Don't you think that we have succeeded?" Barrington Erle thought that upon
the whole they had succeeded; but suggested at the same time that there were seeds of weakness.
"Sir Orlando and Sir Timothy Beeswax are not sound, you know," said Barrington Erle. "He can't
make them sounder by shutting himself up like a hermit," said the Duchess. Barrington Erle,
who had peculiar privileges of his own, promised that if he could by any means make an occasion,
he would let the Duke know that their side of the Coalition was more than contented with the
way in which he did his work.

"You don't think we've made a mess of it?" she said to Phineas, asking him a question. "I don't
think that the Duke has made a mess of it,--or you," said Phineas, who had come to love the
Duchess because his wife loved her. "But it won't go on for ever, Duchess." "You know what
I've done," said the Duchess, who took it for granted that Mr. Finn knew all that his wife
knew. "Has it answered?" Phineas was silent for a moment. "Of course you will tell me the truth.
You won't be so bad as to flatter me now that I am so much in earnest." "I almost think," said
Phineas, "that the time has gone by for what one may call drawing-room influences. They used
to be very great. Old Lord Brock used them extensively, though by no means as your Grace has
done. But the spirit of the world has changed since then." "The spirit of the world never changes,"
said the Duchess, in her soreness.

But her strongest dependence was on the old Duke. The party at the Castle was almost broken
up when she consulted him. She had been so far true to her husband as not to ask another guest
to the house since his command;--but they who had been asked before came and went as had been
arranged. Then, when the place was nearly empty, and when Locock and Millepois and Pritchard
were wondering among themselves at this general collapse, she asked her husband's leave to
invite their old friend again for a day or two. "I do so want to see him, and I think he'll
come," said the Duchess. The Duke gave his permission with a ready smile,--not because the
proposed visitor was his own confidential friend, but because it suited his spirit to grant
such a request as to any one after the order that he had given. Had she named Major Pountney,
I think he would have smiled and acceded.

The Duke came, and to him she poured out her whole soul. "It has been for him and for his honour
that I have done it;--that men and women might know how really gracious he is, and how good.
Of course, there has been money spent, but he can afford it without hurting the children. It
has been so necessary that with a Coalition people should know each other! There was some little
absurd row here. A man who was a mere nobody, one of the travelling butterfly men that fill
up spaces and talk to girls, got hold of him and was impertinent. He is so thin-skinned that
he could not shake the creature into the dust as you would have done. It annoyed him,--that,
and, I think, seeing so many strange faces,--so that he came to me and declared, that as long
as he remained in office he would not have another person in the house, either here or in London.
He meant it literally, and he meant me to understand it literally. I had to get special leave
before I could ask so dear an old friend as your Grace."

"I don't think he would object to me," said the Duke, laughing.

"Of course not. He was only too glad to think you would come. But he took the request as being
quite the proper thing. It will kill me if this is to be carried out. After all that I have
done, I could show myself nowhere. And it will be so injurious to him! Could not you tell him,
Duke? No one else in the world can tell him but you. Nothing unfair has been attempted. No
job has been done. I have endeavoured to make his house pleasant to people, in order that they
might look upon him with grace and favour. Is that wrong? Is that unbecoming a wife?"

The old Duke patted her on the head as though she were a little girl, and was more comforting
to her than her other counsellors. He would say nothing to her husband now;--but they must
both be up in London at the meeting of Parliament, and then he would tell his friend that,
in his opinion, no sudden change should be made. "This husband of yours is a very peculiar
man," he said, smiling. "His honesty is not like the honesty of other men. It is more downright;--more
absolutely honest; less capable of bearing even the shadow which the stain from another's dishonesty
might throw upon it. Give him credit for all that, and remember that you cannot find everything
combined in the same person. He is very practical in some things, but the question is, whether
he is not too scrupulous to be practical in all things." At the close of the interview the
Duchess kissed him and promised to be guided by him. The occurrences of the last few weeks
had softened the Duchess much.

CHAPTER XXIX

The Two Candidates for Silverbridge

On his arrival in London Ferdinand Lopez found a letter waiting for him from the Duchess. This
came into his hand immediately on his reaching the rooms in Belgrave Mansions, and was of course
the first object of his care. "That contains my fate," he said to his wife, putting his hand
down upon the letter. He had talked to her much of the chance that had come in his way, and
had shown himself to be very ambitious of the honour offered to him. She of course had sympathised
with him, and was willing to think all good things both of the Duchess and of the Duke, if
they would between them put her husband into Parliament. He paused a moment, still holding
the letter under his hand. "You would hardly think that I should be such a coward that I don't
like to open it," he said.

"You've got to do it."

"Unless I make you do it for me," he said, holding out the letter to her. "You will have to
learn how weak I am. When I am really anxious I become like a child."

"I do not think you are ever weak," she said, caressing him. "If there were a thing to be done
you would do it at once. But I'll open it if you like." Then he tore off the envelope with
an air of comic importance and stood for a few minutes while he read it.

"What I first perceive is that there has been a row about it," he said.

"A row about it! What sort of a row?"

"My dear friend the Duchess has not quite hit it off with my less dear friend the Duke."

"She does not say so?"

"Oh dear, no! My friend the Duchess is much too discreet for that;--but I can see that it has
been so."

"Are you to be the new member? If that is arranged I don't care a bit about the Duke and Duchess."

"These things do not settle themselves quite so easily as that. I am not to have the seat at
any rate without fighting for it. There's the letter."

The Duchess's letter to her new adherent shall be given, but it must first be understood that
many different ideas had passed through the writer's mind between the writing of the letter
and the order given by the Prime Minister to his wife concerning the borough. She of course
became aware at once that Mr. Lopez must be informed that she could not do for him what she
had suggested that she would do. But there was no necessity of writing at the instant. Mr.
Grey had not yet vacated the seat, and Mr. Lopez was away on his travels. The month of January
was passed in comparative quiet at the Castle, and during that time it became known at Silverbridge
that the election would be open. The Duke would not even make a suggestion, and would neither
express, nor feel, resentment should a member be returned altogether hostile to his Ministry.
By degrees the Duchess accustomed herself to this condition of affairs, and as the consternation
caused by her husband's very imperious conduct wore off, she began to ask herself whether even
yet she need quite give up the game. She could not make a Member of Parliament altogether out
of her own hand, as she had once fondly hoped she might do; but still she might do something.
She would in nothing disobey her husband, but if Mr. Lopez were to stand for Silverbridge,
it could not but be known in the borough that Mr. Lopez was her friend. Therefore she wrote
the following letter:--

   Gatherum, -- January, 18--.

   MY DEAR MR. LOPEZ,

   I remember that you said that you would be home at this
   time, and therefore I write to you about the borough.
   Things are changed since you went away, and, I fear, not
   changed for your advantage.

   We understand that Mr. Grey will apply for the Chiltern
   Hundreds at the end of March, and that the election will
   take place in April. No candidate will appear as favoured
   from hence. We used to run a favourite, and our favourite
   would sometimes win,--would sometimes even have a walk
   over; but those good times are gone. All the good times
   are going, I think. There is no reason that I know why you
   should not stand as well as any one else. You can be early
   in the field;--because it is only now known that there
   will be no Gatherum interest. And I fancy it has already
   leaked out that you would have been the favourite if there
   had been a favourite;--which might be beneficial.

   I need hardly say that I do not wish my name to be
   mentioned in the matter.

   Sincerely yours,

   GLENCORA OMNIUM.

   Sprugeon, the ironmonger, would, I do not doubt, be proud
   to nominate you.

"I don't understand much about it," said Emily.

"I dare say not. It is not meant that any novice should understand much about it. Of course
you will not mention her Grace's letter."

"Certainly not."

"She intends to do the very best she can for me. I have no doubt that some understrapper from
the Castle has had some communication with Mr. Sprugeon. The fact is that the Duke won't be
seen in it, but that the Duchess does not mean that the borough shall quite slip through their
fingers."

"Shall you try it?"

"If I do I must send an agent down to see Mr. Sprugeon on the sly, and the sooner I do so the
better. I wonder what your father will say about it?"

"He is an old Conservative."

"But would he not like his son-in-law to be in Parliament?"

"I don't know that he would care about it very much. He seems always to laugh at people who
want to get into Parliament. But if you have set your heart upon it, Ferdinand--"

"I have not set my heart on spending a great deal of money. When I first thought of Silverbridge
the expense would have been almost nothing. It would have been a walk over, as the Duchess
calls it. But now there will certainly be a contest."

"Give it up if you cannot afford it."

"Nothing venture nothing have. You don't think your father would help me in doing it? It would
add almost as much to your position as to mine." Emily shook her head. She had always heard
her father ridicule the folly of men who spent more than they could afford in the vanity of
writing two letters after their name, and she now explained that it had always been so with
him. "You would not mind asking him," he said.

"I will ask him if you wish it, certainly." Ever since their marriage he had been teaching
her,--intentionally teaching her,--that it would be the duty of both of them to get all they
could from her father. She had learned the lesson, but it had been very distasteful to her.
It had not induced her to think ill of her husband. She was too much engrossed with him, too
much in love with him for that. But she was beginning to feel that the world in general was
hard and greedy and uncomfortable. If it was proper that a father should give his daughter
money when she was married, why did not her father do so without waiting to be asked? And yet,
if he were unwilling to do so, would it not be better to leave him to his pleasure in the matter?
But now she began to perceive that her father was to be regarded as a milch cow, and that she
was to be the dairy-maid. Her husband at times would become terribly anxious on the subject.
On receiving the promise of £3000 he had been elated, but since that he had continually talked
of what more her father ought to do for them.

"Perhaps I had better take the bull by the horns," he said, "and do it myself. Then I shall
find out whether he really has our interest at heart, or whether he looks on you as a stranger
because you've gone away from him."

"I don't think he will look upon me as a stranger."

"We'll see," said Lopez.

It was not long before he made the experiment. He had called himself a coward as to the opening
of the Duchess's letter, but he had in truth always courage for perils of this nature. On the
day of their arrival they dined with Mr. Wharton in Manchester Square, and certainly the old
man had received his daughter with great delight. He had been courteous also to Lopez, and
Emily, amidst the pleasure of his welcome, had forgotten some of her troubles. The three were
alone together, and when Emily had asked after her brother, Mr. Wharton had laughed and said
that Everett was an ass. "You have not quarrelled with him?" she said. He ridiculed the idea
of any quarrel, but again said that Everett was an ass.

After dinner Mr. Wharton and Lopez were left together, as the old man, whether alone or in
company, always sat for an hour sipping port wine after the manner of his forefathers. Lopez
had already determined that he would not let the opportunity escape him, and began his attack
at once. "I have been invited, sir," he said with his sweetest smile, "to stand for Silverbridge."

"You too!" said Mr. Wharton. But, though there was a certain amount of satire in the exclamation,
it had been good-humoured satire.

"Yes, sir. We all get bit sooner or later, I suppose."

"I never was bit."

"Your sagacity and philosophy have been the wonder of the world, sir. There can be no doubt
that in my profession a seat in the House would be of the greatest possible advantage to me.
It enables a man to do a great many things which he could not touch without it."

"It may be so. I don't know anything about it."

"And then it is a great honour."

"That depends on how you get it, and how you use it;--very much also on whether you are fit
for it."

"I shall get it honestly if I do get it. I hope I may use it well. And as for my fitness, I
must leave that to be ascertained when I am there. I am sorry to say there will probably be
a contest."

"I suppose so. A seat in Parliament without a contest does not drop into every young man's mouth."

"It very nearly dropped into mine." Then he told his father-in-law almost all the particulars
of the offer which had been made him, and of the manner in which the seat was now suggested
to him. He somewhat hesitated in the use of the name of the Duchess, leaving an impression
on Mr. Wharton that the offer had in truth come from the Duke. "Should there be a contest,
would you help me?"

"In what way? I could not canvass at Silverbridge, if you mean that."

"I was not thinking of giving you personal trouble."

"I don't know a soul in the place. I shouldn't know that there was such a place except that
it returns a member of Parliament."

"I meant with money, sir."

"To pay the election bills! No; certainly not. Why should I?"

"For Emily's sake."

"I don't think it would do Emily any good, or you either. It would certainly do me none. It
is a kind of luxury that a man should not attempt to enjoy unless he can afford it easily."

"A luxury!"

"Yes, a luxury; just as much as a four-in-hand coach or a yacht. Men go into Parliament because
it gives them fashion, position, and power."

"I should go to serve my country."

"Success in your profession I thought you said was your object. Of course you must do as you
please. If you ask me for advice, I advise you not to try it. But certainly I will not help
you with money. That ass Everett is quarrelling with me at this moment because I won't give
him money to go and stand somewhere."

"Not at Silverbridge!"

"I'm sure I can't say. But don't let me do him an injury. To give him his due, he is more reasonable
than you, and only wants a promise from me that I will pay electioneering bills for him at
the next general election. I have refused him,--though for reasons which I need not mention
I think him better fitted for Parliament than you. I must certainly also refuse you. I cannot
imagine any circumstances which would induce me to pay a shilling towards getting you into
Parliament. If you won't drink any more wine, we'll join Emily upstairs."

This had been very plain speaking, and by no means comfortable to Lopez. What of personal discourtesy
there had been in the lawyer's words,--and they had not certainly been flattering,--he could
throw off from him as meaning nothing. As he could not afford to quarrel with his father-in-law,
he thought it probable that he might have to bear a good deal of incivility from the old man.
He was quite prepared to bear it as long as he could see a chance of a reward;--though, should
there be no such chance, he would be ready to avenge it. But there had been a decision in the
present refusal which made him quite sure that it would be vain to repeat his request. "I shall
find out, sir," he said, "whether it may probably be a costly affair, and if so I shall give
it up. You are rather hard upon me as to my motives."

"I only repeated what you told me yourself."

"I am quite sure of my own intentions, and know that I need not be ashamed of them."

"Not if you have plenty of money. It all depends on that. If you have plenty of money, and
your fancy goes that way, it is all very well. Come, we'll go upstairs."

The next day he saw Everett Wharton, who welcomed him back with warm affection. "He'll do nothing
for me;--nothing at all. I am almost beginning to doubt whether he'll ever speak to me again."

"Nonsense!"

"I tell you everything, you know," said Everett. "In January I lost a little money at whist.
They got plunging at the club, and I was in it. I had to tell him, of course. He keeps me so
short that I can't stand any blow without going to him like a school-boy."

"Was it much?"

"No;--to him no more than half-a-crown to you. I had to ask him for a hundred and fifty."

"He refused it!"

"No;--he didn't do that. Had it been ten times as much, if I owed the money, he would pay it.
But he blew me up, and talked about gambling,--and--and--"

"I should have taken that as a matter of course."

"But I'm not a gambler. A man now and then may fall into a thing of that kind, and if he's
decently well off and don't do it often, he can bear it."

"I thought your quarrel had been altogether about Parliament."

"Oh no! He has been always the same about that. He told me that I was going head foremost to
the dogs, and I couldn't stand that. I shouldn't be surprised if he hasn't lost more at cards
than I have during the last two years." Lopez made an offer to act as go-between, to effect
a reconciliation; but Everett declined the offer. "It would be making too much of an absurdity,"
he said. "When he wants to see me, I suppose he'll send for me."

Lopez did dispatch an agent down to Mr. Sprugeon at Silverbridge, and the agent found that
Mr. Sprugeon was a very discreet man. Mr. Sprugeon at first knew little or nothing,--seemed
hardly to be aware that there was a member of Parliament for Silverbridge, and declared himself
to be indifferent as to the parliamentary character of the borough. But at last he melted a
little, and by degrees, over a glass of hot brandy-and-water with the agent at the Palliser
Arms, confessed to a shade of an opinion that the return of Mr. Lopez for the borough would
not be disagreeable to some person or persons who did not live quite a hundred miles away.
The instructions given by Lopez to his agent were of the most cautious kind. The agent was
merely to feel the ground, make a few inquiries, and do nothing. His client did not intend
to stand unless he could see the way to almost certain success with very little outlay. But
the agent, perhaps liking the job, did a little outstep his employer's orders. Mr. Sprugeon,
when the frost of his first modesty had been thawed, introduced the agent to Mr. Sprout, the
maker of cork soles, and Mr. Sprugeon and Mr. Sprout between them had soon decided that Mr.
Ferdinand Lopez should be run for the borough as the "Castle" candidate. "The Duke won't interfere,"
said Sprugeon; "and, of course, the Duke's man of business can't do anything openly;--but the
Duke's people will know." Then Mr. Sprout told the agent that there was already another candidate
in the field, and in a whisper communicated the gentleman's name. When the agent got back to
London, he gave Lopez to understand that he must certainly put himself forward. The borough
expected him. Sprugeon and Sprout considered themselves pledged to bring him forward and support
him,--on behalf of the Castle. Sprugeon was quite sure that the Castle influence was predominant.
The Duke's name had never been mentioned at Silverbridge,--hardly even that of the Duchess.
Since the Duke's declaration "The Castle" had taken the part which the old Duke used to play.
The agent was quite sure that no one could get in for Silverbridge without having the Castle
on his side. No doubt the Duke's declaration had had the ill effect of bringing up a competitor,
and thus of causing expense. That could not now be helped. The agent was of opinion that the
Duke had had no alternative. The agent hinted that times were changing, and that though dukes
were still dukes, and could still exercise ducal influences, they were driven by these changes
to act in an altered form. The proclamation had been especially necessary because the Duke
was Prime Minister. The agent did not think that Mr. Lopez should be in the least angry with
the Duke. Everything would be done that the Castle could do, and Lopez would be no doubt returned,--though,
unfortunately, not without some expense. How much would it cost? Any accurate answer to such
a question would be impossible, but probably about £600. It might be £800;--could not possibly
be above £1000. Lopez winced as he heard these sums named, but he did not decline the contest.

Then the name of the opposition candidate was whispered to Lopez. It was Arthur Fletcher! Lopez
started, and asked some questions as to Mr. Fletcher's interest in the neighbourhood. The Fletchers
were connected with the De Courcys, and as soon as the declaration of the Duke had been made
known, the De Courcy interest had aroused itself, and had invited that rising young barrister,
Arthur Fletcher, to stand for the borough on strictly conservative views. Arthur Fletcher had
acceded, and a printed declaration of his purpose and political principles had been just published.
"I have beaten him once," said Lopez to himself, "and I think I can beat him again."

CHAPTER XXX

"Yes;--a Lie!"

"So you went to Happerton after all," said Lopez to his ally, Mr. Sextus Parker. "You couldn't
believe me when I told you the money was all right! What a cur you are!"

"That's right;--abuse me."

"Well, it was horrid. Didn't I tell you that it must necessarily injure me with the house?
How are two fellows to get on together unless they can put some trust in each other? Even if
I did run you into a difficulty, do you really think I'm ruffian enough to tell you that the
money was there if it were untrue?"

Sexty looked like a cur and felt like a cur, as he was being thus abused. He was not angry
with his friend for calling him bad names, but only anxious to excuse himself. "I was out of
sorts," he said, "and so d----d hippish I didn't know what I was about."

"Brandy-and-soda!" suggested Lopez.

"Perhaps a little of that;--though, by Jove, it isn't often I do that kind of thing. I don't
know a fellow who works harder for his wife and children than I do. But when one sees such
things all round one,--a fellow utterly smashed here who had a string of hunters yesterday,
and another fellow buying a house in Piccadilly and pulling it down because it isn't big enough,
who was contented with a little box at Hornsey last summer, one doesn't quite know how to keep
one's legs."

"If you want to learn a lesson look at the two men, and see where the difference lies. The
one has had some heart about him, and the other has been a coward."

Parker scratched his head, balanced himself on the hind legs of his stool, and tacitly acknowledged
the truth of all that his enterprising friend said to him. "Has old Wharton come down well?"
at last he asked.

"I have never said a word to old Wharton about money," Lopez replied,--"except as to the cost
of this election I was telling you of."

"And he wouldn't do anything in that?"

"He doesn't approve of the thing itself. I don't doubt but that the old gentleman and I shall
understand each other before long."

"You've got the length of his foot."

"But I don't mean to drive him. I can get along without that. He's an old man, and he can't
take his money along with him when he goes the great journey."

"There's a brother, Lopez,--isn't there?"

"Yes,--there's a brother; but Wharton has enough for two; and if he were to put either out
of his will it wouldn't be my wife. Old men don't like parting with their money, and he's like
other old men. If it were not so I shouldn't bother myself coming into the city at all."

"Has he enough for that, Lopez?"

"I suppose he's worth a quarter of a million."

"By Jove! And where did he get it?"

"Perseverance, sir. Put by a shilling a day, and let it have its natural increase, and see
what it will come to at the end of fifty years. I suppose old Wharton has been putting by two
or three thousand out of his professional income, at any rate for the last thirty years, and
never for a moment forgetting its natural increase. That's one way to make a fortune."

"It ain't rapid enough for you and me, Lopez."

"No. That was the old-fashioned way, and the most sure. But, as you say, it is not rapid enough;
and it robs a man of the power of enjoying his money when he has made it. But it's a very good
thing to be closely connected with a man who has already done that kind of thing. There's no
doubt about the money when it is there. It does not take to itself wings and fly away."

"But the man who has it sticks to it uncommon hard."

"Of course he does;--but he can't take it away with him."

"He can leave it to hospitals, Lopez. That's the devil!"

"Sexty, my boy, I see you have taken an outlook into human life which does you credit. Yes,
he can leave it to hospitals. But why does he leave it to hospitals?"

"Something of being afraid about his soul, I suppose."

"No; I don't believe in that. Such a man as this, who has been hard-fisted all his life, and
who has had his eyes thoroughly open, who has made his own money in the sharp intercourse of
man to man, and who keeps it to the last gasp,--he doesn't believe that he'll do his soul any
good by giving it to hospitals when he can't keep it himself any longer. His mind has freed
itself from those cobwebs long since. He gives his money to hospitals because the last pleasure
of which he is capable is that of spiting his relations. And it is a great pleasure to an old
man, when his relations have been disgusted with him for being old and loving his money. I
rather think I should do it myself."

"I'd give myself a chance of going to heaven, I think," said Parker.

"Don't you know that men will rob and cheat on their death-beds, and say their prayers all
the time? Old Wharton won't leave his money to hospitals if he's well handled by those about him."

"And you'll handle him well;--eh, Lopez?"

"I won't quarrel with him, or tell him that he's a curmudgeon because he doesn't do all that
I want him. He's over seventy, and he can't carry his money with him."

All this left so vivid an impression of the wisdom of his friend on the mind of Sextus Parker,
that in spite of the harrowing fears by which he had been tormented on more than one occasion
already, he allowed himself to be persuaded into certain fiscal arrangements, by which Lopez
would find himself put at ease with reference to money at any rate for the next four months.
He had at once told himself that this election would cost him £1000. When various sums were
mentioned in reference to such an affair, safety could alone be found in taking the outside
sum;--perhaps might generally be more surely found by adding fifty per cent. to that. He knew
that he was wrong about the election, but he assured himself that he had had no alternative.
The misfortune had been that the Duke should have made his proclamation about the borough immediately
after the offer made by the Duchess. He had been almost forced to send the agent down to inquire;--and
the agent, when making his inquiries, had compromised him. He must go on with it now. Perhaps
some idea of the pleasantness of increased intimacy with the Duchess of Omnium encouraged him
in this way of thinking. The Duchess was up in town in February, and Lopez left a card in Carlton
Terrace. On the very next day the card of the Duchess was left for Mrs. Lopez at the Belgrave
Mansions.

Lopez went into the city every day, leaving home at about eleven o'clock, and not returning
much before dinner. The young wife at first found that she hardly knew what to do with her
time. Her aunt, Mrs. Roby, was distasteful to her. She had already learned from her husband
that he had but little respect for Mrs. Roby. "You remember the sapphire brooch," he had said
once. "That was part of the price I had to pay for being allowed to approach you." He was sitting
at the time with his arm round her waist, looking out on beautiful scenery and talking of his
old difficulties. She could not find it in her heart to be angry with him, but the idea brought
to her mind was disagreeable to her. And she was thoroughly angry with Mrs. Roby. Of course
in these days Mrs. Roby came to see her, and of course when she was up in Manchester Square,
she went to the house round the corner,--but there was no close intimacy between the aunt and
the niece. And many of her father's friends,--whom she regarded as the Herefordshire set,--were
very cold to her. She had not made herself a glory to Herefordshire, and,--as all these people
said,--had broken the heart of the best Herefordshire young man of the day. This made a great
falling-off in her acquaintance, which was the more felt as she had never been, as a girl,
devoted to a large circle of dearest female friends. She whom she had loved best had been Mary
Wharton, and Mary Wharton had refused to be her bridesmaid almost without an expression of
regret. She saw her father occasionally. Once he came and dined with them at their rooms, on
which occasion Lopez struggled hard to make up a well-sounding party. There were Roby from
the Admiralty, and the Happertons, and Sir Timothy Beeswax, with whom Lopez had become acquainted
at Gatherum, and old Lord Mongrober. But the barrister, who had dined out a good deal in his
time, perceived the effort. Who, that ever with difficulty scraped his dinner guests together,
was able afterwards to obliterate the signs of the struggle? It was, however, a first attempt,
and Lopez, whose courage was good, thought that he might do better before long. If he could
get into the House and make his mark there people then would dine with him fast enough. But
while this was going on Emily's life was rather dull. He had provided her with a brougham,
and everything around her was even luxurious, but there came upon her gradually a feeling that
by her marriage she had divided herself from her own people. She did not for a moment allow
this feeling to interfere with her loyalty to him. Had she not known that this division would
surely take place? Had she not married him because she loved him better than her own people?
So she sat herself down to read Dante,--for they had studied Italian together during their
honeymoon, and she had found that he knew the language well. And she was busy with her needle.
And she already began to anticipate the happiness which would come to her when a child of his
should be lying in her arms.

She was of course much interested about the election. Nothing could as yet be done, because
as yet there was no vacancy; but still the subject was discussed daily between them. "Who do
you think is going to stand against me?" he said one day with a smile. "A very old friend of
yours." She knew at once who the man was, and the blood came to her face. "I think he might
as well have left it alone, you know," he said.

"Did he know?" she asked in a whisper.

"Know;--of course he knew. He is doing it on purpose. But I beat him once, old girl, didn't
I? And I'll beat him again." She liked him to call her old girl. She loved the perfect intimacy
with which he treated her. But there was something which grated against her feelings in this
allusion by him to the other man who had loved her. Of course she had told him the whole story.
She had conceived it to be her duty to do so. But then the thing should have been over. It
was necessary, perhaps, that he should tell her who was his opponent. It was impossible that
she should not know when the fight came. But she did not like to hear him boast that he had
beaten Arthur Fletcher once, and that he would beat him again. By doing so he likened the sweet
fragrance of her love to the dirty turmoil of an electioneering contest.

He did not understand,--how should he?--that though she had never loved Arthur Fletcher, had
never been able to bring herself to love him when all her friends had wished it, her feelings
to him were nevertheless those of affectionate friendship;--that she regarded him as being
perfect in his way, a thorough gentleman, a man who would not for worlds tell a lie, as most
generous among the generous, most noble among the noble. When the other Whartons had thrown
her off, he had not been cold to her. That very day, as soon as her husband had left her, she
looked again at that little note. "I am as I always have been!" And she remembered that farewell
down by the banks of the Wye. "You will always have one,--one besides him,--who will love you
best in the world." They were dangerous words for her to remember; but in recalling them to
her memory she had often assured herself that they should not be dangerous to her. She was
too sure of her own heart to be afraid of danger. She had loved the one man and had not loved
the other;--but yet, now, when her husband talked of beating this man again, she could not
but remember the words.

She did not think,--or rather had not thought,--that Arthur Fletcher would willingly stand
against her husband. It had occurred to her at once that he must first have become a candidate
without knowing who would be his opponent. But Ferdinand had assured her as a matter of fact
that Fletcher had known all about it. "I suppose in politics men are different," she said to
herself. Her husband had evidently supposed that Arthur Fletcher had proposed himself as a
candidate for Silverbridge, with the express object of doing an injury to the man who had carried
off his love. And she repeated to herself her husband's words, "He is doing it on purpose."
She did not like to differ from her husband, but she could hardly bring herself to believe
that revenge of this kind should have recommended itself to Arthur Fletcher.

Some little time after this, when she had been settled in London about a month, a letter was
brought her, and she at once recognised Arthur Fletcher's writing. She was alone at the time,
and it occurred to her at first that perhaps she ought not to open any communication from him
without showing it to her husband. But then it seemed that such a hesitation would imply a
doubt of the man, and almost a doubt of herself. Why should she fear what any man might write
to her? So she opened the letter, and read it,--with infinite pleasure. It was as follows:--

   MY DEAR MRS. LOPEZ,

   I think it best to make an explanation to you as to a
   certain coincidence which might possibly be misunderstood
   unless explained. I find that your husband and I are to
   be opponents at Silverbridge. I wish to say that I had
   pledged myself to the borough before I had heard his name
   as connected with it. I have very old associations with
   the neighbourhood, and was invited to stand by friends
   who had known me all my life as soon as it was understood
   that there would be an open contest. I cannot retire now
   without breaking faith with my party, nor do I know that
   there is any reason why I should do so. I should not,
   however, have come forward had I known that Mr. Lopez was
   to stand. I think you had better tell him so, and tell
   him also, with my compliments, that I hope we may fight
   our political battle with mutual good-fellowship and
   good-feeling.

   Yours very sincerely,

   ARTHUR FLETCHER.

Emily was very much pleased by this letter, and yet she wept over it. She felt that she understood
accurately all the motives that were at work within the man's breast when he was writing it.
As to its truth,--of course the letter was gospel to her. Oh,--if the man could become her
husband's friend how sweet it would be! Of course she wished, thoroughly wished, that her husband
should succeed at Silverbridge. But she could understand that such a contest as this might
be carried on without personal animosity. The letter was so like Arthur Fletcher,--so good,
so noble, so generous, so true! The moment her husband came in she showed it to him with delight.
"I was sure," she said as he was reading the letter, "that he had not known that you were to
stand."

"He knew it as well as I did," he replied, and as he spoke there came a dark scowl across his
brow. "His writing to you is a piece of infernal impudence."

"Oh, Ferdinand!"

"You don't understand, but I do. He deserves to be horsewhipped for daring to write to you,
and if I can come across him he shall have it."

"Oh,--for heaven's sake!"

"A man who was your rejected lover,--who has been trying to marry you for the last two years,
presuming to commence a correspondence with you without your husband's sanction!"

"He meant you to see it. He says I am to tell you."

"Psha! That is simple cowardice. He meant you not to tell me; and then when you had answered
him without telling me, he would have had the whip-hand of you."

"Oh, Ferdinand, what evil thoughts you have!"

"You are a child, my dear, and must allow me to dictate to you what you ought to think in such
a matter as this. I tell you he knew all about my candidature, and that what he has said here
to the contrary is a mere lie;--yes, a lie." He repeated the word because he saw that she shrank
at hearing it; but he did not understand why she shrank,--that the idea of such an accusation
against Arthur Fletcher was intolerable to her. "I have never heard of such a thing," he continued.
"Do you suppose it is common for men who have been thrown over to write to the ladies who have
rejected them immediately after their marriage?"

"Do not the circumstances justify it?"

"No;--they make it infinitely worse. He should have felt himself to be debarred from writing
to you, both as being my wife and as being the wife of the man whom he intends to oppose at
Silverbridge."

This he said with so much anger that he frightened her. "It is not my fault," she said.

"No; it is not your fault. But you should regard it as a great fault committed by him."

"What am I to do?"

"Give me the letter. You, of course, can do nothing."

"You will not quarrel with him?"

"Certainly I will. I have quarrelled with him already. Do you think I will allow any man to
insult my wife without quarrelling with him? What I shall do I cannot yet say, and whatever
I may do, you had better not know. I never thought much of these Herefordshire swells who believe
themselves to be the very cream of the earth, and now I think less of them than ever."

He was then silent, and slowly she took herself out of the room, and went away to dress. All
this was very terrible. He had never been rough to her before, and she could not at all understand
why he had been so rough to her now. Surely it was impossible that he should be jealous because
her old lover had written to her such a letter as that which she had shown him! And then she
was almost stunned by the opinions he had expressed about Fletcher, opinions which she knew,--was
sure that she knew,--to be absolutely erroneous. A liar! Oh, heavens! And then the letter itself
was so ingenuous and so honest! Anxious as she was to do all that her husband bade her, she
could not be guided by him in this matter. And then she remembered his words: "You must allow
me to dictate to you what you ought to think." Could it be that marriage meant as much as that,--that
a husband was to claim to dictate to his wife what opinions she was to form about this and
that person,--about a person she had known so well, whom he had never known? Surely she could
only think in accordance with her own experience and her own intelligence! She was certain
that Arthur Fletcher was no liar. Not even her own husband could make her think that.

CHAPTER XXXI

"Yes;--with a Horsewhip in My Hand"

Emily Lopez, when she crept out of her own room and joined her husband just before dinner,
was hardly able to speak to him, so thoroughly was she dismayed, and troubled, and horrified,
by the manner in which he had taken Arthur Fletcher's letter. While she had been alone she
had thought it all over, anxious if possible to bring herself into sympathy with her husband;
but the more she thought of it the more evident did it become to her that he was altogether
wrong. He was so wrong that it seemed to her that she would be a hypocrite if she pretended
to agree with him. There were half-a-dozen accusations conveyed against Mr. Fletcher by her
husband's view of the matter. He was a liar, giving a false account of his candidature;--and
he was a coward; and an enemy to her, who had laid a plot by which he had hoped to make her
act fraudulently towards her own husband, who had endeavoured to creep into a correspondence
with her, and so to compromise her! All this, which her husband's mind had so easily conceived,
was not only impossible to her, but so horrible that she could not refrain from disgust at
her husband's conception. The letter had been left with him, but she remembered every word
of it. She was sure that it was an honest letter, meaning no more than had been said,--simply
intending to explain to her that he would not willingly have stood in the way of a friend whom
he had loved, by interfering with her husband's prospects. And yet she was told that she was
to think as her husband bade her think! She could not think so. She could not say that she
thought so. If her husband would not credit her judgment, let the matter be referred to her
father. Ferdinand would at any rate acknowledge that her father could understand such a matter
even if she could not.

During dinner he said nothing on the subject, nor did she. They were attended by a page in
buttons whom he had hired to wait upon her, and the meal passed off almost in silence. She
looked up at him frequently and saw that his brow was still black. As soon as they were alone
she spoke to him, having studied during dinner what words she would first say: "Are you going
down to the club to-night?" He had told her that the matter of this election had been taken
up at the Progress, and that possibly he might have to meet two or three persons there on this
evening. There had been a proposition that the club should bear a part of the expenditure,
and he was very solicitous that such an arrangement should be made.

"No," said he, "I shall not go out to-night. I am not sufficiently light-hearted."

"What makes you heavy-hearted, Ferdinand?"

"I should have thought you would have known."

"I suppose I do know,--but I don't know why it should. I don't know why you should be displeased.
At any rate, I have done nothing wrong."

"No;--not as to the letter. But it astonishes me that you should be so--so bound to this man
that--"

"Bound to him, Ferdinand!"

"No;--you are bound to me. But that you have so much regard for him as not to see that he has
grossly insulted you."

"I have a regard for him."

"And you dare to tell me so?"

"Dare! What should I be if I had any feeling which I did not dare to tell you? There is no
harm in regarding a man with friendly feelings whom I have known since I was a child, and whom
all my family have loved."

"Your family wanted you to marry him!"

"They did. But I have married you, because I loved you. But I need not think badly of an old
friend, because I did not love him. Why should you be angry with him? What can you have to
be afraid of?" Then she came and sat on his knee and caressed him.

"It is he that shall be afraid of me," said Lopez. "Let him give the borough up if he means
what he says."

"Who could ask him to do that?"

"Not you,--certainly."

"Oh, no."

"I can ask him."

"Could you, Ferdinand?"

"Yes;--with a horsewhip in my hand."

"Indeed, indeed you do not know him. Will you do this;--will you tell my father everything,
and leave it to him to say whether Mr. Fletcher has behaved badly to you?"

"Certainly not. I will not have any interference from your father between you and me. If I
had listened to your father, you would not have been here now. Your father is not as yet a
friend of mine. When he comes to know what I can do for myself, and that I can rise higher
than these Herefordshire people, then perhaps he may become my friend. But I will consult him
in nothing so peculiar to myself as my own wife. And you must understand that in coming to
me all obligation from you to him became extinct. Of course he is your father; but in such
a matter as this he has no more to say to you than any stranger." After that he hardly spoke
to her; but sat for an hour with a book in his hand, and then rose and said that he would go
down to the club. "There is so much villainy about," he said, "that a man if he means to do
anything must keep himself on the watch."

When she was alone she at once burst into tears; but she soon dried her eyes, and putting down
her work, settled herself to think of it all. What did it mean? Why was he thus changed to
her? Could it be that he was the same Ferdinand to whom she had given herself without a doubt
as to his personal merit? Every word that he had spoken since she had shown him the letter
from Arthur Fletcher had been injurious to her, and offensive. It almost seemed as though he
had determined to show himself to be a tyrant to her, and had only put off playing the part
till the first convenient opportunity after their honeymoon. But through all this, her ideas
were loyal to him. She would obey him in all things where obedience was possible, and would
love him better than all the world. Oh yes;--for was he not her husband? Were he to prove himself
the worst of men she would still love him. It had been for better or for worse; and as she
had repeated the words to herself, she had sworn that if the worst should come, she would still
be true.

But she could not bring herself to say that Arthur Fletcher had behaved badly. She could not
lie. She knew well that his conduct had been noble and generous. Then unconsciously and involuntarily,--or
rather in opposition to her own will and inward efforts,--her mind would draw comparisons between
her husband and Arthur Fletcher. There was some peculiar gift, or grace, or acquirement belonging
without dispute to the one, and which the other lacked. What was it? She had heard her father
say when talking of gentlemen,--of that race of gentlemen with whom it had been his lot to
live,--that you could not make a silk purse out of a sow's ear. The use of the proverb had
offended her much, for she had known well whom he had then regarded as a silk purse and whom
as a sow's ear. But now she perceived that there had been truth in all this, though she was
as anxious as ever to think well of her husband, and to endow him with all possible virtues.
She had once ventured to form a doctrine for herself, to preach to herself a sermon of her
own, and to tell herself that this gift of gentle blood and of gentle nurture, of which her
father thought so much, and to which something of divinity was attributed down in Herefordshire,
was after all but a weak, spiritless quality. It could exist without intellect, without heart,
and with very moderate culture. It was compatible with many littlenesses and with many vices.
As for that love of honest, courageous truth which her father was wont to attribute to it,
she regarded his theory as based upon legends, as in earlier years was the theory of the courage,
and constancy, and loyalty of the knights of those days. The beau ideal of a man which she
then pictured to herself was graced, first with intelligence, then with affection, and lastly
with ambition. She knew no reason why such a hero as her fancy created should be born of lords
and ladies rather than of working mechanics, should be English rather than Spanish or French.
The man could not be her hero without education, without attributes to be attained no doubt
more easily by the rich than by the poor; but, with that granted, with those attained, she
did not see why she, or why the world, should go back beyond the man's own self. Such had been
her theories as to men and their attributes, and acting on that, she had given herself and
all her happiness into the keeping of Ferdinand Lopez. Now, there was gradually coming upon
her a change in her convictions,--a change that was most unwelcome, that she strove to reject,--one
which she would not acknowledge that she had adopted even while adopting it. But now,--ay,
from the very hour of her marriage,--she had commenced to learn what it was that her father
had meant when he spoke of the pleasure of living with gentlemen. Arthur Fletcher certainly
was a gentleman. He would not have entertained the suspicion which her husband had expressed.
He could not have failed to believe such assertions as had been made. He could never have suggested
to his own wife that another man had endeavoured to entrap her into a secret correspondence.
She seemed to hear the tones of Arthur Fletcher's voice, as those of her husband still rang
in her ear when he bade her remember that she was now removed from her father's control. Every
now and then the tears would come to her eyes, and she would sit pondering, listless, and low
in heart. Then she would suddenly rouse herself with a shake, and take up her book with a resolve
that she would read steadily, would assure herself as she did so that her husband should still
be her hero. The intelligence at any rate was there, and, in spite of his roughness, the affection
which she craved. And the ambition, too, was there. But, alas, alas! why should such vile suspicions
have fouled his mind?

He was late that night, but when he came he kissed her brow as she lay in bed, and she knew
that his temper was again smooth. She feigned to be sleepy, though not asleep, as she just
put her hand up to his cheek. She did not wish to speak to him again that night, but she was
glad to know that in the morning he would smile on her. "Be early at breakfast," he said to
her as he left her the next morning, "for I'm going down to Silverbridge to-day."

Then she started up. "To-day!"

"Yes;--by the 11.20. There is plenty of time, only don't be unusually late."

Of course she was something more than usually early, and when she came out she found him reading
his paper. "It's all settled now," he said. "Grey has applied for the Hundreds, and Mr. Rattler
is to move for the new writ to-morrow. It has come rather sudden at last, as these things always
do after long delays. But they say the suddenness is rather in my favour."

"When will the election take place?"

"I suppose in about a fortnight;--perhaps a little longer."

"And must you be at Silverbridge all that time?"

"Oh dear no. I shall stay there to-night, and perhaps to-morrow night. Of course I shall telegraph
to you directly I find how it is to be. I shall see the principal inhabitants, and probably
make a speech or two."

"I do so wish I could hear you."

"You'd find it awfully dull work, my girl. And I shall find it awfully dull too. I do not imagine
that Mr. Sprugeon and Mr. Sprout will be pleasant companions. Well; I shall stay there a day
or two and settle when I am to go down for the absolute canvass. I shall have to go with my
hat in my hand to every blessed inhabitant in that dirty little town, and ask them all to be
kind enough to drop in a paper for the most humble of their servants, Ferdinand Lopez."

"I suppose all candidates have to do the same."

"Oh yes;--your friend, Master Fletcher, will have to do it." She winced at this. Arthur Fletcher
was her friend, but at the present moment he ought not so to have spoken of him. "And from
all I hear, he is just the sort of fellow that will like the doing of it. It is odious to me
to ask a fellow that I despise for anything."

"Why should you despise them?"

"Low, ignorant, greasy cads, who have no idea of the real meaning of political privileges;--men
who would all sell their votes for thirty shillings each, if that game had not been made a
little too hot!"

"If they are like that I would not represent them."

"Oh yes, you would;--when you came to understand the world. It's a fine thing to be in Parliament,
and that is the way to get in. However, on this visit I shall only see the great men of the
town,--the Sprouts and Sprugeons."

"Shall you go to Gatherum Castle?"

"Oh, heavens, no! I may go anywhere now rather than there. The Duke is supposed to be in absolute
ignorance of the very names of the candidates, or whether there are candidates. I don't suppose
that the word Silverbridge will be even whispered in his ear till the thing is over."

"But you are to get in by his friendship."

"Or by hers;--at least I hope so. I have no doubt that the Sprouts and the Sprugeons have been
given to understand by the Lococks and the Pritchards what are the Duchess's wishes, and that
it has also been intimated in some subtle way that the Duke is willing to oblige the Duchess.
There are ever so many ways, you know, of killing a cat."

"And the expense?" suggested Emily.

"Oh,--ah; the expense. When you come to talk of the expense things are not so pleasant. I never
saw such a set of meaningless asses in my life as those men at the club. They talk and talk,
but there is not one of them who knows how to do anything. Now at the club over the way they
do arrange matters. It's a common cause, and I don't see what right they have to expect that
one man should bear all the expense. I've a deuced good mind to leave them in the lurch."

"Don't do it, Ferdinand, if you can't afford it."

"I shall go on with it now. I can't help feeling that I've been a little let in among them.
When the Duchess first promised me it was to be a simple walk over. Now that they've got their
candidate, they go back from that and open the thing to any comer. I can't tell you what I
think of Fletcher for taking advantage of such a chance. And then the political committee at
the club coolly say that they've got no money. It isn't honest, you know."

"I don't understand all that," said Emily sadly. Every word that he said about Fletcher cut
her to the heart;--not because it grieved her that Fletcher should be abused, but that her
husband should condescend to abuse him. She escaped from further conflict at the moment by
proclaiming her ignorance of the whole matter; but she knew enough of it to be well aware that
Arthur Fletcher had as good a right to stand as her husband, and that her husband lowered himself
by personal animosity to the man. Then Lopez took his departure. "Oh, Ferdinand," she said,
"I do so hope you may be successful."

"I don't think he can have a chance. From what people say, he must be a fool to try. That is,
if the Castle is true to me. I shall know more about it when I come back."

That afternoon she dined with her father, and there met Mrs. Roby. It was of course known that
Lopez had gone down to Silverbridge, and Emily learned in Manchester Square that Everett had
gone with him. "From all I hear, they're two fools for their pains," said the lawyer.

"Why, papa?"

"The Duke has given the thing up."

"But still his interest remains."

"No such thing! If there is an honest man in England it is the Duke of Omnium, and when he
says a thing he means it. Left to themselves, the people of a little town like Silverbridge
are sure to return a Conservative. They are half of them small farmers, and of course will
go that way if not made to go the other. If the club mean to pay the cost--"

"The club will pay nothing, papa."

"Then I can only hope that Lopez is doing well in his business!" After that, nothing further
was said about the election, but she perceived that her father was altogether opposed to the
idea of her husband being in Parliament, and that his sympathies and even his wishes were on
the other side. When Mrs. Roby suggested that it would be a very nice thing for them all to
have Ferdinand in Parliament,--she always called him Ferdinand now,--Mr. Wharton railed at
her. "Why should it be a nice thing? I wonder whether you have any idea of a meaning in your
head when you say that. Do you suppose that a man gets £1000 a year by going into Parliament?"

"Laws, Mr. Wharton; how uncivil you are! Of course I know that members of Parliament ain't paid."

"Where's the niceness then? If a man has his time at his command and has studied the art of
legislation it may be nice, because he will be doing his duty;--or if he wants to get into
the government ruck like your brother-in-law, it may be nice;--or if he be an idle man with
a large fortune it may be nice to have some place to go to. But why it should be nice for Ferdinand
Lopez I cannot understand. Everett has some idea in his head when he talks about Parliament,--though
I cannot say that I agree with him." It may easily be understood that after this Emily would
say nothing further in Manchester Square as to her husband's prospects at Silverbridge.

Lopez was at Silverbridge for a couple of days, and then returned, as his wife thought, by
no means confident of success. He remained in town nearly a week, and during that time he managed
to see the Duchess. He had written to her saying that he would do himself the honour of calling
on her, and when he came was admitted. But the account he gave to his wife of the visit did
not express much satisfaction. It was quite late in the evening before he told her whither
he had been. He had intended to keep the matter to himself, and at last spoke of it,--guided
by the feeling which induces all men to tell their secrets to their wives,--because it was
a comfort to him to talk to some one who would not openly contradict him. "She's a sly creature
after all," he said.

"I had always thought that she was too open rather than sly," said his wife.

"People always try to get a character just opposite to what they deserve. When I hear that
a man is always to be believed, I know that he is the most dangerous liar going. She hummed
and hawed and would not say a word about the borough. She went so far as to tell me that I
wasn't to say a word about it to her."

"Wasn't that best if her husband wished her not to talk of it?"

"It is all humbug and falsehood to the very bottom. She knows that I am spending money about
it, and she ought to be on the square with me. She ought to tell me what she can do and what
she can't. When I asked her whether Sprugeon might be trusted, she said that she really wished
that I wouldn't say anything more to her about it. I call that dishonest and sly. I shouldn't
at all wonder but that Fletcher has been with the Duke. If I find that out, won't I expose
them both!"

CHAPTER XXXII

"What Business Is It of Yours?"

Things had not gone altogether smoothly with the Duchess herself since the breaking up of the
party at Gatherum Castle,--nor perhaps quite smoothly with the Duke. It was now March. The
House was again sitting, and they were both in London,--but till they came to town they had
remained at the Castle, and that huge mansion had not been found to be more comfortable by
either of them as it became empty. For a time the Duchess had been cowed by her husband's stern
decision; but as he again became gentle to her,--almost seeming by his manner to apologise
for his unwonted roughness,--she plucked up her spirit and declared to herself that she would
not give up the battle. All that she did,--was it not for his sake? And why should she not
have her ambition in life as well as he his? And had she not succeeded in all that she had
done? Could it be right that she should be asked to abandon everything, to own herself to have
been defeated, to be shown to have failed before all the world, because such a one as Major
Pountney had made a fool of himself? She attributed it all to Major Pountney;--very wrongly.
When a man's mind is veering towards some decision, some conclusion which he has been perhaps
slow in reaching, it is probably a little thing which at last fixes his mind and clenches his
thoughts. Indeed I may say that the people, happily for their own health, show no inclination
to wear more clothing; and no doubt as a result of their conservatism in this respect they escape
many a fatal cold and attack of pneumonia, and the spread of infectious skin diseases is somewhat
reduced. I may also add that the Bishop and Fathers of the Mission do not attempt, or seem
to desire, to urge the people who come under their influence to endanger their health and their
lives for the sake of conforming to views as to clothing which have
played such havoc with tropical natives in many parts of the globe.

[40]

Physical Body Decoration, &c.
Tattooing and body-scarring are not practised by either men or women
among the Mafulu.

Depilation. He had petted her and caressed her when they met, and once even
said that nothing should really trouble him as long as he had her with him. Such a speech as
that never in his life had he made before to her! So she plucked up her courage and asked her
question,--not exactly on that occasion, but soon afterwards; "May not I say a word to Sprugeon
about the election?"

"Not a word!" And he looked at her as he had looked on that day when he had told her of the
Major's sins. She tossed her head and pouted her lips and walked on without speaking. If it
was to be so, then indeed would she have failed. And, therefore, though in his general manner
he was loving to her, things were not going smooth with her.

And things were not going smooth with him because there had reached him a most troublous dispatch
from Sir Orlando Drought only two days before the Cabinet meeting at which the points to be
made in the Queen's speech were to be decided. It had been already agreed that a proposition
should be made to Parliament by the Government, for an extension of the county suffrage, with
some slight redistribution of seats. The towns with less than 20,000 inhabitants were to take
in some increased portions of the country parishes around. But there was not enough of a policy
in this to satisfy Sir Orlando, nor was the conduct of the bill through the House to be placed
in his hands. That was to be intrusted to Mr. Monk, and Mr. Monk would be, if not nominally
the Leader, yet the chief man of the Government in the House of Commons. This was displeasing
to Sir Orlando, and he had, therefore, demanded from the Prime Minister more of a "policy."
Sir Orlando's present idea of a policy was the building four bigger ships of war than had ever
been built before,--with larger guns, and more men, and thicker iron plates, and, above all,
with a greater expenditure of money. He had even gone so far as to say, though not in his semi-official
letter to the Prime Minister, that he thought that "The Salvation of the Empire" should be
the cry of the Coalition party. "After all," he said, "what the people care about is the Salvation
of the Empire!" Sir Orlando was at the head of the Admiralty; and if glory was to be achieved
by the four ships, it would rest first on the head of Sir Orlando.

Now the Duke thought that the Empire was safe, and had been throughout his political life averse
to increasing the army and navy estimates. He regarded the four ships as altogether unnecessary,--and
when reminded that he might in this way consolidate the Coalition, said that he would rather
do without the Coalition and the four ships than have to do with both of them together,--an
opinion which was thought by some to be almost traitorous to the party as now organised. The
secrets of Cabinets are not to be disclosed lightly, but it came to be understood,--as what
is done at Cabinet meetings generally does come to be understood,--that there was something
like a disagreement. The Prime Minister, the Duke of St. Bungay, and Mr. Monk were altogether
against the four ships. Sir Orlando was supported by Lord Drummond and another of his old friends.
At the advice of the elder Duke, a paragraph was hatched, in which it was declared that her
Majesty, "having regard to the safety of the nation and the possible, though happily not probable,
chances of war, thought that the present strength of the navy should be considered." "It will
give him scope for a new gun-boat on an altered principle," said the Duke of St. Bungay. But
the Prime Minister, could he have had his own way, would have given Sir Orlando no scope whatever.
He would have let the Coalition have gone to the dogs and have fallen himself into infinite
political ruin, but that he did not dare that men should hereafter say of him that this attempt
at government had failed because he was stubborn, imperious, and self-confident. He had known
when he took his present place that he must yield to others; but he had not known how terrible
it is to have to yield when a principle is in question,--how great is the suffering when a
man finds himself compelled to do that which he thinks should not be done! Therefore, though
he had been strangely loving to his wife, the time had not gone smoothly with him.

In direct disobedience to her husband the Duchess did speak a word to Mr. Sprugeon. When at
the Castle she was frequently driven through Silverbridge, and on one occasion had her carriage
stopped at the ironmonger's door. Out came Mr. Sprugeon, and there were at first half-a-dozen
standing by who could hear what she said. Millepois, the cook, wanted to have some new kind
of iron plate erected in the kitchen. Of course she had provided herself beforehand with her
excuse. As a rule, when the cook wanted anything done, he did not send word to the tradesman
by the Duchess. But on this occasion the Duchess was personally most anxious. She wanted to
see how the iron plate would work. It was to be a particular kind of iron plate. Then, having
watched her opportunity, she said her word, "I suppose we shall be safe with Mr. Lopez?" When
Mr. Sprugeon was about to reply, she shook her head and went on about the iron plate. This
would be quite enough to let Mr. Sprugeon understand that she was still anxious about the borough.
Mr. Sprugeon was an intelligent man, and possessed of discretion to a certain extent. As soon
as he saw the little frown and the shake of the head, he understood it all. He and the Duchess
had a secret together. Would not everything about the Castle in which a morsel of iron was
employed want renewing? And would not the Duchess take care that it should all be renewed by
Sprugeon? But then he must be active, and his activity would be of no avail unless others helped
him. So he whispered a word to Sprout, and it soon became known that the Castle interest was
all alive.

But unfortunately the Duke was also on the alert. The Duke had been very much in earnest when
he made up his mind that the old custom should be abandoned at Silverbridge and had endeavoured
to impress that determination of his upon his wife. The Duke knew more about his property and
was better acquainted with its details than his wife or others believed. He heard that in spite
of all his orders the Castle interest was being maintained, and a word was said to him which
seemed to imply that this was his wife's doings. It was then about the middle of February,
and arrangements were in process for the removal of the family to London. The Duke had already
been up to London for the meeting of Parliament, and had now come back to Gatherum, purporting
to return to London with his wife. Then it was that it was hinted to him that her Grace was
still anxious as to the election,--and had manifested her anxiety. The rumour hurt him, though
he did not in the least believe it. It showed to him, as he thought, not that his wife had
been false to him,--as in truth she had been,--but that even her name could not be kept free
from slander. And when he spoke to her on the subject, he did so rather with the view of proving
to her how necessary it was that she should keep herself altogether aloof from such matters,
than with any wish to make further inquiry. But he elicited the whole truth. "It is so hard
to kill an old established evil," he said.

"What evil have you failed to kill now?"

"Those people at Silverbridge still say that I want to return a member for them."

"Oh; that's the evil! You know I think that instead of killing an evil, you have murdered an
excellent institution." This at any rate was very imprudent on the part of the Duchess. After
that disobedient word spoken to Mr. Sprugeon, she should have been more on her guard.

"As to that, Glencora, I must judge for myself."

"Oh yes,--you have been jury, and judge, and executioner."

"I have done as I thought right to do. I am sorry that I should fail to carry you with me in
such a matter, but even failing in that I must do my duty. You will at any rate agree with
me that when I say the thing should be done, it should be done."

"If you wanted to destroy the house, and cut down all the trees, and turn the place into a
wilderness, I suppose you would only have to speak. Of course I know it would be wrong that
I should have an opinion. As 'man' you are of course to have your own way." She was in one
of her most aggravating moods. Though he might compel her to obey, he could not compel her
to hold her tongue.

"Glencora, I don't think you know how much you add to my troubles, or you would not speak to
me like that."

"What am I to say? It seems to me that any more suicidal thing than throwing away the borough
never was done. Who will thank you? What additional support will you get? How will it increase
your power? It's like King Lear throwing off his clothes in the storm because his daughters
turned him out. And you didn't do it because you thought it right."

"Yes, I did," he said, scowling.

"You did it because Major Pountney disgusted you. You kicked him out. Why wouldn't that satisfy
you without sacrificing the borough? It isn't what I think or say about it, but that everybody
is thinking and saying the same thing."

"I choose that it shall be so."

"Very well."

"And I don't choose that your name shall be mixed up in it. They say in Silverbridge that you
are canvassing for Mr. Lopez."

"Who says so?"

"I presume it's not true."

"Who says so, Plantagenet?"

"It matters not who has said so, if it be untrue. I presume it to be false."

"Of course it is false." Then the Duchess remembered her word to Mr. Sprugeon, and the cowardice
of the lie was heavy on her. I doubt whether she would have been so shocked by the idea of
a falsehood as to have been kept back from it had she before resolved that it would save her;
but she was not in her practice a false woman, her courage being too high for falsehood. It
now seemed to her that by this lie she was owning herself to be quelled and brought into absolute
subjection by her husband. So she burst out into truth. "Now I think of it, I did say a word
to Mr. Sprugeon. I told him that--that I hoped Mr. Lopez would be returned. I don't know whether
you call that canvassing."

"I desired you not to speak to Mr. Sprugeon," he thundered forth.

"That's all very well, Plantagenet, but if you desire me to hold my tongue altogether, what
am I to do?"

"What business is this of yours?"

"I suppose I may have my political sympathies as well as another. Really you are becoming so
autocratic that I shall have to go in for women's rights."

"You mean me to understand then that you intend to put yourself in opposition to me."

"What a fuss you make about it all!" she said. "Nothing that one can do is right! You make
me wish that I was a milkmaid or a farmer's wife." So saying she bounced out of the room, leaving
the Duke sick at heart, low in spirit, and doubtful whether he were right or wrong in his attempts
to manage his wife. Surely he must be right in feeling that in his high office a clearer conduct
and cleaner way of walking was expected from him than from other men! Noblesse oblige! To his
uncle the privilege of returning a member to Parliament had been a thing of course; and when
the Radical newspapers of the day abused his uncle, his uncle took that abuse as a thing of
course. The old Duke acted after his kind, and did not care what others said of him. And he
himself, when he first came to his dukedom, was not as he was now. Duties, though they were
heavy enough, were lighter then. Serious matters were less serious. There was this and that
matter of public policy on which he was intent, but, thinking humbly of himself, he had not
yet learned to conceive that he must fit his public conduct in all things to a straight rule
of patriotic justice. Now it was different with him, and though the change was painful, he
felt it to be imperative. He would fain have been as other men, but he could not. But in this
change it was so needful to him that he should carry with him the full sympathies of one person;--that
she who was the nearest to him of all should act with him! And now she had not only disobeyed
him, but had told him, as some grocer's wife might tell her husband, that he was "making a
fuss about it all!"

And then, as he thought of the scene which has been described, he could not quite approve of
himself. He knew that he was too self-conscious,--that he was thinking too much about his own
conduct and the conduct of others to him. The phrase had been odious to him, but still he could
not acquit himself of "making a fuss." Of one thing only was he sure,--that a grievous calamity
had befallen him when circumstances compelled him to become the Queen's Prime Minister.

He said nothing further to his wife till they were in London together, and then he was tempted
to caress her again, to be loving to her, and to show her that he had forgiven her. But she
was brusque to him, as though she did not wish to be forgiven. "Cora," he said, "do not separate
yourself from me."

"Separate myself! What on earth do you mean? I have not dreamed of such a thing." The Duchess
answered him as though he had alluded to some actual separation.

"I do not mean that. God forbid that a misfortune such as that should ever happen! Do not disjoin
yourself from me in all these troubles."

"What am I to do when you scold me? You must know pretty well by this time that I don't like
to be scolded. 'I desired you not to speak to Mr. Sprugeon!'" As she repeated his words she
imitated his manner and voice closely. "I shouldn't dream of addressing the children with such
magnificence of anger. 'What business is it of yours?' No woman likes that sort of thing, and
I'm not sure that I am acquainted with any woman who likes it much less than--Glencora, Duchess
of Omnium." As she said these last words in a low whisper, she curtseyed down to the ground.

"You know how anxious I am," he began, "that you should share everything with me,--even in
politics. But in all things there must at last be one voice that shall be the ruling voice."

"And that is to be yours,--of course."

"In such a matter as this it must be."

"And, therefore, I like to do a little business of my own behind your back. It's human nature,
and you've got to put up with it. I wish you had a better wife. I dare say there are many who
would be better. There's the Duchess of St. Bungay who never troubles her husband about politics,
but only scolds him because the wind blows from the east. It is just possible there might be
worse."

"Oh, Glencora!"

"You had better make the best you can of your bargain and not expect too much from her. And
don't ride over her with a very high horse. And let her have her own way a little if you really
believe that she has your interest at heart."

After this he was quite aware that she had got the better of him altogether. On that occasion
he smiled and kissed her, and went his way. But he was by no means satisfied. That he should
be thwarted by her, ate into his very heart;--and it was a wretched thing to him that he could
not make her understand his feeling in this respect. If it were to go on he must throw up everything.
Ruat coelum, fiat--proper subordination from his wife in regard to public matters! No wife
had a fuller allowance of privilege, or more complete power in her hands, as to things fit
for women's management. But it was intolerable to him that she should seek to interfere with
him in matters of a public nature. And she was constantly doing so. She had always this or
that aspirant for office on hand;--this or that job to be carried, though the jobs were not
perhaps much in themselves;--this or that affair to be managed by her own political allies,
such as Barrington Erle and Phineas Finn. And in his heart he suspected her of a design of
managing the Government in her own way, with her own particular friend, Mrs. Finn, for her
Prime Minister. If he could in no other way put an end to such evils as these, he must put
an end to his own political life. Ruat coelum, fiat justitia. Now "justitia" to him was not
compatible with feminine interference in his own special work.

It may therefore be understood that things were not going very smoothly with the Duke and Duchess;
and it may also be understood why the Duchess had had very little to say to Mr. Lopez about
the election. She was aware that she owed something to Mr. Lopez, whom she had certainly encouraged
to stand for the borough, and she had therefore sent her card to his wife and was prepared
to invite them both to her parties;--but just at present she was a little tired of Ferdinand
Lopez, and perhaps unjustly disposed to couple him with that unfortunate wretch, Major Pountney.

CHAPTER XXXIII

Showing That a Man Should Not Howl

Arthur Fletcher, in his letter to Mrs. Lopez, had told her that when he found out who was to
be his antagonist at Silverbridge, it was too late for him to give up the contest. He was,
he said, bound in faith to continue it by what had passed between himself and others. But in
truth he had not reached his conclusion without some persuasion from others. He had been at
Longbarns with his brother when he first heard that Lopez intended to stand, and he at once
signified his desire to give way. The woman to the extreme right in Plate 26 is wearing one of these.

Widows' vests. These are mourning garments, only worn by the widows of chiefs. The garment, which
is made by women, is a vest made of string network (like a string bag), the mesh of which is
the special Mafulu mesh, which will be described hereafter, and it
is not coloured.

It is plainly and simply made, with openings at the top for the neck, and at the sides for the arms
(no sleeves), and coming down to about the waist, without any other opening either in front
or at the back. This garment is also worn until the formal end of the period of mourning.
[39] I was unable to secure a picture of one of these.

There is
no special dress for chiefs to distinguish them from other people. But she had been made to understand by her elder son,
the lord of Longbarns, that not a word was to be said when Arthur was there. "I think he ought
to be taught to forget her," Mrs. Fletcher had said. But John in his own quiet but imperious
way, had declared that there were some men to whom such lessons could not be taught, and that
Arthur was one of them. "Is he never to get a wife, then?" Mrs. Fletcher had asked. John wouldn't
pretend to answer that question, but was quite sure that his brother would not be tempted into
other matrimonial arrangements by anything that could be said against Emily Lopez. When Mrs.
Fletcher declared in her extreme anger that Arthur was a fool for his trouble, John did not
contradict her, but declared that the folly was of a nature to require tender treatment.

Matters were in this condition at Longbarns when Arthur communicated to his brother the contents
of Mr. Gresham's letter, and expressed his own purpose of giving up Silverbridge. "I don't
quite see that," said John.

"No;--and it is impossible that you should be expected to see it. I don't quite know how to
talk about it even to you, though I think you are about the softest-hearted fellow out."

"I don't acknowledge the soft heart;--but go on."

"I don't want to interfere with that man. I have a sort of feeling that as he has got her he
might as well have the seat too."

"The seat, as you call it, is not there for his gratification or for yours. The seat is there
in order that the people of Silverbridge may be represented in Parliament."

"Let them get somebody else. I don't want to put myself in opposition to him, and I certainly
do not want to oppose her."

"They can't change their candidate in that way at a day's notice. You would be throwing Gresham
over, and, if you ask me, I think that is a thing you have no right to do. This objection of
yours is sentimental, and there is nothing of which a man should be so much in dread as sentimentalism.
It is not your fault that you oppose Mr. Lopez. You were in the field first, and you must go
on with it." John Fletcher, when he spoke in this way, was, at Longbarns, always supposed to
be right; and on the present occasion he, as usual, prevailed. Then Arthur Fletcher wrote his
letter to the lady. He would not have liked to have had it known that the composition and copying
of that little note had cost him an hour. He had wished that she should understand his feelings,
and yet it was necessary that he should address her in words that should be perfectly free
from affection or emotion. He must let her know that, though he wrote to her, the letter was
for her husband as well as for herself, and he must do this in a manner which would not imply
any fear that his writing to her would be taken amiss. The letter when completed was at any
rate simple and true; and yet, as we know, it was taken very much amiss.

Arthur Fletcher had by no means recovered from the blow he had received that day when Emily
had told him everything down by the river side; but then, it must be said of him, that he had
no intention of recovery. He was as a man who, having taken a burden on his back, declares
to himself that he will, for certain reasons, carry it throughout his life. The man knows that
with the burden he cannot walk as men walk who are unencumbered, but for those reasons of his
he has chosen to lade himself, and having done so he abandons regret and submits to his circumstances.
So had it been with him. He would make no attempt to throw off the load. It was now far back
in his life, as much at least as three years, since he had first assured himself of his desire
to make Emily Wharton the companion of his life. From that day she had been the pivot on which
his whole existence had moved. She had refused his offers more than once, but had done so with
so much tender kindness, that, though he had found himself to be wounded and bruised, he had
never abandoned his object. Her father and all his own friends encouraged him. He was continually
told that her coldness was due to the simple fact that she had not yet learned to give her
heart away. And so he had persevered, being ever thoroughly intent on his purpose, till he
was told by herself that her love was given to this other man.

