"We got to know each other on that picnic the other day," she continued. "He seemed so lonely,
especially as Arthur had gone off with Susan, and one couldn't help guessing what was in his
mind. So we had quite a long talk when you were looking at the ruins, and he told me all about
his life, and his struggles, and how fearfully hard it had been. D'you know, he was a boy in
a grocer's shop and took parcels to people's houses in a basket? That interested me awfully,
because I always say it doesn't matter how you're born if you've got the right stuff in you.
And he told me about his sister who's paralysed, poor girl, and one can see she's a great trial,
though he's evidently very devoted to her. I must say I do admire people like that! I don't
expect you do because you're so clever. Well, last night we sat out in the garden together,
and I couldn't help seeing what he wanted to say, and comforting him a little, and telling
him I did care--I really do--only, then, there's Raymond Oliver. What I want you to tell me
is, can one be in love with two people at once, or can't one?"

She became silent, and sat with her chin on her hands, looking very intent, as if she were
facing a real problem which had to be discussed between them.

"I think it depends what sort of person you are," said Hewet. He looked at her. She was small
and pretty, aged perhaps twenty-eight or twenty-nine, but though dashing and sharply cut, her
features expressed nothing very clearly, except a great deal of spirit and good health.

"Who are you, what are you; you see, I know nothing about you," he continued.

"Well, I was coming to that," said Evelyn M. She continued to rest her chin on her hands and
to look intently ahead of her. "I'm the daughter of a mother and no father, if that interests
you," she said. "It's not a very nice thing to be. It's what often happens in the country.
She was a farmer's daughter, and he was rather a swell--the young man up at the great house.
He never made things straight--never married her--though he allowed us quite a lot of money.
His people wouldn't let him. Poor father! I can't help liking him. Mother wasn't the sort of
woman who could keep him straight, anyhow. He was killed in the war. I believe his men worshipped
him. They say great big troopers broke down and cried over his body on the battlefield. I wish
I'd known him. Mother had all the life crushed out of her. The world--" She clenched her fist.
"Oh, people can be horrid to a woman like that!" She turned upon Hewet.

"Well," she said, "d'you want to know any more about me?"

"But you?" he asked, "Who looked after you?"

"I've looked after myself mostly," she laughed. "I've had splendid friends. I do like people!
That's the trouble. What would you do if you liked two people, both of them tremendously, and
you couldn't tell which most?"

"I should go on liking them--I should wait and see. Why not?"

"But one has to make up one's mind," said Evelyn. "Or are you one of the people who doesn't
believe in marriages and all that? Look here--this isn't fair, I do all the telling, and you
tell nothing. Perhaps you're the same as your friend"--she looked at him suspiciously; "perhaps
you don't like me?"

"I don't know you," said Hewet.

"I know when I like a person directly I see them! I knew I liked you the very first night at
dinner. Oh dear," she continued impatiently, "what a lot of bother would be saved if only people
would say the things they think straight out! I'm made like that. I can't help it."

"But don't you find it leads to difficulties?" Hewet asked.

"That's men's fault," she answered. "They always drag it in-love, I mean."

"And so you've gone on having one proposal after another," said Hewet.

"I don't suppose I've had more proposals than most women," said Evelyn, but she spoke without
conviction.

"Five, six, ten?" Hewet ventured.

Evelyn seemed to intimate that perhaps ten was the right figure, but that it really was not
a high one.

"I believe you're thinking me a heartless flirt," she protested. "But I don't care if you are.
I don't care what any one thinks of me. Just because one's interested and likes to be friends
with men, and talk to them as one talks to women, one's called a flirt."

"But Miss Murgatroyd--"

"I wish you'd call me Evelyn," she interrupted.

"After ten proposals do you honestly think that men are the same as women?"

"Honestly, honestly,--how I hate that word! It's always used by prigs," cried Evelyn. "Honestly
I think they ought to be. That's what's so disappointing. Every time one thinks it's not going
to happen, and every time it does."

"The pursuit of Friendship," said Hewet. "The title of a comedy."

"You're horrid," she cried. "You don't care a bit really. You might be Mr. Hirst."

"Well," said Hewet, "let's consider. Let us consider--" He paused, because for the moment he
could not remember what it was that they had to consider. He was far more interested in her
than in her story, for as she went on speaking his numbness had disappeared, and he was conscious
of a mixture of liking, pity, and distrust. "You've promised to marry both Oliver and Perrott?"
he concluded.

"Not exactly promised," said Evelyn. "I can't make up my mind which I really like best. Oh
how I detest modern life!" she flung off. "It must have been so much easier for the Elizabethans!
I thought the other day on that mountain how I'd have liked to be one of those colonists, to
cut down trees and make laws and all that, instead of fooling about with all these people who
think one's just a pretty young lady. Though I'm not. I really might do something." She reflected
in silence for a minute. Then she said:

"I'm afraid right down in my heart that Alfred Perrot won't do. He's not strong, is he?"

"Perhaps he couldn't cut down a tree," said Hewet. "Have you never cared for anybody?" he asked.

"I've cared for heaps of people, but not to marry them," she said. "I suppose I'm too fastidious.
All my life I've wanted somebody I could look up to, somebody great and big and splendid. Most
men are so small."

"What d'you mean by splendid?" Hewet asked. "People are--nothing more."

Evelyn was puzzled.

"We don't care for people because of their qualities," he tried to explain. "It's just them
that we care for,"--he struck a match--"just that," he said, pointing to the flames.

"I see what you mean," she said, "but I don't agree. I do know why I care for people, and I
think I'm hardly ever wrong. I see at once what they've got in them. Now I think you must be
rather splendid; but not Mr. Hirst."

Hewlet shook his head.

"He's not nearly so unselfish, or so sympathetic, or so big, or so understanding," Evelyn continued.

Hewet sat silent, smoking his cigarette.

"I should hate cutting down trees," he remarked.

"I'm not trying to flirt with you, though I suppose you think I am!" Evelyn shot out. "I'd
never have come to you if I'd thought you'd merely think odious things of me!" The tears came
into her eyes.

"Do you never flirt?" he asked.

"Of course I don't," she protested. "Haven't I told you? I want friendship; I want to care
for some one greater and nobler than I am, and if they fall in love with me it isn't my fault;
I don't want it; I positively hate it."

Hewet could see that there was very little use in going on with the conversation, for it was
obvious that Evelyn did not wish to say anything in particular, but to impress upon him an
image of herself, being, for some reason which she would not reveal, unhappy, or insecure.
He was very tired, and a pale waiter kept walking ostentatiously into the middle of the room
and looking at them meaningly.

"They want to shut up," he said. "My advice is that you should tell Oliver and Perrott to-morrow
that you've made up your mind that you don't mean to marry either of them. I'm certain you
don't. If you change your mind you can always tell them so. They're both sensible men; they'll
understand. And then all this bother will be over." He got up.

But Evelyn did not move. She sat looking up at him with her bright eager eyes, in the depths
of which he thought he detected some disappointment, or dissatisfaction.

"Good-night," he said.

"There are heaps of things I want to say to you still," she said. "And I'm going to, some time.
I suppose you must go to bed now?"

"Yes," said Hewet. "I'm half asleep." He left her still sitting by herself in the empty hall.

"Why is it that they won't be honest?" he muttered to himself as he went upstairs. Why was
it that relations between different people were so unsatisfactory, so fragmentary, so hazardous,
and words so dangerous that the instinct to sympathise with another human being was an instinct
to be examined carefully and probably crushed? What had Evelyn really wished to say to him?
What was she feeling left alone in the empty hall? The mystery of life and the unreality even
of one's own sensations overcame him as he walked down the corridor which led to his room.
It was dimly lighted, but sufficiently for him to see a figure in a bright dressing-gown pass
swiftly in front of him, the figure of a woman crossing from one room to another.

Chapter XV

Whether too slight or too vague the ties that bind people casually meeting in a hotel at midnight,
they possess one advantage at least over the bonds which unite the elderly, who have lived
together once and so must live for ever. Slight they may be, but vivid and genuine, merely
because the power to break them is within the grasp of each, and there is no reason for continuance
except a true desire that continue they shall. When two people have been married for years
they seem to become unconscious of each other's bodily presence so that they move as if alone,
speak aloud things which they do not expect to be answered, and in general seem to experience
all the comfort of solitude without its loneliness. The joint lives of Ridley and Helen had
arrived at this stage of community, and it was often necessary for one or the other to recall
with an effort whether a thing had been said or only thought, shared or dreamt in private.
At four o'clock in the afternoon two or three days later Mrs. Ambrose was standing brushing
her hair, while her husband was in the dressing-room which opened out of her room, and occasionally,
through the cascade of water--he was washing his face--she caught exclamations, "So it goes
on year after year; I wish, I wish, I wish I could make an end of it," to which she paid no
attention.

"It's white? Or only brown?" Thus she herself murmured, examining a hair which gleamed suspiciously
among the brown. She pulled it out and laid it on the dressing-table. She was criticising her
own appearance, or rather approving of it, standing a little way back from the glass and looking
at her own face with superb pride and melancholy, when her husband appeared in the doorway
in his shirt sleeves, his face half obscured by a towel.

"You often tell me I don't notice things," he remarked.

"Tell me if this is a white hair, then?" she replied. She laid the hair on his hand.

"There's not a white hair on your head," he exclaimed.

"Ah, Ridley, I begin to doubt," she sighed; and bowed her head under his eyes so that he might
judge, but the inspection produced only a kiss where the line of parting ran, and husband and
wife then proceeded to move about the room, casually murmuring.

"What was that you were saying?" Helen remarked, after an interval of conversation which no
third person could have understood.

"Rachel--you ought to keep an eye upon Rachel," he observed significantly, and Helen, though
she went on brushing her hair, looked at him. His observations were apt to be true.

"Young gentlemen don't interest themselves in young women's education without a motive," he
remarked.

"Oh, Hirst," said Helen.

"Hirst and Hewet, they're all the same to me--all covered with spots," he replied. "He advises
her to read Gibbon. Did you know that?"

Helen did not know that, but she would not allow herself inferior to her husband in powers
of observation. She merely said:

"Nothing would surprise me. Even that dreadful flying man we met at the dance--even Mr. Dalloway--even--"

"I advise you to be circumspect," said Ridley. "There's Willoughby, remember--Willoughby";
he pointed at a letter.

Helen looked with a sigh at an envelope which lay upon her dressing-table. Yes, there lay Willoughby,
curt, inexpressive, perpetually jocular, robbing a whole continent of mystery, enquiring after
his daughter's manners and morals--hoping she wasn't a bore, and bidding them pack her off
to him on board the very next ship if she were--and then grateful and affectionate with suppressed
emotion, and then half a page about his own triumphs over wretched little natives who went
on strike and refused to load his ships, until he roared English oaths at them, "popping my
head out of the window just as I was, in my shirt sleeves. The beggars had the sense to scatter."

"If Theresa married Willoughby," she remarked, turning the page with a hairpin, "one doesn't
see what's to prevent Rachel--"

But Ridley was now off on grievances of his own connected with the washing of his shirts, which
somehow led to the frequent visits of Hughling Elliot, who was a bore, a pedant, a dry stick
of a man, and yet Ridley couldn't simply point at the door and tell him to go. The truth of
it was, they saw too many people. And so on and so on, more conjugal talk pattering softly
and unintelligibly, until they were both ready to go down to tea.

The first thing that caught Helen's eye as she came downstairs was a carriage at the door,
filled with skirts and feathers nodding on the tops of hats. She had only time to gain the
drawing-room before two names were oddly mispronounced by the Spanish maid, and Mrs. Thornbury
came in slightly in advance of Mrs. Wilfrid Flushing.

"Mrs. Wilfrid Flushing," said Mrs. Thornbury, with a wave of her hand. "A friend of our common
friend Mrs. Raymond Parry."

Mrs. Flushing shook hands energetically. She was a woman of forty perhaps, very well set up
and erect, splendidly robust, though not as tall as the upright carriage of her body made her
appear.

She looked Helen straight in the face and said, "You have a charmin' house."

She had a strongly marked face, her eyes looked straight at you, and though naturally she was
imperious in her manner she was nervous at the same time. Mrs. Thornbury acted as interpreter,
making things smooth all round by a series of charming commonplace remarks.

"I've taken it upon myself, Mr. Ambrose," she said, "to promise that you will be so kind as
to give Mrs. Flushing the benefit of your experience. I'm sure no one here knows the country
as well as you do. No one takes such wonderful long walks. No one, I'm sure, has your encyclopaedic
knowledge upon every subject. Mr. Wilfrid Flushing is a collector. He has discovered really
beautiful things already. I had no notion that the peasants were so artistic--though of course
in the past--"

"Not old things--new things," interrupted Mrs. Flushing curtly. "That is, if he takes my advice."

The Ambroses had not lived for many years in London without knowing something of a good many
people, by name at least, and Helen remembered hearing of the Flushings. Mr. Flushing was a
man who kept an old furniture shop; he had always said he would not marry because most women
have red cheeks, and would not take a house because most houses have narrow staircases, and
would not eat meat because most animals bleed when they are killed; and then he had married
an eccentric aristocratic lady, who certainly was not pale, who looked as if she ate meat,
who had forced him to do all the things he most disliked--and this then was the lady. Helen
looked at her with interest. They had moved out into the garden, where the tea was laid under
a tree, and Mrs. Flushing was helping herself to cherry jam. She had a peculiar jerking movement
of the body when she spoke, which caused the canary-coloured plume on her hat to jerk too.
Her small but finely-cut and vigorous features, together with the deep red of lips and cheeks,
pointed to many generations of well-trained and well-nourished ancestors behind her.

"Nothin' that's more than twenty years old interests me," she continued. "Mouldy old pictures,
dirty old books, they stick 'em in museums when they're only fit for burnin'."

"I quite agree," Helen laughed. "But my husband spends his life in digging up manuscripts which
nobody wants." She was amused by Ridley's expression of startled disapproval.

"There's a clever man in London called John who paints ever so much better than the old masters,"
Mrs. Flushing continued. "His pictures excite me--nothin' that's old excites me."

"But even his pictures will become old," Mrs. Thornbury intervened.

"Then I'll have 'em burnt, or I'll put it in my will," said Mrs. Flushing.

"And Mrs. Flushing lived in one of the most beautiful old houses in England--Chillingley,"
Mrs. Thornbury explained to the rest of them.

"If I'd my way I'd burn that to-morrow," Mrs. Flushing laughed. She had a laugh like the cry
of a jay, at once startling and joyless.

"What does any sane person want with those great big houses?" she demanded. "If you go downstairs
after dark you're covered with black beetles, and the electric lights always goin' out. What
would you do if spiders came out of the tap when you turned on the hot water?" she demanded,
fixing her eye on Helen.

Mrs. Ambrose shrugged her shoulders with a smile.

"This is what I like," said Mrs. Flushing. She jerked her head at the Villa. "A little house
in a garden. I had one once in Ireland. One could lie in bed in the mornin' and pick roses
outside the window with one's toes."

"And the gardeners, weren't they surprised?" Mrs. Thornbury enquired.

"There were no gardeners," Mrs. Flushing chuckled. "Nobody but me and an old woman without
any teeth. You know the poor in Ireland lose their teeth after they're twenty. But you wouldn't
expect a politician to understand that--Arthur Balfour wouldn't understand that."

Ridley sighed that he never expected any one to understand anything, least of all politicians.

"However," he concluded, "there's one advantage I find in extreme old age--nothing matters
a hang except one's food and one's digestion. All I ask is to be left alone to moulder away
in solitude. It's obvious that the world's going as fast as it can to--the Nethermost Pit,
and all I can do is to sit still and consume as much of my own smoke as possible." He groaned,
and with a melancholy glance laid the jam on his bread, for he felt the atmosphere of this
abrupt lady distinctly unsympathetic.

"I always contradict my husband when he says that," said Mrs. Thornbury sweetly. "You men!
Where would you be if it weren't for the women!"

"Read the Symposium," said Ridley grimly.

"Symposium?" cried Mrs. Flushing. "That's Latin or Greek? Tell me, is there a good translation?"

"No," said Ridley. "You will have to learn Greek."

Mrs. Flushing cried, "Ah, ah, ah! I'd rather break stones in the road. I always envy the men
who break stones and sit on those nice little heaps all day wearin' spectacles. I'd infinitely
rather break stones than clean out poultry runs, or feed the cows, or--"

Here Rachel came up from the lower garden with a book in her hand.

"What's that book?" said Ridley, when she had shaken hands.

"It's Gibbon," said Rachel as she sat down.

"The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire?" said Mrs. Thornbury. "A very wonderful book, I
know. My dear father was always quoting it at us, with the result that we resolved never to
read a line."

"Gibbon the historian?" enquired Mrs. Flushing. "I connect him with some of the happiest hours
of my life. We used to lie in bed and read Gibbon--about the massacres of the Christians, I
remember--when we were supposed to be asleep. It's no joke, I can tell you, readin' a great
big book, in double columns, by a night-light, and the light that comes through a chink in
the door. Then there were the moths--tiger moths, yellow moths, and horrid cockchafers. Louisa,
my sister, would have the window open. I wanted it shut. We fought every night of our lives
over that window. Have you ever seen a moth dyin' in a night-light?" she enquired.

Again there was an interruption. Hewet and Hirst appeared at the drawing-room window and came
up to the tea-table.

Rachel's heart beat hard. She was conscious of an extraordinary intensity in everything, as
though their presence stripped some cover off the surface of things; but the greetings were
remarkably commonplace.

"Excuse me," said Hirst, rising from his chair directly he had sat down. He went into the drawing-room,
and returned with a cushion which he placed carefully upon his seat.

"Rheumatism," he remarked, as he sat down for the second time.

"The result of the dance?" Helen enquired.

"Whenever I get at all run down I tend to be rheumatic," Hirst stated. He bent his wrist back
sharply. "I hear little pieces of chalk grinding together!"

Rachel looked at him. She was amused, and yet she was respectful; if such a thing could be,
the upper part of her face seemed to laugh, and the lower part to check its laughter.

Hewet picked up the book that lay on the ground.

"You like this?" he asked in an undertone.

"No, I don't like it," she replied. She had indeed been trying all the afternoon to read it,
and for some reason the glory which she had perceived at first had faded, and, read as she
would, she could not grasp the meaning with her mind.

"It goes round, round, round, like a roll of oil-cloth," she hazarded. Evidently she meant
Hewet alone to hear her words, but Hirst demanded, "What d'you mean?"

She was instantly ashamed of her figure of speech, for she could not explain it in words of
sober criticism.

"Surely it's the most perfect style, so far as style goes, that's ever been invented," he continued.
"Every sentence is practically perfect, and the wit--"

"Ugly in body, repulsive in mind," she thought, instead of thinking about Gibbon's style. "Yes,
but strong, searching, unyielding in mind." She looked at his big head, a disproportionate
part of which was occupied by the forehead, and at the direct, severe eyes.

"I give you up in despair," he said. He meant it lightly, but she took it seriously, and believed
that her value as a human being was lessened because she did not happen to admire the style
of Gibbon. The others were talking now in a group about the native villages which Mrs. Flushing
ought to visit.

"I despair too," she said impetuously. "How are you going to judge people merely by their minds?"

"You agree with my spinster Aunt, I expect," said St. John in his jaunty manner, which was
always irritating because it made the person he talked to appear unduly clumsy and in earnest.
"'Be good, sweet maid'--I thought Mr. Kingsley and my Aunt were now obsolete."

"One can be very nice without having read a book," she asserted. Very silly and simple her
words sounded, and laid her open to derision.

"Did I ever deny it?" Hirst enquired, raising his eyebrows.

