A TALE OF A LONELY PARISH

by

F. MARION CRAWFORD

1886

TO My MOTHER

I DEDICATE THIS TALE A MEAN TOKEN OF A LIFELONG AFFECTION

SORRENTO, Christmas Day, 1885

CHAPTER I.

The Reverend Augustin Ambrose would gladly have given up taking pupils. He was growing old
and his sight was beginning to trouble him; he was very weary of Thucydides, of Homer, of the
works of Mr. Todhunter of which the green bindings expressed a hope still unrealised, of conic
sections--even of his beloved Horace. He was tired of the stupidities of the dull young men
who were sent to him because they could not "keep up", and he had long ceased to be surprised
or interested by the remarks of the clever ones who were sent to him because their education
had not prepared them for an English University. The dull ones could never be made to understand
anything, though Mr. Ambrose generally succeeded in making them remember enough to matriculate,
by dint of ceaseless repetition and a system of memoria technica which embraced most things
necessary to the salvation of dull youth. The clever ones, on the other hand, generally lacked
altogether the solid foundation of learning; they could construe fluently but did not know
a long syllable from a short one; they had vague notions of elemental algebra and no notion
at all of arithmetic, but did very well in conic sections; they knew nothing of prosody, but
dabbled perpetually in English blank verse; altogether they knew most of those things which
they need not have known and they knew none of those things thoroughly which they ought to
have known. After twenty years of experience Mr. Ambrose ascertained that it was easier to
teach a stupid boy than a clever one, but that he would prefer not to teach at all.

Unfortunately the small tithes of a small country parish in Essex did not furnish a sufficient
income for his needs. He had been a Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, within a few years
of taking his degree, wherein he had obtained high honours. But he had married and had found
himself obliged to accept the first living offered to him, to wit, the vicarage of Billingsfield,
whereof his college held the rectory and received the great tithes. The entire income he obtained
from his cure never at any time exceeded three hundred and forty-seven pounds, and in the year
when it reached that high figure there had been an unusually large number of marriages. It
was not surprising that the vicar should desire to improve his circumstances by receiving one
or two pupils. He had married young, as has been said, and there had been children born to
him, a son and a daughter. Mrs. Ambrose was a good manager and a good mother, and her husband
had worked hard. Between them they had brought up their children exceedingly well. The son
had in his turn entered the church, had exhibited a faculty of pushing his way which had not
characterised his father, had got a curacy in a fashionable Yorkshire watering-place, and was
thought to be on the way to obtain a first-rate living. In the course of time, too, the daughter
had lost her heart to a young physician who had brilliant prospects and some personal fortune,
and the Reverend Augustin Ambrose had given his consent to the union. Nor had he been disappointed.
The young physician had risen rapidly in his profession, had been elected a member of the London
College, had transferred himself to the capital and now enjoyed a rising practice in Chelsea.
So great was his success that it was thought he would before long purchase the goodwill of
an old practitioner who dwelt in the neighbourhood of Brompton Crescent, and who, it was said,
might shortly be expected to retire.

It will be seen, therefore, that if Mr. Ambrose's life had not been very brilliant, his efforts
had on the whole been attended with success. His children were both happy and independent and
no longer needed his assistance or support; his wife, the excellent Mrs. Ambrose, enjoyed unfailing
health and good spirits; he himself was still vigorous and active, and as yet found no difficulty
in obtaining a couple of pupils at two hundred pounds a year each, for he had early got a reputation
for successfully preparing young gentlemen with whom no other private tutor could do anything,
and he had established the scale of his prices accordingly. It is true that he had sacrificed
other things for the sake of imparting tuition, and more than once he had hesitated and asked
himself whether he should go on. Indeed, when he graduated, it was thought that he would soon
make himself remarkable by the publication of some scholarly work; it was foretold that he
might become a famous preacher; it was asserted that he was a general favourite with the Fellows
of Trinity and would get a proportionately fat living--but he had committed the unpardonable
sin of allowing his chances of fortune to slip from him. He had given up his fellowship, had
married and had accepted an insignificant country living. He asked nothing, and he got nothing.
He never attracted the notice of his bishop by doing anything extraordinary, nor the notice
of the public by appearing in print. He baptized, married and buried the people of Billingsfield,
Essex, and he took private pupils. He wrote a sermon once a fortnight, and revised old ones
for the other three occasions out of four. His sermons were good in their way, but were intended
for simple folk and did no justice to the powers he had certainly possessed in his youth. Indeed,
as years went on, the dry routine of his life produced its inevitable effect upon his mind,
and the productions of Mr. Ambrose grew to be exceedingly commonplace; and the more commonplace
he became, the more he regretted having done so little with the faculties he enjoyed, and the
more weary he became of the daily task of galvanising the dull minds of his pupils into a spasmodic
activity, just sufficient to leap the ditch that separates the schoolboy from the undergraduate.
He had not only educated his children and seen them provided for in the world; he had also
saved a little money, and he had insured his life for five hundred pounds. There was no longer
any positive necessity for continuing to teach, as there had been thirty years ago, when he
first married.

So much for the circumstances of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose. Personally he was a man of
good presence, five feet ten inches in height, active and strong, of a ruddy complexion with
smooth, thick grey hair and a plentiful grey beard. He shaved his upper lip however, greatly
to the detriment of his appearance, for the said upper lip was very long and the absence of
the hirsute appendage showed a very large mouth with very thin lips, generally compressed into
an expression of remarkable obstinacy. His nose was both broad and long and his grey eyes were
bright and aggressive in their glance. As a matter of fact Mr. Ambrose was combative by nature,
but his fighting instincts seem to have been generally employed in the protection of rights
he already possessed, rather than in pushing on in search of fresh fields of activity. He was
an active man, fond of walking alone and able to walk any distance he pleased; a charitable
man with the charity peculiar to people of exceedingly economical tendencies and possessing
small fixed incomes. He would give himself vast personal trouble to assist distress, as though
aware that since he could not give much money to the poor he was bound to give the best of
himself. The good Mrs. Ambrose seconded him in this as in all his works; labouring hard when
hard work could do any good, but giving material assistance with a sparing hand. It sufficiently
defines the two to say that although many a surly labourer in the parish grumbled that the
vicar and his wife were "oncommon near", when money was concerned, there was nevertheless no
trouble in which their aid was not invoked and their advice asked. But the indigent labourer
not uncommonly retrieved his position by asking a shilling of one of the young gentlemen at
the vicarage, who were generally open-handed, good-looking boys, blessed with a great deal
more money than brains.

At the time when this tale opens, however, it chanced that one of the two young gentlemen at
the vicarage was by no means in the position peculiar to the majority of youths who sought
the good offices of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose. John Short, aged eighteen, was in all respects
a remarkable contrast to his companion the Honourable Cornelius Angleside. John Short was apparently
very poor; the Honourable Cornelius on the other hand had plenty of money. Short was undeniably
clever; Angleside was uncommonly dull. Short was the son of a decayed literary man; Angleside
was the son of a nobleman. Short was by nature a hard worker; Angleside was amazingly idle.
Short meant to do something in the world; Angleside had early determined to do nothing.

It would not be easy to define the reasons which induced Mr. Ambrose to receive John Short
under his roof. He had never before taken a pupil on any but his usual terms, and at his time
of life it was strange that he should break through the rule. But here his peculiar views of
charity came into play. Short's father had been his own chum at school, and his friend at college,
but had failed to reap any substantial benefits from his education. He had been a scholar in
his way, but his way had not been the way of other scholars, and when he had gone up for honours
he had got a bad third in classics. He would not enter the church, he could not enter the law,
he had no interest whatever, and he found himself naturally thrust into the profession of literature.
For a time he had nearly starved; then he had met with some success and had, of course, married
without hesitation; after this he had had more misfortunes. His wife had died leaving him an
only son, whom in course of time he had sent to school. But school was too expensive and he
had reluctantly taken the boy home again. It was in a fit of despair that he wrote to his old
friend Augustin Ambrose, asking his advice. The Reverend Augustin considered the matter with
the assistance of his wife, and being charitable souls, they determined that they must help
Short to educate his son. Accordingly the vicar of Billingsfield wrote to his old friend to
say that if he could manage to pay a small sum for the lad's board, he, the vicar, would complete
the boy's education, so that he might at least have a chance in the world. Short accepted the
offer with boundless gratitude and had hitherto not failed to pay the vicar the small sum agreed
upon. The result of all this was that Mr. Ambrose had grown very fond of John, and John had
derived great advantage from his position. He possessed precisely what his father had lacked,
namely a strong bent in one direction, and there was no doubt that he would distinguish himself
if he had a chance. That chance the vicar had determined to give him. He had made up his mind
that his old friend's son should go to college and show what he was able to do. It was not
an easy thing to manage, but the vicar had friends in Cambridge and John had brains; moreover
the vicar and John were both very obstinate people and had both determined upon the same plan,
so that there was a strong probability of their succeeding.

John Short was eighteen years of age, neither particularly good-looking nor by any means the
reverse. He had what bankers commonly call a lucky face; that is to say he had a certain very
prepossessing look of honesty in his blue eyes, and a certain look of energetic goodwill in
his features. When he was much older and wore a beard he passed for a handsome man, but at
eighteen he could only boast the smallest of fair whiskers, and when anybody took the trouble
to look long at him, which was not often, the verdict was that his jaw was too heavy and his
mouth too obstinate. In complexion he was fair, and healthy to look at, generally sunburned
in the summer, for he had a habit of reading out of doors; his laugh was very pleasant, though
it was rarely heard; his eyes were honest but generally thoughtful; his frame was sturdy and
already inclined rather to strength than to graceful proportion; his head matched his body
well, being broad and well-shaped with plenty of prominence over the brows and plenty of fulness
above the temples. He had a way of standing as though it would not be easy to move him, and
a way of expressing his opinion which seemed to challenge contradiction. But he was not a combative
boy. If any one argued with him, it soon appeared that he was not really argumentative, but
merely enthusiastic. It was not necessary to agree with him, and there was small use in contradicting
him. The more he talked the more enthusiastic he grew as he developed his own views; until
seeing that he was not understood or that he was merely laughed at, he would end his discourse
with a merry laugh at himself, or a shy apology for having talked so much. But the vicar assured
his wife that the boy's Greek and Latin verses were something very extraordinary indeed, and
much better than his own in his best days. For John was passionately fond of the classics and
did not propose to acquire any more mathematical knowledge than was strictly necessary for
his matriculation and "little-go." He meant to be a famous scholar and he meant to get a fellowship
at his college in order to be perfectly independent and to help his father.

John was a constant source of wonder to his companion the Honourable Cornelius Angleside, who
remembered to have seen fellows of that sort at Eton but had never got near enough to them
to know what they were really like. Cornelius had a vague idea that there was some trick about
appearing to know so much and that those reading chaps were awful humbugs. How the trick was
performed he did not venture to explain, but he was as firmly persuaded that it was managed
by some species of conjuring as that Messrs. Maskelyne and Cook performed their wonders by
sleight of hand. That one human brain should actually contain the amount of knowledge John
Short appeared to possess was not credible to the Honourable Cornelius, and the latter spent
more of his time in trying to discover how John "did it" than in trying to "do it" himself.
Nevertheless, young Angleside liked Short after his own fashion, and Short did not dislike
Angleside. John's father had given him to understand that as a general rule persons of wealth
and good birth were a set of overbearing, purse-proud bullies, who considered men of genius
to be little better than a set of learned monkeys, certainly not good enough to black their
boots. For John's father in his misfortunes had imbibed sundry radical notions formerly peculiar
to poor literary men, and not yet altogether extinct, and he had accordingly warned his son
that all mammon was the mammon of unrighteousness, and that the people who possessed it were
the natural enemies of people who had to live by their brains. But John had very soon discovered
that though Cornelius Angleside possessed the three qualifications for perdition, in the shape
of birth, wealth and ignorance, against which his poor father railed unceasingly, he succeeded
nevertheless in making himself very good company. Angleside was not overbearing, he was not
purse-proud and he was not a bully. On the contrary he was unobtrusive and sufficiently simple
in manner, and he certainly never mentioned the subject of his family or fortune; John rather
pitied him, on the whole, until he began to discover that Angleside looked up to him on account
of his mental superiority, and then John, being very human, began to like him.

The life at the vicarage of Billingsfield, Essex, was not remarkable for anything but its extreme
regularity. Prayers, breakfast, work, lunch, a walk, work, dinner, work, prayers, bed. The
programme never varied, save as the seasons introduced some change in the hours of the establishment.
The vicar, who was fond of a little gardening and amused himself with a variety of experiments
in the laying of asparagus beds, found occasional excitement in the pursuit of a stray cat
which had managed to climb his wire netting and get at the heads of his favourite vegetable,
in which thrilling chase he was usually aided by an old brown retriever answering, when he
answered at all, to the name of Carlo, and by the Honourable Cornelius, whose skill in throwing
stones was as phenomenal as his ignorance of Latin quantities. The play was invariably opened
by old Reynolds, the ancient and bow-legged gardener, groom and man of all work at the vicarage.

"Please sir, there's Simon Gunn's cat in the sparrergrass." The information was accompanied
by a sort of chuckle of evil satisfaction which at once roused the sleeping passions of the
Reverend Augustin Ambrose.

"Dear me, Reynolds, then why don't you turn her out?" and without waiting for an answer, the
excellent vicar would spring from his seat and rush down the lawn in the direction of the beds,
closely followed by the Honourable Cornelius, who picked up stones from the gravel path as
he ran, and whose long legs made short work of the iron fence at the bottom of the garden.
Meanwhile the aged Reynolds let Carlo loose from the yard and the hunt was prosecuted with
great boldness and ingenuity. The vicar's object was to get the cat out of the asparagus bed
as soon as possible without hurting her, for he was a humane man and would not have hurt a
fly. Cornelius, on the other hand, desired the game to last as long as possible, and endeavoured
to prevent the cat's escape by always hitting the wire netting at the precise spot where she
was trying to get over it. In this way he would often succeed in getting as much as half an
hour's respite from Horace. At last the vicar, panting with his exertions and bathed in perspiration,
would protest against the form of assault.

"Really, Angleside", he would say, "I believe I could throw straighter myself. I'm quite sure
Carlo can get her out if you leave him alone".

Whereupon Cornelius would put his hands in his pockets and look on, and in a few minutes, when
the cat had been driven out and the vicar's back was turned, he would slip a sixpence into
old Reynold's hand, and follow his tutor reluctantly back to the study. Whether there was any
connection between the cat and the sixpence is uncertain, but during the last months of Angleside's
stay at the vicarage the ingenuity of Simon Gunn's yellow cat in getting over the wire netting
reached such a pitch that the vicar began to prepare a letter to the Bishop Stortford Chronicle
on the relations generally existing between cats and asparagus beds.

Another event in the life of the vicarage was the periodical lameness of the vicar's strawberry
mare, followed by the invariable discovery that George Horsnell the village blacksmith had
run a nail into her foot when he shoed her last. Invariably, also, the vicar threatened that
in future the mare should be shod by Hawkins the rival blacksmith, who was a dissenter and
had consequently never been employed by the vicarage. Moreover it was generally rumoured once
every year that old Nat Barker, the octogenarian cripple who had not been able to stand upon
his feet for twenty years, was at the point of death. He invariably recovered, however, in
time to put in an appearance by proxy at the distribution of a certain dole of a loaf and a
shilling on boxing day. It was told also that in remote times the Puckeridge hounds had once
come that way and that the fox had got into the churchyard. A repetition of this stirring event
was anxiously looked for during many years, every time that the said pack met within ten miles
of Billingsfield, but hitherto it had been looked for in vain. On the whole the life at the
vicarage was not eventful, and the studies of the two young men who imbibed learning at the
feet of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose were rarely interrupted.

Mrs. Ambrose herself represented the feminine element in the society of the little place. The
new doctor was a strange man, suspected of being a free-thinker, and he was not married. The
Hall, for there was a Hall at Billingsfield, was uninhabited, and had been uninhabited for
years. The estate which belonged to it was unimportant and moreover was in Chancery and seemed
likely to stay there, for reasons no one ever mentioned at Billingsfield, because no one knew
anything about them. From time to time a legal looking personage drove up to the Duke's Head,
which was kept by Mr. Abraham Boosey, who was also undertaker to the parish, and which was
thought to be a very good inn. The legal personage stayed a day or two, spending most of his
time at the Hall and in driving about to the scattered farms which represented the estate,
but he never came to the vicarage, nor did the vicar ever seem to know what he was doing nor
why he came. "He came on business"--that was all that anybody knew. His business was to collect
rents, of course; but what he did with them, no one was bold enough to surmise. The estate
was in Chancery, it was said, and the definition conveyed about as much to the mind of the
average inhabitant of Billingsfield, as if he had been informed that the moon was in perigee
or the sun in Scorpio. The practical result of its being in Chancery was that no one lived there.

John Short liked Mrs. Ambrose and the Honourable Cornelius behaved to her with well bred affability.
She always said Cornelius had very nice manners, as indeed he had and had need to have. Occasionally,
perhaps four or five times in the year, the Reverend Edward Pewlay, who had what he called
a tenor voice, and his wife, who played the pianoforte very fairly, came over to assist at
a Penny Reading. He lived "over Harlow way," as the natives expressed it; he was what was called
in those parts a rabid Anglican, because he preached in his surplice and had services on the
Saints' days, and the vicar of Billingsfield did not sympathise in his views. Nevertheless
he was very useful at Penny Readings, and on one of these occasions produced a very ingenious
ghost for the delectation of the rustics, by means of a piece of plate glass and a couple of lamps.

There had indeed been festivities at the vicarage to which as many as three clergymen's wives
had been invited, but these were rare indeed. For months at a time Mrs. Ambrose reigned in
undisputed possession of the woman's social rights in Billingsfield. She was an excellent person
in every way. She had once been handsome and even now she was fine-looking, of goodly stature,
if also of goodly weight; rosy, even rubicund, in complexion, and rotund of feature; looking
at you rather severely out of her large grey eyes, but able to smile very cheerfully and to
show an uncommonly good set of teeth; twisting her thick grey hair into a small knot at the
back of her head and then covering it with a neatly made cap which she considered becoming
to her time of life; dressed always with extreme simplicity and neatness, glorying in her good
sense and in her stout shoes; speaking of things which she called "neat" with a devotional
admiration and expressing the extremest height of her disapprobation when she said anything
was "very untidy." A motherly woman, a practical woman, a good housekeeper and a good wife,
careful of small things because generally only small things came in her way, devotedly attached
to her husband, whom she regarded with perfect justice as the best man of her acquaintance,
adding, however, with somewhat precipitous rashness that he was the best man in the world.
She took also a great interest in his pupils and busied herself mightily with their welfare.
Since the arrival of the new doctor who was suspected of free-thinking, she had shown a strong
leaning towards homoeopathy, and prescribed small pellets of belladonna for the Honourable
Cornelius's cold and infinitesimal drops of aconite for John Short's headaches, until she observed
that John never had a headache unless he had worked too much, and Angleside always had a cold
when he did not want to work at all. Especially in the department of the commissariat she showed
great activity, and the reputation the vicar had acquired for feeding his pupils well had perhaps
more to do with his success than he imagined. She was never tired of repeating that Englishmen
needed plenty of good food, and she had no principles which she did not practise. She even
thought it right to lecture young Angleside upon his idleness at stated intervals. He always
replied with great gentleness that he was awfully stupid, you know, and Mr. Ambrose was awfully
good about it and he hoped he should not be pulled when he went up. And strange to relate he
actually passed his examination and matriculated, to his own immense astonishment and to the
no small honour and glory of the Reverend Augustin Ambrose, vicar of Billingsfield, Essex.
But when that great day arrived certain events occurred which are worthy to be chronicled and
remembered.

CHAPTER II.

In the warm June weather young Angleside went up to pass his examination for entrance at Trinity.
There is nothing particularly interesting or worthy of note in that simple process, though
at that time the custom of imposing an examination had only been recently imported from Oxford.
For one whole day forty or fifty young fellows from all parts of the country sat at the long
dining-tables in the beautiful old hall and wrote as busily as they could, answering the printed
questions before them, and eyeing each other curiously from time to time. The weather was warm
and sultry, the trees were all in full leaf and Cambridge was deserted. Only a few hard-reading
men, who stayed up during the Long, wandered out with books at the backs of the colleges or
strayed slowly through the empty courts, objects of considerable interest to the youths who
had come up for the entrance examination--chiefly pale men in rather shabby clothes with old
gowns and battered caps, and a general appearance of being the worse for wear.

Angleside had been in Cambridge before and consequently lost no time in returning to Billingsfield
when the examination was over. Short was to spend the summer at the vicarage, reading hard
until the term began, when he was to go up and compete for a minor scholarship; Angleside was
to wait until he heard whether he had passed, and was then going abroad to meet his father
and to rest from the extreme exertion of mastering the "Apology" and the first books of the
"Memorabilia." John drove over to meet the Honourable Cornelius, who was in a terrible state
of anxiety and left him no peace on the way asking him again and again to repeat the answers
to the questions which had been proposed, reckoning up the ones he had answered wrong and the
ones he thought he might have answered right, and coming each time to a different conclusion,
finally lighting a huge brierwood pipe and swearing "that it was a beastly shame to subject
human beings to such awful torture." John calmed him by saying he fancied Cornelius had "got
through"; for John's words were a species of gospel to Cornelius. By the time they reached
the vicarage Angleside felt sanguine of his success.

The vicar was not visible. It was a strange and unheard of thing--there were visitors in the
drawing-room. This doubtless accounted for the fact that the fly from the Duke's Head was standing
on the opposite side of the road. The two young men went into their study, which was on the
ground floor and opened upon the passage which led to the drawing-room from the little hall.
Angleside remarked that by leaving the door open they would catch a glimpse of the visitor
when he went out. But the visitor stayed long. The curiosity of the two was wrought up to a
high pitch; it was many months since there had been a real visitor at the vicarage. Angleside
suggested going out and finding old Reynolds--he always knew everything that was going on.

"If we only wait long enough," said Short philosophically, "they are sure to come out."

"Perhaps," returned Cornelius rather doubtfully.

"They" did come out. The drawing-room door opened and there was a sound of voices. It was a
woman's voice, and a particularly sweet voice, too. Still no one came down the passage. The
lady seemed to be lingering in taking her leave. Then there was a sound of small feet and suddenly
a little girl stood before the open door of the study, looking wonderingly at the two young
men. Short thought he had never seen such a beautiful child. She could not have been more than
seven or eight years old, and was not tall for her age; a delicate little figure, all in black,
with long brown curls upon her shoulders, flowing abundantly from beneath a round black sailor's
hat that was set far back upon her head. The child's face was rather pale than very fair, of
a beautiful transparent paleness, with the least tinge of colour in the cheeks; her great violet
eyes gazed wonderingly into the study, and her lips parted in childlike uncertainty, while
her little gloved hand rested on the door-post as though to get a sense of security from something
so solid.

It was only for a moment. Both the young fellows smiled at the child unconsciously. Perhaps
she thought they were laughing at her; she turned and ran away again; then passed a second
time, stealing a long glance at the two strangers, but followed immediately by the lady, who
was probably her mother, and whose voice had been heard for the last few moments. The lady,
too, glanced in as she went by, and John Short lost his heart then and there; not that the
lady was beautiful as the little girl was, but because there was something in her face, in
her figure, in her whole carriage, that moved the boy suddenly as she looked at him and sent
the blood rushing to his cheeks and forehead.

She seemed young, but he never thought of her age. In reality she was nine-and-twenty years
old but looked younger. She was pale, far paler than the little girl, but she had those same
violet eyes, large, deep and sorrowful, beneath dark, smooth eyebrows that arched high and
rose a little in the middle. But behind the brave and pious front she thus shows to the world her
heart is growing more heavy day by day. Poverty is at her door in the guise of importunate creditors,
her servants are clamouring for overdue wages, and consumption, which for long has threatened
her, now shows its presence in hectic cheeks and a hacking cough. Fortune seems at last to
have abandoned her; and it requires all her courage to sustain her in this hour of darkness.

In
her extremity she appeals to Sir William Hamilton for a loan, much as a Queen might confer a
favour on a subject, and Hamilton, pleased to be of service to so fair and pious a lady, sends her
letter to his Leghorn banker, Mr John Dick, with instructions to arrange the matter.

* * * * *

While the Princess Aly was practising piety and cultivating Cardinals in Rome, with an empty
purse and a pain-racked body to make a mockery of her claim to a
crown, away in distant Russia Catherine II. was nursing a terrible
revenge on the woman who had dared to usurp her position and threaten
her throne.

The succession of revolutions, at which she had at first smiled scornfully,
had now roused the tigress in her.

She would show the world that she was no woman to be trifled with, and the first victim of her
vengeance should be that brazen Princess who dared to masquerade as "Elizabeth II."

She sent imperative orders to her trusted and beloved Orloff, fresh from his crushing defeat
of the Turkish fleet, to seize her at any cost, even if he had to
raze Ragusa to the ground; and these orders she knew would be executed
to the letter.

For was not Orloff the man whose strong hands had strangled her husband and placed the crown on
her head; also her most devoted slave? He was, it is true, the biggest scoundrel (as he was
also one of the handsomest men) in Europe, a man ready to stoop to any infamy, and thus the
best possible tool for such an infamous purpose; but he was also
her greatest admirer, eager to step into the place of "chief favourite"
from which his brother Gregory had just been dismissed.

When, however, Orloff went to Ragusa, with his soldiers at his back, he found that the Princess
had already flown, leaving no trace behind her. He ransacked Sicily in vain, and it was only when
Sir William Hamilton's letter to his Leghorn banker came to his hands that he discovered that
she was in Rome, a much safer asylum than Ragusa.

It was hopeless now to capture her by force; he must try diplomacy, and, by the hands of an
aide-de-camp, he sent her a letter in which he informed her that
he had received her ukase and was anxious to pay due homage to the
future Empress of Russia.

Such was the "Judas" message Kristenef, Orloff's emissary, carried to the Princess, whom he found
in a pitiful condition, wasted to a shadow by disease and starvation--"in a room cold and bare,
whose only furniture was a leather sofa, on which she lay in a high
fever, coughing convulsively."

To such pathetic straits was "Elizabeth II." reduced when Kristenef
came with his fawning airs and lying tongue to tell her that Alexis
Orloff, the greatest man in Russia, had instructed him to offer her
the throne of the Tsars, and, as an earnest of his loyalty, to beg
her acceptance of a loan of eleven thousand ducats.

In vain did Domanski, who was still by her side, warn her against the smooth-tongued envoy. She
was flattered by such unexpected homage, her eyes were dazzled by
the near prospect of the coveted crown which was to be hers, at last,
just when hope seemed dead.

She would accept Orloff's invitation to go to Pisa to meet him.

"As for you," she said, "if you are afraid, you can stay behind. I am going where Destiny
calls me."

This revolution in her fortunes acted like magic. New life coursed through her veins, colour
returned to her cheeks, and brightness to her eyes, as one February day in 1775 she left Rome,
with the devoted Domanski for companion and a brilliant escort, for Pisa, where Orloff greeted
her as an Empress. He gave regal fêtes in her honour and filled her ears with honeyed and flattering
words.

Affecting to be dazzled by her beauty, he even dared to make passionate love to her, which no
man of his day could do more effectively than this handsomest of the Orloffs; and so infatuated
was the poor Princess by the adoration of her handsome lover and the assurance of the throne
he was to give her, that she at last consented to share that throne with him, and by his side
went through a marriage ceremony, at which two of his officers masqueraded as officiating priests.

Nothing
remained now between her and the goal of her desires, except to make
the journey to Russia as speedily as possible, and a few hours after
the wedding banquet we see her in the Admiral's launch, with Orloff
and Domanski and a brilliant suite of officers, leaving Leghorn for
the Russian flagship, where she was received with the blare of bands
and the booming of artillery.

The crowning moment arrived when, as she was being hoisted to the deck in a gorgeous chair
suspended from the yard-arm, her future sailors greeted her with thunders of shouts, "Long live
the Empress!"

The moment she set foot on deck she was seized, handcuffs were snapped on her wrists, and she
was carried a helpless captive to a cabin. At the same moment Domanski was overpowered before
he had time to use his sword, and made a prisoner.

The Princess's cries for Orloff, her husband and saviour, are met with derision. Orloff she
is told is himself a prisoner. He has, in fact, vanished, his dastardly mission executed; and she
never saw him again. Two months later the victim of a man's treachery and a woman's vengeance
is looking with tear-dimmed eyes on "her capital" through a barred window of a cell in the
fortress of Saints Peter and Paul.

Over the tragic closing of her days we may not dwell long. The scene is too pitiful, too harrowing.
In vain she implores an interview with Catherine, who blazes into anger at the request. "The
impudence of the wretch," she exclaims, "is beyond all bounds! She must be mad. Tell her if
she wishes any improvement in her lot to cease the comedy she is playing." Prince Galitzin,
Grand Chancellor, exerts all his skill in vain to force a confession of imposture from her.
To his wiles and threats alike she opposes a dignified and calm front. She persists in the story
of her birth; refuses to admit that she is an impostor.

Even when she is flung into a loathsome cell, with bread and water for diet, she does not waver
a jot in her demeanour of dignity or in her Royal claims. Only when she is charged with being
the daughter of a Prague innkeeper does she allow indignation to master her, as she retorts, "I
have never been in Prague in my life, and if I knew who had thus slandered me I would scratch
his eyes out."

Domanski, too, proves equally intractable; even the promise of marriage to her will not wring
from him a word that might discredit his beloved Princess.

But although the Princess keeps such a brave heart under conditions that might well have broken
it, her spirit is powerless against the insidious disease that is working such havoc with her
body. In her damp, noisome cell consumption makes rapid headway. Her strength ebbs daily; the end is coming
swiftly near. She makes a last dying appeal to Catherine to see her if but for a few moments,
but the appeal falls on deaf ears. When she sends for a priest to minister to her last hours, and,
by Catherine's orders, he makes a final attempt to wrest her secret
from her, she moans with her failing breath, "Say the prayers for
the dead.

That is all there is for you to do here."

Four days later death came to her release. Catherine's throne was safe from this danger at
least, and she was left to dalliance with her legion of lovers, while the woman on whom she
had wreaked such terrible vengeance lay deeply buried in the courtyard of her prison, the very
soldiers who dug her grave being sworn to secrecy. Thus in mystery her life opened, and in
secrecy it closed.

CHAPTER VIII

THE KING AND THE "LITTLE DOVE"

A savage murmur ran through the market-place of Bergen, one summer morning in the year 1507, as Chancellor
Valkendorf made his pompous way along the avenues of stalls laden with their country produce,
his passage followed by scowling eyes and low-spoken maledictions.

There could not have been a more unwelcome visitor than this cold-eyed, supercilious Chancellor,
unless it were his master, Christian, the Danish Prince who had come to rule Norway with the
iron hand, and to stamp out the fires of rebellion against the alien rule that were always smouldering,
when not leaping into flame. Bergen itself had been the scene of the latest revolt against oppressive
and unjust taxes, and the insolent Valkendorf, who was now taking his morning stroll in the market-place,
was fresh from suppressing it with a rough hand which had left many a smart and longing for vengeance
behind it.

But the Chancellor could afford to smile at such evidences of unpopularity.

He knew that he was the most hated man in Norway--after his master--but he had executed his mission
well and was ready to do it again. And thus it was with an air, half-amused, half-contemptuous,
that he made his progress this July morning among the booths and stalls of the market, with eyes
scornfully blind to frowns, but very wide open for any pretty face he might chance to see.

He
had not strolled far before his eyes were arrested by as strangely contrasted a picture as
any he had ever seen. Behind one of the stalls, heaped high with luscious, many-coloured fruits
and mountains of vegetables, were two women, each so remarkable in her different way that, almost
involuntarily, he stood rooted to the spot, gazing open-eyed at them. The elder of the two
was of gigantic stature, towering head and shoulders over her companion, with harsh, masculine
face, massive jaw, coarse protruding lips, and black eyes which were fixed on him in a magnetic stare,
defiant and scornful--for none knew better than she who the stranger was, and few hated him
more.

But it was not to this grim, hard-visaged Amazon that Valkendorf's eyes were drawn, compelling
as were her stature and her basilisk stare. They quickly turned from her, with a motion of
contempt, to feast on the vision by her side--that of a girl on the threshold of young womanhood
and of a beauty that dazzled the eyes of the old voluptuary. How had she come there and in
such company, this ravishing girl on whom Nature had lavished the last touch of virginal loveliness,
this maiden with her figure of such supple grace, the proud little oval face with its complexion
of cream and roses, the dainty head from which twin plaits of golden hair fell almost to her
knees, and the eyes blue as violets, now veiled demurely, now opening wide to reveal their glories, enhanced
by a look of appeal, almost of fear.

The Chancellor, who was the last man to pass by a flower so seductively beautiful, approached the
stall, undaunted by the forbidding eyes of the giantess, Frau Sigbrit, by name, and, after making
a small purchase, sought to draw her into amiable conversation.

"No," she said in answer to his inquiries, "we are not Norwegian. We come from Holland, my daughter
and I, and we are trying to earn a little money before returning there. But why do you ask?"
she demanded almost fiercely, putting a protecting arm around the girl, as if she would shield
her from an enemy. "You are in such a different world from ours!"

Little by little, however, the grim face began to relax under the adroit flatteries and courtly deference
of the Chancellor--for none knew better than he the arts of charming, when he pleased; and it
was not long before the Amazon, completely thawed, was confiding to him the most intimate details
of her history and her hopes.

"Yes, my daughter is beautiful," she said, with a look of pride at the girl which transfigured
her face. "Many a great man has told me so--dukes, princes, and lords. She is as fair a flower
as ever grew in Holland; and she is as sweet as she is fair. She is Dyveke, my "little dove,"
the pride of my heart, my soul, my life. She is to be a Queen one day. It has been revealed
to me in my dreams. But when the day dawns it will be the saddest in my life." And with further
amiable words and a final courtly salute, Valkendorf continued his stroll, secretly promising himself
a further acquaintance with the dragon and her "little dove."

This was the first of many morning strolls in the Bergen market, in which the Chancellor spent
delightful moments at Frau Sigbrit's stall, each leaving him more and more a slave to her daughter's
charms; for he quickly found that to her physical perfections were allied a low, sweet voice, every
note of which was musical as that of a nightingale, a quiet dignity and refinement as far removed
from her station as her simple print frock with the bunch of roses nestling in the white purity
of her bosom, and a sprightliness of wit which even her modesty could not always repress.

Thus it was that, when Valkendorf at last returned to Upsala and the Court of his master, Christian,
his tongue was full of the praises of the "market-beauty" of Bergen, whose charms he pictured so
glowingly that the Prince's heart became as inflamed by a sympathetic
passion as his mind by curiosity to see such a siren.

"I shall not rest," he said to his Chancellor, "until I have seen your 'little dove' with
my own eyes; and who knows," he added with a laugh, "perhaps I shall steal her from you!"

It was in vain that Valkendorf, now alarmed by his indiscretion, began to pour cold water on the
flames he had lit. Christian had quite lost his susceptible heart
to the rustic and unknown beauty, and vowed that he could not rest
until he had seen her with his own eyes. And within a month he was
riding into Bergen, with Valkendorf by his side, at the head of a
brilliant retinue.

As the Prince made his way through the crowded
avenues of the Bergen streets to an accompaniment of scowls punctuated
by feeble, forced cheers, he cut a goodly enough figure to win many
an admiring, if reluctant, glance from bright eyes. With his broad
shoulders, his erect, well-knit figure clothed in purple velvet, his
stern, swarthy face crowned by a white-plumed hat, Christian looked
every inch a Prince.

To-day, too, he was in his most amiable mood,
with a smile ready to leap to his lips, and many a gracious wave of
the hand and sweep of plumed hat to acknowledge the grudged salutes
of his subjects. He could be charming enough when he pleased, and
this was a day of high good-humour; for his mind was full of the pleasure
that awaited him. Even Frau Sigbrit's scowl was chased away when his
eyes were drawn to her towering figure, and with a swift smile he
singled her out for the honour of a special salute.

When the Prince
at last arrived in the market-square, he was greeted by a procession
of the prettiest maidens in Bergen who, in white frocks and with flower-wreathed
hair, advanced to pay him the homage of demure eyes. But among them
all, the loveliest girls of the city, Christian saw but one--a girl
younger than almost any other, but so radiantly lovely that his eyes
fixed themselves on her as if entranced, until her cheeks flamed a
vivid crimson under the ardour of his gaze. "No need to point her
out," he whispered delightedly to Valkendorf, "I see your 'little
dove,' and she is all you have told me and more."

Before many hours
had passed, a Court official appeared at Frau Sigbrit's cottage door
with a command from the Prince to her and her daughter to attend a
State ball the following evening.

So John got into the dogcart and was driven off by the ancient Reynolds--past the "Duke's Head,"
past the "Feathers," past the churchyard and the croft--the "croat," they called it in Billingsfield--and
on by the windmill on the heath, a hideous bit of grassless common euphemistically so named,
and so out to the high-road towards the railway station, feeling very miserable indeed. It
is a curious fact, too, in the history of his psychology that in proportion as he got farther
from the vicarage he thought more and more of his old tutor and less and less of his unfinished
dream, and he realised painfully that the vicar was nearly the only friend he had in the world.
He would of course find Cornelius Angleside at Cambridge, but he suspected that Cornelius,
turned loose among a merry band of undergraduates of his own position would be a very different
person from the idle youth he had known at Billingsfield, trembling in the intervals of his
idleness at the awful prospect of the entrance examination, and frantically attempting to master
some bit of stray knowledge which might possibly be useful to him. Cornelius would hunt, would
gamble, would go to the races and would give wines at college; John was to be a reading man
who must avoid such things as he would avoid the devil himself, not only because he was too
wretchedly poor to have any share whatever in the amusements of Cornelius and his set, but
because every minute was important, every hour meant not only learning but meant, most emphatically,
money. He thought of his poor father, grinding out the life of a literary hack in a wretched
London lodging, dining Heaven knew where and generally supping not at all, saving every penny
to help his son's education, hard working, honest, lacking no virtue except the virtue of all
virtues--success. Then he thought how he himself had been favoured by fortune during these
last years, living under the vicar's roof, treated with the same consideration as the high-born
young gentlemen who had been his companions, living well, sleeping well and getting the best
education in England for nothing or next to nothing, while that same father of his had never
ceased to slave day and night with his pen, honestly doing his best and yet enjoying none of
the good things of life. John thought of all this and set his teeth boldly to face the world.
A few months, he thought, and he might have earned a scholarship--he might be independent.
Then a little longer--less than three years--and he might, nay, he would, take high honours
in the university and come back crowned with glory, with the prospect of a fellowship, with
every profession open to him, with the world at his feet and with money in his hand to help
his father out of all his troubles.

That was how John Short went to Trinity. It was a hard struggle at first, for he found himself
much poorer than he had imagined, and it seemed as though the ends could not possibly meet.
There was no question of denying himself luxuries; that would have been easy enough. In those
first months it was the necessities that he lacked, the coals for his little grate, the oil
for his one small lamp. But he fought bravely through it, having, like many another young fellow
who has weathered the storms of poverty in pursuit of learning, an iron constitution, and an
even stronger will. He used to say long afterwards that feeling cold was a mere habit and that
when one thoroughly understood the construction of Greek verses, some stimulus of physical
discomfort was necessary to make the imagination work well; in support of which assertion he
said that he had never done such good things by the comfortable fire in the study at Billingsfield
vicarage as he did afterwards on winter nights by the light of a tallow candle, high up in
Neville's Court. Moreover, if any one argued that it was better for an extremely poor man not
to go to Trinity, but to some much smaller college, he answered that as far as he himself was
concerned he could not have done better, which was quite true and therefore perfectly unanswerable.
Where the competition was less, he would have been satisfied with less, he said; where it was
greatest a man could only be contented when he had reached the highest point possible. But
before he attained his end he suffered more than any one knew, especially during those first
months. For when he had got his first scholarship, he insisted upon sending back the little
sums of hard-earned money his father sent him from time to time, and he consequently had nearly
as hard work as before to keep himself warm and to keep oil in his lamp during the long winter's
evenings. But he succeeded, nevertheless.

CHAPTER III.

In the month of October of that year, a short time after John had taken up his abode in Trinity
College, an event occurred which shook Billingsfield to its foundations; no less an event than
the occupation of the dwelling known as the "cottage." What the cottage was will appear hereafter.
The arrival of the new tenants occurred in the following manner.

The Reverend Augustin Ambrose received a letter, which he immediately showed to his wife, as
he showed most of his correspondence; for he was of the disposition which may be termed wife-consulting.
Married men are generally of two kinds; those who tell their wives everything and those who
tell them nothing. It is evident that the relative merits of the two systems depend chiefly
upon the relative merits of the wives in question. Mr. Ambrose had no doubt of the advantages
of his own method and he carried it to its furthest expression, for he never did anything whatever
without consulting his better half. On the whole the plan worked well, for the vicar had learning
and his wife had common sense. He therefore showed the letter to her and she read it, and read
it again, and finally put it away, writing across the envelope in her own large, clear hand
the words--Goddard, Cottage--indicative of the contents.

       *       *       *       *       *

"MY DEAR SIR--It is now nearly five months since I saw you last. Need I tell you that the sense
of your kindness is still fresh in my memory? You do not know, indeed you cannot know, what
an impression your goodness made upon me. You showed me that I was acting rightly. It has been
so hard to act rightly. Of course you quite understand what I mean. I cannot refer to the great
sorrow which has overtaken me and my dear innocent little Nellie. There is no use in referring
to it, for I have told you all. You allowed me to unburden my heart to you during my brief
visit, and ever since that day I have felt very much, I may say infinitely, relieved.

"I am again about to ask you a favour; I trust indeed that I am not asking too much, but I
know by experience how kind you are and so I am not afraid to ask this too. Do you remember
speaking to me of the little cottage? The picture you drew of it quite charmed me, and I have
determined to take it, that is, if it is still to be let and if it is not asking quite too
much of you. I mean, if you will take it for me. You cannot think how grateful I shall be and
I enclose a cheque. I am almost sure you said thirty-six pounds. It was thirty-six, was it
not? The reason I venture to enclose the money is because you are so very kind, but of course
you do not know anything certain about me. But I am sure you will understand. You said you
were sure I could live with my little girl in Billingsfield for three hundred a year. I find
I have a little more, in fact nearly five hundred. If you tell me that I can have the cottage,
I will come down at once, for town is very dreary and we have been here all summer except a
week at Margate. Let me thank you again, you have been so very kind, and believe me, my dear
sir, very sincerely yours,

"MARY GODDARD."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Augustin, my dear, this is very exciting," said Mrs. Ambrose, as she handed the cheque to
her husband for inspection and returned the letter to its envelope, preparatory to marking
it for future reference; and when, as has been said, she had written upon the outside the words--Goddard,
Cottage, and had put it away she turned upon her husband with an inquiring manner peculiar
to her. Mr. Ambrose was standing before the window, looking out at the rain and occasionally
glancing at the cheque he still held in his hand.

"Just like a woman to send a cheque to 'bearer' through the post," he remarked, severely. "However
since I have got it, it is all right."

"I don't think it is all right, Augustin," said his wife. "We are taking a great responsibility
in bringing her into the parish. I am quite sure she is a dissenter or a Romanist or something
dreadful, to begin with."

"My dear," answered the vicar, mildly, "you make very uncharitable suppositions. It seems to
me that the most one can say of her is that she is very unhappy and that she does not write
very good English."

"Oh, I have no doubt she is very unhappy. But as you say we must not be uncharitable. I suppose
you will have to write about the cottage."

"I suppose so," said Mr. Ambrose doubtfully. "I cannot send her back the money, and the cottage
is certainly to let."

He deposited the cheque in the drawer of his writing-table and began to walk up and down the
room, glancing up from time to time at his wife who was lifting one after another the ornaments
which stood upon the chimney-piece, in order to ascertain whether Susan had dusted underneath
them. She had many ways of assuring herself that people did their work properly.

"No," said she, "you cannot send her back the money. But it is a very solemn responsibility.
I hope we are doing quite right."

"I certainly would not hesitate to return the cheque, my dear, if I thought any harm would
come of Mrs. Goddard's living here. But I don't think there is any reason to doubt her story."

"Of course not. It was in the Standard, so there is no doubt about it. I only hope no one else
reads the papers here."

"They read them in the kitchen," added Mrs. Ambrose presently, "and they probably take a paper
at the Duke's Head. Mr. Boosey is rather a literary character."

"Nobody will suppose it was that Goddard, my dear," said the vicar in a reassuring tone of voice.

"No--you had better write about the cottage."

"I will," said the vicar; and he forthwith did. And moreover, with his usual willingness to
give himself trouble for other people, he took a vast deal of pains to see that the cottage
was really habitable. It turned out to be in very good condition. It was a pretty place enough,
standing ten yards back from the road, beyond the village, just opposite the gates of the park;
a little square house of red brick with a high pointed roof and a little garden. The walls
were overgrown with creepers which had once been trained with considerable care, but which
during the last two years had thriven in untrimmed luxuriance and now covered the whole of
the side of the house which faced the road. So thickly did they grow that it was with difficulty
that the windows could at first be opened. The vicar sighed as he entered the darkened rooms.
His daughter had lived in the cottage when she first married the young doctor who had now gone
to London, and the vicar had been, and was, very fond of his daughter. He had almost despaired
of ever seeing her again in Billingsfield; the only glimpses of her he could obtain were got
by going himself to town, for the doctor was so busy that he always put off the projected visit
to the country and his wife was so fond of him that she refused to go alone. The vicar sighed
as he forced open the windows upon the lower floor and let the light into the bare and empty
rooms which had once been so bright and full of happiness. He wondered what sort of person
Mrs. Goddard would turn out to be upon nearer acquaintance, and made vague, unconscious conjectures
about her furniture as he stumbled up the dark stairs to the upper story.

He was not left long in doubt. The arrangements were easily concluded, for the cottage belonged
to the estate in Chancery and the lawyer in charge was very busy with other matters. The guarantee
afforded by the vicar's personal application, together with the payment of a year's rent in
advance so far facilitated matters that four days after she had written to Mr. Ambrose the
latter informed Mrs. Goddard that she was at liberty to take possession. The vicar suggested
that the Billingsfield carrier, who drove his cart to London once a week, could bring her furniture
down in two trips and save her a considerable expense; Mrs. Goddard accepted this advice and
in the course of a fortnight was installed with all her goods in the cottage. Having completed
her arrangements at last, she came to call upon the vicar's wife.

Mrs. Goddard had not changed since she had first visited Billingsfield, five months earlier,
though little Eleanor had grown taller and was if possible prettier than ever. Something of
the character of the lady in black may have been gathered from the style of her letter to Mr.
Ambrose; that communication had impressed the vicar's wife unfavourably and had drawn from
her husband a somewhat compassionate remark about the bad English it contained. Nevertheless
when Mrs. Goddard came to live in Billingsfield the Ambroses soon discovered that she was a
very well-educated woman, that she appeared to have read much and to have read intelligently,
and that she was on the whole decidedly interesting. It was long, however, before Mrs. Ambrose
entirely conquered a certain antipathy she felt for her, and which she explained after her
own fashion. Mrs. Goddard was not a dissenter and she was not a Romanist; on the contrary she
appeared to be a very good churchwoman. She paid her bills regularly and never gave anybody
any trouble. She visited the vicarage at stated intervals, and the vicarage graciously returned
her visits. The vicar himself even went to the cottage more often than Mrs. Ambrose thought
strictly necessary, for the vicar was strongly prejudiced in her favour. But Mrs. Ambrose did
not share that prejudice. Mrs. Goddard, she said, was too effusive, talked too much about herself
and her troubles, did not look thoroughly straightforward, probably had foreign blood. Ay,
there was the rub--Mrs. Ambrose suspected that Mrs. Goddard was not quite English. If she was
not, why did she not say so, and be done with it?

Mrs. Goddard was English, nevertheless, and would have been very much surprised could she have
guessed the secret cause of the slight coldness she sometimes observed in the manner of the
clergyman's wife towards her. She herself, poor thing, believed it was because she was in trouble,
and considering the nature of the disaster which had befallen her, she was not surprised. She
was rather a weak woman, rather timid, and if she talked a little too much sometimes it was
because she felt embarrassed; there were times, too, when she was very silent and sad. She
had been very happy and the great catastrophe had overtaken her suddenly, leaving her absolutely
without friends. She wanted to be hidden from the world, and by one of those strange contrasts
often found in weak people she had suddenly made a very bold resolution and had successfully
carried it out. She had come straight to a man she had never seen, but whom she knew very well
by reputation, and had told him her story and asked him to help her; and she had not come in
vain. The person who advised her to go to the Reverend Augustin Ambrose knew that there was
not a better man to whom she could apply. She had found what she wanted, a sort of deserted
village where she would never be obliged to meet any one, since there was absolutely no society;
she had found a good man upon whom she felt she could rely in case of further difficulty; and
she had not come upon false pretences, for she had told her whole story quite frankly. For
a woman who was naturally timid she had done a thing requiring considerable courage, and she
was astonished at her own boldness after she had done it. But in her peaceful retreat, she
reflected that she could not possibly have left England, as many women in her position would
have done, simply because the idea of exile was intolerable to her; she reflected also that
if she had settled in any place where there was any sort of society her story would one day
have become known, and that if she had spent years in studying her situation she could not
have done better than in going boldly to the vicar of Billingsfield and explaining her sad
position to him. She had found a haven of rest after many months of terrible anxiety and she
hoped that she might end her days in peace and in the spot she had chosen. But she was very
young--not thirty years of age yet--and her little girl would soon grow up--and then? Evidently
her dream of peace was likely to be of limited duration; but she resigned herself to the unpleasant
possibilities of the future with a good grace, in consideration of the advantages she enjoyed
in the present.

Mrs. Ambrose was at home when Mrs. Goddard and little Eleanor came to the vicarage. Indeed
Mrs. Ambrose was rarely out in the afternoon, unless something very unusual called her away.
She received her visitor with the stern hospitality she exercised towards strangers. The strangers
she saw were generally the near relations of the young gentlemen whom her husband received
for educational purposes. She stood in the front drawing-room, that is to say, in the most
impressive chamber of that fortress which is an Englishman's house. It was a formal room, arranged
by a fixed rule and the order of it was maintained inflexibly; no event could be imagined of
such terrible power as to have caused the displacement of one of those chairs, of one of those
ornaments upon the chimney-piece, of one of those engravings upon the walls. The walls were
papered with one shade of green, the furniture was covered with material of another shade of
green and the well-spared carpet exhibited still a third variety of the same colour. Mrs. Ambrose's
sense of order did not extend to the simplest forms of artistic harmony, but when it had an
opportunity of impressing itself upon inanimate objects which were liable to be moved, washed
or dusted, its effects were formidable indeed. She worshipped neatness and cleanliness; she
left the question of taste to others. And now she stood in the keep of her stronghold, the
impersonation of moral rectitude and of practical housekeeping.

Mrs. Goddard entered rather timidly, followed by little Eleanor whose ideas had been so much
disturbed by the recent change in her existence, that she had grown unusually silent and her
great violet eyes were unceasingly opened wide to take in the growing wonders of her situation.
Mrs. Goddard was still dressed in black, as when John Short had seen her five months earlier.
There was something a little peculiar in her mourning, though Mrs. Ambrose would have found
it hard to define the peculiarity. Some people would have said that if she was really a widow
her gown fitted a little too well, her bonnet was a little too small, her veil a little too
short. Mrs. Ambrose supposed that those points were suggested by the latest fashions in London
and summed up the difficulty by surmising that Mrs. Goddard had foreign blood.

"I should have called before," said the latter, deeply impressed by the severe appearance of
the vicar's wife, "but I have been so busy putting my things into the cottage--"

"Pray don't think of it," answered Mrs. Ambrose. Then she added after a pause, "I am very glad
to see you." She appeared to have been weighing in her conscience the question whether she
could truthfully say so or not. But Mrs. Goddard was grateful for the smallest advances.

"Thank you," she said, "you are so very kind. Will you tell Mr. Ambrose how thankful I am for
his kind assistance? Yes, Nellie and I have had hard work in moving, have not we, dear?" She
drew the beautiful child close to her and gazed lovingly into her eyes. But Nellie was shy;
she hid her face on her mother's shoulder, and then looked doubtfully at Mrs. Ambrose, and
then hid herself again.

"How old is your little girl?" asked Mrs. Ambrose more kindly. She was fond of children, and
actually pitied any child whose mother perhaps had foreign blood.

"Eleanor--I call her Nellie--is eight years old. She will be nine in January. She is tall for
her age," added Mrs. Goddard with affectionate pride. As a matter of fact Nellie was small
for her years, and Mrs. Ambrose, who was the most truthful of women, felt that she could not
conscientiously agree in calling hex tall. She changed the subject.

"I am afraid you will find it very quiet in Billingsfield," she said presently.

"Oh, I am used--that is, I prefer a very quiet place. I want to live very quietly for some
years, indeed I hope for the rest of my life. Besides it will be so good for Nellie to live
in the country--she will grow so strong."

"She looks very well, I am sure," answered Mrs. Ambrose rather bluntly, looking at the child's
clear complexion and bright eyes. "And have you always lived in town until now, Mrs. Goddard?"
she asked.

"Oh no, not always, but most of the year, perhaps. Indeed I think so." Mrs. Goddard felt nervous
before the searching glance of the elder woman. Mrs. Ambrose concluded that she was not absolutely
straightforward.

"Do you think you can make the cottage comfortable?" asked the vicar's wife, seeing that the
conversation languished.

"Oh, I think so," answered her visitor, glad to change the subject, and suddenly becoming very
voluble as she had previously been very shy. "It is really a charming little place. These muscles
we name the "Ring-Shield Muscles." In opposition to them there is another pair inside the shield,
running parallel with the vocal ligaments (pl. IX, 1, 2, 3). They are attached (like the vocal
ligaments) in front to the shield cartilage and behind to the pyramids. These muscles we will call
the "Shield-Pyramid Muscles." They counteract the ring-shield muscles, and having overcome
their resistance, pull the shield cartilage up again, thereby, of course, relaxing the vocal ligaments.
The ring-shield muscles, therefore, stretch the vocal ligaments and the shield-pyramid muscles
relax them.

The shield-pyramid muscles have an additional function--that of pressing
together the vocal ligaments, under certain circumstances, thereby
narrowing the opening between them.

They have therefore been, in these later days, called the Sphincter[G]
muscle of the glottis.

They have also been called the Vocal Muscles, since they play so
important a part in the formation of all vocal tone that a paralysis
of them causes total loss of voice.

It may be observed here that it is impossible to imitate, in the dead subject, the contraction
of the vocal muscles.

All conclusions, therefore, drawn from experiments upon exsected
larynges, with regard to tone-production in living man are necessarily
quite untrustworthy, and cannot for one moment be admitted as evidence
against observations made upon singers with the laryngoscope.

These two pairs of muscles, then, namely the ring-shield muscles (pl.
VIII, 1, 2) and the shield-pyramid muscles (pl. IX, 1, 2, 3) by stretching,
slackening, and compressing the vocal ligaments, mainly govern the
pitch of the tones produced by their vibrations.

The ring-shield muscles receive some assistance in stretching the
vocal ligaments from another quarter, of which we shall speak later
on.

We have now had a look at the vocal ligaments, and we have seen by
what means they are put on the stretch.

 You may have
seen him when you came last June, Mrs. Goddard?"

"Had he very bright blue eyes--a nice face?"

"Yes--that is, it might have been Mr. Angleside--Lord Scatterbeigh's son--he was here, too."

"Oh," said Mrs. Goddard, "perhaps it was."

"Mamma," asked little Nellie, "what is Laws Catterbay?"

"A peer, darling."

"Like the one at Brighton, mamma, with a band?"

"No, child," answered the mother laughing. "P, double E, R, peer--a rich gentleman."

"Like poor papa then?" inquired the irrepressible Eleanor.

Mrs. Goddard turned pale and pressed the little girl close to her side, leaning down to whisper
in her ear.

"You must not ask foolish questions, darling--I will tell you by and by."

"Papa was a rich gentleman," objected the child.

Mrs. Goddard looked at Mrs. Ambrose, and the ready tears came into her eyes. The vicar's wife
smiled kindly and took little Nellie by the hand.

"Come, dear," she said in the motherly tone that was natural to her when she was not receiving
visitors. "Come and see the garden and you can play with Carlo."

"Can't I see Laws Catterbay, too?" asked the little girl rather wistfully.

"Carlo is a great, big, brown dog," said Mrs. Ambrose, leading the child out into the garden,
while Mrs. Goddard followed close behind. Before they had gone far they came upon the vicar,
arrayed in an old coat, his hands thrust into a pair of gigantic gardening gloves and a battered
old felt hat upon his head. Mrs. Goddard had felt rather uncomfortable in the impressive society
of Mrs. Ambrose and the sight of the vicar's genial face was reassuring in the extreme. She
was not disappointed, for he immediately relieved the situation by asking all manner of kindly
questions, interspersed with remarks upon his garden, while Mrs. Ambrose introduced little
Nellie to the acquaintance of Carlo who had not seen so pretty a little girl for many a day,
and capered and wagged his feathery tail in a manner most unseemly for so clerical a dog.

So it came about that Mrs. Goddard established herself at Billingsfield and made her first
visit to the vicarage. After that the ice was broken and things went on smoothly enough. Mrs.
Ambrose's hints concerning foreign blood, and her husband's invariable remonstrance to the
effect that she ought to be more charitable, grew more and more rare as time went on, and finally
ceased altogether. Mrs. Goddard became a regular institution, and ceased to astonish the inhabitants.
Mr. Thomas Reid, the sexton, was heard to remark from time to time that he "didn't hold with
th'm newfangle fashins in dress;" but he was a regular old conservative, and most people agreed
with Mr. Abraham Boosey of the Duke's Head, who had often been to London, and who said she
did "look just A one, slap up, she did!"

Mrs. Goddard became an institution, and in the course of the first year of her residence in
the cottage it came to be expected that she should dine at the vicarage at least once a week;
and once a week, also, Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose went up and had tea with her and little Eleanor
at the cottage. It came to pass also that Mrs. Goddard heard a vast deal of talk about John
Short and his successes at Trinity, and she actually developed a lively interest in his career,
and asked for news of him almost as eagerly as though he had been already a friend of her own.
In very quiet places people easily get into the sympathetic habit of regarding their neighbours'
interests as very closely allied to their own. The constant talk about John Short, the vicar's
sanguine hopes for his brilliant future, and Mrs. Ambrose's unlimited praise of his moral qualities,
repeated day by day and week by week produced a vivid impression on Mrs. Goddard's mind. It
would have surprised her and even amused her beyond measure had she had any idea that she herself
had for a long time absorbed the interest of this same John Short, that he had written hundreds
of Greek and Latin verses in her praise, while wholly ignorant of her name, and that at the
very time when without knowing him, she was constantly mentioning him as though she knew him
intimately well, he himself was looking back to the one glimpse he had had of her, as to a
dream of unspeakable bliss.

It never occurred to Mr. Ambrose's mind to tell John in the occasional letters he wrote that
Mrs. Goddard had settled in Billingsfield. John, he thought, could take no possible interest
in knowing about her, and moreover, Mrs. Goddard herself was most anxious never to be mentioned
abroad. She had come to Billingsfield to live in complete obscurity, and the good vicar had
promised that as far as he and his wife were concerned she should have her wish. To tell even
John Short, his own beloved pupil, would be to some extent a breach of faith, and there was
assuredly no earthly reason why John should be told. It might do harm, for of course the young
fellow had made acquaintances at Cambridge; he had probably read about the Goddard case in
the papers, and might talk about it. If he should happen to come down for a day or two he would
probably meet her; but that could not be avoided. It was not likely that he would come for
some time. The vicar himself intended to go up to Cambridge for a day or two after Christmas
to see him; but the winter flew by and Mr. Ambrose did not go. Then came Easter, then the summer
and the Long vacation. John wrote that he could not leave his books for a day, but that he
hoped to run down next Christmas. Again he did not come, but there came the news of his having
won another and a more important scholarship; the news also that he was already regarded as
the most promising man in the university, all of which exceedingly delighted the heart of the
Reverend Augustin Ambrose, and being told with eulogistic comments to Mrs. Goddard, tended
to increase the interest she felt in the existence of John Short, so that she began to long
for a sight of him, without exactly knowing why.

Gradually, too, as she and her little girl passed many peaceful days in the quiet cottage,
the sad woman's face grew less sorrowful. She spoke of herself more cheerfully and dwelt less
upon the subject of her grief. She had at first been so miserable that she could hardly talk
at all without referring to her unhappy situation though, after her first interview with Mrs.
Ambrose, no one had ever heard her mention any details connected with her trouble. But now
she never approached the subject at all. Her face lost none of its pathetic beauty, it is true,
but it seemed to express sorrow past rather than present. Meanwhile little Nellie grew daily
more lovely, and absorbed more and more of her mother's attention.

CHAPTER IV.

Events of such stirring interest as the establishment of Mrs. Goddard in Billingsfield rarely
come alone; for it seems to be in the nature of great changes to bring other changes with them,
even when there is no apparent connection whatever between them. It took nearly two years for
Billingsfield to recover from its astonishment at Mrs. Goddard's arrival, and before the excitement
had completely worn off the village was again taken off its feet by unexpected news of stupendous
import, even as of old Pompeii was overthrown by a second earthquake before it had wholly recovered
from the devastation caused by the first. The shock was indeed a severe one. The Juxon estate
was reported to be out of Chancery, and a new squire was coming to take up his residence at
the Hall.

It is not known exactly how the thing first became known, but there was soon no doubt whatever
that it was true. Thomas Reid, the sexton, who remembered that the old squire died forty years
ago come Michaelmas, and had been buried in a "wonderful heavy" coffin, Thomas Reid the stern
censor of the vicar's sermons, a melancholic and sober man, so far lost his head over the news
as to ask Mr. Ambrose's leave to ring the bells, Mr. Abraham Boosey having promised beer for
the ringers. Even to the vicar's enlightened mind it seemed fitting that there should be some
festivity over so great an event and the bells were accordingly rung during one whole afternoon.
Thomas Reid's ringers never got beyond the first "bob" of a peal, for with the exception of
the sexton himself and old William Speller the wheelwright, who pulled the treble bell, they
were chiefly dull youths who with infinite difficulty had been taught what changes they knew
by rote and had very little idea of ringing by scientific rule. Moreover Mr. Boosey was liberal
in the matter of beer that day and the effect of each successive can that was taken up the
stairs of the old tower was immediately apparent to every one within hearing, that is to say
as far as five miles around.

The estate was out of Chancery at last. For forty years, ever since the death of the old squire,
no one had rightfully called the Hall his own. The heir had lived abroad, and had lived in
such an exceedingly eccentric manner as to give ground for a suit de lunatico inquirendo, brought
by another heir. With the consistency of judicial purpose which characterises such proceedings
the courts appeared to have decided that though the natural possessor, the eccentric individual
who lived abroad, was too mad to be left in actual possession, he was not mad enough to justify
actual possession in the person of the next of kin. Proceedings continued, fees were paid,
a certain legal personage already mentioned came down from time to time and looked over the
estate, but the matter was not finally settled until the eccentric individual died, after forty
years of eccentricity, to the infinite relief and satisfaction of all parties and especially
of his lawful successor Charles James Juxon now, at last, "of Billingsfield Hall, in the county
of Essex, Esquire."

In due time also Mr. Juxon appeared. It was natural that he should come to see the vicar, and
as it happened that he called late in the afternoon upon the day when Mrs. Goddard and little
Eleanor were accustomed to dine at the vicarage, he at once had an opportunity of making the
acquaintance of his tenant; thus, if we except the free-thinking doctor, it will be seen that
Mr. Juxon was in the course of five minutes introduced to the whole of the Billingsfield society.

He was a man inclining towards middle age, of an active and vigorous body, of a moderate intelligence
and of decidedly prepossessing appearance. His features were of the strong, square type, common
to men whose fathers for many generations have lived in the country. His eyes were small, blue
and very bright, and to judge from the lines in his sunburned face he was a man who laughed
often and heartily. He had an abundance of short brown hair, parted very far upon one side
and brushed to a phenomenal smoothness, and he wore a full brown beard, cut rather short and
carefully trimmed. He immediately won the heart of Mrs. Ambrose on account of his extremely
neat appearance. There was no foreign blood in him, she was sure. He had large clean hands
with large and polished nails. He wore very well made clothes, and he spoke like a gentleman.
The vicar, too, was at once prepossessed in his favour, and even little Eleanor, who was generally
very shy before strangers, looked at him admiringly and showed little of her usual bashfulness.
But Mrs. Goddard seemed ill at ease and tried to keep out of the conversation as much as possible.

"There have been great rejoicings at the prospect of your arrival," said the vicar when the
new-comer had been introduced to both the ladies. "I fancy that if you had let it be known
that you were coming down to-day the people would have turned out to meet you at the station."

"The truth is, I rather avoid that sort of thing," said the squire, smiling. "I would rather
enter upon my dominions as quietly as possible."

"It is much better for the people, too," remarked Mrs. Ambrose. "Their idea of a holiday is
to do no work and have too much beer." 

A corrupt official may often find that by favoring private interests at the expense of the people
who have elected him, he can afford to forfeit all chance of re-election. The independence of
public officials which our forefathers were so anxious to secure has been found to be a fruitful
source of corruption.

A realization of this fact has been responsible for the introduction of the recall system under
which the people enforce official responsibility through their power
to remove by a vote of lack of confidence in the form of a petition
signed by a certain percentage of the voters.

Such an expression of popular disapproval has the effect of suspending
from office the offending official who can regain the office only
by offering himself again as a candidate at an election called for
that purpose.

This is as yet merely an innovation in municipal government, but
if it proves to be satisfactory, the principle will doubtless be incorporated,
not only in municipal charters generally, but in our state constitutions
as well.

Simultaneous with this movement to make government really representative
by enforcing official responsibility is another movement which also
aims to make the will of the majority supreme, but by a totally different
method of procedure.

This is the movement looking toward the establishment of the initiative and the referendum.
Instead of leaving power in the hands of representative bodies and
seeking to make them responsible as the first plan of reform contemplates,
the second plan would guard representative bodies against temptation
by divesting them of all powers which they are liable to misuse and
conferring them directly upon the people.

This is merely an attempt to get back to the basic idea of the old town meeting, where local
measures were directly proposed and adopted or rejected by the people. It is, moreover, the logical
outcome of the struggle which the advocates of majority rule have been and are now making to
secure control of our state and municipal governments. The constitutional checks on democracy
have greatly obstructed and delayed the progress of political reform. Some of them have been
removed, it is true, but enough still remain to make it possible for the minority to defeat the
will of the majority with reference to many questions of vital importance.

It must be admitted, when we review the course of our political development,
that much progress has been made.

But the evolution has been toward a direct rather than toward a representative democracy. The
reason for this is not far to seek.

The system of checks which limited the power of the majority made the legislature largely
an irresponsible body; and since it could not be trusted, it was necessary to take out of its hands
the powers it was most likely to abuse.

The legislature was first deprived of its power to enact constitutional legislation, though it was
allowed to retain an effective veto on such changes through its refusal
to take the initiative.

With the progress of the democratic movement some of the legislative
powers most frequently abused were, like the state constitution itself,
made subject to popular ratification.

This submission of constitutional and certain kinds of statutory legislation to the people
before it could go into effect merely gave them to this extent a
veto on the recommendations of their legislatures and constitutional
conventions.

There was still no way to prevent the legislature from misrepresenting the people with respect
to those measures which did not require popular ratification.

The tendency was to diminish the power of the legislature by including in the constitution itself
much that might have taken the form of ordinary statutory legislation, as well as by requiring that
some of the more important acts passed by the legislature should receive the direct assent
of the voters.

This merely gave to the people a partial negative. It enabled them to reject some measures which
they did not approve of, but not all, since in those cases where
popular ratification was not required, public sentiment could be disregarded
by the law-making body.

Moreover, the people did not have the right to initiate measures--a
right which is indispensable if the people are to have any real power
to mold the policy of the state.

The logical outcome of this line of development is easily seen. As pointed out in an earlier
part of this volume, constitutional development first limits and
eventually destroys irresponsible power, and in the end makes the
responsible power in the state supreme.

The prevalent lack of confidence in our state legislatures is no
indication of hostility to the principle of representative government;
for representative government in the true sense means government that
is responsible to the people.

The popular movement has in modifying our state and municipal governments merely taken the line
of least resistance, and that has involved the transfer of legislative powers to the people
themselves.

Just how far this movement will go it is impossible to foresee.

A government of the representative type, if responsive to public
sentiment, would answer all the requirements of a democratic state.

It would at the same time be merely carrying out in practice what has long been the generally accepted,
if mistaken, view of our political system.

The adoption of some effective plan of direct nomination and recall
of officials would accomplish much in the way of restoring confidence
in legislative bodies.

To this extent it would check the tendency to place the law-making power directly in the hands
of the people. Popular ratification of all important laws would be unnecessary, if our legislative
bodies were really responsible to the people.

Nevertheless, the popular veto is a power which the people should have the right to use whenever
occasion demands. This would prevent the possibility of legislation in the interest of the minority
as now often happens.

The popular veto through the referendum is not, however, of itself sufficient. The people
need the power to initiate legislation as well as the power to defeat it. The initiative combined
with the referendum would make the majority in fact, as it now is
in name only, the final authority in all matters of legislation.

It is in our state and municipal governments that democracy is likely to win its first victories.
The minority, however, will make a desperate struggle to prevent the overthrow of the system which
has been and still is the source of its power. The political machine supported by every privileged
interest will oppose by every means in its power the efforts of the people to break down the checks
upon the majority.

To this end we must expect them to make large use in the near future, as they have in the past,
of the extraordinary powers exercised by our courts.

In fact the courts as the least responsible and most conservative of our organs of government
have been the last refuge of the minority when defeated in the other
branches of the government.

The disposition so generally seen among the opponents of democracy
to regard all measures designed to break down the checks upon the
majority as unconstitutional points to the judiciary as the chief
reliance of the conservative classes.

Indeed, the people are beginning to see that the courts are in possession of political powers of
supreme importance--that they can, and often do, defeat the will of the majority after it
has successfully overcome opposition in all other branches of the government. If the will of
the majority is to prevail, the courts must be deprived of the power which they now have to declare
laws null and void. Popular government can not really exist so long as judges who are politically
irresponsible have power to override the will of the majority. The democratic movement will
either deprive the judicial branch of the government of its political
powers or subject it to the same degree of popular control applied
to other political organs.

The extension of direct nomination and recall to the members of our state judiciary would
deprive the special interests of the power to use the courts as the means of blocking the way to
popular reforms. In any democratic community the final interpreter of the constitution must
be the majority. With the evolution of complete popular government, then, the judicial veto
must disappear, or the court must become a democratic body.

It is through our state governments that we must approach the problem of reforming the national
government. Complete control of the former will open the door that leads to eventual control of
the latter. Democratize the state governments, and it will be possible even to change the character
of the United States Senate.

With a state legislature directly nominated and subject to removal through the use of the
recall, it will be possible to deprive that body of any real power in the selection of United
States senators. Under these conditions the legislature would merely ratify the candidate
receiving a majority of the popular vote just as the electoral college has come to ratify the
popular choice of the President. In this way direct nomination and direct election of United States
senators could be made really effective while at the same time preserving the form but not the
substance of election by the state legislatures.[196]

This would make possible that much needed separation of state and municipal from national politics.
Candidates for the state legislature are now nominated and elected largely with reference
to the influence of that body upon the composition of the United States Senate. This has a
tendency to, and in fact does, make state legislation in no small degree a by-product of senatorial
elections. By divesting the legislature of this function, it would cease to be, as it is now,
one of the organs of the Federal government, and in assuming its proper role of a local legislative
body, it would become in fact what it has hardly been even in theory--a body mainly interested
in formulating and carrying out purely local policies. Experience has shown beyond question
that its function as an electoral college for the choice of United States senators is incompatible
with the satisfactory exercise of local legislative functions. The latter will be sacrificed in
the interest of the former. This of itself is no small evil. For if there is any advantage in
our Federal form of government, it is in the opportunity thus provided for the faithful expression
of local public opinion in local legislation. But in addition to this subordination of state
to national politics, which might be justified under existing conditions on the ground that
local measures and local interests should be sacrificed whenever by so doing it would contribute
to the success of the larger and more important matters of national policy, it has become a
prolific source of corruption.

It is not a mere accident that the United States Senate is to-day the stronghold of railway and
other corporate interests. Possessing as it does more extended powers than the House of Representatives,
it is for that very reason the body in which every privileged interest will make the greatest
effort to obtain representation. Moreover, the indirect method of election is one that readily
lends itself to purposes of corruption. It is a notorious fact that it is much easier to buy the representatives
of the people than to buy the people themselves. Money expended in influencing elections always
has in view certain benefits direct or indirect which those who contribute the funds for that
purpose expect to receive. Such funds invariably come in the main from special interests which
expect to get back from the people more than the amount of their political investments. If they had
to deal with the people directly, the latter would demand an equivalent
for any concession granted, since it would not be to their advantage
to enrich special interests at their own expense.

But where the concession can be granted by a small body such as a state legislature, the latter
may find that it is to its advantage to co-operate with a selfish
and unscrupulous class in furthering purely private interests at the
expense of the public.

The opportunity for the successful employment of corrupt means is
greatly augmented, too, through the confusion of state and national
issues under the present system.

Many measures may be sacrificed by the party in control of the state
legislature under the plea that it is necessary in order to advance
the general interests of the party by the election of a United States
senator.

This possibility of evading responsibility for the nonfulfillment of its duty as a local legislative
body would disappear as soon as it is deprived of the part which
it now plays in the choice of United States senators.

The deeper and more enduring social movements and tendencies are
not always obvious to the superficial observer.

For this reason much that has been written in recent years concerning
our alleged decline in public morality is far from convincing.

Facts tending to show the prevalence of fraud and corruption in politics and business are
not in themselves sufficient to warrant any sweeping conclusions
as to present tendencies.

Paradoxical as it may seem, an increase in crime and other surface
manifestations of immorality, is no proof of a decline, but may as
a matter of fact be merely a transient effect of substantial and permanent
advance toward higher standards of morality.

Before making any comparison between the morality of two different periods, we should first
find out whether, in passing from the one period to the other, there
has been any change in the accepted ideas of right and wrong.

Now, if such is the case, it is manifestly an important factor in the problem--one that should not
be ignored; and yet this is just what many writers are doing who imagine that they are proving
by statistics a decline in morality. Their error consists in overlooking the one fact of paramount
importance, viz., that the accepted standard of morality has itself been raised. We are not
judging conduct to-day according to the ideas of civic duty in vogue a century, or even a generation
ago.

We are insisting upon higher standards of conduct both in politics and in business. Our ideas of
right and wrong in their manifold applications to social life have been profoundly changed,
and in many respects for the better. We are trying to realize a new conception of justice.
Many things which a century ago were sanctioned by law, or at least
not forbidden, are no longer tolerated.

Moreover, enlightened public opinion now condemns many things which have not yet been brought under
the ban of the law.

During any period, such as that in which we are now living, when society is rapidly assuming a higher ethical
type, it is inevitable that much resistance should be made to the enforcement of the new standard
of justice. Old methods of business and old political practices are not easily repressed, even
when the public opinion of the community has come to regard them as socially injurious. Forms
of conduct once permitted, but now regarded as anti-social, tend
to persist in spite of the effort of law and public opinion to dislodge
them.

The more rapid the ethical progress of society, the more frequent and the more pronounced will
be the failure of the morally backward individuals to meet the requirements
of the new social standard.

At such a time we always see an increase in crimes, misdemeanors and acts which enlightened
public opinion condemns. This is due, however, not to any decline in public morality, but to
the fact that the ethical progress of society as a whole has been more rapid than that of the
offending class.

There is another source of error which we must guard against. Social immorality is not always detected
even when it exists. Much that is socially immoral both in politics and in business escapes observation.
Nevertheless, the agencies for ferreting out and holding up to public condemnation offences against
society, are far more efficient and active to-day than they have ever been in the past. Both the
corrupt public official and the unscrupulous business man dread the
searchlight of public opinion, which is becoming more and more effective
as a regulator of conduct with the growth of intelligence among the
masses.

Nor is it surprising that when the hitherto dark recesses of politics
and business are exposed to view, an alarming amount of fraud and
corruption should be revealed.

We are too prone to forget, however, that publicity is something new--that in our day the seen
may bear a much larger proportion to the unseen than it has in the past. What appears, then,
to be an increase in business and political immorality may, after all, be largely accounted for
as the result of more publicity. Here, again, we see that the facts usually taken to indicate
a decline in public morality are susceptible of a very different interpretation.

Another feature of present-day society which deserves careful consideration
by reason of its far-reaching effect upon public morality is the change
now taking place in theological beliefs.

Heretofore the church has been by far the most important agency for enforcing conformity to
the accepted moral standard.

The hope of reward or fear of punishment in the world to come has been the chief support upon which
the church has in the past rested its system of social control.

But this other-world sanction is now losing its compelling force in consequence of the growing
disbelief in the old doctrine of rewards and punishments.

The fear of the supernatural, which has its highest development in the savage, steadily declines
with the progress of the race.

When the general level of intelligence is low, the supernatural sanction is a far more potent means
of regulating conduct than any purely temporal authority. But, just in proportion as society
advances, the other-world sanction loses its potency and increasing reliance must, therefore,
be placed upon purely human agencies.

The immediate effect of this change in our attitude toward the hereafter and the supernatural
has been to remove or at least to weaken an important restraint upon anti-social tendencies.
There is no reason, however, for apprehension as to the final outcome. Society always experiences
some difficulty, it is true, in making the transition from the old to the new. In every period
of social readjustment old institutions and beliefs lose their efficacy before the new social
agencies have been perfected. But if the new is higher and better than the old, the good that
will accrue to society will in the long run greatly outweigh any temporary evil.

But great as has been the change in our point of view with reference
to the church, our attitude toward the state has been even more profoundly
changed.

We do not have to go very far back into the past to find government everywhere controlled
by a king and privileged class. The ascendency of the few was everywhere established by the
sword, but it could not be long maintained by force alone.

The ignorance of the masses was in the past, as it is now, the main reliance of those who wished
to perpetuate minority rule.

Fraud and deception have always been an indispensable means of maintaining
class ascendency in government.

The primitive politician no less than his present-day successor saw the possibility of utilizing
the credulity of the masses for the purpose of furthering his own selfish ends. This explains
the long-continued survival of that interesting political superstition
which for so many centuries protected class rule under the pretended
sanction of a God-given right.

The growth of intelligence among the masses by discrediting the doctrine of divine right made it necessary
to abandon the old defense of class rule. From that time down to the present the disintegration
of the old political order has been rapid. Every effort has been made by the defenders of the
old system to find some means of justifying and maintaining class rule--a task which is becoming more and
more difficult with the growing belief in democracy. At the present time we are in a transition
stage. The divine theory of the state, which was the foundation and support of the old system
of class rule, is no longer accepted by intelligent people in any civilized country. But class
rule still has its advocates, even in the countries that have advanced farthest in the direction
of popular government. The opponents of democracy, however, comprise but a small part of the
population numerically, yet, owing to their great wealth and effective organization, their
influence as a class is everywhere very great. Over against these is arrayed the bulk of the population,
who are struggling, though not very intelligently always, to overcome the opposition of the
few and make the political organization and the policy of the state
a complete and faithful expression of the popular will.

No modern state has yet passed entirely through this transition stage.

Everywhere the movement toward democracy has been and is now being energetically resisted by
those who fear that thoroughgoing popular government would deprive
them of economic or political privileges which they now enjoy.

Let us not deceive ourselves by thinking that the old system of class rule has been entirely
overthrown.

No fundamental change in government or any other social institution ever comes about suddenly.
Time, often much time, is required for those intellectual and moral
readjustments without which no great change in social institutions
can be made.

And when we remember that only a century ago every government in
the Western world was avowedly organized on the basis of minority
rule, we can readily understand that society has not yet had sufficient
time to outgrow the influence of the old political order.

No one can discuss intelligently the question of political morality
if he ignores the effect of this struggle between the old system of
minority domination and the new system of majority rule.

And yet scarcely ever do our text-books or magazine articles dealing with present political
evils even so much as allude to this most important fact--the one, indeed, on which hinges
our whole system of business fraud and political corruption. We often hear the opinion expressed
by people of more than ordinary intelligence that the public immorality so much in evidence in
this country is the natural and inevitable result of popular government.

This view is industriously encouraged by the conservative and even
accepted by not a few of those whose sympathies are with democracy.

Yet no conclusion could be more erroneous. It would be just as logical to attribute the religious
persecutions of the Middle Ages to the growth of religious dissent.

If there had been no dissenters, there would have been no persecution;
neither would there have been any reformation or any progress toward
a system of religious liberty.

Persecution was the means employed to repress dissent and defeat the end which the dissenters
had in view. Corruption sustains exactly the same relation to the
democratic movement of modern times.

It has been employed, not to promote, but to defeat the ends of popular government. No intelligent
person should any longer be in doubt as to the real source of corruption. It is to be eradicated,
not by placing additional restrictions on the power of the people,
but by removing those political restraints upon the majority which
now preclude any effective popular control of public officials.

 Andrea del Sarto? Yes, I thought so--wonderful--upon my word, in a cottage
in Billingsfield. Where did you find it?"

"It was my husband's," said Mrs. Goddard.

"Ah--ah, yes," said the squire in a subdued tone. "I beg your pardon," he added, as people
often do, unconsciously, when they fancy they have accidentally roused in another a painful
train of thought. Then he turned to go. "We dine at half-past seven, you know, so as to be
early for Miss Nellie," he said, as he went out.

Mrs. Goddard was glad he was gone, though she felt that he was not unsympathetic. The story
of the dog had frightened her, and her own mention of her husband had made her nervous and
sad. More than ever she felt that fear of being in a false position, which had assailed her
when she had first met the squire on the previous evening. He had at once opened relations
with her in a way which showed that he intended to be intimate; he had offered to improve her
cottage, had insisted upon making frames in her garden, had asked her to dinner with the Ambroses
and had established the right to talk to her whenever he got a chance. He interested her, too,
which was worse. His passing references to his travels and to his adventures, of which he spoke
with the indifference of a man accustomed to danger, his unassuming manner, his frank ways--everything
about him awakened her interest. She had supposed that in two years the very faculty of being
interested by a man would be dulled if not destroyed; she found to her annoyance that though
she had seen Mr. Juxon only twice she could not put him out of her thoughts. She was, moreover,
a nervous, almost morbid, woman, and the natural result of trying to forget his existence was
that she could think of nothing else.

How much better it would be, she thought, if he knew her story from the first. He might then
be as friendly as he pleased; there would be no danger in it, to him or to her. She almost
determined to go at once and ask the vicar's advice. But by the time she had nearly made up
her mind it was the hour for luncheon, and little Nellie's appetite was exigent. By the time
lunch was over her determination had changed. She had reflected that the vicar would think
her morbid, that, with his usual good sense, he would say there was no necessity for telling
the squire anything; indeed, that to do so would be undignified. If the squire were indeed
going to lead the life of a recluse as he proposed doing, he was not really a man to cause
her any apprehension. If he had travelled about the world for forty years, without having his
heart disturbed by any of the women he must have met in that time, he was certainly not the
kind of man, when once he had determined to settle in his home, to fall in love with the first
pretty woman he met. It was absurd; there was no likelihood of it; it was her own miserable
vanity, she told herself, which made the thing seem probable, and she would not think any more
about it. She, a woman thirty-one years of age, with a daughter who ere long would be growing
up to womanhood! To be afraid of a mere stranger like Mr. Juxon--afraid lest he should fall
in love with her! Could anything be more ridiculous? Her duty was to live quietly as she had
lived before, to take no more notice of the squire than was necessary in order to be civil,
and so all would be well.

And so it seemed for a long time. The squire improved the garden of the cottage and Mrs. Goddard
and Nellie, with the Ambroses, dined at the Hall, which at first seemed an exceedingly dreary
and dismal place, but which, as they returned thither again and again, grew more and more luxurious,
till the transformation was complete. Mr. Juxon brought all manner of things to the house;
vans upon vans arrived, laden with boxes of books and pictures and oriental carpets and rare
objects which the squire had collected in his many years of travel, and which he appeared to
have stored in London until he had at last inherited the Hall. The longer the Ambroses and
Mrs. Goddard knew him, the more singularly impressed they were with his reticence concerning
himself. He appeared to have been everywhere, to have seen everything, and he had certainly
brought back a vast collection of more or less valuable objects from his travels, besides the
large library he had accumulated and which contained many rare and curious editions of ancient
books. He was evidently a man of very good education, and a much better scholar than he was
willing to allow. The vicar delighted in his society and when the two found themselves together
in the great room which Mr. Juxon had lined with well-filled shelves, they remained for hours
absorbed in literary and scholastic talk. But whenever the vicar approached the subject of
the squire's past life, the latter became vague and gave ambiguous answers to any direct questions
addressed to him. He evidently disliked talking of himself, though he would talk about anything
else that occurred to him with a fluency which Mrs. Ambrose declared was the only un-English
thing about him. The consequence was that the vicar became more and more interested in his
new acquaintance, and though the squire was so frank and honest a man that it was impossible
to suspect him of any doubtful action in the past, Mr. Ambrose suspected that he had a secret.
Indeed after hearing the story Mrs. Goddard had confided to his ears, nothing would have surprised
the vicar. After finding that so good, so upright and so honourable a woman as the fair tenant
of the cottage could be put into such a singularly painful position as that in which she now
found herself, it was not hard to imagine that this singular person who had inherited the Hall
might also have some weighty reason for loving the solitude of Billingsfield.

To chronicle the small events which occurred in that Arcadian parish, would be to overstep
the bounds of permissible tediousness. In such places all events move slowly and take long
to develop to their results. The passions which in our own quickly moving world spring up,
flourish, wither and are cut down in a month require, when they are not stimulated by the fertilising
heat of artificial surroundings, a longer period for their growth; and when that growth is
attained they are likely to be stronger and more deeply rooted. It is not true that the study
of them is less interesting, nor that they have less importance in themselves. The difficulty
of narrative is greater when they are to be described, for it is necessary to carry the imagination
in a short time over a long period, to show how from small incidents great results follow,
and to show also how the very limited and trivial nature of the surroundings may cause important
things to be overlooked. Amidst such influences acquaintance is soon made between the few persons
so thrown together, but each is apt to regard such new acquaintance merely as bearing upon
his or her own particular interests. It is surprising to see how people will live side by side
in solitude, even in danger, in distant settlements, in the mining districts of the West, in
up-country stations in India, on board ship, even, for months and years, without knowing anything
of each other's previous history; whereas in the crowded centres of civilisation and society
the first questions are "Where does he come from?" "What are his antecedents?" "What has he
done in the world?" And unless a man can answer such inquiries to the general satisfaction
he is likely to be heavily handicapped in the social race. But in more primitive situations
men are ruled by more primitive feelings of mutual respect; it is considered that a man should
not be pressed to speak of things he shows no desire to discuss and that, provided he does
not interfere with his neighbour's wellbeing, his past life is nobody's business. One may feel
curiosity concerning him, but under no circumstances is one justified in asking questions.

For these reasons, although Mr. Juxon's arrival and instalment in the Hall were regarded with
satisfaction by the little circle at Billingsfield, while he himself was at once received into
intimacy and treated with cordial friendliness, he nevertheless represented in the minds of
all an unsolved enigma. And to the squire the existence of one of the circle was at least as
problematical as his own life could seem to any of them. The more he saw of Mrs. Goddard, the
more he wondered at her and speculated about her and the less he dared to ask her any questions.
But he understood from Mr. Ambrose's manner, that the vicar at least was in possession of her
secret, and he inferred from what he was able to judge about the vicar's character that the
latter was not a man to extend his friendship to any one who did not deserve it. Whatever Mrs.
Goddard's story was, he felt sure that her troubles had not been caused by her own misconduct.
She was in every respect what he called a good woman. Of course, too, she was a widow; the
way in which she spoke of her husband implied that, on those rare occasions when she spoke
of him at all. Charles James Juxon was a gentleman, whatever course of life he had followed
before settling in the country, and he did not feel that he should be justified in asking questions
about Mrs. Goddard of the vicar. Besides, as time went on and he found his own interest in
her increasing, he began to nourish the hope that he might one day hear her story from her
own lips. In his simplicity it did not strike him that he himself had grown to be an object
of interest to her.

Somehow, during the summer and autumn of that year, Mrs. Goddard contracted a habit of watching
the park gate from the window of the cottage, particularly at certain hours of the day. It
was only a habit, but it seemed to amuse her. She used to sit in the small bay window with
her books, reading to herself or teaching Nellie, and it was quite natural that from time to
time she should look out across the road. But it rarely happened, when she was installed in
that particular place, that Mr. Juxon failed to appear at the gate, with his dog Stamboul,
his green stockings, his stick and the inevitable rose in his coat. Moreover he generally crossed
the road and, if he did not enter the cottage and spend a quarter of an hour in conversation,
he at least spoke to Mrs. Goddard through the open window. It was remarkable, too, that as
time went on what at first had seemed the result of chance, recurred with such invariable regularity
as to betray the existence of a fixed rule. Nellie, too, who was an observant child, had ceased
asking questions but watched her mother with her great violet eyes in a way that made Mrs.
Goddard nervous. Nellie liked the squire very much but though she asked her mother very often
at first whether she, too, was fond of that nice Mr. Juxon, the answers she received were not
encouraging. How was it possible, Mrs. Goddard asked, to speak of liking anybody one had known
so short a time? And as Nellie was quite unable to answer such an inquiry, she desisted from
her questions and applied herself to the method of personal observation. But here, too, she
was met by a hopeless difficulty. The squire and her mother never seemed to have any secrets,
as Nellie would have expressed it. They met daily, and daily exchanged very much the same remarks
concerning the weather, the garden, the vicar's last sermon. When they talked about anything
else, they spoke of books, of which the squire lent Mrs. Goddard a great number. But this was
a subject which did not interest Nellie very much; she was not by any means a prodigy in the
way of learning, and though she was now nearly eleven years old was only just beginning to
read the Waverley novels. On one occasion she remarked to her mother that she did not believe
a word of them and did not think they were a bit like real life, but the momentary fit of scepticism
soon passed and Nellie read on contentedly, not omitting however to watch her mother in order
to find out, as her small mind expressed it, "whether mamma really liked that nice Mr. Juxon."
Events were slowly preparing themselves which would help her to come to a satisfactory conclusion
upon that matter.

Mr. Juxon himself was in a very uncertain state of mind. After knowing Mrs. Goddard for six
months, and having acquired the habit of seeing her almost every day, he found to his surprise
that she formed a necessary part of his existence. It need not have surprised him, for in spite
of that lady's surmise with regard to his early life, he was in reality a man of generous and
susceptible temperament. He recognised in the charming tenant of the cottage many qualities
which he liked, and he could not deny that she was exceedingly pretty. Being a strong man he
was particularly attracted by the pathetic expression of her face, the perpetual sadness that
was visible there when she was not momentarily interested or amused. Had he suspected her paleness
and air of secret suffering to be the result of any physical infirmity, she would not have
interested him so much. But Mrs. Goddard's lithe figure and easy grace of activity belied all
idea of weakness. It was undoubtedly some hidden suffering of mind which lent that sadness
to her voice and features, and which so deeply roused the sympathies of the squire. At the
end of six months Mr. Juxon was very much interested in Mrs. Goddard, but despite all his efforts
to be agreeable he seemed to have made no progress whatever in the direction of banishing her
cares. To tell the truth, it did not enter his mind that he was in love with her. She was his
tenant; she was evidently very unhappy about something; it was therefore undeniably his duty
as a landlord and as a gentleman to make life easy for her.

He wondered what the matter could be. At first he had been inclined to think that she was poor
and was depressed by poverty. But though she lived very simply, she never seemed to be in difficulties.
Five hundred pounds a year go a long way in the village of Billingsfield. It was certainly
not want of money which made her unhappy. The interest of the sum represented by the pictures
hung in her little sitting-room, not to mention the other objects of value she possessed, would
have been alone sufficient to afford her a living. The squire himself would have given her
a high price for these things, but in six months she never in the most distant manner suggested
that she wished to part with them. The idea then naturally suggested itself to Mr. Juxon's
mind that she was still mourning for her husband, and that she would probably continue to mourn
for him until some one, himself for instance, succeeded in consoling her for so great a loss.

The conclusion startled the squire. That was not precisely the part he contemplated playing,
nor the species of consolation he proposed to offer. Mrs. Goddard was indeed a charming woman,
and the squire liked charming women and delighted in their society. But Mr. Juxon was a bachelor
of more than forty years standing, and he had never regarded marriage as a thing of itself,
for himself, desirable. He immediately thrust the idea from his mind with a mental "vade retro
Satanas!" and determined that things were very agreeable in their present state, and might
go on for ever; that if Mrs. Goddard was unhappy that did not prevent her from talking very
pleasantly whenever he saw her, which was nearly every day, and that her griefs were emphatically
none of his business. Before very long however Mr. Juxon discovered that though it was a very
simple thing to make such a determination it was a very different thing to keep it. Mrs. Goddard
interested him too much. When he was with her he was perpetually longing to talk about herself
instead of about the weather and the garden and the books, and once or twice he was very nearly
betrayed into talking about himself, a circumstance so extraordinary that Mr. Juxon imagined
he must be either ill or going mad, and thought seriously of sending for the doctor. He controlled
the impulse, however, and temporarily recovered; but strange to say from that time forward
the conversation languished when he found himself alone with Mrs. Goddard, and it seemed very
hard to maintain their joint interest in the weather, the garden and the books at the proper
standard of intensity. They had grown intimate, and familiarity had begun to breed a contempt
of those petty subjects upon which their intimacy had been founded. It is not clear why this
should be so, but it is true, nevertheless, and many a couple before Charles Juxon and Mary
Goddard had found it out. As the interest of two people in each other increases their interest
in things, as things, diminishes in like ratio, and they are very certain ultimately to reach
that point described by the Frenchman's maxim--"a man should never talk to a woman except of
herself or himself."

If Mr. Juxon was not in love with Mary Goddard he was at least rapidly approaching a very dangerous
state; for he saw her every day and could not let one day go by without seeing her, and moreover
he grew silent in her company, to a degree which embarrassed her and made him feel himself
more stupid than he had ever dreamed possible; so that he would sometimes stay too long, in
the hope of finding something to say, and sometimes he would leave her abruptly and go and
shut himself up with his books, and busy himself with his catalogues and his bindings and the
arrangement of his rare editions. One day at last, he felt that he had behaved so very absurdly
that he was ashamed of himself, and suddenly disappeared for nearly a week. When he returned
he said he had been to town to attend a great sale of books, which was perfectly true; he did
not add that the learned expert he employed in London could have done the business for him
just as well. But the trip had done him no good, for he grew more silent than ever, and Mrs.
Goddard even thought his brown face looked a shade paler; but that might have been the effect
of the winter weather. Ordinary sunburn she reflected, as she looked at her own white skin
in the mirror, will generally wear off in six months, though freckles will not.

If Mr. Juxon was not in love, it would be very hard to say what Mary Goddard felt. It was not
true that time was effacing the memory of the great sorrow she had suffered. It was there still,
that memory, keen and sharp as ever; it would never go away again so long as she lived. But
she had been soothed by the quiet life in Billingsfield; the evidences of the past had been
removed far from her, she had found in the Reverend Augustin Ambrose one of those rare and
manly natures who can keep a secret for ever without ever referring to its existence even with
the person who has confided it. For a few days she had hesitated whether to ask the vicar's
advice about Mr. Juxon or not. She had thought it her duty to allow Mr. Ambrose to tell the
squire whatever he thought fit of her own story. But she had changed her mind, and the squire
had remained in ignorance. It was best so, she thought; for now, after more than six months,
Mr. Juxon had taken the position of a friend towards her, and, as she thought, showed no disposition
whatever to overstep the boundaries of friendship. The regularity of his visits and the sameness
of the conversation seemed of themselves a guarantee of his simple goodwill. It did not strike
her as possible that if he were going to fall in love with her at all, that catastrophe should
be postponed beyond six months from their first acquaintance. Nor did it seem extraordinary
to her that she should actually look forward to those visits, and take pleasure in that monotonous
intercourse. Her life was very quiet; it was natural that she should take whatever diversion
came in her way, and should even be thankful for it. Mr. Juxon was an honest gentleman, a scholar
and a man who had seen the world. If what he said was not always very original it was always
very true, a merit not always conceded to the highest originality. He spoke intelligently;
he told her the news; he lent her the newest books and reviews, and offered her his opinions
upon them, with the regularity of a daily paper. In such a place, where communications with
the outer world seemed as difficult as at the antipodes, and where the remainder of society
was limited to the household of the vicarage, what wonder was it if she found Mr. Juxon an
agreeable companion, and believed the companionship harmless?

But far down in the involutions of her feminine consciousness there was present a perpetual
curiosity in regard to the squire, a curiosity she never expected to satisfy, but was wholly
unable to repress. Under the influence of this feeling she made remarks from time to time of
an apparently harmless nature, but which in the squire promoted that strange inclination to
talk about himself, which he had lately observed and which caused him so much alarm. He said
to himself that he had nothing to be concealed, and that if any one had asked him direct questions
concerning his past he would have answered them boldly enough. But he knew himself to be so
singularly averse to dwelling on his own affairs that he wondered why he should now be impelled
to break through so good a rule. Indeed he had not the insight to perceive that Mrs. Goddard
lost no opportunity of leading him to the subject of his various adventures, and, if he had
suspected it, he would have been very much surprised.

Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose were far from guessing what an intimacy had sprung up between the two.
Both the cottage and the Hall lay at a considerable distance from the vicarage, and though
Mrs. Ambrose occasionally went to see Mrs. Goddard at irregular hours in the morning and afternoon,
it was remarkable that the squire never called when she was there. Once Mrs. Ambrose arrived
during one of his visits, but thought it natural enough that Mr. Juxon should drop in to see
his tenant. Indeed when she called the two were talking about the garden--as usual.

CHAPTER VI.

John Short had almost finished his hard work at college. For two years and a half he had laboured
on acquiring for himself reputation and a certain amount of more solid advantage in the shape
of scholarships. Never in that time had he left Cambridge even for a day unless compelled to
do so by the regulations of his college. His father had found it hard to induce him to come
up to town; and, being in somewhat easier circumstances since John had declared that he needed
no further help to complete his education, he had himself gone to see his son more than once.
But John had never been to Billingsfield and he knew nothing of the changes that had taken
place there. At last, however, Short felt that he must have some rest before he went up for
honours; he had grown thin and even pale; his head ached perpetually, and his eyes no longer
seemed so good as they had been. He went to a doctor, and the doctor told him that with his
admirable constitution a few days of absolute rest would do all that was necessary. John wrote
to Mr. Ambrose to say that he would at last accept the invitation so often extended and would
spend the week between Christmas and New Year's day at Billingsfield.

There were great rejoicings at the vicarage. John had never been forgotten for a day since
he had left, each successive step in his career had been hailed with hearty delight, and now
that at last he was coming back to rest himself for a week before the final effort Mrs. Ambrose
was as enthusiastic as her husband. Even Mrs. Goddard, who was not quite sure whether she had
ever seen John or not, and the squire who had certainly never seen him, joined in the general
excitement. Mrs. Goddard asked the entire party to tea at the cottage and the squire asked
them to come and skate at the Hall and to dine afterwards; for the weather was cold and the
vicar said John was a very good skater. Was there anything John could not do? There was nothing
he could not do much better than anybody else, answered Mr. Ambrose; and the good clergyman's
pride in his pupil was perhaps not the less because he had at first received him on charitable
considerations, and felt that if he had risked much in being so generous he had also been amply
rewarded by the brilliant success of his undertaking.

When John arrived, everybody said he was "so much improved." He had got his growth now, being
close upon one and twenty years of age; his blue eyes were deeper set; his downy whiskers had
disappeared and a small moustache shaded his upper lip; he looked more intellectual but not
less strong, though Mrs. Ambrose said he was dreadfully pale--perhaps he owed some of the improvement
observed in his appearance to the clothes he wore. Poor boy, he had been but scantily supplied
in the old days; he looked prosperous, now, by comparison.

"We have had great additions to our society, since you left us," said the vicar. "We have got
a squire at the Hall, and a lady with a little girl at the cottage."

"Such a nice little girl," remarked Mrs. Ambrose.

When John found out that the lady at the cottage was no other than the lady in black to whom
he had lost his heart two years and a half before, he was considerably surprised. It would
be absurd to suppose that the boyish fancy which had made so much romance in his life for so
many months could outlast the excitements of the University. It would be absurd to dignify
such a fancy by any serious name. He had grown to be a man since those days and he had put
away childish things. He blushed to remember that he had spent hours in writing odes to the
beautiful unknown, and whole nights in dreaming of her face. And yet he could remember that
as much as a year after he had left Billingsfield he still thought of her as his highest ideal
of woman, and still occasionally composed a few verses to her memory, regretting, perhaps,
the cooling of his poetic ardour. Then he had gradually lost sight of her in the hard work
which made up his life. Profound study had made him more prosaic and he believed that he had
done with ideals for ever, after the manner of many clever young fellows who at one and twenty
feel that they are separated from the follies of eighteen by a great and impassable gulf. The
gulf, however, was not in John's case so wide nor so deep but what, at the prospect of being
suddenly brought face to face, and made acquainted, with her who for so long had seemed the
object of a romantic passion, he felt a strange thrill of surprise and embarrassment. Those
meetings of later years generally bring painful disillusion. How many of us can remember some
fair-haired little girl who in our childhood represented to us the very incarnation of feminine
grace and beauty, for whom we fetched and carried, for whom we bound nosegays on the heath
and stole apples from the orchard and climbed upon the table after desert, if we were left
alone in the dining-room, to lay hands on some beautiful sweetmeat wrapped in tinsel and fringes
of pink paper--have we not met her again in after-life, a grown woman, very, very far from
our ideal of feminine grace and beauty? And still in spite of changes in herself and ourselves
there has clung to her memory through all those years enough of romance to make our heart beat
a little faster at the prospect of suddenly meeting her, enough to make us wonder a little
regretfully if she was at all like the little golden-haired child we loved long ago.

But with John the feeling was stronger than that. It was but two years and a half since he
had seen Mrs. Goddard, and, not even knowing her name, had erected for her a pedestal in his
boyish heart. There was moreover about her a mystery still unsolved. There was something odd
and strange in her one visit to the vicarage, in the fact that the vicar had never referred
to that visit and, lastly, it seemed unlike Mr. Ambrose to have said nothing of her settlement
in Billingsfield in the course of all the letters he had written to John since the latter had
left him. John dwelt upon the name--Goddard--but it held no association for him. It was not
at all like the names he had given her in his imagination. He wondered what she would be like
and he felt nervously anxious to meet her. Somehow, too, what he heard of the squire did not
please him; he felt an immediate antagonism to Mr. Juxon, to his books, to his amateur scholarship,
even to his appearance as described by Mrs. Ambrose, who said he was such a thorough Englishman
and wondered how he kept his hair so smooth.

It was not long before he had an opportunity of judging for himself of what Mr. Ambrose called
the recent addition to Billingsfield society. On the very afternoon of his arrival the vicar
proposed to walk up to the Hall and have a look at the library, and John readily assented.
It was Christmas Eve and the weather, even in Essex, was sharp and frosty. The muddy road was
frozen hard and the afternoon sun, slanting through the oak trees that bordered the road beyond
the village, made no perceptible impression on the cold. The two men walked briskly in the
direction of the park gate. Before they had quite reached it however, the door of the cottage
opposite was opened, and Stamboul, the Russian bloodhound, bounded down the path, cleared the
wicket gate in his vast stride, and then turning suddenly crouched in the middle of the road
to wait for his master. But the dog instantly caught sight of the vicar, with whom he was on
very good terms, and trotted slowly up to him, thrusting his great nose into his hand, and
then proceeding to make acquaintance with John. He seemed to approve of the stranger, for he
gave a short sniff of satisfaction and trotted back to the wicket of the cottage. At this moment
Mrs. Goddard and Nellie came out, followed by the squire arrayed in his inevitable green stockings.
There was however no rose in his coat. Whether the greenhouses at the Hall had failed to produce
any in the bitter weather, or whether Mr. Juxon had transferred the rose from his coat to the
possession of Mrs. Goddard, is uncertain. The three came out into the road where the vicar
and John stood still to meet them.

"Mrs. Goddard," said the clergyman, "this is Mr. Short, of whom you have heard--John, let me
introduce you to Mr. Juxon."

John felt that he blushed violently as he took Mrs. Goddard's hand. He would not have believed
that he could feel so much embarrassed, and he hated himself for betraying it. But nobody noticed
his colour. The weather was bright and cold, and even Mrs. Goddard's pale and delicate skin
had a rosy tinge.

"We were just going for a walk," she explained.

"And we were going to see you at the Hall," said the vicar to Mr. Juxon.

"Let us do both," said the latter. "Let us walk to the Hall and have a cup of tea. We can look
at the ice and see whether it will bear to-morrow."

Everybody agreed to the proposal, and it so fell out that the squire and the vicar went before
while John and Mrs. Goddard followed and Nellie walked between them, holding Stamboul by the
collar, and talking to him as she went. John looked at his companion, and saw with a strange
satisfaction that his first impression, the impression he had cherished so long, had not been
a mistaken one. Her deep violet eyes were still sad, beautiful and dreamy. Her small nose was
full of expression, and was not reddened by the cold as noses are wont to be. Her rich brown
hair waved across her forehead as it did on that day when John first saw her; and now as he
spoke with her, her mouth smiled, as he had been sure it would. John felt a curious sense of
pride in her, in finding that he had not been deceived, that this ideal of whom he had dreamed
was really and truly very good to look at. He knew little of the artist's rules of beauty;
he had often looked with wonder at the faces in the illustrations to Dr. Smith's classical
dictionary, and had tried to understand where the beauty of them lay, and at Cambridge he had
seen and studied with interest many photographs and casts from the antiques. But to his mind
the antique would not bear comparison for a moment with Mrs. Goddard, who resembled no engraving
nor photograph nor cast he had ever seen.

And she, too, looked at him, and said to herself that he did not look like what she had expected.
He looked like a lean, fresh young Englishman of moderate intelligence and in moderate circumstances.
And yet she knew that he was no ordinary young fellow, that he was wonderfully gifted, in fact,
and likely to make a mark in the world. She resolved to take a proper interest in him.

"Do you know," she said, "I have heard so much about you, that I feel as though I had met you
before, Mr. Short."

"We really have met," said John. "Do you remember that hot day when you came to the vicarage
and I waked up Muggins for you?"

"Yes--was that you? You have changed. That is, I suppose I did not see you very well in the hurry."

"I suppose I have changed in two years and a half. I was only a boy then, you know. But how
have you heard so much about me?"

"Billingsfield," said Mrs. Goddard with a faint smile, "is not a large place. The Ambroses
are very fond of you and always talk of what you are doing."

"And so you really live here, Mrs. Goddard? How long is it since you came? Mr. Ambrose never
told me--"

"I have been here more than two years--two years last October," she answered quietly.

"The very year I left--only a month after I was gone. How strange!"

Mrs. Goddard looked up nervously. She was frightened lest John should have made any deductions
from the date of her arrival. But John was thinking in a very different train of thought.

"Why is it strange?" she asked.

"Oh, I hardly know," said John in considerable embarrassment. "I was only thinking--about you--that
is, about it all."

The answer did not tend to quiet Mrs. Goddard's apprehensions.

"About me?" she exclaimed. "Why should you think about me?"

"It was very foolish, of course," said John. "Only, when I caught sight of you that day I was
very much struck. You know, I was only a boy, then. I hoped you would come back--but you did
not." He blushed violently, and then glanced at his companion to see whether she had noticed it.

"No," she said, "I did not come back for some time."

"And then I was gone. Mr. Ambrose never told me you had come."

"Why should he?"

"Oh, I don't know. I think he might. You see Billingsfield has been a sort of home to me, and
it is a small place; so I thought he might have told me the news."

"I suppose he thought it would not interest you," said Mrs. Goddard. "I am sure I do not know
why it should. But you must be very fond of the place, are you not?"

"Very. As I was saying, it is very like home to me. My father lives in town you know--that
is not at all like home. One always associates the idea of home with the country, and a vicarage
and a Hall, and all that."

"Does one?" said Mrs. Goddard, picking her way over the frozen mud of the road. "Take care,
Nellie, it is dreadfully slippery!"

"How much she has grown," remarked John, looking at the girl's active figure as she walked
before them. "She was quite a little girl when I saw her first."

"Yes, she grows very fast," answered Mrs. Goddard rather regretfully.

"You say that as though you were sorry."

"I? No. I am glad to see her grow. What a funny remark."

"I thought you spoke sadly," explained John.

"Oh, dear no. Only she is coming to the awkward age."

"She is coming to it very gracefully," said John, who wanted to say something pleasant.

"That is the most any of us can hope to do," answered Mrs. Goddard with a little smile. "We
all have our awkward age, I suppose."

"I should not think you could remember yours."

"Why? Do you think it was so very long ago?" Mrs. Goddard laughed.

"No--I cannot believe you ever had any," said John.

The boyish compliment pleased Mrs. Goddard. It was long since any one had flattered her, for
flattery did not enter into the squire's system for making himself agreeable.

"Do they teach that sort of thing at Cambridge?" she asked demurely.

"What sort of thing?"

"Making little speeches to ladies," said she.

"No--I wish they did," said John, laughing. "I should know much better how to make them. We
learn how to write Greek odes to moral abstractions."

"What a dreadful thing to do!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard.

"Do you think so? I do not know. Now, for instance, I have written a great many Greek odes
to you--"

"To me?" interrupted his companion in surprise.

"Do you think it is so very extraordinary?"

"Very."

"Well--you see--I only saw you once--you won't laugh?"

"No," said Mrs. Goddard, who was very much amused, and was beginning to think that John Short
was the most original young man she had ever met.

"I only saw you once, when you came to the vicarage, and I had not the least idea what your
name was. But I--I hoped you would come back; and so I used to write poems to you. They were
very good, too," added John in a meditative tone, "I have never written any nearly so good
as they were."

"Really?" Mrs. Goddard looked at him rather incredulously and then laughed.

"You said you would not laugh," objected John.

"I cannot help it in the least," said she. "It seems so funny."

"It did not seem funny to me, I can assure you," replied John rather warmly. "I thought it
very serious."

"You don't do it now, do you?" asked Mrs. Goddard, looking up at him quietly.

"Oh no--a man's ideals change so much, you know," answered John, who felt he had been foolishly
betrayed into telling his story, and hated to be laughed at.

"I am very glad of that. How long are you going to stay here, Mr. Short?"

"Until New Year's Day, I think," he answered. "Perhaps you will have time to forget about the
poetry before I go."

"I don't know why," said Mrs. Goddard, noticing his hurt tone. "I think it was very pretty--I
mean the way you did it. You must be a born poet--to write verses to a person you did not know
and had only seen once!"

"It is much easier than writing verses to moral abstractions one has never seen at all," explained
John, who was easily pacified. "When a man writes a great deal he feels the necessity of attaching
all those beautiful moral qualities to some real, living person whom he can see--"

"Even if he only sees her once," remarked Mrs. Goddard demurely.

"Yes, even if he only sees her once. You have no idea how hard it is to concentrate one's faculties
upon a mere idea; but the moment a man sees a woman whom he can endow with all sorts of beautiful
qualities--why it's just as easy as hunting."

"I am glad to have been of so much service to you, even unconsciously--but, don't you think
perhaps Mrs. Ambrose would have done as well?"

"Mrs. Ambrose?" repeated John. Then he broke into a hearty laugh. "No--I have no hesitation
in saying that she would not have done as well. I am deeply indebted to Mrs. Ambrose for a
thousand kindnesses, for a great deal more than I can tell--but, on the whole, I say, no; I
could not have written odes to Mrs. Ambrose."

"No, I suppose not. Besides, fancy the vicar's state of mind! She would have had to call him
in to translate your poetry."

"It is very singular," said John in a tone of reflection. "But, if I had not done all that,
we should not be talking as we are now, after ten minutes acquaintance."

"Probably not," said Mrs. Goddard.

"No--certainly not. By the bye, there is the Hall. I suppose you have often been there since
Mr. Juxon came--what kind of man is he?"

"He has been a great traveller," answered his companion. "And then--well, he is a scholar and
has an immense library--"

"And an immense dog--yes, but I mean, what kind of man is he himself?"

"He is very agreeable," said Mrs. Goddard quietly. "Very well bred, very well educated. We
find him a great addition in Billingsfield."

"I should think so, if he is all you say," said John discontentedly. His antagonism against
Mr. Juxon was rapidly increasing. Mrs. Goddard looked at him in some surprise, being very far
from understanding his tone.

"I think you will like him," she said. "He knows all about you from the Ambroses, and he always
speaks of you with the greatest admiration."

"Really? It is awfully kind of him, I am sure. I am very much obliged," said John rather contemptuously.

"Why do you speak like that?" asked Mrs. Goddard gravely. "You cannot possibly have any cause
for disliking him. Besides, he is a friend of ours--"

"Oh, of course, then it is different," said John. "If he is a friend of yours--"

"Do you generally take violent dislikes to people at first sight, Mr. Short?"

"Oh, dear no. Not at all--at least, not dislikes. I suppose Mr. Juxon's face reminds me of
somebody I do not like. I will behave like an angel. Here we are."

The effect of this conversation upon the two persons between whom it took place was exceedingly
different. Mrs. Goddard was amused, without being altogether pleased. She had made the acquaintance
of a refreshingly young scholar whom she understood to be full of genius. He was enthusiastic,
simple, seemingly incapable of concealing anything that passed through his mind, unreasonable
and evidently very susceptible. On the whole, she thought she should like him, though his scornful
manner in speaking of the squire had annoyed her. The interest she could feel in him, if she
felt any at all, would be akin to that of the vicar in the boy. He was only a boy; brilliantly
talented, they said, but still a mere boy. She was fully ten years older than he--she might
almost be his mother--well, not quite that, but very nearly. It was amusing to think of his
writing odes to her. She wished she could see translations of them, and she almost made up
her mind to ask him to show them to her.

John on the other hand experienced a curious sensation. He had never before been in the society
of so charming a woman. He looked at her and looked again, and came to the conclusion that
she was not only charming but beautiful. He had not the least idea of her age; it is not the
manner of his kind to think much about the age of a woman, provided she is not too young. The
girl might be ten. Mrs. Goddard might have married at sixteen--twenty-six, twenty-seven--what
was that? John called himself twenty-two. Five years was simply no difference at all! Besides,
who cared for age?

He had suddenly found himself almost on a footing of intimacy with this lovely creature. His
odes had served him well; it had pleased her to hear the story. She had laughed a little, of
course; but women, as John knew, always laugh when they are pleased. He would like to show
her his odes. As he walked through the park by her side he felt a curious sense of possession
in her which gave him a thrill of exquisite delight; and when they entered the Hall he felt
as though he were resigning her to the squire, which gave him a corresponding sense of annoyance.
When an Englishman experiences these sensations, he is in love. John resolved that whatever
happened he would walk back with Mrs. Goddard.

"Come in," said the squire cheerily. "We are not so cold as we used to be up here."

A great fire of logs was burning upon the hearth in the Hall. Stamboul stalked up to the open
chimney, scratched the tiger's skin which served for a rug, and threw himself down as though
his day's work were done. Mr. Juxon went up to Mrs. Goddard.

"I think you had better take off your coat," he said. "The house is very warm."

Mrs. Goddard allowed the squire to help her in removing the heavy black jacket lined and trimmed
with fur, which she wore. John eyed the proceeding uneasily and kept on his greatcoat.

"Thank you--I don't mind the heat," he said shortly when the squire suggested to him that he
might be too warm. John was in a fit of contrariety. Mrs. Goddard glanced at him, as he spoke,
and he thought he detected a twinkle of amusement in her eyes, which did not tend to smooth
his temper.

"You will have some tea, Mrs. Goddard?" said Mr. Juxon, leading the way into the library, which
he regarded as the most habitable room in the house. Mrs. Goddard walked by his side and the
vicar followed, while John and Nellie brought up the rear.

"Is not it a beautiful place?" said Nellie, who was anxious that the new-comer should appreciate
the magnificence of the Hall.

"Can't see very well," said John, "it is so dark."

"Oh, but it is beautiful," insisted Miss Nellie. "And they have lots of lamps here in the evening.
Perhaps Mr. Juxon will have them lighted before we go. He is always so kind."

"Is he?" asked John with a show of interest.

"Yes--he brings mamma a rose every day," said Nellie.

"Not really?" said John, beginning to feel that he was justified in hating the squire with
all his might.

"Yes--and books, too. Lots of them--but then, he has so many. See, this is the library. Is
not it splendid!"

John looked about him and was surprised. The last rays of the setting sun fell across the open
lawn and through the deep windows of the great room, illuminating the tall carved bookcases,
the heavily gilt bindings, the rich, dark Russia leather and morocco of the folios. The footsteps
of the party fell noiselessly upon the thick carpet and almost insensibly the voices of the
visitors dropped to a lower key. A fine large wood fire was burning on the hearth, carefully
covered with a metal netting lest any spark should fly out and cause damage to the treasures
accumulated in the neighbouring shelves.

"Pray make yourself at home, Mr. Short," said the squire, coming up to John. "You may find
something of interest here. There are some old editions of the classics that are thought rare--some
specimens of Venetian printing, too, that you may like to look at. Mr. Ambrose can tell you
more about them than I."

John's feeling of antagonism, and even his resentment against Mr. Juxon, roused by Nellie's
innocent remark about the roses, were not proof against the real scholastic passion aroused
by the sight of rare and valuable books. In a few minutes he had divested himself of his greatcoat
and was examining the books with an expression of delight upon his face which was pleasant
to see. He glanced from time to time at the other persons in the room and looked very often
at Mrs. Goddard, but on the whole he was profoundly interested in the contents of the library.
Mrs. Goddard was installed in a huge leathern easy-chair by the fire, and the squire was handing
her one after another a number of new volumes which lay upon a small table, and which she appeared
to examine with interest. Nellie knew where to look for her favourite books of engravings and
had curled herself up in a corner absorbed in "Hyde's Royal Residences." The vicar went to
look for something he wanted to consult.

"What do you think of our new friend?" asked Mrs. Goddard of the squire. She spoke in a low
tone and did not look up from the new book he had just handed her.

"He appears to have a very peculiar temper," said Mr. Juxon. "But he looks clever."

"What do you think he was talking about as we came through the park?" asked Mrs. Goddard.

"What?"

"He was saying that he saw me once before he went to college, and--fancy how deliciously boyish!
he said he had written ever so many Greek odes to my memory since!" Mrs. Goddard laughed a
little and blushed faintly.

"Let us hope, for the sake of his success, that you may continue to inspire him," said the
squire gravely. "I have no doubt the odes were very good."

"So he said. Fancy!"

CHAPTER VII.

Mrs. Goddard did not mean to walk home with John; but on the other hand she did not mean to
walk with the squire. She revolved the matter in her mind as she sat in the library talking
in an undertone with Mr. Juxon. She liked the great room, the air of luxury, the squire's tea
and the squire's conversation. It is worth noticing that his flow of talk was more abundant
to-day than it had been for some time; whether it was John's presence which stimulated Mr.
Juxon's imagination, or whether Mrs. Goddard had suddenly grown more interesting since John
Short's appearance it is hard to say; it is certain that Mr. Juxon talked better than usual.

The afternoon, however, was far spent and the party had only come to make a short visit. Mrs.
Goddard rose from her seat.

"Nellie, child, we must be going home," she said, calling to the little girl who was still
absorbed in the book of engravings which she had taken to the window to catch the last of the
waning light.

John started and came forward with alacrity. The vicar looked up; Nellie reluctantly brought
her book back.

"It is very early," objected the squire. "Really, the days have no business to be so short."

"It would not seem like Christmas if they were long," said Mrs. Goddard.

"It does not seem like Christmas anyhow," remarked John, enigmatically. No one understood his
observation and no one paid any attention to it. Whereupon John's previous feeling of annoyance
returned and he went to look for his greatcoat in the dark corner where he had laid it.

"You must not come all the way back with us," said Mrs. Goddard as they all went out into the
hall and began to put on their warm things before the fire. "Really--it is late. Mr. Ambrose
will give me his arm."

The squire insisted however, and Stamboul, who had had a comfortable nap by the fire, was of
the same opinion as his master and plunged wildly at the door.

"Will you give me your arm, Mr. Ambrose?" said Mrs. Goddard, looking rather timidly at the
vicar as they stood upon the broad steps in the sparkling evening air. She felt that she was
disappointing both the squire and John, but she had quite made up her mind. She had her own
reasons. The vicar, good man, was unconsciously a little flattered by her choice, as with her
hand resting on the sleeve of his greatcoat he led the way down the park. The squire and John
were fain to follow together, but Nellie took her mother's hand, and Stamboul walked behind
affecting an unusual gravity.

"You must come again when there is more daylight," said Mr. Juxon to his companion.

"Thank you," said John. "You are very good." He intended to relapse into silence, but his instinct
made him ashamed of seeming rude. "You have a magnificent library," he added presently in a
rather cold tone.

"You have been used to much better ones in Cambridge," said the squire, modestly.

"Do you know Cambridge well, Mr. Juxon?"

"Very well. I am a Cambridge man, myself."

"Indeed?" exclaimed John, immediately discovering that the squire was not so bad as he had
thought. "Indeed! I had no idea. Mr. Ambrose never told me that."

"I am not sure that he is aware of it," said Mr. Juxon quietly. "The subject never happened
to come up."

"How odd!" remarked John, who could not conceive of associating with a man for any length of
time without asking at what University he had been.

"I don't know," answered Mr. Juxon. "There are lots of other things to talk about."

"Oh--of course," said John, in a tone which did not express conviction.

Meanwhile Mr. Ambrose and Mrs. Goddard walked briskly in front; so briskly in fact that Nellie
occasionally jumped a step, as children say, in order to keep up with them.

"What a glorious Christmas eve!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard, as they turned a bend in the drive
and caught sight of the western sky still clear and red. "And there is the new moon!" The slender
crescent was hanging just above the fading glow.

"Oh mamma, have you wished?" cried Nellie. "You must, you know, when you see the new moon!"

Mrs. Goddard did not answer, but she sighed faintly and drew a little closer to the worthy
vicar as she walked. She always wished, whether there was a new moon or not, and she always
wished the same wish. Perhaps Mr. Ambrose understood, for he was not without tact. He changed
the subject.

"How do you like our John Short?" he asked.

"Very much, I think," answered Mrs. Goddard. "He is so fresh and young."

"He is a fine fellow. I was sure you would like him. Is he at all like what you fancied he
would be?"

"Well no--not exactly. I know you told me how he looked, but I always thought he would be rather
Byronic--the poetical type, if you know what I mean."

"He has a great deal of poetry in him," said Mr. Ambrose in a tone of profound admiration.
"He writes the best Greek verse I ever saw."

"Oh yes--I daresay," replied Mrs. Goddard smiling in the dusk. "I am sure he must be very clever."

So they chatted quietly as they walked down the park. But the squire and John did not make
progress in their conversation, and by the time they reached the gate they had yielded to an
awkward silence. They had both been annoyed because Mrs. Goddard had taken the vicar's arm
instead of choosing one of themselves, but the joint sense of disappointment did not constitute
a common bond of interest. Either one would have suffered anything rather than mention Mrs.
Goddard to the other in the course of the walk. And yet Mr. Juxon might have been John's father.
At the gate of the cottage they separated. The squire said he would turn back. Mrs. Goddard
had reached her destination. John and the vicar would return to the vicarage. John tried to
linger a moment, to get a word with Mrs. Goddard. He was so persistent that she let him follow
her through the wicket gate and then turned quickly.

"What is it?" she asked, rather suddenly, holding out her hand to say good-bye.

"Oh, nothing," answered John. "That is--would you like to see one of those--those little odes
of mine?"

"Yes, certainly, if you like," she answered frankly, and then laughed. "Of course I would.
Good-night."

He turned and fled. The vicar was waiting for him, and eyed him rather curiously as he came
back. Mr. Juxon was standing in the middle of the road, making Stamboul jump over his stick,
backwards and forwards.

"Good-night," he said, pausing in his occupation. The vicar and John turned away and walked
homewards. Before they turned the corner towards the village John instinctively looked back.
Mr. Juxon was still making Stamboul jump the stick before the cottage, but as far as he could
see in the dusk, Mrs. Goddard and Nellie had disappeared within. John felt that he was very
unhappy.

"Mr. Ambrose," he began. Then he stopped and hesitated. "Mr. Ambrose," he continued at last,
"you never told me half the news of Billingsfield in your letters."

"You mean about Mrs. Goddard? Well--no--I did not think it would interest you very much."

"She is a very interesting person," said John. He could have added that if he had known she
was in Billingsfield he would have made a great sacrifice in order to come down for a day to
make her acquaintance. But he did not say it.

"She is a great addition," said the vicar.

"Oh--very great, I should think."

Christmas eve was passed at the vicarage in preparation for the morrow. Mrs. Ambrose was very
active in binding holly wherever it was possible to put it. The mince-pies were tasted and
pronounced a success, and old Reynolds was despatched to the cottage with a small basket containing
a certain number of them as a present to Mrs. Goddard. An emissary appeared from the Hall with
a variety of articles which the squire begged to contribute towards the vicar's Christmas dinner;
among others a haunch of venison which Mrs. Ambrose pronounced to be in the best condition.
The vicar retorted by sending to the Hall a magnificent Cottenham cheese which, as a former
Fellow of Trinity, he had succeeded in obtaining. Moreover Mr. Ambrose himself descended to
the cellar and brought up several bottles of Audit ale which he declared must be allowed to
stand some time in the pantry in order to bring out the flavour and to be thoroughly settled.
John gave his assistance wherever it was needed and enjoyed vastly the old-fashioned preparations
for Christmas day. It was long since the season had brought him such rejoicing and he intended
to rejoice with a good will towards men and especially towards the Ambroses. After dinner the
whole party, consisting of three highly efficient persons and old Reynolds, adjourned to the
church to complete the decorations for the morrow.

The church of Billingsfield, known as St. Mary's, was quite large enough to contain twice the
entire population of the parish. It was built upon a part of the foundations of an ancient
abbey, and the vicar was very proud of the monument of a crusading Earl of Oxford which he
had caused to be placed in the chancel, it having been discovered in the old chancel of the
abbey in the park, far beyond the present limits of the church. The tower was the highest in
the neighbourhood. The whole building was of gray rubble, irregular stones set together with
a crumbling cement, and presented an appearance which, if not architecturally imposing, was
at least sufficiently venerable. At the present time the aisles were full of heaped-up holly
and wreaths; a few lamps and a considerable number of tallow candles shed a rather feeble light
amongst the pillars; a crowd of school children, not yet washed for the morrow, were busy under
the directions of the schoolmistress in decorating the chancel; Mr. Thomas Reid the conservative
sexton was at the top of a tall ladder, presumably using doubtful language to himself as every
third nail he tried to drive into the crevices of the stone "crooked hisself and larfed at
him," as he expressed it; the organ was playing and a dozen small boys with three or four men
were industriously practising the anthem "Arise, Shine," producing strains which if not calculated
altogether to elevate the heart by their harmony, would certainly have caused the hair of a
sensitive musician to rise on end; three or four of the oldest inhabitants were leaning on
their sticks in the neighbourhood of the great stove in the middle aisle, warming themselves
and grumbling that "times warn't as they used to be;" Mr. Abraham Boosey was noisily declaring
that he had "cartlods more o' thim greens" to come, and Muggins, who had had some beer, was
stumbling cheerfully against the pews in his efforts to bring a huge load of fir branches to
the foot of Mr. Thomas Reid's long ladder. It was a thorough Christmas scene and John Short's
heart warmed as he came back suddenly to the things which for three years had been so familiar
to him and which he had so much missed in his solitude at Cambridge. Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose set
to work and John followed their example. Even the prickly holly leaves were pleasant to touch
and there was a homely joy in the fir branches dripping with half melted snow.

Before they had been at work very long, John was aware of a little figure, muffled in furs
and standing beside him. He looked up and saw little Nellie's lovely face and long brown curls.

"Can't I help you, Mr. Short?" she asked timidly. "I like to help, and they won't let me."

"Who are 'they'?" asked John kindly, but looking about for the figure of Nellie's mother.

"The schoolmistress and Mrs. Ambrose. They said I should dirty my frock."

"Well," said John, doubtfully, "I don't know. Perhaps you would. But you might hold the string
for me--that won't hurt your clothes, you know."

"There are more greens this year," remarked Nellie, sitting down upon the end of the choir
bench where John was at work and taking the ball of string in her hand. "Mr. Juxon has sent
a lot from the park."

"He seems to be always sending things," said John, who had no reason whatever for saying so,
except that the squire had sent a hamper to the vicarage. "Did he stay long before dinner?"
he added, in the tone people adopt when they hope to make children talk.

"Stay long where?" asked Nellie innocently.

"Oh, I thought he went into your house after we left you," answered John.

"Oh no--he did not come in," said Nellie. John continued to work in silence. At some distance
from where he was, Mrs. Goddard was talking to Mrs. Ambrose. He could see her graceful figure,
but he could hardly distinguish her features in the gloom of the dimly-lighted church. He longed
to leave Nellie and to go and speak to her, but an undefined feeling of hurt pride prevented
him. He would not forgive her for having taken the vicar's arm in coming home through the park;
so he stayed where he was, pricking his fingers with the holly and rather impatiently pulling
the string off the ball which Nellie held. If Mrs. Goddard wanted to speak to him, she might
come of her own accord, he thought, for he felt that he had behaved foolishly in asking if
she wished to see his odes. Somehow, when he thought about it, the odes did not seem so good
now as they had seemed that afternoon.

Mrs. Goddard had not seen him at first, and for some time she remained in consultation with
Mrs. Ambrose. At last she turned and looking for Nellie saw that she was seated beside John;
to his great delight she came towards him. She looked more lovely than ever, he thought; the
dark fur about her throat set off her delicate, sad face like a frame.

"Oh--are you here, too, Mr. Short?" she said.

"Hard at work, as you see," answered John. "Are you going to help, Mrs. Goddard? Won't you
help me?"

"I wanted to," said Nellie, appealing to her mother, "but they would not let me, so I can only
hold the string."

"Well, dear--we will see if we can help Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard good-naturedly, and she
sat down upon the choir bench.

John never forgot that delightful Christmas Eve. For nearly two hours he never left Mrs. Goddard's
side, asking her advice about every branch and bit of holly and following out to the letter
her most minute suggestions. He forgot all about the squire and about the walk back from the
park, in the delight of having Mrs. Goddard to himself. He pushed the school children about
and spoke roughly to old Reynolds if her commands were not instantly executed; he felt in the
little crowd of village people that he was her natural protector, and he wished he might never
have anything in the world to do save to decorate a church in her company. He grew more and
more confidential and when the work was all done he felt that he had thoroughly established
himself in her good graces and went home to dream of the happiest day he had ever spent. The
organ ceased playing, the little choir dispersed, the school children were sent home, Mr. Abraham
Boosey retired to the bar of the Duke's Head, Muggins tenderly embraced every tombstone he
met on his way through the churchyard, the "gentlefolk" followed Reynolds' lantern towards
the vicarage, and Mr. Thomas Reid, the conservative and melancholic sexton, put out the lights
and locked the church doors, muttering a sour laudation of more primitive times, when "the
gentlefolk minded their business."

For the second time that day, John and Mr. Ambrose walked as far as the cottage, to see Mrs.
Goddard to her home. When they parted from her and Nellie, John was careful not to say anything
more about the odes, a subject to which Mrs. Goddard had not referred in the course of the
evening. John thanked her rather effusively for her help--he could never have got through those
choir benches without her, he said; and the vicar added that he was very much obliged, too,
and surreptitiously conveyed to Mrs. Goddard's hand a small package intended for Miss Nellie's
Christmas stocking, from him and his wife, and which he had forgotten to give earlier. Nellie
was destined to have a fuller stocking than usual this year, for the squire had remembered
her as well as Mr. Ambrose.

John went to bed in his old room at the vicarage protesting that he had enjoyed the first day
of his holiday immensely. As he blew out the light, he thought suddenly how often in that very
room he had gone to bed dreaming about the lady in black and composing verses to her, till
somehow the Greek terminations would get mixed up with the Latin roots, the quantities all
seemed to change places, and he used to fall asleep with a delicious half romantic sense of
happiness always unfulfilled yet always present. And now at last it began to be fulfilled in
earnest; he had met the lady in black at last, had spent nearly half a day in her company and
was more persuaded than ever that she was really and truly his ideal. He did not go to sleep
so soon as in the old days, and he was sorry to go to sleep at all; he wanted to enjoy all
his delicious recollections of that afternoon before he slept and, as he recapitulated the
events which had befallen him and recalled each expression of the face that had charmed him
and every intonation of the charmer's voice, he felt that he had never been really happy before,
that no amount of success at Cambridge could give him half the delight he had experienced during
one hour in the old Billingsfield church, and that altogether life anywhere else was not worth
living. To-morrow he would see Mrs. Goddard again, and the next day and the day after that
and then--"bother the future!" ejaculated John, and went to sleep.

He awoke early, roused by the loud clanging of the Christmas bells, and looking out he saw
that the day was fine and cold and bright as Christmas day should be, and generally is. The
hoar frost was frozen into fantastic shapes upon his little window, the snow was clinging to
the yew branches outside and the robins were hopping and chirping over the thin crust of frozen
snow that just covered the ground. The road was hard and brown as on the previous day, and
the ice in the park would probably bear. Perhaps Mrs. Goddard would skate in the afternoon
between the services, but then--Juxon would be there. "Never mind Juxon," quoth John to himself,
"it is Christmas day!"

At the vicarage and elsewhere, all over the land, those things were done which delight the
heart of Englishmen at the merry season. Everybody shook hands with everybody else, everybody
cried "Merry Christmas!" to his neighbour in the street, with an intonation as though he were
saying something startlingly new and brilliant which had never been said before. Every labourer
who had a new smock-frock put it on, and those who had none had at least a bit of new red worsted
comforter about their throats and began the day by standing at their doors in the cold morning,
smoking a "ha'p'orth o' shag" in a new clay pipe, greeting each other across the village street.
Muggins, who had spent a portion of the night in exchanging affectionate Christmas wishes with
the tombstones in the churchyard, appeared fresh and ruddy at an early hour, clad in the long
black coat and tall hat which he was accustomed to wear when he drove Mr. Boosey's fly on great
festivals. Most of the cottages in the single street sported a bit of holly in their windows,
and altogether the appearance of Billingsfield was singularly festive and mirthful. At precisely
ten minutes to eleven the vicar and Mrs. Ambrose, accompanied by John, issued from the vicarage
and went across the road by the private path to the church. As they entered the porch Mr. Reid,
who stood solemnly tolling the small bell, popularly nicknamed the "Ting-tang," and of which
the single rope passed down close to the south door, vouchsafed John a sour smile of recognition.
John felt as though he had come home. Mrs. Goddard and Nellie appeared a moment afterwards
and took their seats in the pew traditionally belonging to the cottage, behind that of the
squire who was always early, and the sight of whose smoothly brushed hair and brown beard was
a constant source of satisfaction to Mrs. Ambrose. John and Mrs. Ambrose sat on the opposite
side of the aisle, but John's eyes strayed very frequently towards Mrs. Goddard; so frequently
indeed that she noticed it and leaned far back in her seat to avoid his glance. Whereupon John
blushed and felt that the vicar, who was reading the Second Lesson, had probably noticed his
distraction. It was hard to realise that two years and a half had passed since he had sat in
that same pew; perhaps, however, the presence of Mrs. Goddard helped him to understand the
lapse of time. But for her it would have been very hard; for the vicar's voice sounded precisely
as it used to sound; Mrs. Ambrose had not lost her habit of removing one glove and putting
it into her prayer book as a mark while she found the hymn in the accompanying volume; the
bright decorations looked as they looked years ago above the organ and round the chancel; from
far down the church, just before the sermon, came the old accustomed sound of small boys shuffling
their hobnailed shoes upon the stone floor and the audible guttural whisper of the churchwarden
admonishing them to "mind the stick;" the stained-glass windows admitted the same pleasant
light as of yore--all was unchanged. But Mrs. Goddard and Nellie occupied the cottage pew,
and their presence alone was sufficient to mark to John the fact that he was now a man.

The service was sympathetic to John Short. He liked the simplicity of it, even the rough singing
of the choir, as compared with the solemn and magnificent musical services of Trinity College
Chapel. But it seemed very long before it was all over and he was waiting for Mrs. Goddard
outside the church door.

There were more greetings, more "Merry Christmas" and "Many happy returns." Mrs. Goddard looked
more charming than ever and was quite as cordial as on the previous evening.

"How much better it all looked this morning by daylight," she said.

"I think it looked very pretty last night," answered John. "There is nothing so delightful
as Christmas decorations, is there?"

"Perhaps you will come down next year and help us again?" suggested Mrs. Goddard.

"Yes--well, I might come at Easter, for that matter," answered the young man, who after finding
it impossible to visit Billingsfield during two years and a half, now saw no difficulty whatever
in the way of making two visits in the course of six months. "Do you still decorate at Easter?"
he asked.

"Oh yes--do you think you can come?" she said pleasantly. "I thought you were to be very busy
just then."

"Yes, that is true," answered John. "But of course I could come, you know, if it were necessary."

"Hardly exactly necessary--" Mrs. Goddard laughed.

"The doctor told me some relaxation was absolutely indispensable for my health," said John
rather sententiously.

"You don't really look very ill--are you?" She seemed incredulous.

"Oh no, of course not--only a little overworked sometimes."

"In that case I have no doubt it would do you good," said Mrs. Goddard.

"Do you really think so?" asked John, hopefully.

"Oh--that is a matter for your doctor to decide. I cannot possibly tell," she answered.

"I think you would make a very good doctor, Mrs. Goddard," said John venturing on a bolder flight.

"Really--I never thought of trying it," she replied with a little laugh. "Good morning, Mr.
Ambrose. Nellie wants to thank you for your beautiful present. It was really too good of you."

The vicar came out of the vestry and joined the group in the path. Mrs. Ambrose, who had been
asking Tom Judd's wife about her baby, also came up, and the squire, who had been presenting
Mr. Reid with ten shillings for his Christmas box and who looked singularly bereaved without
the faithful Stamboul at his heels, sauntered up and began congratulating everybody. In the
distance the last of the congregation, chiefly the old women and cripples who could not keep
up with the rest, hobbled away through the white gate of the churchyard. 

The only contradiction to this tale was, that the officers of justice found the escritoire not broken
open, but unlocked; and yet the key which belonged to it was found
in a pocketbook in my clothes, where Desmarais said, rightly, I always
kept it.

How, then, had the escritoire been unlocked? it was supposed by the master-keys peculiar to
experienced burglars; this diverted suspicion into a new channel,
and it was suggested that the robbery and the murder had really been
committed by common housebreakers.

It was then discovered that a large purse of gold, and a diamond
cross, which the escritoire contained, were gone.

And a few articles of ornamental /bijouterie/ which I had retained
from the wreck of my former profusion in such baubles, and which were
kept in a room below stairs, were also missing.

The circumstances immediately confirmed the opinion of those who
threw the guilt upon vulgar and mercenary villains, and a very probable
and plausible supposition was built on this hypothesis.

Might not this Oswald, at best an adventurer with an indifferent
reputation, have forged this story of the packet in order to obtain
admission into the house, and reconnoitre, during the confusion of
a wedding, in what places the most portable articles of value were
stowed?

A thousand opportunities, in the opening and shutting of the house-doors, would have allowed
an ingenious villain to glide in; nay, he might have secreted himself
in my own room, and seen the place where I had put the packet: certain
would he then be that I had selected for the repository of a document
I believed so important that place where all that I most valued was
secured; and hence he would naturally resolve to break open the escritoire,
above all other places, which, to an uninformed robber, might have
seemed not only less exposed to danger, but equally likely to contain
articles of value.

The same confusion which enabled him to enter and conceal himself would have also enabled
him to withdraw and introduce his accomplice.

This notion was rendered probable by his insisting so strongly on my not opening the packet
within a certain time; had I opened it immediately, I might have perceived that a deceit had been
practised, and not have hoarded it in that place of security which it was the villain's object
to discover. Hence, too, in opening the escritoire, he would naturally retake the packet (which
other plunderers might not have cared to steal), as well as things of more real price,--naturally
retake it, in order that his previous imposition might not be detected, and that suspicion
might be cast upon those who would appear to have an interest in stealing a packet which I believed
to be so inestimably important.

What gave a still greater colour to this supposition was the fact that none of the servants
had seen Oswald leave the house, though many had seen him enter. And what put his guilt beyond
a doubt in the opinion of many, was his sudden and mysterious disappearance.

To my mind, all these circumstances were not conclusive.

Both the men seemed taller than Oswald; and I knew that that confusion which was so much insisted
upon, had not--thanks to my singular fastidiousness in those matters--existed. I was also
perfectly convinced that Oswald could not have been hidden in my room while I locked up the packet;
and there was something in the behaviour of the murderer utterly unlike that of a common robber
actuated by common motives.

All these opposing arguments were, however, of a nature to be deemed nugatory by the world;
and on the only one of any importance in their estimation, namely, the height of Oswald being
different from that of the robbers, it was certainly very probable that, in a scene so dreadful, so
brief, so confused, I should easily be mistaken. Having therefore once flowed in this direction,
public opinion soon settled into the full conviction that Oswald was the real criminal, and
against Oswald was the whole strength of inquiry ultimately, but still vainly, bent. Some few,
it is true, of that kind class who love family mysteries, and will
not easily forego the notion of a brother's guilt for that of a mere
vulgar housebreaker, still shook their heads and talked of Gerald;
but the suspicion was vague and partial, and it was only in the close
gossip of private circles that it was audibly vented.



John, however, did not moralise upon his situation. The weather was again fine and as he dressed
his spirits rose. He became magnanimous and resolved to forget yesterday and make the most
of today. He would see Mrs. Goddard of course; perhaps he would show her a little coldness
at first, giving her to understand that she had not treated him well on the previous afternoon;
then he would interest her by his talk--he would repeat to her one of those unlucky odes and
translate it for her benefit, making use of the freedom he would thus get in order to make
her an unlimited number of graceful compliments. Perhaps, too, he ought to pay more attention
to Nellie, if he wished to conciliate her mother. Women, he reflected, have such strange prejudices!

He wondered whether it would be proper for him to call upon Mrs. Goddard. He was not quite
sure about it, and he was rather ashamed of having so little knowledge of the world; but he
believed that in Billingsfield he might run the risk. There had been talk of skating again
that morning, and so, about ten o'clock, John told Mr. Ambrose he would go for a short walk
and then join them all at the pond in the park. The project seemed good, and he put it into
execution. As he walked up the frozen road, he industriously repeated in his mind the Greek
verses he was going to translate to Mrs. Goddard; he had no copy of them but his memory was
very good. He met half a dozen labourers, strolling about with their pipes until it was time
to go and have a pint of beer, as is their manner upon holidays; they touched their hats to
him, remembering his face well, and he smiled happily at the rough fellows, contrasting his
situation with theirs, who from the misfortune of social prejudice were not permitted to go
and call upon Mrs. Goddard. His heart beat rather fast as he went up to the door of the cottage,
and for one unpleasant moment he again doubted whether it was proper for him to make such an
early visit. But being bent on romantic adventure he rang boldly and inquired for Mrs. Goddard.

She was surprised to see John at that hour and alone; but it did not enter her head to refuse
him admittance. Indeed as he stood in the little passage he heard the words which passed between
her and Martha.

"What is it, Martha?"

"It's a young gentleman, mam. I rather think, mam, it's the young gentleman that's stopping
at the vicarage."

"Oh--ask him to come in."

"In 'ere, mam?"

"No--into the sitting-room," said Mrs. Goddard, who was busy in the dining-room.

John was accordingly ushered in and told to wait a minute; which he did, surveying with surprise
the beautiful pictures, the rich looking furniture and the valuable objects that lay about
upon the tables. He experienced a thrill of pleasure, for he felt sure that Mrs. Goddard possessed
another qualification which he had unconsciously attributed to her--that of being accustomed
to a certain kind of luxury, which in John's mind was mysteriously connected with his romance.
It is one of the most undefinable of the many indefinite feelings to which young men in love
are subject, especially young men who have been, or are, very poor. They like to connect ideas
of wealth and comfort, even of a luxurious existence, with the object of their affections.
They desire the world of love to be new to them, and in order to be wholly new in their experience,
it must be rich. The feeling is not so wholly unworthy as it might seem; they instinctively
place their love upon a pedestal and require its surroundings to be of a better kind than such
as they have been accustomed to in their own lives. King Cophetua, being a king, could afford
to love the beggar maid, and a very old song sings of a "lady who loved a swine," but the names
of the poor young men who have loved above their fortune and station are innumerable as the
swallows in spring. John saw that Mrs. Goddard was much richer than he had ever been, and without
the smallest second thought was pleased. In a few moments she entered the room. John had his
speech ready.

"I thought, if you were going to skate, I would call and ask leave to go with you," he said
glibly, as she gave him her hand.

"Oh--thanks. But is not it rather early?"

"It is twenty minutes past ten," said John, looking at the clock.

"Well, let us get warm before starting," said Mrs. Goddard, sitting down by the fire. "It is
so cold this morning."

John thought she was lovely to look at as she sat there, warming her hands and shielding her
face from the flame with them at the same time. She looked at him and smiled pleasantly, but
said nothing. She was still a little surprised to see him and wondered whether he himself had
anything to say.

"Yes," said John, "it is very cold--traditional Christmas weather. Could not be finer, in fact,
could it?"

"No--it could not be finer," echoed Mrs. Goddard, suppressing a smile. Then as though to help
him out of his embarrassment by giving an impulse to the conversation, she added, "By the bye,
Mr. Short, while we are warming ourselves why do not you let me hear one of your odes?"

She meant it kindly, thinking it would give him pleasure, as indeed it did. John's heart leaped
and he blushed all over his face with delight. Mrs. Goddard was not quite sure whether she
had done right, but she attributed his evident satisfaction to his vanity as a scholar.

"Certainly," he said with alacrity, "if you would like to hear it. Would you care to hear me
repeat the Greek first?"

"Oh, of all things. I do not think I have ever heard Greek."

John cleared his throat and began, glancing at his hostess rather nervously from time to time.
But his memory never failed him, and he went on to the end without a break or hesitation.

"How do you think it sounds?" he asked timidly when he had finished.

"It sounds very funny," said Mrs. Goddard. "I had no idea Greek sounded like that--but it has
a pleasant rhythm."

"That is the thing," said John, enthusiastically. "I see you really appreciate it. Of course
nobody knows how the ancients pronounced Greek, and if one pronounced it as the moderns do,
it would sound all wrong--but the rhythm is the thing, you know. It is impossible to get over
that."

Mrs. Goddard was not positively sure what he meant by "getting over the rhythm;" possibly John
himself could not have defined his meaning very clearly. But his cheeks glowed and he was very
much pleased.

"Yes, of course," said Mrs. Goddard confidently. "But what does it all mean, Mr. Short?"

"Would you really like to know?" asked John in fresh embarrassment. He suddenly realised how
wonderfully delightful it was to be repeating his own poetry to the woman for whom it was written.

"Indeed yes--what is the use of your telling me all sorts of things in Greek, if you do not
tell me what they mean?"

"Yes--you will promise not to be offended?"

"Of course," said Mrs. Goddard; then blushing a little she added, "it is quite--I mean--quite
the sort of thing, is not it?"

"Oh quite," said John, blushing too, but looking grave for a moment. Then he repeated the English
translation of the verses which, as they were certainly not so good as the original, may be
omitted here. They set forth that in the vault of the world's night a new star had appeared
which men had not yet named, nor would be likely to name until the power of human speech should
be considerably increased, and the verses dwelt upon the theme, turning it and revolving it
in several ways, finally declaring that the far-darting sun must look out for his interests
unless he meant to be outshone by the new star. Translated into English there was nothing very
remarkable about the performance though the original Greek ode was undoubtedly very good of
its kind. But Mrs. Goddard was determined to be pleased.

"I think it is charming," she said, when John had reached the end and paused for her criticism.

"The Greek is very much better," said John doubtfully. "I cannot write English verses--they
seem to me so much harder."

"I daresay," said Mrs. Goddard. "But did you really write that when--" she stopped not knowing
exactly how to express herself. But John had his answer ready.

"Oh, I wrote ever so many," he said, "and I have got them all at Cambridge. But that is the
only one I quite remember. I wrote them just after the day when I waked up Muggins--the only
time I had seen you till now. I think I could--"

"How funny it seems," said Mrs. Goddard, "without knowing a person, to write verses to them!
How did you manage to do it?"

"I was going to say that I think--I am quite sure--I could write much better things to you now."

"Oh, that is impossible--quite absurd, Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard, laughing more gaily than
usual.

"Why?" asked John, somewhat emboldened by his success. "I do not see why, if one has an ideal,
you know, one should not understand it much better when one comes near to it."

"Yes--but--how can I possibly be your ideal?" She felt herself so much older than John that
she thought it was out of the question to be annoyed; so she treated him in a matter of fact
way, and was really amused at his talk.

"I don't see why not," answered John stoutly. "You might be any man's ideal."

"Oh, really--" ejaculated Mrs. Goddard, somewhat startled at the force of the sweeping compliment.
To be told point-blank, even by an enthusiastic youth of one and twenty, that one is the ideal
woman, must be either very pleasant or very startling.

"Excuse me," she said quickly, before he could answer her, "you know of course I am very ignorant--yes
I am--but will you please tell me what is an 'ideal'?"

"Why--yes," said John, "it is very easy. Ideal comes from idea. Plato meant, by the idea, the
perfect model--well, do you see?"

"Not exactly," said Mrs. Goddard.

"It is very simple. When I, when anybody, says you are the ideal woman, it is meant that you
are the perfect model, the archetype of a woman."

"Yes--but that is absurd," said his companion rather coldly.

"I am sorry that it should seem absurd," said John in a persuasive tone; "it seems very natural
to me. A man thinks for a long time about everything that most attracts him and then, on a
sudden, he sees it all before him, quite real and alive, and then he says he has realised his
ideal. But you liked the verses, Mrs. Goddard?" he added quickly, hoping to bring back the
smile that had vanished from her face. He had a strong impression that he had been a little
too familiar. Probably Mrs. Goddard thought so too.

"Oh yes, I think they are very nice," she answered. But the smile did not come back. She was
not displeased, but she was not pleased either; she was wondering how far this boy would go
if she would let him. John, however, felt unpleasantly doubtful about what he had done.

"I hope you are not displeased," he said.

"Oh, not in the least," said she. "Shall we go to the park and skate?"

"I am not sure that I will skate to-day," said John, foolishly. Mrs. Goddard looked at him
in unfeigned surprise.

"Why not? I thought it was for that--"

"Oh, of course," said John quickly. "Only it is not very amusing to skate when Mr. Juxon is
pushing you about in a chair."

"Really--why should not he push me about, if I like it?"

"If you like it--that is different," answered John impatiently.

Mrs. Goddard began to think that John was very like a spoiled child, and she resented his evident
wish to monopolise her society. She left the room to get ready for the walk, vaguely wishing
that he had not come.

"I have made a fool of myself again," said John to himself, when he was left alone; and he
suddenly wished he could get out of the house without seeing her again. But before he had done
wishing, she returned.

"Where is Miss Nellie?" he asked gloomily, as they walked down the path. "I hope she is coming
too."

"She went up to the pond with Mr. Juxon, just before you came."

"Do you let her go about like that, without you?" asked John severely.

"Why not? Really, Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard, glancing up at his face, "either you dislike
Mr. Juxon very much, or else I think you take a good deal upon yourself in remarking--in this
way--"

She was naturally a little timid, but John's youth and what she considered as his extraordinary
presumption inspired her with courage to protest. The effect upon John was instantaneous.

"Pray forgive me," he said humbly, "I am very silly. I daresay you are quite right and I do
not like Mr. Juxon. Not that I have the smallest reason for not liking him," he continued quickly,
"it is a mere personal antipathy, a mere idea, I daresay--very foolish of me."

"It is very foolish to take unreasonable dislikes to people one knows nothing about," she said
quietly. "Will you please open the gate?" They were standing before the bars, but John was
so much disturbed in mind that he stood still, quite forgetting to raise the long iron latch.

"Dear me--I beg your pardon--I cannot imagine what I was thinking of," he said, making the
most idiotic excuse current in English idiom.

"Nor I," said Mrs. Goddard, with a little laugh, as he held the gate back for her to pass.
It was a plain white gate with stone pillars, and there was no gatehouse. People who came to
the Hall were expected to open it for themselves. Mrs. Goddard was so much amused at John's
absence of mind that her good humour returned, and he felt that since that object was attained
he no longer regretted his folly in the least. The cloud that had darkened the horizon of his
romance had passed quickly away, and once more he said inwardly that he was enjoying the happiest
days of his life. If for a moment the image of Mr. Juxon entered the field of his imaginative
vision in the act of pushing Mrs. Goddard's chair upon the ice, he mentally ejaculated "bother
the squire!" as he had done upon the previous night, and soon forgot all about him. The way
through the park was long, the morning was delightful and Mrs. Goddard did not seem to be in
a hurry.

"I wish the winter would last for ever," he said presently.

"So do I," answered his companion, "it is the pleasantest time of the year. One does not feel
that nature is dead because one is sure she will very soon be alive again."

"That is a charming idea," said John, "one might make a good subject of it."

"It is a little old, perhaps. I think I have heard it before--have not you?"

"All good ideas are old. The older the better," said John confidently. Mrs. Goddard could not
resist the temptation of teazing him a little. They had grown very intimate in forty-eight
hours; it had taken six months for Mr. Juxon to reach the point John had won in two days.

"Are they?" she asked quietly. "Is that the reason you selected me for the 'idea' of your ode,
which you explained to me?"

"You?" said John in astonishment. Then he laughed. "Why, you are not any older than I am!"

"Do you think so?" she inquired with a demure smile. "I am very much older than you think."

"You must be--I mean, you know, you must be older than you look."

"Thank you," said Mrs. Goddard, still smiling, and just resting the tips of her fingers upon
his arm as she stepped across a slippery place in the frozen road. "Yes, I am a great deal
older than you."

John would have liked very much to ask her age, but even to his youthful and unsophisticated
mind such a question seemed almost too personal. He did not really believe that she was more
than five years older than he, and that seemed to be no difference at all.

"I don't know," he said. "I am nearly one and twenty."

"Yes, I know," said Mrs. Goddard, who had heard every detail concerning John from Mr. Ambrose,
again and again. "Just think," she added with a laugh, "only one and twenty! Why when I was
one and twenty I was--" she stopped short.

"What were you doing then?" asked John, trying not to seem too curious.

"I was living in London," she said quietly. She half enjoyed his disappointment.

"Yes," he said, "I daresay. But what--well, I suppose I ought not to ask any questions."

"Certainly not," said she. "It is very rude to ask a lady questions about her age."

"I do not mean to be rude again," said John, pretending to laugh. "Have you always been fond
of skating?" he asked, fixing his eye upon a distant tree, and trying to look unconscious.

"No--I only learned since I came here. Besides, I skate very badly."

"Did Mr. Juxon teach you?" asked John, still gazing into the distance. From not looking at
the path he slipped on a frozen puddle and nearly fell. Whereat, as usual, when he did anything
awkward, he blushed to the brim of his hat.

"Take care," said Mrs. Goddard, calmly. "You will fall if you don't look where you are going.
No; Mr. Juxon was not here last year. He only came here in the summer."

"It seems to me that he has always been here," said John, trying to recover his equanimity.
"Then I suppose Mr. Ambrose taught you to skate?"

"Exactly--Mr. Ambrose taught me. He skates very well."

"So will you, with a little more practice," answered her companion in a rather patronising
tone. He intended perhaps to convey the idea that Mrs. Goddard would improve in the exercise
if she would actually skate, and with him, instead of submitting to be pushed about in a chair
by Mr. Juxon.

"Oh, I daresay," said Mrs. Goddard indifferently. "We shall soon be there, now. I can hear
them on the ice."

"Too soon," said John with regret.

"I thought you liked skating so much."

"I like walking with you much better," he replied, and he glanced at her face to see if his
speech produced any sign of sympathy.

"You have walked with me; now you can skate with Nellie," suggested Mrs. Goddard.

"You talk as though I were a child," said John, suddenly losing his temper in a very unaccountable
way.

"Because I said you might skate with Nellie? Really, I don't see why. Mr. Juxon is not a child,
and he has been skating with her all the morning."

"That is different," retorted John growing very red.

"Yes--Nellie is much nearer to your age than to Mr. Juxon's," answered Mrs. Goddard, with a
calmness which made John desperate.

"Really, Mrs. Goddard," he said stiffly, "I cannot see what that has to do with it."

"'The atrocious crime of being a young man, which the lady so much older than myself has charged--'
How does the quotation end, Mr. Short?"

"'Has, with such spirit and decency, charged upon me, I shall neither attempt to palliate nor
deny,'" said John savagely. "Quite so, Mrs. Goddard. I shall not attempt to palliate it, nor
will I venture to deny it."

"Then why in the world are you so angry with me?" she asked, suddenly turning her violet eyes
upon him. "I was only laughing, you know."

"Only laughing!" repeated John. "It is more pleasant to laugh than to be laughed at."

"Yes--would not you allow me the pleasure then, just for once?"

"Certainly, if you desire it. You are so extremely merry--"

"Come, Mr. Short, we must not seem to have been quarrelling when we reach the pond. It would
be too ridiculous."

"Everything seems to strike you in a humorous light to-day," answered John, beginning to be
pacified by her tone.

"Do you know, you are much more interesting when you are angry," said Mrs. Goddard.

"And you only made me angry in order to see whether I was interesting?"

"Perhaps--but then, I could not help it in the least."

"I trust you are thoroughly satisfied upon the point, Mrs. Goddard? If there is anything more
that I can do to facilitate your researches in psychology--"

"You would help me? Even to the extent of being angry again?" She smiled so pleasantly and
frankly that John's wrath vanished.

"It is impossible to be angry with you. I am very sorry if I seemed to be," he answered. "A
man who has the good fortune to be thrown into your society is a fool to waste his time in
being disagreeable."

"I agree with the conclusion, at all events--that is, it is much better to be agreeable. Is
it not? Let us be friends."

"Oh, by all means," said John.

They walked on for some minutes in silence. John reflected that he had witnessed a phase of
Mrs. Goddard's character of which he had been very far from suspecting the existence. He had
not hitherto imagined her to be a woman of quick temper or sharp speech. His idea of her was
formed chiefly upon her appearance. Her sad face, with its pathetic expression, suggested a
melancholy humour delighting in subdued and tranquil thoughts, inclined naturally to the romantic
view, or to what in the eyes of youths of twenty appears to be the romantic view of life. He
had suddenly found her answering him with a sharpness which, while it roused his wits, startled
his sensibilities. But he was flattered as well. His instinct and his observation of Mrs. Goddard
when in the society of others led him to believe that with Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose, or even with
Mr. Juxon, she was not in the habit of talking as she talked with him. He was therefore inwardly
pleased, so soon as his passing annoyance had subsided, to feel that she made a difference
between him and others.

It was quite true that she made a distinction, though she did so almost unconsciously. It was
perfectly natural, too. She was young in heart, in spite of her thirty years and her troubles;
she had an elastic temperament; to a physiognomist her face would have shown a delicate sensitiveness
to impressions rather than any inborn tendency to sadness. In spite of everything she was still
young, and for two years and a half she had been in the society of persons much older than
herself, persons she respected and regarded as friends, but persons in whom her youth found
no sympathy. It was natural, therefore, that when time to some extent had healed the wound
she had suffered and she suddenly found herself in the society of a young and enthusiastic
man, something of the enforced soberness of her manner should unbend, showing her character
in a new light. She herself enjoyed the change, hardly knowing why; she enjoyed a little passage
of arms with John, and it amused her more than she could have expected to be young again, to
annoy him, to break the peace and heal it again in five minutes. But what happened entirely
failed to amuse the squire, who did not regard such diversions as harmless; and moreover she
was far from expecting the effect which her treatment of John Short produced upon his scholarly
but enthusiastic temper.

CHAPTER IX.

The squire had remarked that John Short seemed to have a peculiar temper, and Mrs. Goddard
had observed the same thing. What has gone before sufficiently explains the change in John's
manner, and the difference in his behaviour was plainly apparent even to Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose.
The vicar indeed was wise enough to see that John was very much attracted by Mrs. Goddard,
but he was also wise enough to say nothing about it. His wife, however, who had witnessed no
love-making for nearly thirty years, except the courtship of the young physician who had married
her daughter, attributed John's demeanour to no such disturbing cause. He was overworked, she
said; he was therefore irritable; he had of course never taken that excellent homoeopathic
remedy, highly diluted aconite, since he had left the vicarage; the consequence was that he
was subject to nervous headache--she only hoped he would not be taken ill on the eve of the
examination for honours. She hoped, too, that he would prolong his holiday to the very last
moment, for the country air and the rest he enjoyed were sure to do him so much good. With
regard, to the extension of John's visit, the vicar thought differently, although he held his
peace. There were many reasons why John should not become attached to Mrs. Goddard both for
her sake and his own, and if he staid long, the vicar felt quite sure that he would fall in
love with her. She was dangerously pretty, she was much older than John--which in the case
of very young men constitutes an additional probability--she evidently took an innocent pleasure
in his society, and altogether such a complication as was likely to ensue was highly undesirable.
Therefore, when Mrs. Ambrose pressed John to stay longer than he had intended, the vicar not
only gave him no encouragement, but spoke gravely of the near approach of the contest for honours,
of the necessity of concentrating every force for the coming struggle, and expressed at the
same time the firm conviction that, if John did his best, he ought to be the senior classic
in the year.

Even Mrs. Goddard urged him to go. Of course he asked her advice. He would not have lost that
opportunity of making her speak of himself, nor of gauging the exact extent of the interest
he hoped she felt in him.

It was two or three days after the long conversation he had enjoyed with her. In that time
they had met often and John's admiration for her, strengthened by his own romantic desire to
be really in love, had begun to assume proportions which startled Mrs. Goddard and annoyed
Mr. Juxon. The latter felt that the boy was in his way; whenever he wanted to see Mrs. Goddard,
John was at her side, talking eagerly and contesting his position against the squire with a
fierceness which in an older and wiser man would have been in the worst possible taste. Even
as it was, Mr. Juxon looked considerably annoyed as he stood by, smoothing his smooth hair
from time to time with his large white hand and feeling that even at his age, and with his
experience, a man might sometimes cut a poor figure.

On the particular occasion when the relations between John and the squire became an object
of comment to Mrs. Ambrose, the whole party were assembled at Mrs. Goddard's cottage. She had
invited everybody to tea, a meal which in her little household represented a compromise between
her appetite and Nellie's. She had felt that in the small festivities of the Billingsfield
Christmas season she was called upon to do her share with the rest and, being a simple woman,
she took her part simply, and did not dignify the entertainment of her four friends by calling
it a dinner. The occasion was none the less hospitable, for she gave both time and thought
to her preparations. Especially she had considered the question of precedence; it was doubtful,
she thought, whether the squire or the vicar should sit upon her right hand. The squire, as
being lord of the manor, represented the powers temporal, the vicar on the other hand represented
the church, which on ordinary occasions takes precedence of the lay faculty. She had at last
privately consulted Mr. Juxon, in whom she had the greatest confidence, asking him frankly
which she should do, and Mr. Juxon had unhesitatingly yielded the post of honour to the vicar,
adding to enforce his opinion the very plausible argument that if he, the squire, took Mrs.
Goddard in to tea, the vicar would have to give his arm either to little Nellie or to his own
wife. Mrs. Goddard was convinced and the affair was a complete success.

John felt that he could not complain of his position, but as he was separated from the object
of his admiration during the whole meal, he resolved to indemnify himself for his sufferings
by monopolising her conversation during the rest of the evening. The squire on the other hand,
who had been obliged to talk to Mrs. Ambrose during most of the time while they were at table,
and who, moreover, was beginning to feel that he had seen almost enough of John Short, determined
to give the young man a lesson in the art of interesting women in general and Mrs. Goddard
in particular. She, indeed, would not have been a woman at all had she not understood the two
men and their intentions. After tea the party congregated round the fire in the little drawing-room,
standing in a circle, of which their hostess formed the centre. Mr. Juxon and John, anticipating
that Mrs. Goddard must ultimately sit upon one side or other of the fireplace had at first
chosen opposite sides, each hoping that she would take the chair nearest to himself. But Mrs.
Goddard remained standing an unreasonably long time, for the very reason that she did not choose
to sit beside either of them. Seeing this the squire, who had perhaps a greater experience
than his adversary in this kind of strategic warfare, left his place and put himself on the
same side as John. He argued that Mrs. Goddard would probably then choose the opposite side,
whereas John who was younger would think she would come towards the two where they stood; John
would consequently lose time, Mr. Juxon would cross again and install himself by her side while
his enemy was hesitating.

While these moves and counter-moves were proceeding, the conversation was general. The vicar
was for the hundredth time admiring the Andrea del Sarto over the chimney-piece and his wife
was explaining her general objections to the representation of sacred subjects upon canvas,
while Mrs. Goddard answered each in turn and endeavoured to disagree with neither. What the
squire had foreseen when he made his last move, however, actually took place at last. Mrs.
Goddard established herself upon the side opposite the two men. Mr. Juxon crossed rapidly to
where she was seated, and Mrs. Ambrose, who had turned with the intention of speaking to the
squire, found herself confronted by John. The elegant author of "De Vere" has fallen into a very great
though a very hackneyed error, in lauding Oxford's political character, and condemning Bolingbroke's,
because the former awaited a trial and the latter shunned it. A very little reflection might
perhaps have taught the accomplished novelist that there could be no comparison between the two cases,
because there was no comparison between the relative danger of Oxford and Bolingbroke. Oxford,
as their subsequent impeachment proved, was far more numerously and powerfully supported than
his illustrious enemy: and there is really no earthly cause for doubting the truth of Bolingbroke's
assertion; namely, that "He had received repeated and certain information that a resolution was
taken, by those who had power to execute it, to pursue him to the
scaffold."

There are certain situations in which a brave and a good man should willingly surrender life--but
I humbly opine that there may sometimes exist a situation in which
he should preserve it; and if ever man was placed in that latter situation,
it was Lord Bolingbroke.

To choose unnecessarily to put one's head under the axe, without benefiting any but one's
enemies by the act, is, in my eyes, the proof of a fool, not a hero;
and to attack a man for not placing his head in that agreeable and
most useful predicament--for preferring, in short, to live for a world,
rather than to perish by a faction--appears to be a mode of arguing
that has a wonderful resemblance to nonsense.

When Lord Bolingbroke was impeached, two men only out of those numerous retainers in the Lower
House who had been wont so loudly to applaud the secretary of state,
in his prosecution of those very measures for which he was now to
be condemned,--two men only, General Ross and Mr. Hungerford, uttered
a single syllable in defence of the minister disgraced.--ED.

Bolingbroke smiled, and quoted Cicero, and after an hour's conversation, which on his part was by
no means like that of a person whose very head was in no enviable state of safety, he slid
at once from a sarcasm upon Steele into a discussion as to the best
measures to be adopted.

Let me be brief on this point. Throughout the whole of that short session, he behaved in a manner
more delicately and profoundly wise than, I think, the whole of his
previous administration can equal.

He sustained with the most unflagging, the most unwearied, dexterity, the sinking spirits of his associates.
Without an act, or the shadow of an act, that could be called time-serving, he laid himself out
to conciliate the king, and to propitiate Parliament; with a dignified
prudence which, while it seemed above petty pique, was well calculated
to remove the appearance of that disaffection with which he was charged,
and discriminated justly between the king and the new administration,
he lent his talents to the assistance of the monarch by whom his impeachment
was already resolved on, and aided in the settlement of the civil
list while he was in full expectation of a criminal accusation.

The new Parliament met, and all doubt was over. An impeachment of the late administration was
decided upon.

I was settling bills with my little lawyer one morning, when Bolingbroke
entered my room.

He took a chair, nodded to me not to dismiss my assistant, joined
our conversation, and when conversation was merged in accounts, he
took up a book of songs, and amused himself with it till my business
was over and my disciple of Coke retired.

He then said, very slowly, and with a slight yawn, "You have never
been at Paris, I think?"

"Never: you are enchanted with that gay city."

"Yes, but when I was last there, the good people flattered my vanity
enough to bribe my taste.

I shall be able to form a more unbiased and impartial judgment in
a few days."

"A few days!"

"Ay, my dear Count: does it startle you?

I wonder whether the pretty De Tencin will be as kind to me as she was, and whether /tout le
monde/ (that most exquisite phrase for five hundred people) will
rise now at the Opera on my entrance.

Do you think that a banished minister can have any, the smallest
resemblance to what he was when in power?

By Gumdragon, as our friend Swift so euphoniously and elegantly says, or swears, by Gumdragon,
I think not!

What altered Satan so after his fall? what gave him horns and a tail? Nothing but his disgrace.
Oh! years, and disease, plague, pestilence, and famine never alter
a man so much as the loss of power."

"You say wisely; but what am I to gather from your words? is it all over with us in real earnest?"

"Us!
with /me/ it is indeed all over: /you/ may stay here forever. I must fly: a packet-boat to
Calais, or a room in the Tower, I must choose between the two. I had some thoughts of remaining
and confronting my trial: but it would be folly; there is a difference
between Oxford and me.

He has friends, though out of power: I have none.

If they impeach him, he will escape; if they impeach me, they will either shut me up like a
rat in a cage, for twenty years, till, old and forgotten, I tear my heart out with my confinement,
or they will bring me at once to the block.

No, no: I must keep myself for another day; and, while they banish
me, I will leave the seeds of the true cause to grow up till my return.

Wise and exquisite policy of my foes,--'/Frustra Cassium amovisti, si gliscere et vigere Brutorum
emulos passurus es.'* But I have no time to lose: farewell, my friend; God bless you; you are
saved from these storms; and even intolerance, which prevented the exercise of your genius,
preserves you now from the danger of having applied that genius to
the welfare of your country.

Heaven knows, whatever my faults, I have sacrificed what I loved better than all things--study
and pleasure--to her cause. In her wars I served even my enemy Marlborough,
in order to serve her; her peace I effected, and I suffer for it.

Be it so, I am

"'Fidens animi atque in utrumque paratus.'**

"Once more I embrace you; farewell."

* "Vainly have you banished Cassius, if you shall suffer the rivals
of the Brutuses to spread themselves and flourish."

** "Confident of soul and prepared for either fortune."

"Nay," said I, "listen to me; you shall not go alone.

France is already, in reality, my native country: there did I receive my birth; it is no hardship
to return to my /natale solum/; it is an honour to return in the
company of Henry St. John.

I will have no refusal: my law case is over; my papers are few; my money I will manage to transfer.
Remember the anecdote you told me yesterday of Anaxagoras, who, when asked where his country
was, pointed with his finger to heaven. It is applicable, I hope, as well to me as to yourself:
to me, uncelebrated and obscure; to you, the senator and the statesman."

In

vain Bolingbroke endeavoured to dissuade me from this resolution; he was the only friend fate
had left me, and I was resolved that misfortune should not part us. At last he embraced me tenderly,
and consented to what he could not resist.

"But you cannot," he said, "quit England to-morrow night, as I must."

"Pardon me," I answered, "the briefer the preparation, the greater
the excitement, and what in life is equal to /that/?"

"True," answered Bolingbroke; "to some natures, too restless to be happy, excitement can compensate
for all,--compensate for years wasted, and hopes scattered,--compensate for bitter regret at talents
perverted and passions unrestrained.

But we will talk philosophically when we have more leisure. You will dine with me to-morrow:
we will go to the play together; I promised poor Lucy that I would
see her at the theatre, and I cannot break my word; and an hour afterwards
we will commence our excursion to Paris.

And now I will explain to you the plan I have arranged for our escape."

CHAPTER III.

THE REAL ACTORS SPECTATORS TO THE FALSE ONES.

IT was a brilliant night at the theatre. The boxes were crowded to excess. Every eye was directed
towards Lord Bolingbroke, who, with his usual dignified and consummate grace of manner, conversed
with the various loiterers with whom, from time to time, his box was filled.

"Look yonder," said a very young man, of singular personal beauty, "look yonder, my Lord, what
a panoply of smiles the Duchess wears to-night, and how triumphantly she directs those eyes,
which they say were once so beautiful, to your box."

"Ah," said Bolingbroke, "her Grace does me too much honour: I must not neglect to acknowledge
her courtesy; "and, leaning over the box, Bolingbroke watched his opportunity till the Duchess
of Marlborough, who sat opposite to him, and who was talking with great and evidently joyous
vivacity to a tall, thin man, beside her, directed her attention, and that of her whole party,
in a fixed and concentrated stare, to the imperilled minister. With a dignified smile Lord Bolingbroke
then put his hand to his heart, and bowed profoundly; the Duchess looked a little abashed, but
returned the courtesy quickly and slightly, and renewed her conversation.

"Faith, my Lord," cried the young gentleman who had before spoken, "you managed that well! No reproach
is like that which we clothe in a smile, and present with a bow."

"I am happy," said Lord Bolingbroke, "that my conduct receives the grave support of a son of
my political opponent."

"/Grave/ support, my Lord! you are mistaken: never apply the epithet grave to anything belonging
to Philip Wharton.

But, in sober earnest, I have sat long enough with you to terrify all my friends, and must now
show my worshipful face in another part of the house. Count Devereux, will you come with me
to the Duchess's?"

"What! the Duchess's immediately after Lord Bolingbroke's!--the Whig after the Tory: it would be as
trying to one's assurance as a change from the cold bath to the hot to one's constitution."

"Well, and what so delightful as a trial in which one triumphs? and a change in which one does
not lose even one's countenance?"

"Take care, my Lord," said Bolingbroke, laughing; "those are dangerous sentiments for a man
like you, to whom the hopes of two great parties are directed, to express so openly, even on a trifle
and in a jest."

"'Tis for that reason I utter them. I like being the object of hope and fear to men, since my
miserable fortune made me marry at fourteen, and cease to be aught but a wedded thing to the
women. But sup with me at the Bedford,--you, my Lord, and the Count."

"And you will ask Walpole, Addison, and Steele,* to join us, eh?" said Bolingbroke. "No, we
have other engagements for to-night; but we shall meet again soon."

* All political opponents of Lord Bolingbroke.

And the eccentric youth nodded his adieu, disappeared, and a minute afterwards was seated by
the side of the Duchess of Marlborough.

"There goes a boy," said Bolingbroke, "who, at the age of fifteen, has in him the power to
be the greatest man of his day, and in all probability will only be the most singular. An obstinate
man is sure of doing well; a wavering or a whimsical one (which is the same thing) is as uncertain,
even in his elevation, as a shuttlecock. But look to the box at the right: do you see the beautiful
Lady Mary?"

"Yes," said Mr. Trefusis, who was with us, "she has only just come
to town.

'Tis said she and Ned Montagu live like doves."

"How!" said Lord Bolingbroke; "that quick, restless eye seems to have very little of the dove
in it."

"But how beautiful she is!" said Trefusis, admiringly.

"What a pity that those exquisite hands should be so dirty! It reminds me" (Trefusis loved a
coarse anecdote) "of her answer to old Madame de Noailles, who made
exactly the same remark to her.

'Do you call my hands dirty?' cried Lady Mary, holding them up with the most innocent /naivete/.
'Ah, Madame, /si vous pouviez voir mes pieds!'"

"/Fi donc/," said I, turning away; "but who is that very small, deformed
man behind her,--he with the bright black eye?"

"Know you not?" said Bolingbroke; "tell it not in Gath!--'tis a rising
sun, whom I have already learned to worship,--the young author of
the 'Essay on Criticism,' and 'The Rape of the Lock.' Egad, the little
poet seems to eclipse us with the women as much as with the men.

Do you mark how eagerly Lady Mary listens to him, even though the
tall gentleman in black, who in vain endeavours to win her attentions,
is thought the handsomest gallant in London?

Ah, Genius is paid by smiles from all females but Fortune; little, methinks, does that young
poet, in his first intoxication of flattery and fame, guess what a lot of contest and strife
is in store for him.

The very breath which a literary man respires is hot with hatred,
and the youthful proselyte enters that career which seems to him so
glittering, even as Dame Pliant's brother in the 'Alchemist' entered
town,--not to be fed with luxury, and diet on pleasure, but 'to learn
to quarrel and live by his wits.'"

The play was now nearly over.

With great gravity Lord Bolingbroke summoned one of the principal
actors to his box, and bespoke a play for the next week; leaning then
on my arm, he left the theatre.

We hastened to his home, put on our disguises, and, without any adventure worth recounting, effected
our escape and landed safely at Calais.

THE ex-minister was received both at Calais and at Paris with the
most gratifying honours: he was then entirely the man to captivate
the French.

The beauty of his person, the grace of his manner, his consummate taste in all things, the
exceeding variety and sparkling vivacity of his conversation, enchanted
them.

In later life he has grown more reserved and profound, even in habitual intercourse; and attention
is now fixed to the solidity of the diamond, as at that time one was too dazzled to think of
anything but its brilliancy.

While Bolingbroke was receiving visits of state, I busied myself in
inquiring after a certain Madame de Balzac.

The reader will remember that the envelope of that letter which Oswald had brought to me at
Devereux Court was signed by the letters C. de B. Now, when Oswald
disappeared, after that dreadful night to which even now I can scarcely
bring myself to allude, these initials occurred to my remembrance,
and Oswald having said they belonged to a lady formerly intimate with
my father, I inquired of my mother if she could guess to what French
lady such initials would apply.

She, with an evident pang of jealousy, mentioned a Madame de Balzac; and to this lady I now
resolved to address myself, with the faint hope of learning from
her some intelligence respecting Oswald.

It was not difficult to find out the abode of one who in her day
had played no inconsiderable role in that 'Comedy of Errors,'--the
Great World.

She was still living at Paris: what Frenchwoman would, if she could help it, live anywhere
else? "There are a hundred gates," said the witty Madame de Choisi to me, "which lead into
Paris, but only two roads out of it,--the convent, or (odious word!)
the grave."

I hastened to Madame Balzac's hotel.

I was ushered through three magnificent apartments into one which to my eyes seemed to contain
a throne: upon a nearer inspection I discovered it was a bed. Upon a large chair, by a very
bad fire--it was in the month of March--sat a tall, handsome woman,
excessively painted, and dressed in a manner which to my taste, accustomed
to English finery, seemed singularly plain.

I had sent in the morning to request permission to wait on her, so that she was prepared for
my visit. She rose, offered me her cheek, kissed mine, shed several tears, and in short testified
a great deal of kindness towards me. Old ladies who have flirted with our fathers always seem to
claim a sort of property in the sons!

Before she resumed her seat she held me out at arm's length.

"You have a family likeness to your brave father," said she, with
a little disappointment; "but--"

"Madame de Balzac would add," interrupted I, filling up the sentence which I saw her /bienveillance/
had made her break off, "Madame de Balzac would add that I am not so good-looking. It is true:
the likeness is transmitted to me within rather than without; and
if I have not my father's privilege to be admired, I have at least
his capacities to admire," and I bowed.

Madame de Balzac took three large pinches of snuff.

"That is very well said," said she, gravely: "very well indeed! not at all like your father,
though, who never paid a compliment in his life. Your clothes, by the by, are in exquisite taste:
I had no idea that English people had arrived at such perfection
in the fine arts.

Your face is a little too long! You admire Racine, of course? How do you like Paris?"

All this was not said gayly or quickly: Madame de Balzac was by no means a gay or a quick person. She
belonged to a peculiar school of Frenchwomen, who affected a little
languor, a great deal of stiffness, an indifference to forms when
forms were to be used by themselves, and an unrelaxing demand of forms
when forms were to be observed to them by others. Added to this, they
talked plainly upon all matters, without ever entering upon sentiment.
This was the school she belonged to; but she possessed the traits
of the individual as well as of the species. She was keen, ambitious,
worldly, not unaffectionate nor unkind; very proud, a little of the
devotee,--because it was the fashion to be so,--an enthusiastic admirer
of military glory, and a most prying, searching, intriguing schemer
of politics without the slightest talent for the science.

"Like Paris!"
said I, answering only the last question, and that not with the most
scrupulous regard to truth. "Can Madame de Balzac think of Paris,
and not conceive the transport which must inspire a person entering
it for the first time? But I had something more endearing than a stranger's
interest to attach me to it: I longed to express to my father's friend
my gratitude for the interest which I venture to believe she on one
occasion manifested towards me."

"Ah! you mean my caution to you
against that terrible De Montreuil. Yes, I trust I was of service
to you /there/."

And Madame de Balzac then proceeded to favour me
with the whole history of the manner in which she had obtained the
letter she had sent me, accompanied by a thousand anathemas against
those /atroces Jesuites/ and a thousand eulogies on her own genius
and virtues. I brought her from this subject so interesting to herself,
as soon as decorum would allow me; and I then made inquiry if she
knew aught of Oswald or could suggest any mode of obtaining intelligence
respecting him. Madame de Balzac hated plain, blunt, blank questions,
and she always travelled through a wilderness of parentheses before
she answered them.

CHAPTER X.

The vicar's suspicions were more than realized and he passed an uncomfortable day after his
interview with John, in debating what he ought to do, whether he ought to do anything at all,
or whether he should merely hasten his old pupil's departure and leave matters to take care
of themselves. He was a very conscientious man, and he felt that he was responsible for John's
conduct towards Mrs. Goddard, seeing that she had put herself under his protection, and that
John was almost like one of his family. His first impulse was to ask counsel of his wife, but
he rejected the plan, reflecting with great justice that she was very fond of John and had
at first not been sure of liking Mrs. Goddard; she would be capable of thinking that the latter
had "led Short on," as she would probably say. The vicar did not believe this, and was therefore
loath that any one else should. He felt that circumstances had made him Mrs. Goddard's protector,
and he was moreover personally attached to her; he would not therefore do or say anything whereby
she was likely to appear to any one else in an unfavourable light. It was incredible that she
should have given John any real encouragement. Mr. Ambrose wondered whether he ought to warn
her of his pupil's madness. But when he thought about that, it seemed unnecessary. It was unlikely
that John would betray himself during his present visit, since the vicar had solemnly assured
him that there was no possibility of a marriage so far as Mr. Juxon was concerned. It was undoubtedly
a very uncomfortable situation but there was evidently nothing to be done; Mr. Ambrose felt
that to speak to Mrs. Goddard would be to precipitate matters in a way which could not but
cause much humiliation to John Short and much annoyance to herself. He accordingly held his
peace, but his upper lip set itself stiffly and his eyes had a combative expression which told
his wife that there was something the matter.

After breakfast John went out, on pretence of walking in the garden, and Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose
were left alone. The latter, as usual after the morning meal, busied herself about the room,
searching out those secret corners which she suspected Susan of having forgotten to dust. The
vicar stood looking out of the window. The weather was grey and it seemed likely that there
would be a thaw which would spoil the skating.

"I think," said Mrs. Ambrose, "that John is far from well."

"What makes you say that?" inquired the vicar, who was thinking of him at that very moment.

"Anybody might see it. He has no appetite--he ate nothing at breakfast this morning. He looks
pale. My dear, that boy will certainly break down."

"I don't believe it," answered Mr. Ambrose still looking out of the window. His hands were
in his pockets, thrusting the skirts of his clerical coat to right and left; he slowly raised
himself upon his toes and let himself down again, repeating the operation as though it helped
him to think.

"That is the way you spoil all your coats, Augustin," said his wife looking at him from behind.
"I assure you, my dear, that boy is not well. Poor fellow, all alone at college with nobody
to look after him--"

"We have all had to go through that. I do not think it hurts him a bit," said the vicar, slowly
removing his hands from his pockets in deference to his wife's suggestion.

"Then what is it, I would like to know? There is certainly something the matter. Now I ask
you whether he looks like himself?"

"Perhaps he does look a little tired."

"Tired! There is something on his mind, Augustin. I am positively certain there is something
on his mind. Why won't you tell me?"

"My dear--" began the vicar, and then stopped short. He was a very truthful man, and as he
knew very well what was the matter with John he was embarrassed to find an answer. "My dear,"
he repeated, "I do not think he is ill."

"Then I am right," retorted Mrs. Ambrose, triumphantly. "It is just as I thought, there is
something on his mind. Don't deny it, Augustin; there is something on his mind."

Mr. Ambrose was silent; he glared fiercely at the window panes.

"Why don't you tell me?" insisted his better half. "I am quite sure you know all about it.
Augustin, do you know, or do you not?"

Thus directly questioned the vicar turned sharply round, sweeping the window with his coat tails.

"My dear," he said, shortly, "I do know. Can you not imagine that it may be a matter which
John does not care to have mentioned?"

Mrs. Ambrose grew red with annoyance. She had set her heart on finding out what had disturbed
John, and the vicar had apparently made up his mind that she should not succeed. Such occurrences
were very rare between that happy couple.

"I cannot believe he has done anything wrong," said Mrs. Ambrose. "Anything which need be concealed
from me--the interest I have always taken--"

"He has not done anything wrong," said the vicar impatiently. "I do wish you would drop the
subject--"

"Then why should it be concealed from me?" objected his wife with admirable logic. "If it is
anything good he need not hide his light under a bushel, I should think."

"There are plenty of things which are neither bad nor good," argued the vicar, who felt that
if he could draw Mrs. Ambrose into a Socratic discussion he was safe.

"That is a distinct prevarication, Augustin," said she severely. "I am surprised at you."

"Not at all," retorted the vicar. "What has occurred to John is not owing to any fault of his."
In his own mind the good man excused himself by saying that John could not have helped falling
in love with Mrs. Goddard. But his wife turned quickly upon him.

"That does not prevent what has occurred to him, as you call it, from being good, or more likely
bad, to judge from his looks."

"My dear," said Mr. Ambrose, driven to bay, "I entirely decline to discuss the point."

"I thought you trusted me, Augustin."

"So I do--certainly--and I always consult you about my own affairs."

"I think I have as much right to know about John as you have," retorted his wife, who seemed
deeply hurt.

"That is a point then which you ought to settle with John," said the vicar. "I cannot betray
his confidence, even to you."

"Oh--then he has been making confidences to you?"

"How in the world should I know about his affairs unless he told me?"

"One may see a great many things without being told about them, you know," answered Mrs. Ambrose,
assuming a prim expression as she examined a small spot in the tablecloth. The vicar was walking
up and down the room. Her speech, which was made quite at random, startled him. She, too, might
easily have observed John's manner when he was with Mrs. Goddard; she might have guessed the
secret, and have put her own interpretation on John's sudden melancholy.

"What may one see?" asked the vicar quickly.

"I did not say one could see anything," answered his wife. "But from your manner I infer that
there really is something to see. Wait a minute--what can it be?"

"Nothing--my dear, nothing," said the vicar desperately.

"Oh, Augustin, I know you so well," said the implacable Mrs. Ambrose. "I am quite sure now,
that it is something I have seen. Deny it, my dear."

The vicar was silent and bit his long upper lip as he marched up and down the room.

"Of course--you cannot deny it," she continued. "It is perfectly clear. The very first day
he arrived--when you came down from the Hall, in the evening--Augustin, I have got it! It is
Mrs. Goddard--now don't tell me it is not. I am quite sure it is Mrs. Goddard. How stupid of
me! Is it not Mrs. Goddard?"

"If you are so positive," said the vicar, resorting to a form of defence generally learned
in the nursery, "why do you ask me?"

"I insist upon knowing, Augustin, is it, or is it not, Mrs. Goddard?"

"My dear, I positively refuse to answer any more questions," said the vicar with tardy firmness.

"Oh, it is no matter," retorted Mrs. Ambrose in complete triumph, "if it were not Mrs. Goddard
of course you would say so at once."

A form of argument so unanswerable, that the vicar hastily left the room feeling that he had
basely betrayed John's confidence, and muttering something about intolerable curiosity. Mrs.
Ambrose had vanquished her husband, as she usually did on those rare occasions when anything
approaching to a dispute arose between them. Having come to the conclusion that "it" was Mrs.
Goddard, the remainder of the secret needed no discovery. It was plain that John must be in
love with the tenant of the cottage, and it seemed likely that it would devolve upon Mrs. Ambrose
to clear up the matter. She was very fond of John and her first impression was that Mrs. Goddard,
whom she now again suspected of having foreign blood, had "led him on"--an impression which
the vicar had anticipated when he rashly resolved not to tell his wife John's secret. She knew
very well that the vicar must have told John his mind in regard to such an attachment, and
she easily concluded that he must have done so on the previous evening when John called him
into the study. But she had just won a victory over her husband, and she consequently felt
that he was weak, probably too weak to save the situation, and it was borne in upon her that
she ought to do something immediately. Unhappily she did not see quite clearly what was to
be done. She might go straight to Mrs. Goddard and accuse her of having engaged John's affections;
but the more she thought of that, the more diffident she grew in regard to the result of such
an interview. Curiosity had led her to a certain point, but caution prevented her from going
any further. Mrs. Ambrose was very cautious. The habit of living in a small place, feeling
that all her actions were watched by the villagers and duly commented upon by them, had made
her even more careful than she was by nature. It would be very unwise to bring about a scene
with Mrs. Goddard unless she were very sure of the result. Mrs. Goddard was hardly a friend.
In Mrs. Ambrose's opinion an acquaintance of two years and a half standing involving almost
daily meetings and the constant exchange of civilities did not constitute friendship. Nevertheless
the vicar's wife would have been ashamed to own that after such long continued intercourse
she was wholly ignorant of Mrs. Goddard's real character; especially as the latter had requested
the vicar to tell Mrs. Ambrose her story when she first appeared at Billingsfield. Moreover,
as her excitement at the victory she had gained over her husband began to subside, she found
herself reviewing mentally the events of the last few days. She remembered distinctly that
John had perpetually pursued Mrs. Goddard, and that although the latter seemed to find him
agreeable enough, she had never to Mrs. Ambrose's knowledge given him any of those open encouragements
in the way of smiles and signals, which in the good lady's mind were classified under the term
"flirting." Mrs. Ambrose's ideas of flirtation may have been antiquated; thirty years of Billingsfield
in the society of the Reverend Augustin had not contributed to their extension; but, on the
whole, they were just. Mrs. Goddard had not flirted with John. It is worthy of notice that
in proportion as the difficulties she would enter upon by demanding an explanation from Mrs.
Goddard seemed to grow in magnitude, she gradually arrived at the conclusion that it was John's
fault. Half an hour ago, in the flush of triumph she had indignantly denied that anything could
be John's fault. She now resolved to behave to him with great austerity. Such an occurrence
as his falling in love could not be passed over with indifference. It seemed best that he should
leave Billingsfield very soon.

John thought so too. Existence would not be pleasant now that the vicar knew his secret, and
he cursed the folly and curiosity which had led him to betray himself in order to find out
whether Mr. Juxon thought of marrying Mrs. Goddard. He had now resolved to return to Cambridge
at once and to work his hardest until the Tripos was over. He would then come back to Billingsfield
and, with his honours fresh upon him and the prospect of immediate success before him, he would
throw himself at Mrs. Goddard's feet. But of course he must have one farewell interview. Oh,
those farewell interviews! Those leave-takings, wherein often so much is taken without leave!

Accordingly at luncheon he solemnly announced his intention of leaving the vicarage on the
morrow. Mrs. Ambrose received the news with an equanimity which made John suspicious, for she
had heretofore constantly pressed him to extend his holiday, expressing the greatest solicitude
for his health. She now sat stony as a statue and said very coldly that she was sorry he had
to go so soon, but that, of course, it could not be helped. The vicar was moved by his wife's
apparent indifference. John, he said, might at least have stayed till the end of the promised
week; but at this suggestion Mrs. Ambrose darted at her husband a look so full of fierce meaning,
that the vicar relapsed into silence, returning to the consideration of bread and cheese and
a salad of mustard and cress. John saw the look and was puzzled; he did not believe the vicar
capable of going straight to Mrs. Ambrose with the story of the last night's interview. But
he was already so much disturbed that he did not attempt to explain to himself what was happening.

But when lunch was over, and he realised that he had declared his intention of leaving Billingsfield
on the next day, he saw that if he meant to see Mrs. Goddard before he left he must go to her
at once. He therefore waited until he heard Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose talking together in the sitting-room
and then slipped quietly out by the garden to the road.

He had no idea what he should say when he met Mrs. Goddard. He meant, of course, to let her
understand, or at least suppose, that he was leaving suddenly on her account, but he did not
know in the least how to accomplish it. He trusted that the words necessary to him would come
into his head spontaneously. His heart beat fast and he was conscious that he blushed as he
rang the bell of the cottage. Almost before he knew where he was, he found himself ushered
into the little drawing-room and in the presence of the woman he now felt sure that he loved.
But to his great annoyance she was not alone; Nellie was with her. Mrs. Goddard sat near the
fire, reading a review; Nellie was curled up in a corner of the deep sofa with a book, her
thick brown curls falling all over her face and hands as she read. Mrs. Goddard extended her
hand, without rising.

"How do you do, Mr. Short?" she said. The young man stood hat in hand in the middle of the
room, feeling very nervous. It was strange that he should experience any embarrassment now,
considering how many hours he had spent in her company during the last few days. He blushed
and stammered.

"How do you do? I, in fact--I have come to say good-bye," he blurted out.

"So soon?" said Mrs. Goddard calmly. "Pray sit down."

"Are you really going away, Mr. Short?" asked Nellie. "We are so sorry to lose you." The child
had caught the phrase from a book she had been reading, and thought it very appropriate. Her
mother smiled.

"Yes--as Nellie says--we are sorry to lose you," she said. "I thought you were to stay until
Monday?"

"So I was--but--very urgent business--not exactly business of course, but work--calls me away
sooner." Having delivered himself of this masterpiece of explanation John looked nervously
at Nellie and then at his hat and then, with an imploring glance, at Mrs. Goddard.

"But we shall hear of you, Mr. Short--after the examinations, shall we not?"

"Oh yes," said John eagerly. "I will come down as soon as the lists are out."

"You have my best wishes, you know," said Mrs. Goddard kindly. "I feel quite sure that you
will really be senior classic."

"Mamma is always saying that--it is quite true," explained Nellie.

John blushed again and looked gratefully at Mrs. Goddard. He wished Nellie would go away, but
there was not the least chance of that.

"Yes," said Mrs. Goddard, "I often say it. We all take a great interest in your success here."

"You are very kind," murmured John. "Of course I shall come down at once and tell you all about
it, if I succeed. I do not really expect to be first, of course. I shall be satisfied if I
get a place in the first ten. But I mean to do my best."

"No one can do more," said Mrs. Goddard, leaning back in her chair and looking into the fire.
Her face was quiet, but not sad as it sometimes was. There was a long silence which John did
not know how to break. Nellie sat upon a carved chair by the side of the fireplace dangling
her legs and looking at her toes, turning them alternately in and out. She wished John would
go for she wanted to get back to her book, but had been told it was not good manners to read
when there were visitors. John looked at Mrs. Goddard's face and was about to speak, and then
changed his mind and grew red and said nothing. Had she noticed his shyness she would have
made an effort at conversation, but she was absent-minded to-day, and was thinking of something
else. Suddenly she started and laughed a little.

"I beg your pardon," she said. "What were you saying, Mr. Short?" Had John been saying anything
he would have repeated it, but being thus interrogated he grew doubly embarrassed.

"I--I have not much to say--except good-bye," he answered.

"Oh, don't go yet," said Mrs. Goddard. "You are not going this afternoon? It is always so unpleasant
to say good-bye, is it not?"

"Dreadfully," answered John. "I would rather say anything else in the world. No; I am going
early to-morrow morning. There is no help for it," he added desperately. "I must go, you know."

"The next time you come, you will be able to stay much longer," said Mrs. Goddard in an encouraging
way. "You will have no more terms, then."

"No indeed--nothing but to take my degree."

"And what will you do then? You said the other day that you thought seriously of going into
the church."

"Oh mamma," interrupted Nellie suddenly looking up, "fancy Mr. Short in a black gown, preaching
like Mr. Ambrose! How perfectly ridiculous he would look!"

"Nellie--Nellie!" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard, "do not talk nonsense. It is very rude to say Mr.
Short would look ridiculous."

"I didn't mean to be rude, mamma," returned Nellie, blushing scarlet and pouting her lips,
"only it would be very funny, wouldn't it?"

"I daresay it would," said John, relieved by the interruption. "I wish you would advise me
what to do, Mrs. Goddard," he added in a confidential tone.

"I?" she exclaimed, and then laughed. "How should I be able to advise you?"

"I am sure you could," said John, insisting. "You have such wonderfully good judgment--"

"Have I? I did not know it. But, tell me, if you come out very high are you not sure of getting
a fellowship?"

"It is likely," answered John indifferently. "But I should have to give it up if I married--"

"Surely, Mr. Short," cried Mrs. Goddard, with a laugh that cut him to the quick, "you do not
think of marrying for many years to come?"

"Oh--I don't know," he said, blushing violently, "why should not I?"

"In the first place, a man should never marry until he is at least five and twenty years old,"
said Mrs. Goddard, calmly.

"Well--I may be as old as that before I get the fellowship."

"Yes, I daresay. But even then, why should you want to resign a handsome independence as soon
as you have got it? Is there anything else so good within your reach?"

"There is the church, of course," said John. "But Miss Nellie seems to think that ridiculous--"

"Never mind Nellie," answered Mrs. Goddard. "Seriously, Mr. Short, do you approve of entering
the church merely as a profession, a means of earning money?"

"Well--no--I did not put it in that way. But many people do."

"That does not prove that it is either wise or decent," said Mrs. Goddard. "If you felt impelled
to take orders from other motives, it would be different. As I understand you, you are choosing
a profession for the sake of becoming independent."

"Certainly," said John.

"Well, then, there is nothing better for you to do than to get a fellowship and hold it as
long as you can, and during that time you can make up your mind." She spoke with conviction,
and the plan seemed good. "But I cannot imagine," she continued, "why you should ask my advice."

"And not to marry?" inquired John nervously.

"There is plenty of time to think of that when you are thirty--even five and thirty is not
too late."

"Dear me!" exclaimed John, "I think that is much too old!"

"Do you call me old?" asked Mrs. Goddard serenely. "I was thirty-one on my last birthday."

For the twentieth time, John felt himself growing uncomfortably hot. Not only had he said an
unconscionably stupid thing, but Mrs. Goddard, after advising him not to marry for ten years,
had almost hinted that she might meanwhile be married herself. What else could she mean by
the remark? But John was hardly a responsible being on that day. His views of life and his
understanding were equally disturbed.

"No indeed," he protested on hearing her confession of age. "No indeed--why, you are the youngest
person I ever saw, of course. But with men--it is quite different."

"Is it? I always thought women were supposed to grow old faster than men. That is the reason
why women always marry men so much older than themselves."

"Oh--in that case--I have nothing more to say," replied John in very indistinct tones. The
perspiration was standing upon his forehead; the room swam with him and he felt a terrible,
prickly sensation all over his body.

"Mamma, shan't I open the door? Mr. Short is so very hot," said Nellie looking at him in some
astonishment. At that moment John felt as though he could have eaten little Nellie, long legs,
ringlets and all, with infinite satisfaction. He rose suddenly to his feet.

"The fact is--it is late--I must really be saying good-bye," he stammered.

"Must you?" said Mrs. Goddard, suspecting that something was the matter. "Well, I am very sorry
to say good-bye. But you will be coming back soon, will you not?"

"Yes--I don't know--perhaps I shall not come back at all. Good-bye--Mrs. Goddard--good-bye,
Miss Nellie."

"Good-bye, Mr. Short," said Mrs. Goddard, looking at him with some anxiety. "You are not ill?
What is the matter?"

"Oh dear no, nothing," answered John with an unnatural laugh. "No thank you--good-bye."

He managed to get out of the door and rushed down to the road. The cold air steadied his nerves.
He felt better. With a sudden revulsion of feeling, he began to utter inward imprecations against
his folly, against the house he had just left, against everybody and everything in general,
not forgetting poor little Nellie.

"If ever I cross that threshold again--" he muttered with tragic emphasis. His face was still
red, and he swung his stick ferociously as he strode towards the vicarage. Several little boys
in ragged smock-frocks saw him and thought he had had some beer, even as their own fathers,
and made vulgar gestures when his back was turned.

So poor John packed his portmanteau and left the vicarage early on the following morning. He
sent an excuse to Mr. Juxon explaining that the urgency of his work called him back sooner
than he had expected, and when the train moved fairly off towards Cambridge he felt that in
being spared the ordeal of shaking hands with his rival he had at least escaped some of the
bitterness of his fate; as he rolled along he thought very sadly of all that had happened in
that short time which was to have been so gay and which had come to such a miserable end.

Reflecting calmly upon his last interview with Mrs. Goddard, he was surprised to find that
his memory failed him. He could not recall anything which could satisfactorily account for
the terrible disappointment and distress he had felt. She had only said that she was thirty-one
years old, precisely as the vicar had stated on the previous evening, and she had advised him
not to marry for some years to come. But she had laughed, and his feelings had been deeply
wounded--he could not tell precisely at what point in the conversation, but he was quite certain
that she had laughed, and oh! that terrible Nellie! It was very bitter, and John felt that
the best part of his life was lived out. He went back to his books with a dark and melancholy
tenacity of purpose, flavoured by a hope that he might come to some sudden and awful end in
the course of the next fortnight, thereby causing untold grief and consternation to the hard-hearted
woman he had loved. But before the fortnight had expired he found to his surprise that he was
intensely interested in his work, and once or twice he caught himself wondering how Mrs. Goddard
would look when he went back to Billingsfield and told her he had come out at the head of the
classical Tripos--though, of course, he had no intention of going there, nor of ever seeing
her again.

CHAPTER XI.

Mr. Juxon was relieved to hear that John Short had suddenly gone back to Cambridge. He had
indeed meant to like him from the first and had behaved towards him with kindness and hospitality;
but while ready to admire his good qualities and to take a proper amount of interest in his
approaching contest for honours, he had found him a troublesome person to deal with and, in
his own words, a nuisance. Matters had come to a climax after the tea at the cottage, when
the squire had so completely vanquished him, but since that evening the two had not met.

The opposition which John brought to bear against Mr. Juxon was not, however, without its effect.
The squire was in that state of mind in which a little additional pressure sufficed to sway
his resolutions. It has been seen that he had for some time regarded Mrs. Goddard's society
as an indispensable element in his daily life; he had been so much astonished at discovering
this that he had absented himself for several days and had finally returned ready to submit
to his fate, in so far as his fate required that he should see Mrs. Goddard every day. Shortly
afterwards John had appeared and by his persistent attempts to monopolise Mrs. Goddard's conversation
had again caused an interruption in the squire's habits, which the latter had resented with
characteristic firmness. The very fact of having resisted John had strengthened and given a
new tone to Mr. Juxon's feelings towards his tenant. He began to watch the hands of the clock
with more impatience than formerly when, after breakfast, he sat reading the papers before
the library fire, waiting for the hour when he was accustomed to go down to the cottage. His
interest in the papers decreased as his interest in the time of day grew stronger, and for
the first time in his life he found to his great surprise that after reading the news of the
day with the greatest care, he was often quite unable to remember a word of what he had read.
Then, at first, he would be angry with himself and would impose upon himself the task of reading
the paper again before going to the cottage. But very soon he found that he had to read it
twice almost every day, and this seemed such an unreasonable waste of time that he gave it
up, and fell into very unsystematic habits.

For some days, as though by mutual consent, neither Mrs. Goddard nor the squire spoke of John
Short. The squire was glad he was gone and hoped that he would not come back, but was too kind-hearted
to say so; Mrs. Goddard instinctively understood Mr. Juxon's state of mind and did not disturb
his equanimity by broaching an unpleasant subject. Several days passed by after John had gone
and he would certainly not have been flattered had he known that during that time two, out
of the four persons he had met so often in his short holiday, had never so much as mentioned him.

One afternoon in January the squire found himself alone with Mrs. Goddard. It was a great exception,
and she herself doubted whether she were wise to receive him when she had not Nellie with her.
Nellie had gone to the vicarage to help Mrs. Ambrose with some work she had in hand for her
poor people, but Mrs. Goddard had a slight headache and had stayed at home in consequence.
The weather was very bad; heavy clouds were driving overhead and the north-east wind howled
and screamed through the leafless oaks of the park, driving a fine sleet against the cottage
windows and making the dead creepers rattle against the wall. It was a bitter January day,
and Mrs. Goddard felt how pleasant a thing it was to stay at home with a book beside her blazing
fire. She was all alone, and Nellie would not be back before four o'clock. Suddenly a well-known
step echoed upon the slate flags without and there was a ring at the bell. Mrs. Goddard had
hardly time to think what she should do, as she laid her book upon her knee and looked nervously
over her shoulder towards the door. It was awkward, she thought, but it could not be helped.
In such weather it seemed absurd to send the squire away because her little girl was not with
her. He had come all the way down from the Hall to spend this dreary afternoon at the cottage--she
could not send him away. There were sounds in the passage as of some one depositing a waterproof
coat and an umbrella, the door opened and Mr. Juxon appeared upon the threshold.

"Come in," said Mrs. Goddard, banishing her scruples as soon as she saw him. "I am all alone,"
she added rather apologetically. The squire, who was a simple man in many ways, understood
the remark and felt slightly embarrassed.

"Is Miss Nellie out?" he asked, coming forward and taking Mrs. Goddard's hand. He had not yet
reached the point of calling the child plain "Nellie;" he would have thought it an undue familiarity.

"She is gone to the vicarage," answered Mrs. Goddard. "What a dreadful day! You must be nearly
frozen. Will you have a cup of tea?"

"No thanks--no, you are very kind. I have had a good walk; I am not cold--never am. As you
say, in such weather I could not resist the temptation to come in. This is a capital day to
test that India-rubber tubing we have put round your windows. Excuse me--I will just look and
see if the air comes through."

Mr. Juxon carefully examined the windows of the sitting-room and then returned to his seat.

"It is quite air-tight, I think," he said with some satisfaction, as he smoothed his hair with
his hand.

"Oh, quite," said Mrs. Goddard. "It was so very good of you."

"Not a bit of it," returned the squire cheerily. "A landlord's chief pre-occupation ought to
be the comfort of his tenants and his next thought should be to keep his houses in repair.
I never owned any houses before, so I have determined to start with good principles."

"I am sure you succeed. You walked down?"

"Always walk, in any weather. It is much less trouble and much cheaper. Besides, I like it."

"The best of all reasons. Then you will not have any tea? I almost wish you would, because
I want some myself."

"Oh of course--in that case I shall be delighted. Shall I ring?"

He rang and Martha brought the tea. Some time was consumed in the preparations which Mr. Juxon
watched with interest as though he had never seen tea made before. Everything that Mrs. Goddard
did interested him.

"I do not know why it is," she said at last, "but weather like this is delightful when one
is safe at home. I suppose it is the contrast--"

"Yes indeed. It is like the watch below in dirty-weather."

"Excuse me--I don't quite understand--"

"At sea," explained the squire. "There is no luxury like being below when the decks are wet
and there is heavy weather about."

"I should think so," said Mrs. Goddard. "Have you been at sea much, Mr. Juxon?"

"Thirty years," returned the squire laconically. Mrs. Goddard looked at him in astonishment.

"You don't mean to say you have been a sailor all your life?"

"Does that surprise you? I have been a sailor since I was twelve years old. But I got very
tired of it. It is a hard life."

"Were you in the navy, Mr. Juxon?" asked Mrs. Goddard eagerly, feeling that she was at last
upon the track of some information in regard to his past life.

"Yes--I was in the navy," answered the squire, slowly. "And then I was at college, and then
in the navy again. At last I entered the merchant service and commanded my own ships for nearly
twenty years."

"How very extraordinary! Why then, you must have been everywhere."

"Very nearly. But I would much rather be in Billingsfield."

"You never told me," said Mrs. Goddard almost reproachfully. "What a change it must have been
for you, from the sea to the life of a country gentleman!"

"It is what I always wanted."

"But you do not seem at all like the sea captains one hears about--"

"Well, perhaps not," replied the squire thoughtfully. "There are a great many different classes
of sea captains. I always had a taste for books. A man can read a great deal on a long voyage.
I have sometimes been at sea for more than two years at a time. Besides, I had a fairly good
education and--well, I suppose it was because I was a gentleman to begin with and was more
than ten years in the Royal Navy. All that makes a great difference. Have you ever made a long
voyage, Mrs. Goddard?"

"I have crossed the channel," said she. "But I wish you would tell me something more about
your life."

"Oh no--it is very dull, all that. You always make me talk about myself," said the squire in
a tone of protestation.

"It is very interesting."

"But--could we not vary the conversation by talking about you a little?" suggested Mr. Juxon.

"Oh no! Please--" exclaimed Mrs. Goddard rather nervously. She grew pale and busied herself
again with the tea. "Do tell me more about your voyages. I suppose that was the way you collected
so many beautiful things, was it not?"

"Yes, I suppose so," answered the squire, looking at her curiously. "In fact of course it was.
I was a great deal in China and South America and India, and in all sorts of places where one
picks up things."

"And in Turkey, too, where you got Stamboul?"

"Yes. He was so wet that I left him outside to day. Did not want to spoil your carpet."

The squire had a way of turning the subject when he seemed upon the point of talking about
himself which was very annoying to Mrs. Goddard. But she had not entirely recovered her equanimity
and for the moment had lost control of the squire. Besides she had a headache that day.

"Stamboul does not get the benefit of the contrast we were talking about at first," she remarked,
in order to say something.

"I could not possibly bring him in," returned the squire looking at her again. "Excuse me,
Mrs. Goddard--I don't mean to be inquisitive you know, but--I always want to be of any use."

She looked at him inquiringly.

"I mean, to be frank, I am afraid that something is giving you trouble. I have noticed it for
some time. You know, if I can be of any use, if I can help you in any way--you have only to
say the word."

Again she looked at him. She did not know why it was so, but the genuinely friendly tone in
which he made the offer touched her. She was surprised, however; she could not understand why
he should think she was in trouble, and indeed she was in no greater distress than she had
suffered during the greater part of the last three years.

"You are very kind, Mr. Juxon. But there is nothing the matter--I have a headache."

"Oh," said the squire, "I beg your pardon." He looked away and seemed embarrassed.

"You have done too much already," said Mrs. Goddard, fearing that she had not sufficiently
acknowledged his offer of assistance.

"I cannot do too much. That is impossible," he said in a tone of conviction. "I have very few
friends, Mrs. Goddard, and I like to think that you are one of the best of them."

"I am sure--I don't know what to say, Mr. Juxon," she answered, somewhat startled by the directness
of his speech. "I am sure you have always been most kind, and I hope you do not think me ungrateful."

"I? You? No--dear me, please never mention it! The fact is, Mrs. Goddard--" he stopped and
smoothed Ms hair. "What particularly disagreeable weather," he remarked irrelevantly, looking
out of the window at the driving sleet.

Mrs. Goddard looked down and slowly stirred her tea. She was pale and her hand trembled a little,
but no one could have guessed that she was suffering any strong emotion. Mr. Juxon looked towards
the window, and the grey light of the winter's afternoon fell coldly upon his square sunburned
face and carefully trimmed beard. He was silent for a moment, and then, still looking away
from his companion, he continued in a less hesitating tone.

"The fact is, I have been thinking a great deal of late," he said, "and it has struck me that
your friendship has grown to be the most important thing in my life." He paused again and turned
his hat round upon his knee. Still Mrs. Goddard said nothing, and as he did not look at her
he did not perceive that she was unnaturally agitated.

"I have told you what my life has been," he continued presently. "I have been a sailor. I made
a little money. I finally inherited my uncle's estate here. I will tell you anything else you
would like to ask--I don't think I ever did anything to conceal. I am forty-two years old.
I have about five thousand a year and I am naturally economical. I would like to make you a
proposal--a very respectful proposal, Mrs. Goddard--"

Mrs. Goddard uttered a faint exclamation of surprise and fell back in her chair, staring with
wide eyes at the squire, her cheeks very pale and her lips white. He was too much absorbed
in what he was saying to notice the short smothered ejaculation, and he was too much embarrassed
to look at her.

"Mrs. Goddard," he said, his voice trembling slightly, "will you marry me?"

He was not prepared for the result of his speech. He had pondered it for some time and had
come to the conclusion that it was best to say as little as possible and to say it plainly.
It was an honourable proposal of marriage from a man in middle life to a lady he had known
and respected for many months; there was very little romance about it; he did not intend that
there should be any. As soon as he had spoken he turned his head and looked to her for his
answer. Mrs. Goddard had clasped her small white hands over her face and had turned her head
away from him against the cushion of the high backed chair. The squire felt very uncomfortable
in the dead silence, broken only by the sleet driving against the window panes with a hissing,
rattling sound, and by the singing of the tea-kettle. For some seconds, which to Juxon seemed
like an eternity, Mrs. Goddard did not move. At last she suddenly dropped her hands and looked
into the squire's eyes. He was startled by the ashen hue of her face.

"It is impossible," she said, shortly, in broken tones. But the squire was prepared for some
difficulties.

"I do not see the impossibility," he said quite calmly. "Of course, I would not press you for
an answer, my dear Mrs. Goddard. I am afraid I have been very abrupt, but I will go away, I
will leave you to consider--"

"Oh no, no!" cried the poor lady in great distress. "It is quite impossible--I assure you it
is quite, quite impossible!"

"I don't know," said Mr. Juxon, who saw that she was deeply moved, but was loath to abandon
the field without a further struggle. "I am not a very young man, it is true--but I am not
a very old one either. You, my dear Mrs. Goddard, have been a widow for some years--"

"I?" cried Mrs. Goddard with a wild hysterical laugh. "I! Oh God of mercy! I wish I were."
Again she buried her face in the cushion. Her bosom heaved violently.

The squire started as though he had been struck, and the blood rushed to his brown face so
that the great veins on his temples stood out like cords.

"Did I--did I understand you to say that--your husband is living?" he asked in a strong, loud
voice, ringing with emotion.

Mrs. Goddard moved a little and seemed to make a great effort to speak.

"Yes," she said very faintly. The squire rose to his feet and paced the room in terrible agitation.

"But where?" he asked, stopping suddenly in his walk. "Mrs. Goddard, I think I have a right
to ask where he is--why you have never spoken of him?"

By a supreme effort the unfortunate lady raised herself from her seat supporting herself upon
one hand, and faced the squire with wildly staring eyes.

"You have a right to know," she said. "He is in Portland--sentenced to twelve years hard labour
for forgery."

She said it all, to the end, and then fell back into her chair. But she did not hide her face
this time. The fair pathetic features were quite motionless and white, without any expression,
and her hands lay with the palms turned upwards on her knees.

Charles James Juxon was a man of few words, not given to using strong language on any occasion.
But he was completely overcome by the horror of the thing. He turned icy cold as he stood still,
rooted to the spot, and he uttered aloud one strong and solemn ejaculation, more an invocation
than an oath, as though he called on heaven to witness the misery he looked upon. He gazed
at the colourless, inanimate face of the poor lady and walked slowly to the window. There he
stood for fully five minutes, motionless, staring out at the driving sleet.

Mrs. Goddard had fainted away, but it did not occur to the squire to attempt to recall her
to her senses. It seemed merciful that she should have lost consciousness even for a moment.
Indeed she needed no help, for in a few minutes she slowly opened her eyes and closed them,
then opened them again and saw Mr. Juxon's figure darkening the window against the grey light.

"Mr. Juxon," she said faintly, "come here, please."

The squire started and turned. Then he came and sat down beside her. His face was very stern
and grave, and he said nothing.

"Mr. Juxon," said Mrs. Goddard, speaking in a low voice, but with far more calm than he could
have expected, "you have a right to know my story. You have been very kind to me, you have
made an honourable offer to me, you have said you were my friend. I ought to have told you
before. If I had had any idea of what was passing in your mind, I would have told you, cost
what it might."

Mr. Juxon gravely bowed his head. She was quite right, he thought. He had a right to know all.
With all his kind-heartedness he was a stern man by nature.

"Yes," continued Mrs. Goddard, "you have every right to know. My husband," her voice trembled,
"was the head of an important firm in London. I was the only child of his partner. Not long
after my father's death I married Mr. Goddard. He was an extravagant man of brilliant tastes.
I had a small fortune of my own which my father had settled upon me, independent of his share
in the firm. My guardians, of whom my husband was one, advised me to leave my father's fortune
in the concern. When I came of age, a year after my marriage, I agreed to do it. My husband--I
never knew it till long afterwards--was very rash. He speculated on the Exchange and tampered
with the deposits placed in his hands. We lived in great luxury. I knew nothing of his affairs.
Three years ago, after we had been married nearly ten years, the firm failed. It was a fraudulent
bankruptcy. My husband fled but was captured and brought back. It appeared that at the last
moment, in the hope of retrieving his position and saving the firm, he had forged the name
of one of his own clients for a large amount. We had a country place at Putney which he had
given to me. I sold it, with all my jewels and most of my possessions. I would have given up
everything I possessed, but I thought of Nellie--poor little Nellie. The lawyers assured me
that I ought to keep my own little fortune. I kept about five hundred a year. It is more than
I need, but it seemed very little then. The lawyer who conducted the defence, such as it was,
advised me to go abroad, but I would not. Then he spoke of Mr. Ambrose, who had educated his
son, and gave me a note to him. I came here and I told Mr. Ambrose my whole story. I only wanted
to be alone--I thought I did right--"

Her courage had sustained her so far, but it had been a great effort. Her voice trembled and
broke and at last the tears began to glisten in her eyes.

"Does Nellie know?" asked the squire, who had sat very gravely by her side, but who was in
reality deeply moved.

"No--she thinks he--that he is dead," faltered Mrs. Goddard. Then she fairly burst into tears
and sobbed passionately, covering her face and rocking herself from side to side.

"My dear friend," said Mr. Juxon very kindly and laying one hand upon her arm, "pray try and
calm yourself. Forgive me--I beg you to forgive me for having caused you so much pain--"

"Do you still call me a friend?" sobbed the poor lady.

"Indeed I do," quoth the squire stoutly. And he meant it. Mrs. Goddard dropped her hands and
stared into the fire through her falling tears.

"I think you behaved very honourably--very generously," continued Mr. Juxon, who did not know
precisely how to console her, and indeed stood much in need of consolation himself. "Perhaps
I had better leave you--you are very much agitated--you must need rest--would you not rather
that I should go?"

"Yes--it is better," said she, still staring at the fire. "You know all about me now," she
added in a tone of pathetic regret. The squire rose to his feet.

"I hope," he said with some hesitation, "that this--this very unfortunate day will not prevent
our being friends--better friends than before?"

Mrs. Goddard looked up gratefully through her tears.

"How good you are!" she said softly.

"Not at all--I am not at all good--I only want to be your friend. Good-bye--G--God bless you!"
He seized her hand and squeezed it and then hurried out of the room. A moment later he was
crossing the road with Stamboul, who was very tired of waiting, bounding before him.

The squire was not a romantic character. He was a strong plain man, who had seen the world
and was used to most forms of danger and to a good many forms of suffering. He was kind-hearted
and generous, capable of feeling sincere sympathy for others, and under certain circumstances
of being deeply wounded himself. He had indeed a far more refined nature than he himself suspected
and on this memorable day he had experienced more emotions than he remembered to have felt
in the course of many years.

After long debate and after much searching inquiry into his own motives he had determined to
offer himself to Mrs. Goddard, and he had accordingly done so in his own straightforward manner.
It had seemed a very important action in his life, a very solemn step, but he was not prepared
for the acute sense of disappointment which he felt when Mrs. Goddard first said it was impossible
for her to accept him, still less had he anticipated the extraordinary story which she had
told him, in explanation of her refusal. His ideas were completely upset. That Mrs. Goddard
was not a widow after all, was almost as astounding as that she should prove to be the wife
of a felon. But Mr. Juxon was no less persuaded that she herself was a perfectly good and noble
woman, than he had been before. He felt that he would like to cut the throat of the villain
himself; but he resolved that he would more than ever try to be a good friend to Mrs. Goddard.

He walked slowly through the storm towards his house, his broad figure facing the wind and
sleet with as much ease as a steamer forging against a head sea. He was perfectly indifferent
to the weather; but Stamboul slunk along at his heels, shielding himself from the driving wet
snow behind his master's sturdy legs. The squire was very much disturbed. The sight of his
own solemn butler affected him strangely. He stared about the library in a vacant way, as though
he had never seen the place before. The realisation of his own calm and luxurious life seemed
unnatural, and his thoughts went back to the poor weeping woman he had just left. She, too,
had enjoyed all this, and more also. She had probably been richer than he. And now she was
living on five hundred a year in one of his own cottages, hiding her shame in desolate Billingsfield,
the shame of her husband, the forger.

It was such a hopeless position, the squire thought. No one could help her, no one could do
anything for her. For many weeks, revolving the situation in his mind, he had amused himself
by thinking how she would look when she should be mistress of the Hall, and wondering whether
little Nellie would call him "father," or merely "Mr. Juxon." And now, she turned out to be
the wife of a forger, sentenced to hard labour in a convict prison, for twelve years. For twelve
years--nearly three must have elapsed already. In nine years more Goddard would be out again.
Would he claim his wife? Of course--he would come back to her for support. And poor little
Nellie thought he was dead! It would be a terrible day when she had to be told. If he only
would die in prison!--but men sentenced to hard labour rarely die. They are well cared for.
It is a healthy life. He would certainly live through it and come back to claim his wife. Poor
Mrs. Goddard! her troubles were not ended yet, though the State had provided her with a respite
of twelve years.

The squire sat long in his easy-chair in the great library, and forgot to dress for dinner--he
always dressed, even though he was quite alone. But the solemn face of his butler betrayed
neither emotion nor surprise when the master of the Hall walked into the dining-room in his
knickerbockers.

CHAPTER XII.

When Nellie came home from the vicarage she found her mother looking very ill. There were dark
rings under her eyes, and her features were drawn and tear-stained, while the beautiful waves
of her brown hair had lost their habitual neatness and symmetry. The child noticed these things,
with a child's quickness, but explained them on the ground that her mother's headache was probably
much worse. Mrs. Goddard accepted the explanation and on the following day Nellie had forgotten
all about it; but her mother remembered it long, and it was many days before she recovered
entirely from the shock of her interview with the squire. The latter did not come to see her
as usual, but on the morning after his visit he sent her down a package of books and some orchids
from his hothouses. He thought it best to leave her to herself for a little while; the very
sight of him, he argued, would be painful to her, and any meeting with her would be painful
to himself. He did not go out of the house, but spent the whole day in his library among his
books, not indeed reading, but pretending to himself that he was very busy. Being a strong
and sensible man he did not waste time in bemoaning his sorrows, but he thought about them
long and earnestly. The more he thought, the more it appeared to him that Mrs. Goddard was
the person who deserved pity rather than he himself. His mind dwelt on the terrors of her position
in case her husband should return and claim his wife and daughter when the twelve years were
over, and he thought with horror of Nellie's humiliation, if at the age of twenty she should
discover that her father during all these years had not been honourably dead and buried, but
had been suffering the punishment of a felon in Portland. "The son of Madame la Marechale de
Devereux will always be most welcome to me!" Then, turning towards us, she pointed to two stools,
and, while we were seating ourselves, said,--

"And how did you leave my excellent friend?"

"When, Madame, I last saw my mother, which is now nearly a year ago, she was in health, and
consoling herself for the advance of years by that tendency to wean the thoughts from this world
which (in her own language) is the divinest comfort of old age!"

"Admirable woman!" said Madame de Maintenon, casting down her eyes; "such are indeed the sentiments
in which I recognize the Marechale. And how does her beauty wear? Those golden locks, and blue
eyes, and that snowy skin, are not yet, I suppose, wholly changed for an adequate compensation
of the beauties within?"

"Time, Madame, has been gentle with her; and I have often thought, though never perhaps more
strongly than at this moment, that there is in those divine studies, which bring calm and light
to the mind, something which preserves and embalms, as it were, the beauty of the body."

A faint blush passed over the face of the devotee.

No, no,--not even at eighty years of age is a compliment to a woman's beauty misplaced! There
was a slight pause. I thought that respect forbade me to break it.

"His Majesty," said the Bishop, in the tone of one who is sensible that he encroaches a little,
and does it with consequent reverence, "his Majesty, I hope, is well?"

"God be thanked, yes, as well as we can expect. It is now nearly the hour in which his Majesty
awaits your personal inquiries."

Fleuri bowed as he answered,--

"The King, then, will receive us to-day? My young companion is very desirous to see the greatest
monarch, and, consequently, the greatest man, of the age."

"The desire is natural," said Madame de Maintenon; and then, turning
to me, she asked if I had yet seen King James the Third.

I took care, in my answer, to express that even if I had resolved to make that stay in Paris
which allowed me to pay my respects to him at all, I should have deemed that both duty and inclination
led me, in the first instance, to offer my homage to one who was both the benefactor of my father
and the monarch whose realms afforded me protection.

"You have not, then," said Madame de Maintenon, "decided on the length of your stay in France?"

"No,"
said I,--and my answer was regulated by my desire to see how far I might rely on the services
of one who expressed herself so warm a friend of that excellent woman, Madame la Marechale,--"no,
Madame. France is the country of my birth, if England is that of my parentage; and could I hope
for some portion of that royal favour which my father enjoyed, I would rather claim it as the
home of my hopes than the refuge of my exile. But"--and I stopped short purposely.

The old lady looked at me very earnestly through her spectacles for one moment, and then, hemming
twice with a little embarrassment, again remarked to the Bishop that the time for seeing the King
was nearly arrived. Fleuri, whose policy at that period was very like that of the concealed
Queen, and who was, besides, far from desirous of introducing any new claimants on Madame de
Maintenon's official favour, though he might not object to introduce them to a private friend,
was not slow in taking the hint. He rose, and I was forced to follow his example.

Madame de Maintenon thought she might safely indulge in a little cordiality when I was just
on the point of leaving her, and accordingly blessed me, and gave me her hand, which I kissed
very devoutly. An extremely pretty hand it was, too, notwithstanding the good Queen's age.
We then retired, and, repassing the three ladies, who were now all yawning, repaired to the King's
apartments.

"What think you of Madame?" asked Fleuri.

"What can I think of her," said I, cautiously, "but that greatness seems in her to take its
noblest form,--that of simplicity?"

"True," rejoined Fleuri; "never was there so meek a mind joined to so lowly a carriage! Do you remark
any trace of former beauty?"

"Yes, indeed, there is much that is soft in her countenance, and much that is still regular in
her features; but what struck me most was the pensive and even sad tranquillity that rests
upon her face when she is silent."

"The expression betrays the mind," answered Fleuri; "and the curse of the great is /ennui/."

"Of the great in station," said I, "but not necessarily of the great in mind. I have heard
that the Bishop of Frejus, notwithstanding his rank and celebrity, employs every hour to the
advantage of others, and consequently without tedium to himself."

"Aha!" said Fleuri, smiling gently and patting my cheek: "see now if the air of palaces is not
absolutely prolific of pretty speeches." And, before I could answer, we were in the apartments
of the King.

Leaving me a while to cool my heels in a gallery, filled with the butterflies who bask in the
royal sunshine, Frejus then disappeared among the crowd; he was scarcely gone when I was agreeably
surprised by seeing Count Hamilton approach towards me.

"/Mort diable/!" said he, shaking me by the hand /a l'Anglaise/; "I am really delighted to
see any one here who does not insult my sins with his superior excellence. Eh, now, look round this
apartment for a moment! Whether would you believe yourself at the court of a great king or the /levee/
of a Roman cardinal! Whom see you chiefly? Gallant soldiers, with worn brows and glittering
weeds? wise statesmen with ruin to Austria and defiance to Rome in every wrinkle? gay nobles in
costly robes, and with the bearing that so nicely teaches mirth to be dignified and dignity to be
merry? No! cassock and hat, rosary and gown, decking sly, demure, hypocritical faces, flit,
and stalk, and sadden round us. It seems to me," continued the witty Count, in a lower whisper,
"as if the old king, having fairly buried his glory at Ramilies and Blenheim, had summoned all
these good gentry to sing psalms over it! But are you waiting for a private audience?"

"Yes, under the auspices of the Bishop of Frejus."

"You might have chosen a better guide: the King has been too much teased about him," rejoined
Hamilton; "and now that we are talking of him, I will show you a singular instance of what good
manners can do at court in preference to good abilities. You observe yon quiet, modest-looking
man, with a sensible countenance and a clerical garb; you observe how he edges away when any one approaches
to accost him; and how, from his extreme disesteem of himself, he seems to inspire every one
with the same sentiment. Well, that man is a namesake of Fleuri, the Prior of Argenteuil; he
has come here, I suppose, for some particular and temporary purpose, since, in reality, he
has left the court. Well, that worthy priest--do remark his bow; did you ever see anything so
awkward?--is one of the most learned divines that the Church can boast of; he is as immeasurably
superior to the smooth-faced Bishop of Frejus as Louis the Fourteenth is to my old friend Charles
the Second. He has had equal opportunities with the said Bishop; been preceptor to the princes of
Conti and the Count de Vermandois; and yet I will wager that he lives and dies a tutor, a bookworm--and
a prior; while t' other Fleuri, without a particle of merit but of the most superficial order,
governs already kings through their mistresses, kingdoms through the kings, and may, for aught I
know, expand into a prime minister and ripen into a cardinal."

"Nay," said I, smiling, "there is little chance of so exalted a lot for the worthy Bishop."

"Pardon me," interrupted Hamilton, "I am an old courtier, and look steadily on the game I no
longer play. Suppleness, united with art, may do anything in a court like this; and the smooth
and unelevated craft of a Fleuri may win even to the same height as the deep wiles of the glittering
Mazarin, or the superb genius of the imperious Richelieu."

"Hist!" said I, "the Bishop has reappeared. Who is that old priest with a fine countenance and
an address that will, at least, please you better than that of the Prior of Argenteuil, who has
just stopped our episcopal courtier?"

"What! do you not know?

It is the most celebrated preacher of the day,--the great Massillon. It is said that that
handsome person goes a great way towards winning converts among the court ladies; it is certain, at
least, that when Massillon first entered the profession he was to the soul something like the
spear of Achilles to the body; and, though very efficacious in healing the wounds of conscience,
was equally ready in the first instance to inflict them."

"Ah," said I, "see the malice of wit; and see, above all, how much more ready one is to mention
a man's frailties than to enlarge upon his virtues."

"To be sure," answered Hamilton, coolly, and patting his snuff-box,
"to be sure, we old people like history better than fiction; and frailty
is certain, while virtue is always doubtful."

"Don't judge of all people," said I, "by your experience among the courtiers of Charles the Second."

"Right,"
said Hamilton. "Providence never assembled so many rascals together
before without hanging them.

And he would indeed be a bad judge of human nature who estimated
the characters of men in general by the heroes of Newgate and the
victims of Tyburn.

But your Bishop approaches. Adieu!"

"What!" said Fleuri, joining me and saluting Hamilton, who had just
turned to depart, "what, Count Antoine!

Does anything but whim bring you here to-day?"

"No," answered Hamilton; "I am only here for the same purpose as the poor go to the temples of
Caitan,--/to inhale the steam of those good things which I see the
priests devour/."

"Ha! ha! ha!" laughed the good-natured Bishop, not in the least disconcerted;
and Count Hamilton, congratulating himself on his /bon mot/, turned
away.

"I have spoken to his Most Christian Majesty," said the Bishop; "he
is willing, as he before ordained, to admit you to his presence.

The Duc de Maine is with the King, as also some other members of
the royal family; but you will consider this a private audience."

I expressed my gratitude: we moved on; the doors of an apartment were thrown open; and I saw
myself in the presence of Louis XIV.

The room was partially darkened. In the centre of it, on a large sofa, reclined the King; he
was dressed (though this, if I may so speak, I rather remembered
than noted) in a coat of black velvet, slightly embroidered; his vest
was of white satin; he wore no jewels nor orders, for it was only
on grand or gala days that he displayed personal pomp.

At some little distance from him stood three members of the royal family; them I never regarded:
all my attention was bent upon the King. My temperament is not that on which greatness, or
indeed any external circumstances, make much impression; but as, following at a little distance
the Bishop of Frejus, I approached the royal person, I must confess that Bolingbroke had scarcely
need to have cautioned me not to appear too self-possessed. Perhaps, had I seen that great
monarch in his /beaux jours/; in the plenitude of his power, his
glory, the dazzling and meridian splendour of his person, his court,
and his renown,--pride might have made me more on my guard against
too deep, or at least too apparent, an impression; but the many reverses
of that magnificent sovereign,--reverses in which he had shown himself
more great than in all his previous triumphs and early successes;
his age, his infirmities, the very clouds round the setting sun, the
very howls of joy at the expiring lion,--all were calculated, in my
mind, to deepen respect into reverence, and tincture reverence itself
with awe.

I saw before me not only the majesty of Louis le Grand, but that of misfortune, of weakness, of
infirmity, and of age; and I forgot at once, in that reflection, what otherwise would have blunted
my sentiments of deference, namely, the crimes of his ministers and
the exactions of his reign.

Endeavouring to collect my mind from an embarrassment which surprised myself, I lifted my
eyes towards the King, and saw a countenance where the trace of the
superb beauty for which his manhood had been celebrated still lingered,
broken, not destroyed, and borrowing a dignity even more imposing
from the marks of encroaching years and from the evident exhaustion
of suffering and disease.

Fleuri said, in a low tone, something which my ear did not catch. There was a pause,--only a
moment's pause; and then, in a voice, the music of which I had hitherto deemed exaggerated,
the King spoke; and in that voice there was something so kind and
encouraging that I felt reassured at once.

Perhaps its tone was not the less conciliating from the evident effect
which the royal presence had produced upon me.

"You have given us, Count Devereux," said the King, "a pleasure which
we are glad, in person, to acknowledge to you.

And it has seemed to us fitting that the country in which your brave
father acquired his fame should also be the asylum of his son."

"Sire," answered I, "Sire, it shall not be my fault if that country
is not henceforth my own; and in inheriting my father's name, I inherit
also his gratitude and his ambition."

"It is well said, Sir," said the King; and I once more raised my eyes, and perceived that his were
bent upon me.

"It is well said," he repeated after a short pause; "and in granting to you this audience,
we were not unwilling to hope that you were desirous to attach yourself
to our court.

The times do not require"

(here I thought the old King's voice was not so firm as before) "the
manifestation of your zeal in the same career as that in which your
father gained laurels to France and to himself.

But we will not neglect to find employment for your abilities, if not for your sword."

"That sword which was given to me, Sire," said I, "by your Majesty,
shall be ever drawn (against all nations but one) at your command;
and, in being your Majesty's petitioner for future favours, I only
seek some channel through which to evince my gratitude for the past."

"We do not doubt," said Louis, "that whatever be the number of the
ungrateful we may make by testifying our good pleasure on your behalf,
/you/ will not be among the number."

The King here made a slight but courteous inclination and turned
round.

The observant Bishop of Frejus, who had retired to a little distance and who knew that the
King never liked talking more than he could help it, gave me a signal.

I obeyed, and backed, with all due deference, out of the royal presence.

So closed my interview with Louis XIV. Although his Majesty did not indulge in prolixity, I spoke
of him for a long time afterwards as the most eloquent of men.

Believe me, there is no orator like a king; one word from a royal mouth stirs the heart more
than Demosthenes could have done. There was a deep moral in that custom of the ancients, by which
the Goddess of Persuasion was always represented /with a diadem on her head/.

I HAD now been several weeks at Paris; I had neither eagerly sought
nor sedulously avoided its gayeties.

It is not that one violent sorrow leaves us without power of enjoyment;
it only lessens the power, and deadens the enjoyment: it does not
take away from us the objects of life; it only forestalls the more
indifferent calmness of age.

The blood no longer flows in an irregular but delicious course of vivid and wild emotion; the
step no longer spurns the earth; nor does the ambition wander, insatiable,
yet undefined, over the million paths of existence: but we lose not
our old capacities; they are quieted, not extinct.

The heart can never utterly and long be dormant: trifles may not
charm it any more, nor levities delight; but its pulse has not yet
ceased to beat.

We survey the scene that moves around, with a gaze no longer distracted by every hope that flutters
by; and it is therefore that we find ourselves more calculated than
before for the graver occupations of our race.

The overflowing temperament is checked to its proper level, the ambition
bounded to its prudent and lawful goal.

The earth is no longer so green, nor the heaven so blue, nor the fancy that stirs within us so
rich in its creations; but we look more narrowly on the living crowd, and more rationally on
the aims of men. The misfortune which has changed us has only adapted
us the better to a climate in which misfortune is a portion of the
air.

The grief that has thralled our spirit to a more narrow and dark cell has also been a change that
has linked us to mankind with a strength of which we dreamed not in the day of a wilder freedom
and more luxuriant aspirings. In later life, a new spirit, partaking of that which was our
earliest, returns to us.

The solitude which delighted us in youth, but which, when the thoughts that make solitude
a fairy land are darkened by affliction, becomes a fearful and sombre void, resumes its old spell,
as the more morbid and urgent memory of that affliction crumbles
away by time.

Content is a hermit; but so also is Apathy. Youth loves the solitary couch, which it surrounds
with dreams. Age, or Experience (which is the mind's age), loves the same couch for the rest
which it affords; but the wide interval between is that of exertion, of labour, and of labour
among men. The woe which makes our /hearts/ less social, often makes our /habits/ more so. The thoughts,
which in calm would have shunned the world, are driven upon it by the tempest, even as the birds
which forsake the habitable land can, so long as the wind sleeps and the thunder rests within
its cloud, become the constant and solitary brooders over the waste
sea: but the moment the storm awakes and the blast pursues them, they
fly, by an overpowering instinct, to some wandering bark, some vestige
of human and social life; and exchange, even for danger from the hands
of men, the desert of an angry Heaven and the solitude of a storm.

I heard no more either of Madame de Maintenon or the King. Meanwhile, my flight and friendship
with Lord Bolingbroke had given me a consequence in the eyes of the
exiled Prince which I should not otherwise have enjoyed; and I was
honoured by very flattering overtures to enter actively into his service.

I have before said that I felt no enthusiasm in his cause, and I was far from feeling it for his
person. My ambition rather directed its hope towards a career in the service of France. France
was the country of my birth, and the country of my father's fame. There no withering remembrances
awaited me; no private regrets were associated with its scenes, and no public penalties with
its political institutions. And although I had not yet received any token of Louis's remembrance,
in the ordinary routine of court favours expectation as yet would have been premature; besides,
his royal fidelity to his word was proverbial; and, sooner or later, I indulged the hope to profit
by the sort of promise he had insinuated to me.

I declined, therefore, with all due respect, the offers of the Chevalier,
and continued to live the life of idleness and expectation, until
Lord Bolingbroke returned to Paris, and accepted the office of secretary
of state in the service of the Chevalier.

As he has publicly declared his reasons in this step, I do not mean to favour the world with
his private conversations on the same subject.

A day or two after his return, I went with him to a party given by a member of the royal family.
The first person by whom we were accosted--and I rejoiced at it, for we could not have been accosted
by a more amusing one--was Count Anthony Hamilton.

"Ah! my Lord Bolingbroke," said he, sauntering up to us; "how are
you?--delighted to see you again.

Do look at Madame la Duchesse d'Orleans!

Saw you ever such a creature? Whither are you moving, my Lord? Ah! see him, Count, see him,
gliding off to that pretty duchess, of course; well, he has a beautiful
bow, it must be owned; why, you are not going too?--what would the
world say if Count Anthony Hamilton were seen left to himself?

No, no, come and sit down by Madame de Cornuel: she longs to be introduced to you, and is one of
the wittiest women in Europe."

"With all my heart! provided she employs her wit ill-naturedly, and uses it in ridiculing other
people, not praising herself."

"Oh! nobody can be more satirical; indeed, what difference is there between wit and satire? Come,
Count!"

And Hamilton introduced me forthwith to Madame de Cornuel. She received me very politely; and,
turning to two or three people who formed the circle round her, said, with the greatest composure,
"Messieurs, oblige me by seeking some other object of attraction;
I wish to have a private conference with my new friend."

"I may stay?" said Hamilton.

"Ah! certainly; you are never in the way."

"In that respect, Madame," said Hamilton, taking snuff, and bowing very low, "in that respect,
I must strongly remind you of your excellent husband."

"Fie!" cried Madame de Cornuel; then, turning to me, she said, "Ah! Monsieur, if you /could/ have
come to Paris some years ago, you would have been enchanted with
us: we are sadly changed. Imagine the fine old King thinkinj it wicked
not to hear plays, but to hear /players/ act them, and so making the
royal family a company of comedians. /Mon Dieu!/ how villanously they
perform! but do you know why I wished to be introduced to you?"

"Yes!
in order to have a new listener: old listeners must be almost as tedious
as old news."

"Very shrewdly said, and not far from the truth. The
fact is, that I wanted to talk about all these fine people present
to some one for whose ear my anecdotes would have the charm of novelty.
Let us begin with Louis Armand, Prince of Conti; you see him."

"What,
that short-sighted, stout, and rather handsome man, with a cast of
countenance somewhat like the pictures of Henri Quatre, who is laughing
so merrily?"

"/O Ciel/! how droll! No! that handsome man is no less
a person than the Duc d'Orleans. You see a little ugly thing like
an anatomized ape,--there, see,--he has just thrown down a chair,
and, in stooping to pick it up, has almost fallen over the Dutch ambassadress,--that
is Louis Armand, Prince of Conti. Do you know what the Duc d'Orleans
said to him the other day? '/Mon bon ami/,' he said, pointing to the
prince's limbs (did you ever see such limbs out of a menagerie, by
the by?) '/mon bon ami/, it is a fine thing for you that the Psalmist
has assured us "that the Lord delighteth not in any man's legs."'
Nay, don't laugh, it is quite true!"

It was now for Count Hamilton
to take up the ball of satire; he was not a whit more merciful than
the kind Madame de Cornuel. "The Prince," said he, "has so exquisite
an awkwardness that, whenever the King hears a noise, and inquires
the cause, the invariable answer is that 'the Prince of Conti has
just tumbled down'! But, tell me, what do you think of Madame d'Aumont?
She is in the English headdress, and looks /triste a la mort/."

"She
is rather pretty, to my taste."

"Yes," cried Madame de Cornuel, interrupting
the gentle Antoine (it did one's heart good to see how strenuously
each of them tried to talk more scandal than the other), "yes, she
is thought very pretty; but I think her very like a /fricandeau/,--white,
soft, and insipid. She is always in tears," added the good-natured
Cornuel, "after her prayers, both at morning and evening. I asked
why; and she answered, pretty simpleton, that she was always forced
to pray to be made good, and she feared Heaven would take her at her
word! However, she has many worshippers, and they call her the evening
star."

"They should rather call her the Hyades!" said Hamilton, "if
it be true that she sheds tears every morning and night, and her rising
and setting are thus always attended by rain."

"Bravo, Count Antoine!
she shall be so called in future," said Madame de Cornuel. "But now,
Monsieur Devereux, turn your eyes to that hideous old woman."

"What!
the Duchesse d'Orleans?"

"The same. She is in full dress to-night;
but in the daytime you generally see her in a riding habit and a man's
wig; she is--" But she drew back as from
a contamination. She was horrified, and it was a natural movement. She knew his voice even
better than his features, now that he spoke. He pressed nearer to her and she thrust him back
with her hands. Then suddenly a thought struck her; she took him by the sleeve and led him
into the dining-room. There was no light there; she pushed him in.

"Stay there one minute--"

"No--no, you won't call--"

"I will save you--there is--there is somebody in the drawing-room." Before he could answer
her she was gone, leaving him alone in the dark. He listened intently, not venturing to leave
the spot where she had placed him; he thought he heard voices and footsteps, but no one came
out into the passage. It seemed an eternity to wait. At last she came, bearing a lighted candle
in her hand. She carefully shut the door of the dining-room behind her and put the light upon
the table. She moved like a person in a dream.

"Sit down," she said, pointing to a chair. "Are you hungry?" His sunken eyes sparkled. She
brought food and ale and set them before him. He ate and drank voraciously in silence. She
sat at the opposite side of the table--the solitary candle between them, and shading her eyes
with one hand she gazed at his face.

Walter Goddard was a man at least forty years of age. He had been thought very handsome once.
He had light blue eyes and a fair skin with flaxen hair--now cropped short and close to his
head. There was nearly a fortnight's growth of beard upon his face, but it was not yet sufficient
to hide his mouth and chin. He had formerly worn a heavy moustache and it was chiefly the absence
of it which now made it hard for his wife to recognise him. A battered hat, drenched and dripping
with rain, shaded his brows. Possibly he was ashamed to remove it. His mouth was small and
weak and his jaw was pointed. His whole expression was singularly disagreeable--his hands were
filthy, and his face was not clean. About his neck was twisted a ragged woollen comforter,
and he wore a smock-frock which was now soaked with water and clung to his thin figure. He
devoured the food his wife had brought him, shivering from time to time as though he were still
cold.

Mrs. Goddard watched him in silence. She had done mechanically according to her first instinct,
had led him in and had given him food. But she had not recovered herself sufficiently from
her first horror and astonishment to realise her situation. At last she spoke.

"How did you escape?" she asked. He bent lower than before, over his plate and would not look
at her.

"Don't ask me," he answered shortly.

"Why did you do it?" she inquired again. Goddard laughed harshly; his voice was hoarse and cracked.

"Why did I do it!" he repeated. "Did you ever hear of any one who would not escape from prison
if he had the chance? Don't look at me like that, Mary--"

"I am sorry for you," she said.

"You don't seem very glad to see me," he answered roughly. "I might have known it."

"Yes, you might have known it."

It seemed a very hard and cruel thing to say, and Mary Goddard was very far from being a cruel
woman by nature; but she was stunned by fear and disgust and horrified by the possibilities
of harm suddenly brought before her.

Goddard pushed his plate away and leaned his elbows upon the table supporting his chin in his
hands. He scowled at her defiantly.

"You have given me a warm reception, after nearly three years of--separation." There was a
bitter sneer in the word.

"I am horrified to see you here," she said simply. "You know very well that I cannot conceal you--"

"Oh, I don't expect miracles," said Goddard contemptuously. "I don't know that, when I came
here, I expected to cause you any particularly agreeable sensation. I confess, when a woman
has not seen her beloved husband for three years, one might expect her to show a little feeling--"

"I will do what I can for you, Walter," said his wife, whose unnatural calm was fast yielding
to an overpowering agitation.

"Then give me fifty pounds and tell me the nearest way east," answered the convict savagely.

"I have not got fifty pounds in the house," protested Mary Goddard, in some alarm. "I never
keep much money--I can get it for you--"

"I have a great mind to look," returned her husband suspiciously. "How soon can you get it?"

"To-morrow night--the time to get a cheque cashed--"

"So you keep a banker's account?"

"Of course. But a cheque would be of no use to you--I wish it were!"

"Naturally you do. You would get rid of me at once." Suddenly his voice changed. "Oh, Mary--you
used to love me!" cried the wretched man, burying his face in his hands.

"I was very wrong," answered his wife, looking away from him. "You did not deserve it--you
never did."

"Because I was unfortunate!"

"Unfortunate!" repeated Mary Goddard with rising scorn. "Unfortunate--when you were deceiving
me every day of your life. I could have forgiven a great deal--Walter--but not that, not that!"

"What? About the money?" he asked with sudden fierceness.

"The money--no. Even though you were disgraced and convicted, Walter, I would have forgiven
that, I would have tried to see you, to comfort you. I should have been sorry for you; I would
have done what I could to help you. But I could not forgive you the rest; I never can."

"Bah! I never cared for her," said the convict. But under his livid skin there rose a faint
blush of shame.

"You never cared for me--that is the reason I--am not glad to see you--"

"I did, Mary. Upon my soul I did. I love you still!" He rose and came near to his wife, and
again he would have put his arm around her. But she sprang to her feet with an angry light
in her eyes.

"If you dare to touch me, I will give you up!" she cried. Goddard shrank back to his chair,
very pale and trembling violently.

"You would not do that, Mary," he almost whined. But she remained standing, looking at him
very menacingly.

"Indeed I would--you don't know me," she said, between her teeth.

"You are as hard as a stone," he answered, sullenly, and for some minutes there was silence
between them.

"I suppose you are going to turn me out into the rain again?" asked the convict.

"You cannot stay here--you are not safe for a minute. You will have to go. You must come back
to-morrow and I will give you the money. You had better go now--"

"Oh, Mary, I would not have thought it of you," moaned Goddard.

"Why--what else can I do? I cannot let you sleep in the house--I have no barn. If any one saw
you here it would be all over. People know about it--"

"What people?"

"The vicar and his wife and Mr. Juxon at the Hall."

"Mr. Juxon? What is he like? Would he give me up if he knew?"

"I think he would," said Mary Goddard, thoughtfully. "I am almost sure he would. He is the
justice of the peace here--he would be bound to."

"Do you know him?" Goddard thought he detected a slight nervousness in his wife's manner.

"Very well. This house belongs to him."

"Oh!" ejaculated the convict. "I begin to see."

"Yes--you see you had better go," said his wife innocently. "How can you manage to come here
tomorrow? You cannot go on without the money--"

"No--and I don't mean to," he answered roughly. Money was indeed an absolute necessity to him.
"Give me what you have got in the house, anyhow. You may think better of it to-morrow. I don't
trust people of your stamp."

Mary Goddard rose without a word and left the room. When she was gone the convict set himself
to finish the jug of ale she had brought, and looked about him. He saw objects that reminded
him of his former home. He examined the fork with which he had eaten and remembered the pattern
and the engraved initials as he turned it over in his hand. The very table itself had belonged
to his house--the carpet beneath his feet, the chair upon which he sat. It all seemed too unnatural
to be true. That very night, that very hour, he must go forth again into the wild February
weather and hide himself, leaving all these things behind him; leaving behind too his wife,
the woman he had so bitterly injured, but who was still his wife. It seemed impossible. Surely
he might stay if he pleased; it was not true that detectives were on his track--it was all
a dream, since that dreadful day when he had written that name, which was not his, upon a piece
of paper. He had waked up and was again at home. But he started as he heard a footstep in the
passage, being now accustomed to start at sounds which suggested pursuit; he started and he
felt the wet smock-frock, which was his disguise, clinging to him as he moved, and the reality
of the present returned to him with awful force. His wife again entered the room.

"There are over nine pounds," she said. "It is all I have." She laid the money upon the table
before him and remained standing. "You shall have the rest to-morrow," she added.

"Can't I see Nellie?" he asked suddenly. It was the first time he had spoken of his child.
Mrs. Goddard hesitated.

"No," she said at last. "You cannot see her now. She must not be told; she thinks you are dead.
You may catch a glimpse of her to-morrow--"

"Well--it is better she should not know, I suppose. You could not explain."

"No, Walter, I could not--explain. Come later to-morrow night--to the same window. I will undo
the shutters and give you the money." Mary Goddard was almost overcome with exhaustion. It
was a terrible struggle to maintain her composure under such circumstances; but necessity does
wonders. "Where will you sleep to-night?" she asked presently. She pitied the wretch from her
heart, though she longed to see him leave her house.

"I will get into the stables of some public-house. I pass for a tramp." There was a terrible
earnestness in the simple statement, which did more to make Mary Goddard realise her husband's
position than anything else could have done. To people who live in the country the word "tramp"
means so much.

"Poor Walter!" said Mrs. Goddard softly, and for the first time since she had seen him the
tears stood in her eyes.

"Don't waste your pity on me," he answered. "Let me be off."

There was half a loaf and some cheese left upon the table. Mrs. Goddard put them together and
offered them to him.

"You had better take it," she said. He took the food readily enough and hid it under his frock.
He knew the value of it. Then he got upon his feet. He moved painfully, for the cold and the
wet had stiffened his limbs already weakened with hunger and exhaustion.

"Let me be off," he said again, and moved towards the door. His wife followed him in silence.
In the passage he paused again.

"Well, Mary," he said, "I suppose I ought to be grateful to you for not giving me up to the
police."

"You know very well," answered Mrs. Goddard, "that what I can do to save you, I will do. You
know that."

"Then do it, and don't forget the money. It's hanging this time if I'm caught."

Mrs. Goddard uttered a low cry and leaned against the wall.

"What?" she faltered. "You have not--"

"I believe I killed somebody in getting away," answered the felon with a grim laugh. Then,
without her assistance, he opened the door and went out into the pouring rain. The door shut
behind him and Mary Goddard heard his retreating footsteps on the path outside. When he was
fairly gone she suddenly broke down, and falling upon her knees in the passage beat her forehead
against the wall in an agony of despair.

Murderer--thief, forger and murderer, too! It was more than she could bear. Even now he was
within a stone's throw of her house; a moment ago he had been here, beside her--there beyond,
too, in the dining-room, sitting opposite to her at her own table as he had sat in his days
of innocence and honour for many a long year before his crime. In the sudden necessity of acting,
in the unutterable surprise of finding herself again face to face with him, she had been calm;
now that he was gone she felt as though she must go mad. She asked herself if this filthy tramp,
this branded villain, was the husband she had loved and cherished for years, whose beauty she
had admired, whose hand she had held so often, whose lips she had kissed--if this was the father
of her lovely child. It was all over now. There was blood upon his hands as well as other guilt.
If he were caught he must die, or at the very least be imprisoned for life. He could never
again be free to come forth after the expiation of his crimes and to claim her and his child.
If he escaped now, it must be to live in a distant country under a perpetual disguise. If he
were caught, the news of his capture would be in all the papers, the news of his trial for
murder, the very details of his execution. The Ambroses would know and the squire, even the
country folk, would perhaps at last know the truth about her. Life even in the quiet spot she
had chosen would become intolerable, and she would be obliged to go forth again into a more
distant exile. She bitterly repented having written to her husband in his prison to tell him
where she was settled. It would have been sufficient to acquaint the governor with the fact,
so that Goddard might know where she was when his term expired. She had never written but once,
and he had perhaps not been allowed to answer the letter. His appearance at her door proved
that he had received it. Would to God he had not, she thought.

There were other things besides his crime of forgery which had acted far more powerfully upon
Mary Goddard's mind, and which had broken for ever all ties of affection; circumstances which
had appeared during his trial and which had shown that he had not only been unfaithful to those
who trusted him, but had been unfaithful to the wife who loved him. That was what she could
not forgive; it was the memory of that which rose like an impassable wall between her and him,
worse than his frauds, his forgery, worse almost than his murder. He had done that which even
a loving woman could not pardon, that which was past all forgiveness. That was why his sudden
appearance roused no tender memories, elicited seemingly so little sympathy from her. She was
too good a woman to say it, but she knew in her heart that she wished him dead, the very possibility
of ever seeing him again gone from her life for ever, no matter how.

But she must see him again, nevertheless, and to-morrow. To-morrow, too, she would have to
meet the squire, and appear to act and talk as though nothing had happened in this terrible
night. That would be the hardest of all, perhaps; even harder than meeting her husband for
a brief moment in order to give him the means of escape. She felt that in helping him she was
participating in his crimes, and yet, she asked herself, what woman would have acted differently?
What woman, even though she might hate her husband with her whole soul, and justly, would yet
be so hard-hearted as to refuse him assistance when he was flying for his life? It would be
impossible. She must help him at any cost; but it was hard to feel that she must see the squire
and behave with indifference, while her husband was lurking in the neighbourhood, when a detective
might at any moment come to the door, and demand to search the house.

These thoughts passed very quickly through her overwrought brain, as she knelt in the passage;
kneeling because she felt she could no longer stand, the passionate tears streaming down her
face, her small hands pressing her temples. Then she struggled to her feet and dried her eyes,
steadying herself against the wall for a moment. She had almost forgotten little Nellie whom
she had left in the drawing-room. She had told the child, when she went back to her, leaving
Goddard alone in the dark, that the man was a poor starving tramp, but that she did not want
Nellie to see him, because he looked so miserable. She would give him something to eat and
send him away, she said, and meanwhile Nellie should sit by the drawing-room fire and wait
for her. The child trusted her mother implicitly and was completely reassured. Mrs. Goddard
dried her eyes, and re-entered the room. Nellie was curled up in a big chair with a book; she
looked up quickly.

"Why, mamma," she said, "you have been crying!"

"Have I, darling? I daresay it was the sight of that poor man. He was very wretched."

"Is he gone?" asked the child.

It was unusually late and Nellie was beginning to be sleepy, so that she was more easily quieted
than she could have been in ordinary circumstances. It might have struck her as strange that
a wandering tramp should know her mother's Christian name, as still more inexplicable that
her mother should have been willing to admit such a man at so late an hour. She had been badly
frightened, but trusting her mother as she did, her terror had quickly disappeared and had
been quickly followed by sleepiness.

But Mrs. Goddard. did not sleep that night. She felt as though she could never sleep again,
and for many hours she lay thinking of the new element of fear which had so suddenly come into
her life at the very time when she believed herself to be safe for many years to come. She
longed to know where her wretched husband was; whether he had found shelter for the night,
whether he was still free or whether he had even then fallen into the hands of his pursuers.
She knew that she could not have concealed him in the house and that she had done all that
lay in her power for him. But she started at every sound, as the rain rattled against the shutters
and the wind howled down the chimney.

Walter Goddard, however, was safe for the present and was even luxuriously lodged, considering
his circumstances, for he was comfortably installed amongst the hay in the barn of the "Feathers"
inn. He had been in Billingsfield since early in the afternoon and had considered carefully
the question of his quarters for the night. He had observed from a distance the landlord of
the said inn, and had boldly offered to do a "day's work for a night's lodging." He said he
was "tramping" his way back from London to his home in Yorkshire; he knew enough of the sound
of the rough Yorkshire dialect to pass for a native of that county amongst ignorant labourers
who had never heard the real tongue. The landlord of the Feathers consented to the bargain
and Goddard was told that he might sleep in the barn if he liked, and should take a turn at
cutting chaff the next day to pay for the convenience. The convict slept soundly; he was past
lying awake in useless fits of remorse, and he was exhausted with his day's journey. Moreover
he had now the immediate prospect of obtaining sufficient money to carry him safely out of
the country, and once abroad he felt sure of baffling pursuit. He was an accomplished man and
spoke French with a fluency unusual in Englishmen; he determined to get across the channel
in some fishing craft; he would then make his way to Paris and enlist in the Foreign Legion.
It would be safer than trying to go to America, where people were invariably caught as they
landed. It was a race for life and death, and he knew it. Had he been able to obtain clothes,
money and a disguise in London he would have travelled by rail. But that had been impossible
and it now seemed a wiser plan to "tramp" it. His beard was growing rapidly and would soon
make a complete disguise. Village constables are generally simple people, easily imposed upon,
very different from London detectives; and hitherto he felt sure that he had baffled pursuit
by the mere simplicity of his proceedings. The intelligent officials of Scotland Yard were
used to forgers and swindlers who travelled by express trains and crossed to America by fashionable
steamers. It did not strike them as very likely that a man of Walter Goddard's previous tastes
and habits could get through the country in the guise of a tramp. If he had been possessed
at the time of his escape of the money he so much desired he would probably have been caught;
as it was, he got away without difficulty, and at the very time when every railway station
and every port in the kingdom were being watched for him, he was lurking in the purlieus of
Whitechapel, and then tramping his way east in comparative safety, half starved, it is true,
but unmolested.

That he was disappointed at the reception his wife had given him did not prevent him from sleeping
peacefully that night. One thing alone disturbed him, and that was her mention of Mr. Juxon,
in whose house, as she had told him, she lived. It seems incredible that a man in Walter Goddard's
position, lost to every sense of honour, a criminal of the worst type, who had deceived his
wife before he was indicted for forgery, who had certainly cared very little for her at any
time, should now, in a moment of supreme danger, feel a pang of jealousy on hearing that his
wife lived in the vicinity of the squire and occupied a house belonging to him. But he was
too bad himself not to suspect others, especially those whom he had wronged, and the feeling
was mingled with a strong curiosity to know whether this woman, who now treated him so haughtily
and drew back from him as from some monstrous horror, was as good as she pretended to be. He
said to himself that on the next day at dawn he would slip out of the barn and try whether
he could not find some hiding-place within easy reach of the cottage, so as to be able to watch
her dwelling at his ease throughout the day. The plan seemed a good one. Since he was obliged
to wait twenty-four hours in order to get the money he wanted, he might as well employ the
time profitably in observing his wife's habits. It would be long, he said to himself with a
bitter sneer, before he troubled her again--he would just like to see.

Having come to this decision he drew some of the hay over his body and in spite of cold and
wet was soon peacefully asleep. But at early dawn he awoke with the alacrity of a man who constantly
expects pursuit, and slipped down from the hayloft into the barn. There was no one stirring
and he got over the fence at the back of the yard and skirted the fields in the direction of
the church, finally climbing another stile and entering what he supposed to be the park. On
this side the back of the church ran out into a broad meadow, where the larger portion of the
ancient abbey had once stood. Goddard walked along close by the church walls. He knew from
his observation on the previous afternoon that he could thus come out into the road in the
vicinity of the cottage, unless his way through the park were interrupted by impassable wire
fences. The ground was very heavy and he was sure not to meet anybody in the meadows in such
weather.

Suddenly he stopped and looked at a buttress that jutted out from the church and for the existence
of which there seemed to be no ostensible reason. He examined it and found that it was not
a buttress but apparently a half ruined chamber, which at some former period had been built
upon the side of the abbey. Low down by the ground there was a hole, where a few stones seemed
to have been removed and not replaced. Goddard knelt down in the long wet grass and put in
his head; then he crept in on his hands and knees and presently disappeared.

He found himself in a room about ten feet square, dimly lighted by a small window at the top,
and surrounded by long horizontal niches. The floor, which was badly broken in some places,
was of stone. Goddard examined the place carefully. It was evidently an old vault of the kind
formerly built above ground for the lords of the manor; but the coffins, if there had ever
been any, had been removed elsewhere. Goddard laughed to himself.

"I might stay here for a year, if I could get anything to eat," he said to himself.

CHAPTER XIV.

The squire had grown used to the position in which he found himself after Mary Goddard had
told him her story. He continued his visits as formerly, and it could hardly be said that there
was any change in his manner towards her; there was no need of any change, for even at the
time when he contemplated making her his wife there had been nothing lover-like in his behaviour.
He had been a friend and had treated her with all the respect due to a lonely lady who was
his tenant, and even with a certain formality which had sometimes seemed unnecessary. But though
there was no apparent alteration in his mode of talking, in his habit of bringing her flowers
and books and of looking after the condition of the cottage, both she and he were perfectly
conscious of the fact that they understood each other much better than before. They were united
by the common bond of a common secret which very closely concerned one of them. Things were
not as they had formerly been. Mrs. Goddard no longer felt that she had anything to hide; the
squire knew that he no longer had anything to hope. If he had been a selfish man, if she had
been a less sensible woman, their friendship might have ended then and there. But Mr. Juxon
was not selfish, and Mary Goddard did not lack good sense. Having ascertained that in the ordinary
course of events there was no possibility of ever marrying her, the squire did not at once
give her over and go elsewhere; on the contrary he showed himself more desirous than ever of
assisting her and amusing her. He was a patient man; his day might come yet, if Goddard died.
It did not follow that if he could not marry Mrs. Goddard he must needs marry some one else;
for it was not a wife that he sought, but the companionship of this particular woman as his
wife. If he could not marry he could still enjoy at least a portion of that companionship,
by visiting her daily and talking with her, and making himself a part of her life. He judged
things very coldly and lost himself in no lofty flights of imagination. It was better that
he should enjoy what fell in his way in at least seeing Mrs. Goddard and possessing her friendship,
than that he should go out of his course in order to marry merely for the sake of marrying.
He had seen so much of the active side of life that he was well prepared to revel in the peace
which had fallen to his lot. He cared little whether he left an heir to the park; there were
others of the name, and since the park had furnished matter for litigation during forty years
before he came into possession of it, it might supply the lawyers with fees for forty years
more after his death, for all he cared. It would have been very desirable to marry Mrs. Goddard
if it had been possible, but since the thing could not be done at present it was best to submit
with a good grace. Since the day when his suit had suddenly come to grief in the discovery
of her real position, Mr. Juxon had philosophically said to himself that he had perhaps been
premature in making his proposal, and that it was as well that it could not have been accepted;
perhaps she would not have made him a good wife; perhaps he had deceived himself in thinking
that because he liked her and desired her friendship he really wished to marry her; perhaps
all was for the best in the best of all possible worlds, after all and in spite of all.

But these reflections, which tended to soothe the squire's annoyance at the failure of a scheme
which he had contemplated with so much delight, did not prevent him from feeling the most sincere
sympathy for Mrs. Goddard, nor from constantly wishing that he could devise some plan for helping
her. She seemed never to have thought of divorcing herself from her husband. The squire was
not sure whether such a thing were possible; he doubted it, and promised himself that he would
get a lawyer's opinion upon the matter. He believed that English law did not grant divorces
on account of the husband's being sentenced to any limited period of penal servitude. But in
any case it would be a very delicate subject to approach, and Mr. Juxon amused himself by constructing
conversations in his mind which should lead up to this point without wounding poor Mrs. Goddard's
sensibilities. He was the kindest of men; he would not for worlds have said a word which should
recall to her that memorable day when she had told him her story. And yet it would be quite
impossible to broach such a scheme without going at once into all the details of the chief
cause of her sorrows. The consequence was that in the windings of his imagination the squire
found himself perpetually turning in a vicious circle; but since the exercise concerned Mrs.
Goddard and her welfare it was not uncongenial. He founded all his vague hopes upon one expression
she had used. When in making his proposal he had spoken of her as being a widow, she had said,
"Would to God that I were!" She had said it with such vehemence that he had felt sure that
if she had indeed been a widow her answer to himself would have been favourable. Men easily
retain such impressions received in moments of great excitement, and found hopes upon them.

So the days had gone by and the squire had thought much but had come to no conclusion. On the
morning when Walter Goddard crept into the disused vault at the back of the church, the squire
awoke from his sleep at his usual early hour. He was not in a very good humour, if so equable
a man could be said to be subject to such weaknesses as humours. The weather was very depressing--day
after day brought only more rain, more wind, more mud, more of everything disagreeable. The
previous evening had been unusually dull. He was never weary of being with Mary Goddard, but
occasionally, when the Ambroses were present, the conversation became oppressive. Mr. Juxon
almost wished that John Short would come back and cause a diversion. His views concerning John
had undergone some change since he had discovered that nobody could marry Mrs. Goddard because
she was married already. He believed he could watch John's efforts to attract her attention
with indifference now, or if without indifference with a charitable forbearance. John at least
would help to make conversation, and the conversation on the previous evening had been intolerably
wearisome. Almost unconsciously, since the chief interest and hope of his daily life had been
removed the squire began to long for a change; he had been a wanderer by profession during
thirty years of his life and he was perhaps not yet old enough to settle into that absolute
indifference to novelty which seems to characterise retired sailors.

But as he brushed his smooth hair and combed his beard that morning, neither change nor excitement
were very far from him. He looked over his dressing-glass at the leafless oaks of the park,
at the grey sky and the driving rain and he wished something would happen. He wished somebody
might die and leave a great library to be sold, that he might indulge his favourite passion;
he wished he had somebody stopping in the Hall--he almost decided to send and ask the vicar
to come to lunch and have a day among the books. As he entered the breakfast-room at precisely
half-past eight o'clock, according to his wont, the butler informed him that Mr. Gall, the
village constable, was below and wanted to see him after breakfast. He received the news in
silence and sat down to eat his breakfast and read the morning paper. Gall had probably come
about some petty summons, or to ask what he should do about the small boys who threw stones
at the rooks and broke the church windows. After finishing his meal and his paper in the leisurely
manner peculiar to country gentlemen who have nothing to do, the squire rang the bell, sent
for the policeman and went into his study, a small room adjoining the library.

Thomas Gall, constable, was a tall fair man with a mild eye and a cheerful face. Goodwill towards
men and plentiful good living had done their work in eradicating from the good man all that
stern element which might have been most useful to him in his career, not to say useful to
the State. Each rolling year was pricked in his leathern belt with a new hole as his heart
grew more peaceful and his body throve. He had a goodly girth and weighed full fifteen stone
in his uniform; his mild blue eye had inspired confidence in a maiden of Billingsfield parish
and Mrs. Gall was now rearing a numerous family of little Galls, all perhaps destined to become
mild-eyed and portly village constables in their turn.

The squire, who was not destitute of a sense of humour, never thought of Mr. Gall without a
smile, so much out of keeping did the man's occupation seem with his jovial humour. Mr. Gall,
he said, was the kind of policeman who would bribe a refractory tramp to move on by the present
of a pint of beer. But Gall had a good point. He was very proud of his profession, and in the
exercise of it he showed a discretion which, if it was the better part of his valour, argued
unlimited natural courage. It was a secret profession, he was wont to say, and a man who could
not keep a secret would never do for a constable. He shrouded his ways in an amiable mystery
and walked a solitary beat on fine nights; when the nights were not fine there was nobody to
see whether he walked his beat or not. Probably, he faithfully fulfilled his obligations; but
his constitution seemed to bear exposure to the weather wonderfully well. Whether he ever saw
anything worth mentioning upon those lonely walks of his, is uncertain; at all events he never
mentioned anything he saw, unless it was in the secrecy of the reports he was supposed to transmit
from time to time to his superiors.

On the present occasion as he entered the study, the squire observed with surprise that he
looked grave. He had never witnessed such a phenomenon before and argued that it was just possible
that something of real importance might have occurred.

"Good morning, sir," said Mr. Gall, approaching the squire respectfully, after carefully closing
the door behind him.

"Good morning, Gall. Nothing wrong, I hope?"

"Not yet, sir. I hope not, sir. Only a little matter of business, Mr. Juxon. In point of fact,
sir, I wished to consult you."

"Yes," said the squire who was used to the constable's method of circumlocution. "Yes--what is it?"

"Well, sir--it's this," said the policeman, running his thumb round the inside of his belt
as though to test the pressure, and clearing his throat. "There has been a general order sent
down to be on the lookout, sir. So I thought it would be best to take your opinion."

"My opinion," said the squire with great gravity, "is that if you are directed to be on the
look-out, you should be on the look-out; by all means. What are you to be on the look-out for?"

"In point of fact, sir," said the constable, lowering his voice, "we are informed that a criminal
has escaped from Portland. I never heard of a convict getting out of that strong'old o' the
law, sir, and I would like to have your opinion upon it."

"But if you are informed that some one has escaped," remarked the squire, "you had better take
it for granted that it is true."

"Juss so, sir. But the circumstances wasn't communicated to us, sir; so we don't know."

Mr. Gall paused, and the squire smoothed his hair a little.

"Well, Gall," said Mr. Juxon, "have you any reason for believing that this escaped convict
is likely to come this way?"

"Well sir, there is some evidence," answered the policeman, mysteriously. "Leastways what seems
like evidence to me, sir."

"Of what kind?" the squire fixed his quiet eyes on Mr. Gall's face.

"His name, sir. The name of the convict. There is a party of that name residin' here."

The squire suddenly guessed what was coming, or at least a possibility of it crossed his mind.
If Mr. Gall had been a more observant man he would have seen that Mr. Juxon grew a shade paler
and changed one leg over the other as he sat. But in that moment he had time to nerve himself
for the worst.

"And what is the name, if you please?" he asked calmly.

"The name in the general orders is Goddard, sir--Walter Goddard. He was convicted of forgery
three years ago, sir, a regular bad lot. But discretion is recommended in the orders, sir,
as the business is not wanted to get into the papers."

The squire was ready. If Gall did not know that Mary Goddard was the wife of the convict Walter,
he should certainly not find it out. In any other country of Europe that would have been the
first fact communicated to the local police. Very likely, thought Mr. Juxon, nobody knew it.

"I do not see," he said very slowly, "that the fact of there being a Mrs. Goddard residing
here in the least proves that she is any relation to this criminal. The name is not so uncommon
as that, you know."

"Nor I either, sir. In point of fact, sir, I was only thinking. It's what you may call a striking
coincidence, that's all."

"It would have been a still more striking coincidence if his name had been Juxon like mine,
or Ambrose like the vicar's," said the squire calmly. "There are other people of the name in
England, and the local policemen will be warned to be on the lookout. If this fellow was called
Juxon instead of Goddard, Gall, would you be inclined to think he was a relation of mine?"

"Oh no, sir. Ha! ha! Very good sir! Very good indeed! No indeed, sir, and she such a real lady
too!"

"Well then, I do not see that you can do anything more than keep a sharp look-out. I suppose
they sent you some kind of description?"

"Well, yes. There was a kind of a description as you say, sir, but I'm not anyways sure of
recognising the party by it. In point of fact, sir, the description says the convict is a fair
man."

"Is that all?"

"Neither particular tall, nor yet particular short, sir. Not a very big 'un nor a very little
'un, sir. In point of fact, sir, a fair man. Clean shaved and close cropped he is, sir, being
a criminal."

"I hope you may recognise him by that account," said the squire, suppressing a smile. "I don't
believe I should."

"Well, sir, it does say as he's a fair man," remarked the constable.

"Supposing he blacked his face and passed for a chimney-sweep?" suggested the squire. The idea
seemed to unsettle Gall's views.

"In that case, sir, I don't know as I should know him, for certain," he answered.

"Probably not--probably not, Gall. And judging from the account they have sent you I don't
think you would be to blame."

"Leastways it can't be said as I've failed to carry out superior instructions," replied Mr.
Gall, proudly. "Then it's your opinion, sir, that I'd better keep a sharp look-out? Did I understand
you to say so, sir?"

"Quite so," returned the squire with great calmness. "By all means keep a sharp look-out, and
be careful to be discreet, as the orders instruct you."

"You may trust me for that, sir," said the policeman, who dearly loved the idea of mysterious
importance. "Then I wish you good morning, sir." He prepared to go.

"Good morning, Gall--good morning. The butler will give you some ale."

Again Mr. Gall passed his thumb round the inside of his belt, testing the local pressure in
anticipation of a pint. He made a sort of half-military salute at the door and went out. When
the squire was alone he rose from his chair and paced the room, giving way to the agitation
he had concealed in the presence of the constable. He was very much disturbed at the news of
Goddard's escape, as well he might be. Not that he was aware that the convict knew of his wife's
whereabouts; he did not even suppose that Goddard could ascertain for some time where she was
living, still less that he would boldly present himself in Billingsfield. But it was bad enough
to know that the man was again at large. So long as he was safely lodged in prison, Mrs. Goddard
was herself safe; but if once he regained his liberty and baffled the police he would certainly
end by finding out Mary's address and there was no telling to what annoyance, to what danger,
to what sufferings she might be exposed. Here was a new interest, indeed, and one which promised
to afford the squire occupation until the fellow was caught.

Mr. Juxon knew that he was right in putting the policeman off the track in regard to Mrs. Goddard.
He himself was a better detective than Gall, for he went daily to the cottage and if anything
was wrong there, was quite sure to discover it. If Goddard ever made his way to Billingsfield
it could only be for the purpose of seeing his wife, and if he succeeded in this, Mrs. Goddard
could not conceal it from the squire. She was a nervous woman who could not hide her emotions;
she would find herself in a terrible difficulty and she would perhaps turn to her friend for
assistance. If Mr. Juxon could lay his hands on Goddard, he flattered himself he was much more
able to arrest a desperate man than mild-eyed Policeman Gall. He had not been at sea for thirty
years in vain, and in his time he had handled many a rough customer. He debated however upon
the course he should pursue. As in his opinion it was unlikely that Goddard would find out
his wife for some time, and improbable that he would waste such precious time in looking for
her, it seemed far from advisable to warn her that the felon had escaped. On the other hand
he mistrusted his own judgment; if she were not prepared it was just possible that the man
should come upon her unawares, and the shock of seeing him might be very much worse than the
shock of being told that he was at large. He might consult the vicar.

At first, the old feeling that it would be disloyal to Mrs. Goddard even to hint to Mr. Ambrose
that he was acquainted with her story withheld him from pursuing such a course. But as he turned
the matter over in his mind it seemed to him that since it was directly for her good, he would
now be justified in speaking. He liked the vicar and he trusted him. He knew that the vicar
had been a good friend to Mrs. Goddard and that he would stand by her in any difficulty so
far as he might be able. The real question was how to make sure that the vicar should not tell
his wife. If Mrs. Ambrose had the least suspicion that anything unusual was occurring, she
would naturally try and extract information from her husband, and she would probably be successful;
women, the squire thought, very generally succeed in operations of that kind. But if once Mr.
Ambrose could be consulted without arousing his wife's suspicions, he was a man to be trusted.
Thereupon Mr. Juxon wrote a note to the vicar, saying that he had something of great interest
to show him, and begging that, if not otherwise engaged, he would come up to the Hall to lunch.
When he had despatched his messenger, being a man of his word, he went into the library to
hunt for some rare volume or manuscript which the vicar had not yet seen, and which might account
in a spirit of rigid veracity for the excuse he had given. Meanwhile, as he turned over his
rare and curious folios he debated further upon his conduct; but having once made up his mind
to consult Mr. Ambrose, he determined to tell him boldly what had occurred, after receiving
from him a promise of secrecy. The messenger brought back word that the vicar would be delighted
to come, and at the hour named the sound of wheels upon the gravel announced the arrival of
Strawberry, the old mare, drawing behind her the vicar and his aged henchman, Reynolds, in
the traditional vicarage dogcart. A moment later the vicar entered the library.

"I am very glad to see you, Mr. Ambrose," said the squire inhospitable tones. "I have something
to show you and I have something to say to you." The two shook hands heartily. Independently
of kindred scholarly tastes, they were sympathetic to each other and were always glad to meet.

"It is just the weather for bookworms," answered the vicar in cheerful tones. "Dear me, I never
come here without envying you and wishing that life were one long rainy afternoon."

"You know I am inclined to think I am rather an enviable person," said Mr. Juxon, slowly passing
his hand over his glossy hair and leading his guest towards a large table near the fire. Several
volumes lay together upon the polished mahogany. The squire laid his hand on one of them.

"I have not deceived you," he said. "That is a very interesting volume. It is the black letter
Paracelsus I once spoke of. I have succeeded in getting it at last."

"Dear me! What a piece of fortune!" said Mr. Ambrose bending down until his formidable nose
almost touched the ancient page.

"Yes," said the squire, "uncommonly lucky as usual. Now, excuse my abruptness in changing the
subject--I want to consult you upon an important matter."

The vicar looked up quickly with that vague, faraway expression which comes into the eyes of
a student when he is suddenly called away from contemplating some object of absorbing interest.

"Certainly," he said, "certainly--a--by all means."

"It is about Mrs. Goddard," said the squire, looking hard at his visitor. "Of course it is
between ourselves," he added.

The vicar's long upper lip descended upon its fellow and he bent his rough grey eyebrows, returning
Mr. Juxon's sharp look with interest. He could not imagine what the squire could have to say
about Mrs. Goddard, unless, like poor John, he had fallen in love with her and wanted to marry
her; which appeared improbable.

"What is it?" he said sharply.

"I daresay you do not know that I am acquainted with her story," began Mr. Juxon. "Do not be
surprised. She saw fit to tell it me herself."

"Indeed?" exclaimed the vicar in considerable astonishment. In that case, he argued quickly,
Mr. Juxon was not thinking of marrying her.

"Yes--it is not necessary to go into that," said Mr. Juxon quickly. "The thing I want to tell
you is this--Goddard the forger has escaped--"

"Escaped?" echoed the vicar in real alarm. "You don't mean to say so!"

"Gall the constable came here this morning," continued Mr. Juxon. "He told me that there were
general orders out for his arrest."

"How in the world did he get out?" cried the vicar. "I thought nobody was ever known to escape
from Portland!"

"So did I. But this fellow has--somehow. Gall did not know. Now, the question is, what is to
be done?"

"I am sure I don't know," returned the vicar, thrusting his hands into his pockets and marching
to the window, the wide skirts of his coat seeming to wave with agitation as he walked.

Mr. Juxon also put his hands into his pockets, but he stood still upon the hearth-rug and looked
at the ceiling, softly whistling a little tune, a habit he had in moments of great anxiety.
For three or four minutes neither of the two spoke.

"Would you tell Mrs. Goddard--or not?" asked Mr. Juxon at last.

"I don't know," said the vicar. "I am amazed beyond measure." He turned and slowly came back
to the table.

"I don't know either," replied the squire. "That is precisely the point upon which I think
we ought to decide. I have known about the story for some time, but I did not anticipate that
it would take this turn."

"I think," said Mr. Ambrose after another pause, "I think that if there is any likelihood of
the fellow finding her out, we ought to tell her. If not I think we had better wait until he
is caught. He is sure to be caught, of course."

"I entirely agree with you," returned Mr. Juxon. "Only--how on earth are we to find out whether
he is likely to come here or not? If any one knows where he is, he is as good as caught already.
If nobody knows, we can certainly have no means of telling."

The argument was unanswerable. Again there was a long silence. The vicar walked about the room
in great perplexity.

"Dear me! Dear me! What a terrible business!" he repeated, over and over again.

"Do you think we are called upon to do anything?" he asked at last, stopping in his walk immediately
in front of Mr. Juxon.

"If we can do anything to save Mrs. Goddard from annoyance or further trouble, we are undoubtedly
called upon to do it," replied the squire. "If that wretch finds her out, he will try to break
into the cottage at night and force her to give him money."

"Do you really think so? Dear me! I hope he will do no such thing!"

"So do I, I am sure," said Mr. Juxon, with a grim smile. "But if he finds her out, he will.
I almost think it would be better to tell her in any case."

"But think of the anxiety she will be in until he is caught!" cried the vicar. "She will be
expecting him every day--every night. Well--I suppose we might tell Gall to watch the house."

"That will not do," said Mr. Juxon firmly. "It would be a great injustice to allow Gall or
any of the people in the village to know anything about her. She might be subjected to all
kinds of insult. You know what these people are. A 'real lady,' who is at the same time the
wife of a convict, is a thing they can hardly understand. I am sure both you and I secretly
flatter ourselves that we have shown an unusual amount of good sense and generosity in understanding
her position as we do."

"I daresay we do," said the vicar with a smile. He was too honest to deny it. "Indeed it took
me some time to get used to the idea myself."

"Precisely. The village people would never get used to it. Of all things to do, we should certainly
not tell Gall, who is an old woman and a great chatterbox. I wish you could have heard his
statement this morning--it filled me with admiration for the local police, I assure you. But--I
think it would be better to tell her. I did not think so before you came, I believe. But talking
always brings the truth out."

The vicar hesitated, rising and falling upon his toes and heels in profound thought, after
his manner.

"I daresay you are right," he said at last. "Will you do it? Or shall I?"

"I would rather not," said the squire, thoughtfully. "You know her better, you have known her
much longer than I."

"But she will ask me where I heard of it," objected the vicar. "I shall be obliged to say that
you told me. That will be as bad as though you told her yourself."

"You need not say you heard it from me. You can say that Gall has received instructions to
look out for Goddard. She will not question you any further, I am sure."

"I would much rather that you told her, Mr. Juxon," said the vicar.

"I would much rather that you told her, Mr. Ambrose," said the squire, almost in the same breath.
Both laughed a little.

"Not that I would not do it at once, if necessary," added Mr. Juxon.

"Or I, in a moment," said Mr. Ambrose.

"Of course," returned Mr. Juxon. "Only it is such a very delicate matter, you see."

"Dear me, yes," murmured the vicar, "a most delicate matter. Poor lady!"

"Poor lady!" echoed the squire. "But I suppose it must be done."

"Oh yes--we cannot do otherwise," answered Mr. Ambrose, still hoping that his companion would
volunteer to perform the disagreeable office.

"Well then, will you--will you do it?" asked Mr. Juxon, anxious to have the matter decided.

"Why not go together?" suggested the vicar.

"No," said Mr. Juxon firmly. "It would be an intolerable ordeal for the poor woman. I think
I see your objection. Perhaps you think that Mrs. Ambrose--"

"Exactly, Mrs. Ambrose," echoed the vicar with a grim smile.

"Oh precisely--then I will do it," said the squire. And he forthwith did, and was very much
surprised at the result.

CHAPTER XV.

It was late in the afternoon when Mr. Juxon walked down towards the cottage, accompanied by
the vicar. In spite of their mutual anxiety to be of service to Mrs. Goddard, when they had
once decided how to act they had easily fallen into conversation about other matters, the black
letter Paracelsus had received its full share of attention and many another rare volume had
been brought out and examined. Neither the vicar nor his host believed that there was any hurry;
if Goddard ever succeeded in getting to Billingsfield it would not be to-day, nor to-morrow either.

The weather had suddenly changed; the east was already clear and over the west, where the sun
was setting in a fiery mist, the huge clouds were banked up against the bright sky, fringed
with red and purple, but no longer threatening rain or snow. The air was sharp and the plentiful
mud in the roads was already crusted with a brittle casing of ice.

The squire took leave of Mr. Ambrose at the turning where the road led into the village and
then walked back to the cottage. Even his solid nerves were a little unsettled at the prospect
of the interview before him; but he kept a stout heart and asked for Mrs. Goddard in his usual
quiet voice. Martha told him that Mrs. Goddard had a bad headache, but on inquiry found that
she would see the squire. He entered the drawing-room softly and went forward to greet her;
she was sitting in a deep chair propped by cushions.

Mary Goddard had spent a miserable day. The grey morning light seemed to reveal her troubles
and fears in a new and more terrible aspect. During the long hours of darkness it seemed as
though those things were mercifully hidden which the strong glare of day must inevitably reveal,
and when the night was fairly past she thought all the world must surely know that Walter Goddard
had escaped and that his wife had seen him. Hourly she expected a ringing at the bell, announcing
the visit of a party of detectives on his track; every sound startled her and her nerves were
strung to such a pitch that she heard with supernatural acuteness. She had indeed two separate
causes for fear. The one was due to her anxiety for Goddard's safety; the other to her apprehensions
for Nellie. She had long determined that at all hazards the child must be kept from the knowledge
of her father's disgrace, by being made to believe in his death. It was a falsehood indeed,
but such a falsehood as may surely be forgiven to a woman as unhappy as Mary Goddard. It seemed
monstrous that the innocent child, who seemed not even to have inherited her father's looks
or temper, should be brought up with the perpetual sense of her disgrace before her, should
be forced to listen to explanations of her father's crimes and tutored to the comprehension
of an inherited shame. From the first Mary Goddard had concealed the whole matter from the
little girl, and when Walter was at last convicted, she had told her that her father was dead.
Dead he might be, she thought, before twelve years were out, and Nellie would be none the wiser.
In twelve years from the time of his conviction Nellie would be in her twenty-first year; if
it were ever necessary to tell her, it would be time enough then, for the girl would have at
least enjoyed her youth, free of care and of the horrible consciousness of a great crime hanging
over her head. No child could grow up in such a state as that implied. No mind could develop
healthily under the perpetual pressure of so hideous a secret; from her earliest childhood
her impressions would be warped, her imagination darkened and her mental growth stunted. It
would be a great cruelty to tell her the truth; it was a great mercy to tell her the falsehood.
It was no selfish timidity which had prompted Mary Goddard, but a carefully weighed consideration
for the welfare of her child.

If now, within these twenty-four hours, Nellie should discover who the poor tramp was, who
had frightened her so much on the previous evening, all this would be at an end. The child's
life would be made desolate for ever. She would never recover from the shock, and to injure
lovely Nellie so bitterly would be worse to Mary Goddard than to be obliged to bear the sharpest
suffering herself. For, from the day when she had waked to a comprehension of her husband's
baseness, the love for her child had taken in her breast the place of the love for Walter.

She did not think connectedly; she did not realise her fears; she was almost wholly unstrung.
But she had procured the fifty pounds her husband required and she waited for the night with
a dull hope that all might yet be well--as well as anything so horrible could be. If only her
husband were not caught in Billingsfield it would not be so bad, perhaps. And yet it may be
that her wisest course would have been to betray him that very night. Many just men would have
said so; but there are few women who would do it. There are few indeed, so stonyhearted as
to betray a man once loved in such a case; and Mary Goddard in her wildest fear never dreamed
of giving up the fugitive. She sat all day in her chair, wishing that the day were over, praying
that she might be spared any further suffering or that at least it might be spared to her child
whom she so loved. She had sent Nellie down to the vicarage with Martha. Mrs. Ambrose loved
Nellie better than she loved Nellie's mother, and there was a standing invitation for her to
spend the afternoons at the vicarage. Nellie said her mother had a terrible headache and wanted
to be alone.

But when the squire came Mrs. Goddard thought it wiser to see him. She had, of course, no intention
of confiding to him an account of the events of the previous night, but she felt that if she
could talk to him for half an hour she would be stronger. He was himself so strong and honest
that he inspired her with courage. She knew, also, that if she were driven to the extremity
of confiding in any one she would choose Mr. Juxon rather than Mr. Ambrose. The vicar had been
her first friend and she owed him much; but the squire had won her confidence by his noble
generosity after she had told him her story. She said to herself that he was more of a man
than the vicar. And now he had come to her at the time of her greatest distress, and she was
glad to see him.

Mr. Juxon entered the room softly, feeling that he was in the presence of a sick person. Mrs.
Goddard turned her pathetic face towards him and held out her hand.

"I am so glad to see you," she said, trying to seem cheerful.

"I fear you are ill, Mrs. Goddard," answered the squire, looking at her anxiously and then
seating himself by her side. "Martha told me you had a headache--I hope it is not serious."

"Oh no--not serious. Only a headache," she said with a smile so unlike her own that Mr. Juxon
began to feel nervous. His resolution to tell her his errand began to waver; it seemed cruel,
he thought, to disturb a person who was evidently so ill with a matter so serious. He remembered
that she had almost fainted on a previous occasion when she had spoken to him of her husband.
She had not been ill then; there was no knowing what the effect of a shock to her nerves might
be at present. He sat still in silence for some moments, twisting his hat upon his knee.

"Do not be disturbed about me," said Mrs. Goddard presently. "It will pass very quickly. I
shall be quite well to-morrow--I hope," she added with a shudder.

"I am very much disturbed about you," returned Mr. Juxon in an unusually grave tone. Mrs. Goddard
looked at him quickly, and was surprised when she saw the expression on his face. He looked
sad, and at the same time perplexed.

"Oh, pray don't be!" she exclaimed as though deprecating further remark upon her ill health.

"I wish I knew," said the squire with some hesitation, "whether--whether you are really very
ill. I mean, of course, I know you have a bad headache, a very bad headache, as I can see.
But--indeed, Mrs. Goddard, I have something of importance to say."

"Something of importance?" she repeated, staring hard at him.

"Yes--but it will keep till to-morrow, if you would rather not hear it now," he replied, looking
at her doubtfully.

"I would rather hear it now," she answered after some seconds of silence. Her heart beat fast.

"You were good enough some time ago to tell me about--Mr. Goddard," began Mr. Juxon in woeful
trepidation.

"Yes," answered his companion under her breath. Her hands were clasped tightly together upon
her knees and her eyes sought the squire's anxiously and then looked away again in fear.

"Well, it is about him," continued Mr. Juxon in a gentle voice. "Would you rather put it off?
It is--well, rather startling."

Mrs. Goddard closed her eyes, like a person expecting to suffer some terrible pain. She thought
Mr. Juxon was going to tell her that Walter had been captured in the village.

"Mr. Goddard has escaped," said the squire, making a bold plunge with the whole truth. The
sick lady trembled violently, and unclasping her hands laid them upon the arms of her chair
as though to steady herself to bear the worse shock to come. But Mr. Juxon was silent. He had
told her all he knew.

"Yes," she said faintly. "Is there anything--anything more?" Her voice was barely audible in
the still and dusky room.

"No--except that, of course, there are orders out for his arrest, all over the country."

"He has not been arrested yet?" asked Mrs. Goddard. She had expected to hear that he was caught;
she thought the squire was trying to break the shock of the news. Her courage rose a little now.

"No, he is not arrested--but I have no doubt he soon will be," added Mr. Juxon in a tone intended
to convey encouragement.

"How did you hear this?"

"Gall the policeman, told me this morning. I--I am afraid I have something else to confess
to you, Mrs. Goddard, I trust you will not--"

"What?" she asked so suddenly as to startle him. Walter might have been heard of in the neighbourhood,
perhaps.

"I think I was right," continued Mr. Juxon. "I hope you will forgive me. It does not seem quite
loyal, but I did not know what to do. I consulted the vicar as to whether we should tell you."

"The vicar? What did he say?" Again Mrs. Goddard felt relieved.

"He quite agreed with me," answered the squire. "You see we feared that Mr. Goddard might find
his way here and come upon you suddenly. We thought you would be terribly pained and startled."

Mrs. Goddard could almost have laughed at that moment. The excellent man had taken all this
trouble in order to save her from the very thing which had already occurred on the previous
night. There was a bitter humour in the situation, in the squire's kind-hearted way of breaking
to her that news which she already knew so well, in his willingness to put off telling her
until the morrow. What would Mr. Juxon say, could he guess that she had herself already spoken
with her husband and had promised to see him again that very night! Forgetting that his last
words required an answer, she leaned back in her chair and again folded her hands before her.
Her eyes were half closed and from beneath the drooping lids she gazed through the gathering
gloom at the squire's anxious face.

"I hope you think I did right," said the latter in considerable doubt.

"Quite right. I think you were both very kind to think of me as you did," said she.

"I am sure, I always think of you," answered Mr. Juxon simply. "I hope that this thing will
have no further consequences. Of course, until we know of Mr. Goddard's whereabouts we shall
feel very anxious. It seems probable that if he can get here unobserved he will do so. He will
probably ask you for some money."

"Do you really think he could get here at all?" asked Mrs. Goddard. She wanted to hear what
he would say, for she thought she might judge from his words whether her husband ran any great
risk.

"Oh no," replied the squire. "I think it is very improbable. I fear this news has sadly disturbed
you, Mrs. Goddard, but let us hope all may turn out for the best." Indeed he thought she showed
very little surprise, though she had evidently been much moved. Perhaps she had been accustomed
to expect that her husband might one day escape. She was ill, too, and her nerves were unstrung,
he supposed.

She had really passed through a very violent emotion, but it had not been caused by her surprise,
but by her momentary fear for the fugitive, instantly allayed by Mr. Juxon's explanation. She
felt that for to-day at least Walter was safe, and by to-morrow he would be safe out of the
neighbourhood. But she reflected that it was necessary to say something; that if she appeared
to receive the news too indifferently the squire's suspicions might be aroused with fatal results.

"It is a terrible thing," she said presently. "You see I am not at all myself."

It was not easy for her to act a part. The words were commonplace.

"No," said Mr. Juxon, "I see you are not." He on his part, instead of looking for a stronger
expression of fear or astonishment, was now only too glad that she should be so calm.

"Would you advise me to do anything?" she asked presently.

"There is nothing to be done," he answered quickly, glad of a chance to relieve the embarrassment
of the situation. "Of course we might put you under the protection of the police but--what
is the matter, Mrs. Goddard?" She had started as though in pain.

"Only this dreadful headache," she said. "Go on please."

"Well, we might set Gall the policeman to watch your house; but that would be very unpleasant
for you. It would be like telling him and all the village people of your situation--"

"Oh don't! Please don't!"

"No, certainly not. I think it very unwise. Besides--" he stopped short. He was about to say
that he felt much better able to watch over Mrs. Goddard himself than Gall the constable could
possibly be; but he checked himself in time.

"Besides--what?" she asked.

"Nothing--Gall is not much of a policeman, that is all. I do not believe you would be any the
safer for his protection. But you must promise me, my dear Mrs. Goddard, that if anything occurs
you will let me know. I may be of some assistance."

"Thank you, so much," said she. "You are always so kind!"

"Not at all. I am very glad if you think I was right to tell you about it."

"Oh, quite right," she answered. "And now, Mr. Juxon, I am really not at all well. All this
has quite unnerved me--"

"You want me to go?" said the squire smiling kindly as he rose. "Yes, I understand. Well, good-bye,
my dear friend--I hope everything will clear up."

"Good-bye. Thank you again. You always do understand me," she answered giving him her small
cold hand. "Don't think me ungrateful," she added, looking up into his eyes.

"No indeed--not that there is anything to be grateful for."

In a moment more he was gone, feeling that he had done his duty like a man, and that it had
not been so hard after all. He was glad it was done, however, and he felt that he could face
the vicar with a bold front at their next meeting. He went quickly down the path and crossed
the road to his own gate with a light step. As he entered the park he was not aware of a wretched-looking
tramp who slouched along the quickset hedge and watched his retreating figure far up the avenue,
till he was out of sight among the leafless trees. If Stamboul had been with the squire the
tramp would certainly not have passed unnoticed; but for some days the roads had been so muddy
that Stamboul had been left behind when Mr. Juxon made his visits to the cottage, lest the
great hound should track the mud into the spotless precincts of the passage. The tramp stood
still and looked after the squire so long as he could see him, and then slunk off across the
wet meadows, where the standing water was now skimmed with ice.

Walter Goddard had spent the day in watching for the squire and he had seen him at last. He
had seen him go down the road with the vicar till they were both out of sight, and he had seen
him come back and enter the cottage. This proceeding, he argued, betrayed that the squire did
not wish to be seen going into Mary's house by the vicar. The tortuous intelligences of bad
men easily impute to others courses which they themselves would naturally pursue. Three words
on the previous evening had sufficed to rouse the convict's jealousy. What he saw to-day confirmed
his suspicions. The gentleman in knickerbockers could be no other than the squire himself,
of course. He was evidently in the habit of visiting Mary Goddard and he did not wish his visits
to be observed by the clergyman, who was of course the vicar or rector of the parish. That
proved conclusively in the fugitive's mind that there was something wrong. He ground his teeth
together and said to himself that it would be worth while to run some risk in order to stop
that little game, as he expressed it. He had, as he himself had confessed to his wife, murdered
one man in escaping; a man, he reflected, could only hang once, and if he had not been taken
in the streets of London he was not likely to be caught in the high street of Billingsfield,
Essex. It would be a great satisfaction to knock the squire on the head before he went any
farther. Moreover he had found a wonderfully safe retreat in the disused vault at the back
of the church. He discovered loose stones inside the place which he could pile up against the
low hole which served for an entrance. Probably no one knew that there was any entrance at
all--the very existence of the vault was most likely forgotten. It was not a cheerful place,
but Goddard's nerves were excited to a pitch far beyond the reach of supernatural fears. Whatever
he might be condemned to feel in the future, his conscience troubled him very little in the
present. The vault was comparatively dry and was in every way preferable, as a resting-place
for one night, to the interior of a mouldy haystack in the open fields. He did not dare show
himself again at the "Feathers" inn, lest he should be held to do the day's work he had promised
in payment for his night in the barn. All that morning and afternoon he had lain hidden in
the quickset hedge near the park gate, within sight of the cottage, and he had been rewarded.
The food he had taken with him the night before had sufficed him and he had quenched his thirst
with rain-water from the ditch. Having seen that the squire went back towards the Hall, Goddard
slunk away to his hiding-place to wait for the night. He lay down as best he might, and listened
for the hours and half-hours as the church clock tolled them out from the lofty tower above.

Mary Goddard had told him to come later than before, and it was after half-past ten when he
tapped upon the shutter of the little drawing-room. All was dark within, and he held his breath
as he stood among the wet creepers, listening intently for the sound of his wife's coming.
Presently the glass window inside was opened.

"Is that you?" asked Mary's voice in a tremulous whisper.

"Yes," he answered. "Let me in." Then the shutter was cautiously unfastened and opened a little
and in the dim starlight Goddard recognised his wife's pale face. Her hand went out to him,
with something in it.

"There is the money," she whispered. "Go as quickly as you can. They are looking for you--there
are orders out to arrest you."

Goddard seized her fingers and took the money. She would have withdrawn her hand but he held
it firmly.

"Who told you that they were after me?" he asked in a fierce whisper.

"Mr. Juxon--let me go."

"Mr. Juxon!" The convict uttered a rough oath. "Your friend Mr. Juxon, eh? He is after me,
is he? Tell him--"

"Hush, hush!" she whispered. "He has no idea you are here--"

"I should think not," muttered Walter. "He would not be sneaking in here on the sly to see
you if he knew I were about!"

"What do you mean?" asked Mary. "Oh, Walter, let me go--you hurt me so!" He held her fingers
as in a vice.

"Hurt you! I wish I could strangle you and him too! Ha, you thought I was not looking this
afternoon when he came! He went to the corner of the road with the parson, and when the parson
was out of sight he came back! I saw you!"

"You saw nothing!" answered his wife desperately. "How can you say so! If you knew how kind
he has been, what a loyal gentleman he is, you would not dare to say such things."

"You used to say I was a loyal gentleman, Mary," retorted the convict. "I daresay he is of
the same stamp as I. Look here, Mary, if I catch this loyal gentleman coming here any more
I will cut his throat--so look out!"

"You do not mean to say you are going to remain here any longer, in danger of your life?" said
Mary in great alarm.

"Well--a man can only hang once. Give me some more of that bread and cheese, Mary. It was exceedingly
good."

"Then let me go," said his wife, trembling with horror at the threat she had just heard.

"Oh yes. I will let you go. But I will just hold the window open in case you don't come back
soon enough. Look sharp!"

There was no need to hurry the unfortunate woman. In less than three minutes she returned,
bringing a "quartern" loaf and a large piece of cheese. She thrust them out upon the window-sill
and withdrew her hand before he could catch it. But he held the window open.

"Now go!" she said. "I cannot do more for you--for God's sake go!"

"You seem very anxious to see the last of me," he whispered. "I daresay if I am hanged you
will get a ticket to see me turned off. Yes--we mention those things rather freely up in town.
Don't be alarmed. I will come back to-morrow night--you had better listen. If you had shown
a little more heart, I would have been satisfied, but you are so stony that I think I would
like another fifty pounds to-morrow night. Those notes are so deliciously crisp--"

"Listen, Walter!" said Mary. "Unless you promise to go I will raise an alarm at once. I can
face shame again well enough. I will have you--hush! For God's sake--hush! There is somebody
coming!"

The convict's quick ear had caught the sound. Instantly he knelt and then lay down at full
length upon the ground below the window. It was a fine night and the conscientious Mr. Gall
was walking his beat. The steady tramp of his heavy shoes had something ominous in it which
struck terror into the heart of the wretched fugitive. With measured tread he came from the
direction of the village. Reaching the cottage he paused and dimly in the starlight Mrs. Goddard
could distinguish his glazed hat--the provincial constabulary still wore hats in those days.
Mr. Gall stood not fifteen yards from the cottage, failed to observe that a window was open
on the lower floor, nodded to himself as though satisfied with his inspection and walked on.
Little by little the sound of his steps grew fainter in the distance. Walter slowly raised
himself again from the ground, and put his head in at the window.

"You see it would not be hard to have you caught," whispered his wife, still breathless with
the passing excitement. "That was the policeman. If I had called him, it would have been all
over with you. I tell you if you try to come again I will give you up."

"Oh, that's the way you treat me, is it?" said the convict with another oath. "Then you had
better look out for your dear Mr. Juxon, that's all."

Without another word, Goddard glided away from the window, let himself out by the wicket gate
and disappeared across the road.

Mary Goddard was in that moment less horrified by her husband's threat than by his base ingratitude
to herself and by the accusation he seemed to make against her. Worn out with the emotions
of fear and anxiety, she had barely the strength to close and fasten the window. Then she sank
into the first chair she could find in the dark and stared into the blackness around her. It
seemed indeed more than she could bear. She was placed in the terrible position of being obliged
to betray her fugitive husband, or of living in constant fear lest he should murder the best
friend she had in the world. 

I thought that this would be the best season for me to present myself.

Accordingly, one morning after the /levee/, I repaired to his palace.

The ante-chamber was already crowded. I sat myself quietly down in one corner of the room,
and looked upon the motley groups around.

I smiled inly as they reminded me of the scenes my own anteroom, in my younger days of folly
and fortune, was wont to exhibit; the same heterogeneous assemblage
(only upon a grander scale) of the ministers to the physical appetites
and the mental tastes.

There was the fretting and impudent mountebank, side by side with
the gentle and patient scholar; the harlot's envoy and the priest's
messenger; the agent of the police and the licensed breaker of its
laws; there--but what boots a more prolix description?

What is the anteroom of a great man, who has many wants and many tastes, but a panorama of the
blended disparities of this compounded world?

While I was moralizing, a gentleman suddenly thrust his head out of a door, and appeared to reconnoitre
us. Instantly the crowd swept up to him.

I thought I might as well follow the general example, and pushing aside some of my fellow-loiterers,
I presented myself and my name to the gentleman, with the most ingratiating air I could command.

The
gentleman, who was tolerably civil for a great man's great man, promised
that my visit should be immediately announced to the Prince; and then,
with the politest bow imaginable, slapped the door in my face.

After I had waited about seven or eight minutes longer, the gentleman
reappeared, singled me from the crowd, and desired me to follow him;
I passed through another room, and was presently in the Regent's presence.

I

was rather startled when I saw, by the morning light, and in deshabille,
the person of that royal martyr to dissipation.

His countenance was red, but bloated, and a weakness in his eyes added considerably to the
jaded and haggard expression of his features. A proportion of stomach rather inclined to corpulency
seemed to betray the taste for the pleasures of the table, which the most radically coarse,
and yet (strange to say) the most generally accomplished and really good-natured of royal
profligates, combined with his other qualifications. He was yawning very elaborately over a great
heap of papers when I entered. He finished his yawn (as if it were too brief and too precious
a recreation to lose), and then said, "Good morning, Monsieur Devereux; I am glad that you have
found me out /at last/."

"I was afraid, Monseigneur, of appearing an intruder on your presence,
by offering my homage to you before."

"So like my good fortune," said the Regent, turning to a man seated
at another table at some distance, whose wily, astute countenance,
piercing eye, and licentious expression of lip and brow, indicated
at once the ability and vice which composed his character.

"So like my good fortune, is it not, Dubois? If ever I meet with a tolerably pleasant fellow,
who does not disgrace me by his birth or reputation, he is always
so terribly afraid of intruding! and whenever I pick up a respectable
personage without wit, or a wit without respectability, he attaches
himself to me like a burr, and can't live a day without inquiring
after my health."

Dubois smiled, bowed, but did not answer, and I saw that his look
was bent darkly and keenly upon me.

"Well," said the Prince, "what think you of our opera, Count Devereux? It beats your English
one--eh?"
 I hope, however, that he will not go to the cottage--"

"My dear, I have a funeral this morning. I wish you would not disturb my mind with these trifles."

"Trifles! Who is dead? You did not tell me."

"Poor Judd's baby, of course. We have spoken of it often enough, I am sure."

"Oh yes, of course. Poor Tom Judd!" exclaimed Mrs. Ambrose with genuine sympathy. "It seems
to me you are always burying his babies, Augustin! It is very sad."

"Not always, my dear. Frequently," said the vicar correcting her. "It is very sad, as you say.
Very sad. You took so much trouble to help them this time, too."

"Trouble!" Mrs. Ambrose cast up her eyes. "You don't know how much trouble. But I am quite
sure it was the fault of that brazen-faced doctor. I cannot bear the sight of him! That comes
of answering advertisements in the newspapers."

The present doctor had bought the practice abandoned by Mrs. Ambrose's son-in-law. He had paid
well for it, but his religious principles had not formed a part of the bargain.

"It is of no use to cry over spilt milk, my dear."

"I do not mean to. No, I never do. But it is very unpleasant to have such people about. I really
hope Tom Judd will not lose his next baby. When is John coming?"

"To-morrow. My dear, if I forget it this morning, will you remember to speak to Reynolds about
the calf?"

"Certainly, Augustin," said his wife. Therewith the good vicar left her and went to bury Tom
Judd's baby, divided in his mind between rejoicing over his favourite pupil's success and lamenting,
as he sincerely did, the misfortunes which befell his parishioners. When he left the churchyard
an hour later he was met by Martha, who came from the cottage with a message begging that the
vicar would come to Mrs. Goddard as soon as possible. Martha believed her mistress was ill,
she wanted to see Mr. Ambrose at once. Without returning to the vicarage he turned to the left
towards the cottage.

Mrs. Goddard had slept that night, being exhausted and almost broken down with fatigue. But
she woke only to a sense of the utmost pain and distress, realising that to-day's anxiety was
harder to bear than yesterday's, and that to-morrow might bring forth even worse disasters
than those which had gone before. Her position was one of extreme doubt and peril. To tell
any one that her husband was in the neighbourhood seemed to be equivalent to rooting out the
very last remnant of consideration for him which remained in her heart, the very last trace
of what had once been the chief joy and delight of her life. She hesitated long. There is perhaps
nothing in human nature more enduring than the love of man and wife; or perhaps one should
rather say than the love of a woman for her husband. There appear to be some men capable of
being so completely estranged from their wives that there positively does not remain in them
even the faintest recollection of what they have once felt, nor the possibility of feeling
the least pity for what the women they once loved so well may suffer. There is no woman, I
believe, who having once loved her husband truly, could see him in pain or distress, or in
danger of his life, without earnestly endeavouring to help him. A woman may cease to love her
husband; in some cases she is right in forgetting her love, but it would be hard to find a
case where, were he the worst criminal alive, had he deceived her a thousand times, she would
not at least help him to escape from his pursuers or give him a crust to save him from starvation.

Mary Goddard had done her best for the wretch who had claimed her assistance. She had fed him,
provided him with money, refused to betray him. But if it were to be a question of giving him
up to the law, or of allowing her best friend to be murdered by him, or even seriously injured,
she felt that pity must be at an end. It would be doubtless a very horrible thing to give him
up, and she had gathered from what he had said that if he were taken he would pay the last
penalty of the law. It was so awful a thing that she groaned when she thought of it. But she
remembered his ghastly face in the starlight and the threat he had hissed out against the squire;
he was a desperate man, with blood already on his hands. It was more than likely that he would
do the deed he had threatened to do. What could be easier than to watch the squire on one of
those evenings when he went up the park alone, to fall upon him and take his life? Of late
Mr. Juxon did not even take his dog with him. The savage bloodhound would be a good protector;
but even when he took Stamboul with him by day, he never brought him at night. It was too long
for the beast to wait, he used to say, from six to nine or half past; he was so savage that
he did not care to leave him out of his sight; he brought mud into the cottage, or into the
vicarage as the case might be--if Stamboul had been an ordinary dog it would have been different.
Those Russian bloodhounds were not to be trifled with. But the squire must be warned of his
danger before another night came on.

It was a difficult question. Mrs. Goddard at first thought of telling him herself; but she
shrank from the thought, for she was exhausted and overwrought. A few days ago she would have
been brave enough to say anything if necessary, but now she had no longer the courage nor the
strength. It seemed so hard to face the squire with such a warning; it seemed as though she
were doing something which would make her seem ungrateful in his eyes, though she hardly knew
why it seemed so. She turned more naturally to the vicar, to whom she had originally come in
her first great distress; she had only once consulted him, but that one occasion seemed to
establish a precedent in her mind, the precedent of a thing familiar. It would certainly be
easier. After much thought and inward debate, she determined to send for Mr. Ambrose.

The fatigue and anxiety she had undergone during the last two days had wrought great changes
in her face. A girl of eighteen or twenty years may gain delicacy and even beauty from the
physical effects of grief, but a woman over thirty years old gains neither. Mrs. Goddard's
complexion, naturally pale, had taken a livid hue; her lips, which were never very red, were
almost white; heavy purple shadows darkened her eyes; the two or three lines that were hardly
noticeable, but which were the natural result of a sad expression in her face, had in two days
become distinctly visible and had almost assumed the proportions of veritable wrinkles. Her
features were drawn and pinched--she looked ten years older than she was. Nothing remained
of her beauty but her soft waving brown hair and her deep, pathetic, violet eyes. Even her
small hands seemed to have grown thin and looked unnaturally white and transparent.

She was sitting in her favourite chair by the fire, when the vicar arrived. She had not been
willing to seem ill, in spite of what Martha had said, and she had refused to put cushions
in the chair. She was making an effort, and even a little sense of physical discomfort helped
to make the effort seem easier. She was so much exhausted that she felt she must not for one
moment relax the tension she imposed upon herself lest her whole remaining strength should
suddenly collapse and leave her at the mercy of events. But Mr. Ambrose was startled when he
saw her and feared that she was very ill.

"My dear Mrs. Goddard," he said, "what is the matter? Are you ill? Has anything happened?"

As he spoke he changed the form of his question, suddenly recollecting that Mr. Juxon had probably
on the previous afternoon told her of her husband's escape, as he had meant to do. This might
be the cause of her indisposition.

"Yes," she said in a voice that did not sound like her own, "I have asked you to come because
I am in great trouble--in desperate trouble."

"Dear me," said the vicar, "I hope not!"

"Not desperate? Perhaps not. Dear Mr. Ambrose, you have always been so kind to me--I am sure
you can help me now." Her voice trembled.

"Indeed I will do my best," said the vicar who judged from so unusual an outburst that there
must be really something wrong. "If you could tell me what it is--" he suggested.

"That is the hardest part of it," said the unhappy woman. She paused a moment as though to
collect her strength. "You know," she began again, "that my husband has escaped?"

"A terrible business!" exclaimed the good man, nodding, however, in affirmation to the question
she asked.

"I have seen him," said Mary Goddard very faintly, looking down at her thin hands. The vicar
started in astonishment.

"My dear friend--dear me! Dear, dear, how very painful!"

"Indeed, you do not know what I have suffered. It is most dreadful, Mr. Ambrose. You cannot
imagine what a struggle it was. I am quite worn out."

She spoke with such evident pain that the vicar was moved. He felt that she had more to tell,
but he had hardly recovered from his surprise.

"But, you know," he said, "that was the whole object of warning you. We did not really believe
that he would come here. We were so much afraid that he would startle you. Of course Mr. Juxon
told you he consulted me--"

"Of course," answered Mrs. Goddard. "It was too late. I had seen him the night before."

"Why, that was the very night we were here!" exclaimed Mr. Ambrose, more and more amazed. Mrs.
Goddard nodded. She seemed hardly able to speak.

"He came and knocked at that window," she said, very faintly. "He came again last night."

"Dear me--I will send for Gall at once; he will have no difficulty in arresting him--"

"Oh please!" interrupted Mrs. Goddard in hysterical tones. "Please, please, dear Mr. Ambrose,
don't!"

The vicar was silent. He rose unceremoniously from his chair and walked to the window, as he
generally did when in any great doubt. He realised at once and very vividly the awful position
in which the poor lady was placed.

"Pray do not think I am very bad," said she, almost sobbing with fear and emotion. "Of course
it must seem dreadful to you that I should wish him to escape!"

The vicar came slowly back and stood beside her leaning against the chimney-piece. It did not
take him long to make up his mind. Kind-hearted people are generally impulsive.

"I do not, my dear lady. I assure you I fully understand your position. The fact is, I was
too much surprised and I am too anxious for your safety not to think immediately of securing
that--ahem--that unfortunate man."

"Oh, it is not my safety! It is not only my safety--"

"I understand--yes--of course you are anxious about him. But it is doubtless not our business
to aid the law in its course, provided we do not oppose it."

"It is something else," murmured Mrs. Goddard. "Oh! how shall I tell you," she moaned turning
her pale cheek to the back of the chair.

The vicar looked at her and began to think it was perhaps some strange case of conscience with
which he had to deal. He had very little experience of such things save in the rude form they
take among the labouring classes. But he reflected that it was likely to be something of the
kind; in such a case Mrs. Goddard would naturally enough have sent for him, more as her clergyman
than as her friend. She looked like a person suffering from some great mental strain. He sat
down beside her and took her passive hand. He was moved, and felt as though he might have been
her father.

"My dear," he said kindly, almost as though he were speaking to a child, "have you anything
upon your mind, anything which distresses you? Do you wish to tell me? If so I will do my very
best to help you."

Mrs. Goddard's fingers pressed his hand a little, but her face was still turned away.

"It is Mr. Juxon," she almost whispered. If she had been watching the vicar she would have
noticed the strange air of perplexity which came over his face when he heard the squire's name.

"Yes--Mr. Juxon," she moaned. Then the choked-down horror rose in her throat. "Walter means
to murder him!" she almost screamed. "Oh, my God, my God, what shall I do!" she cried aloud
clasping her hands suddenly over her face and rocking herself to and fro.

The vicar was horror-struck; he could hardly believe his ears, and believing them his senses
swam. In his wildest dreams--and the good man's dreams were rarely wild--he had never thought
that such things could come near him. Being a very good man and, moreover, a wise man when
he had plenty of time for reflection, he folded his hands quietly and bent his head, praying
fervently for the poor tortured woman who moaned and tossed herself beside him. It was a terrible
moment. Suddenly she controlled herself and grasping one of the arms of the chair looked round
at her silent companion.

"You must save him," she said in agonised tones, "you must save them both! Do not tell me you
cannot--oh, do not tell me that!"

It was a passionate and heart-broken appeal, such a one as few men would or could resist, coming
as it did from a helpless and miserably unhappy woman. Whether the vicar was wise in giving
the answer he did, it would be hard to say: but he was a man who honestly tried to do his best.

"I will try, my dear lady," he said, making a great resolution. Mrs. Goddard took his hand
and pressed it in both of hers, and the long restrained tears flowed fast and softly over her
worn cheeks. For some moments neither spoke.

"If you cannot save both--you must save--Mr. Juxon," she said at last, breathing the words
rather than speaking them.

The vicar knew or guessed what it must cost her to hint that her husband might be captured.
He recognised that the only way in which he could contribute towards the escape of the convict
was by not revealing his hiding-place, and he accordingly refrained from asking where he was
concealed. He shuddered as he thought that Goddard might be lying hidden in the cottage itself,
for all he could tell, but he was quite sure that he ought not to know it. So long as he did
not know where the forger was, it was easy to hold his peace; but if once he knew, the vicar
was not capable of denying the knowledge. He had never told a lie in his life.

"I will try," he repeated; and growing calmer, he added, "You are quite sure this was not an
empty threat, my dear friend? Was there any reason--a--I mean to say, had this unfortunate
man ever known Mr. Juxon?"

"Oh no!" answered Mrs. Goddard, sinking back into her chair. "He never knew him." Her tears
were still flowing but she no longer sobbed aloud; it had been a relief to her overwrought
and sensitive temperament to give way to the fit of weeping. She actually felt better, though
ten minutes earlier she would not have believed it possible.

"Then--why?" asked Mr. Ambrose, hesitating.

"My poor husband was a very jealous man," she answered. "I accidentally told him that the cottage
belonged to Mr. Juxon and yesterday--do you remember? You walked on with Mr. Juxon beyond the
turning, and then he came back to see me--to tell me of my husband's escape. Walter saw that
and--and he thought, I suppose--that Mr. Juxon did not want you to see him coming here."

"But Mr. Juxon had just promised me to go and see you," said the honest vicar.

"Yes," said poor Mrs. Goddard, beginning to sob again, "but Walter--my husband--thinks that
I--I care for Mr. Juxon--he is so jealous," cried she, again covering her face with her hands.
The starting tears trickled through her fingers and fell upon her black dress. She was ashamed,
this time, for she hated even to speak of such a possibility.

"I understand," answered Mr. Ambrose gravely. It certainly did not strike him that it might
be true, and his knowledge of such characters as Walter Goddard was got chiefly from the newspapers.
He had often noticed in reports of trials and detailed descriptions of crimes that criminals
seem to become entirely irrational after a certain length of time, and it was one of the arguments
he best understood for demonstrating that bad men either are originally, or ultimately become
mad. To men like the vicar, almost the only possible theory of crime is the theory of insanity.
It is positively impossible for a man who has passed thirty or forty years in a quiet country
parish to comprehend the motives or the actions of great criminals. He naturally says they
must be crazy or they would not do such things. If Goddard were crazy enough to commit a forgery,
he was crazy enough for anything, even to the extent of suspecting that his wife loved the squire.

"I think," said Mr. Ambrose, "that if you agree with me it will be best to warn Mr. Juxon of
his danger."

"Of course," murmured Mrs. Goddard. "You must warn him at once!"

"I will go to the Hall now," said the vicar bravely. "But--I am very sorry to have to dwell
on the subject, my dear lady, but, without wishing in the least to know where the--your husband
is, could you tell me anything about his appearance? For instance, if you understand what I
mean, supposing that Mr. Juxon knew how he looked and should happen to meet him, knowing that
he wished to kill him--he might perhaps avoid him, if you understand me?"

The vicar's English was a little disturbed by his extreme desire not to hurt Mrs. Goddard's
feelings. If the squire and his dog chanced to meet Walter Goddard they would probably not
avoid him as the vicar expressed it; that was a point Mr. Ambrose was willing to leave to Mrs.
Goddard's imagination.

"Yes--must you know?" she asked anxiously.

"We must know that," returned the vicar.

"He is disguised as a poor tramp," she said sorrowfully. "He wears a smock-frock and an old
hat I think. He is pale--oh, poor, poor Walter!" she cried again bursting into tears.

Mr. Ambrose could say nothing. There was nothing to be said. He rose and took his hat--the
old tall hat he wore to his parishioners' funerals. They were very primitive people in Billingsfield.

"I will go at once," he said. "Believe me, you have all my sympathy--I will do all I can."

Mary Goddard thanked him more by her looks than with any words she was able to speak. But she
was none the less truly grateful for his sympathy and aid. She had a kind of blind reliance
on him which made her feel that since she had once confided her trouble and danger nothing
more could possibly be done. When he was gone, she sobbed with relief, as before she had wept
for fear; she was hysterical, unstrung, utterly unlike herself.

But as the vicar went up towards the Hall he felt that he had his hands full, and he felt moreover
an uneasy sensation which he could not have explained. He was certainly no coward, but he had
never been in such a position before and he did not like it; there was an air of danger about,
an atmosphere which gave him a peculiarly unpleasant thrill from time to time. He was not engaged
upon an agreeable errand, and he had a vague feeling, due, the scientists would have told him,
to unconscious ratiocination, which seemed to tell him that something was going to happen.
People who are very often in danger know that singular uneasiness which warns them that all
is not well; it is not like anything else that can be felt. No one really knows its cause,
unless it be true that the mind sometimes reasons for itself without the consciousness of the
body, and communicates to the latter a spasmodic warning, the result of its cogitations.

To say to the sturdy squire, "Beware of a man in a smock-frock, one Goddard the forger, who
means to murder you," seemed of itself simple enough. But for the squire to distinguish this
same Goddard from all other men in smock-frocks was a less easy matter. The vicar, indeed,
could tell a strange face at a hundred yards, for he knew every man, woman and child in his
parish; but the squire's acquaintance was more limited. Obviously, said Mr. Ambrose to himself,
the squire's best course would be to stay quietly at home until the danger was passed, and
to pass word to Policeman Gall to lay hands on any particularly seedy-looking tramps he happened
to see in the village. It was Gall's duty to do so in any case, as he had been warned to be
on the look-out. Mr. Ambrose inwardly wondered where the man could be hiding. Billingsfield
was not, he believed, an easy place to hide in, for every ploughman knew his fellow, and a
new face was always an object of suspicion. Not a gipsy tinker entered the village but what
every one heard of it, and though tramps came through from time to time, it would be a difficult
matter for one of them to remain two days in the place without attracting a great deal of attention.
It was possible that Walter Goddard might have been concealed for one night in his wife's house,
but even there he could not have remained hidden for two days without being seen by Mrs. Goddard's
two women servants. The vicar walked rapidly through the park, looking about him suspiciously
as he went. Goddard might at that very moment be lurking behind any one of those oaks; it would
be most unpleasant if he mistook the vicar for the squire. But that, the vicar reflected, was
impossible on account of his clerical dress. He reached the Hall in safety and stood looking
down among the leafless trees, waiting for the door to be opened.

CHAPTER XVII.

Mr. Juxon received the vicar in the library as he had received him on the previous day; but
on the present occasion Mr. Ambrose had not been sent for and the squire's face wore an expression
of inquiry. He supposed his friend had come to ask him the result of the interview with Mrs.
Goddard, and as he himself was on the point of going towards the cottage he wished the vicar
had come at a later or an earlier hour.

"I have a message to give you," said Mr. Ambrose, "a very important message."

"Indeed?" answered the squire, observing his serious face.

"Yes. I had better tell you at once. Mrs. Goddard sent for me this morning. She has actually
seen her husband, who must be hiding in the neighbourhood. He came to her drawing-room window
last night and the night before."

"Dear me!" exclaimed Mr. Juxon. "You don't tell me so!"

"That is not the worst of the matter," continued the vicar, looking very grave and fixing his
eyes on the squire's face. "This villainous fellow has been threatening to take your life,
Mr. Juxon."

Mr. Juxon stared at the vicar for a moment in surprise, and then broke into a hearty laugh.

"My life!" he cried. "Upon my word, the fellow does not know what he is talking about! Do you
mean to say that this escaped convict, who can be arrested at sight wherever he is found, imagines
that he could attack me in broad daylight without being caught?"

"Well, no, I suppose not--but you often walk home at night, Mr. Juxon--alone through the park."

"I think that dog of mine could manage Mr. Goddard," remarked the squire calmly. "And pray,
Mr. Ambrose, now that we know that the man is in the neighbourhood, what is to prevent us from
finding him?"

"We do not know where he is," replied the vicar, thanking the inspiration which had prevented
him from asking Mrs. Goddard more questions. He had promised to save Goddard, too, or at least
not to facilitate his capture. But though he was glad to be able to say honestly that he did
not know where he was, he began to doubt whether in the eyes of the law he was acting rightly.

"You do not know?" asked the squire.

"No; and besides I think--perhaps--we ought to consider poor Mrs. Goddard's position."

"Mrs. Goddard's position!" exclaimed Mr. Juxon almost angrily. "And who should consider her
position more than I, Mr. Ambrose? My dear sir, I consider her position before all things--of
course I do. But nothing could be of greater advantage to her position than the certainty that
her husband is safely lodged in prison. I cannot imagine how he contrived to escape--can you?"

"No, I cannot," answered Mr. Ambrose, thrusting his hands into his pockets and biting his long
upper lip.

"By the bye, did the fellow happen to say why he meant to lay violent hands on me?" inquired
Mr. Juxon.

"Since you ask--he did. It appears that he saw you going into the cottage, and immediately
became jealous--"

"Of me?" Mr. Juxon coloured a little beneath his bronzed complexion, and grew more angry. "Well,
upon my word! But if that is true I am much obliged for your warning. Fellows of that sort
never reason--he will very likely attack me as you say. It will be quite the last time he attacks
anybody--the devil shall have his own, Mr. Ambrose, if I can help him to it--"

"Dear me! Mr. Juxon--you surprise me," said the vicar, who had never heard his friend use such
strong language before.

"It is enough to surprise anybody," remarked the squire. "I trust we shall surprise Mr. Goddard
before night. Excuse me, but when did he express his amiable intentions towards me?"

"Last night, I believe," replied Mr. Ambrose, reluctantly.

"And when did he see me going into the cottage?"

"Yesterday afternoon, I believe." The vicar felt as though he were beginning to break his promise
of shielding the fugitive, but he could not refuse to answer a direct question.

"Then, when he saw me, he was either in the cottage or in the park. There was no one in the
road, I am quite sure."

"I do not know," said the vicar, delighted at being able to say so. He was such a simple man
that Mr. Juxon noticed the tone of relief in which he denied any knowledge of Goddard's whereabouts
on the previous day as compared with his reluctance to answer upon those points of which he
was certain.

"You are not anxious that Goddard should be caught," said the squire rather sharply.

"Frankly," returned the vicar, "I do not wish to be instrumental in his capture--not that I
am likely to be."

"That is none of my business, Mr. Ambrose. I will try and catch him alone. But it would be
better that he should be taken alive and quietly--"

"Surely," cried the vicar in great alarm, "you would not kill him?"

"Oh no, certainly not. But my dog might, Mr. Ambrose. They are ugly dogs when they are angry,
and they have a remarkable faculty for finding people who are lost. They used to use them in
Russia for tracking fugitive serfs and convicts who escaped from Siberia."

Mr. Ambrose shuddered. The honest squire seemed almost as bloodthirsty in his eyes as the convict
Goddard. He felt that he did not understand Mr. Juxon. The idea of hunting people with bloodhounds
seemed utterly foreign to his English nature, and he could not understand how his English friend
could entertain such a thought; he probably forgot that a few generations earlier the hunting
of all kinds of men, papists, dissenters, covenanters and rebels, with dogs, had been a favourite
English sport.

"Really, Mr. Juxon," he said in an agitated tone, "I think you would do much better to protect
yourself with the means provided by the law. Considerations of humanity--"

"Considerations of humanity, sir, are at an end when one man threatens the life of another.
You admit yourself that I am not safe unless Goddard is caught, and yet you object to my method
of catching him. That is illogical."

The vicar felt that this was to some extent true; but he was not willing to admit it. He knew
also that if he could dissuade the squire from his barbarous scheme, Goddard would have a far
better chance of escape.

"I think that with the assistance of Gall and a London detective--" he began.

"Gall is an old woman, Mr. Ambrose, and it will take twenty-four hours to get a detective from
town. In twenty-four hours this man may have attacked me."

"He will hardly attempt to force his way into your house, Mr. Juxon."

"So then, I am to stay at home to suit his convenience? I will not do any such thing. Besides,
in twenty-four hours Goddard may have changed his mind and may have taken himself off. For
the rest of her life Mrs. Goddard will then be exposed to the possibility of every kind of
annoyance."

"He would never come back, I am sure," objected the vicar.

"Why not? Every time he comes she will give him money. The more money she gives him the more
often he will come, unless we put an end to his coming altogether."

"You seem to forget," urged Mr. Ambrose, "that there will be a vigorous search made for him.
Why not telegraph to the governor of Portland?"

"I thought you wanted to save Mrs. Goddard from needless scandal; did you not?" returned the
squire. "The governor of Portland would send down a squad of police who would publish the whole
affair. He would have done so as soon as the man escaped had he known that Mrs. Goddard lived
here."

"I wonder how Goddard himself knew it," remarked Mr. Ambrose.

"I don't know. Perhaps she told him she was coming here, at their last interview. Or perhaps
she wrote to him in prison and the governor overlooked the letter. Anything like that would
account for it."

"But if you catch him--alive," hesitated the vicar, "it will all be known at once. I do not
see how you can prevent that."

"If I catch him alive, I will take him out of Billingsfield without any one's knowledge. I
do not mean to hurt him. I only want to get him back to prison. Believe me, I am much more
anxious than you can possibly be to save Mrs. Goddard from harm."

"Very well. I have done my errand," said Mr. Ambrose, with a sort of sigh of relief. "I confess,
I am in great anxiety of mind, both on your account and on hers. I never dreamed that such
things could happen in Billingsfield."

"You are certainly not responsible for them," answered Mr. Juxon. "It is not your fault--"

"Not altogether, perhaps. But I was perhaps wrong in letting her come here--no, I am sure I
was not," he added impulsively, as though ashamed of having said anything so unkind.

"Certainly not. You were quite right, Mr. Ambrose, quite right, I assure you."

"Well, I hope all may yet be for the best," said the vicar.

"Let us hope so," replied Mr. Juxon gravely. "By all means, let us hope that all may be for
the best."

Whether the squire doubted the possibility of so happy an issue to events or not, is uncertain.
He felt almost more sorry for the vicar than for himself; the vicar was such a good man, so
unused to the violent deeds of violent people, of which the squire in his wanderings had seen
more than was necessary to convince him that all was not always for the best in this best of
all possible worlds.

Mr. Ambrose left his friend and as he retraced his steps through the park was more disturbed
than ever. That Goddard should contemplate killing the squire was bad enough, in all conscience,
but that the squire should deliberately purpose to hunt down Goddard with his bloodhound seemed
somehow even worse. The vicar had indeed promised Mrs. Goddard that he would not help to capture
her husband, but he would have been as glad as any one to hear that the convict was once more
lodged in his prison. There lurked in his mind, nevertheless, an impression that even a convict
should have a fair chance. The idea was not expressed, but existed in him. Everybody, he would
have said, ought to have a fair chance, and as the law of nations forbids the use of explosive
bullets in warfare, the laws of humanity seemed to forbid the use of bloodhounds in the pursuit
of criminals. He had a very great respect for the squire's character and principles, but the
cold-blooded way in which Mr. Juxon had spoken of catching and probably killing Walter Goddard,
had shaken the good vicar's belief in his friend. He doubted whether he were not now bound
to return to Mrs. Goddard and to warn her in his turn of her husband's danger, whether he ought
not to do something to save the wretched convict from his fate. It seemed hideous to think
that in peaceful Billingsfield, in his own lonely parish, a human being should be exposed to
such peril. But at this point the vicar's continuity forsook him. He had not the heart to tell
the tale of his interview with Mr. Juxon to the unhappy lady he had left that morning. It was
extremely improbable, he thought, that she should be able to communicate with her husband during
the day, and the squire's language led him to think that the day would not pass without some
attempt to discover Walter Goddard's hiding-place. Besides, the vicar's mind was altogether
more disturbed than it had been in thirty years, and he was no longer able to account to himself
with absolute accuracy for what he did. At all events, he felt that it was better not to tell
Mrs. Goddard what the squire had said.

When he was gone, Mr. Juxon paced his library alone in the greatest uncertainty. He had told
the vicar in his anger that he would find Goddard with the help of Stamboul. That the hound
was able to accomplish the feat in the present weather, and if Goddard had actually stood some
time at the cottage window on the previous night, he did not doubt for a moment. The vicar
had mentioned the window to him when he told him that Mrs. Goddard had seen her husband. He
had probably been at the window as late as midnight, and the scent, renewed by his visit, would
not be twelve hours old. Stamboul could find the man, unless he had got into a cart, which
was improbable. But a new and startling consideration presented itself to the squire's mind
when the vicar was gone and his anger had subsided; a consideration which made him hesitate
what course to pursue.

That he would be justified in using any means in his power to catch the criminal seemed certain.
It would be for the public good that he should be delivered up to justice as soon as possible.
So long as Goddard was at large the squire's own life was not safe, and Mrs. Goddard was liable
to all kinds of annoyances at any moment. There was every reason why the fellow should be captured.
But to capture him, safe and sound, was one thing; to expose him to the jaws of Stamboul was
quite another. Mr. Juxon had a lively recollection of the day in the Belgrade forest when the
great hound had pulled down one of his assailants, making his fangs meet through flesh and
bone. If Stamboul were set upon Goddard's track, the convict could hardly escape with his life.
In the first flush of the squire's anger this seemed of little importance. But on mature reflection
the thing appeared in a different light.

He loved Mrs. Goddard in his own way, which was a very honourable way, if not very passionate.
He had asked her to marry him. She had expressed a wish that she were a widow, implying perhaps
that if she had been free she would have accepted him. If the obstacle of her living husband
were removed, it was not improbable that she would look favourably upon the squire's suit;
to bring Goddard to an untimely end would undoubtedly be to clear the way for the squire. It
was not then, a legitimate desire for justice which made him wish to catch the convict and
almost to wish that Stamboul might worry him to death; it was the secret hope that Goddard
might be killed and that he, Charles James Juxon, might have the chance to marry his widow.
"In other words," he said to himself, "I really want to murder Goddard and take his wife."

It was not easy to see where legitimate severity ended and unlawful and murderous selfishness
began. The temptation was a terrible one. The very uncertainty which there was, tempted the
squire to disregard the possibility of Goddard's death as compared with the importance of his
capture. It was quite likely, he unconsciously argued, that the bloodhound would not kill him
after all; it was even possible that he might not find him; but it would be worth while to
make the attempt, for the results to be obtained by catching the fugitive were very great--Mrs.
Goddard's peace was to be considered before all things. But still before the squire's eyes
arose the picture of Stamboul tearing the throat of the man he had killed in the Belgrade forest.
If he killed the felon, Juxon would know that to all intents and purposes he had himself done
the deed in order to marry Mrs. Goddard. But still the thought remained with him and would
not leave him.

The fellow had threatened his own life. It was then a fair fight, for a man cannot be blamed
if he tries to get the better of one who is going about to kill him. On one of his many voyages,
he had once shot a man in order to quell a mutiny; he had not killed him it is true, but he
had disabled him for the time--he had handled many a rough customer in his day. The case, he
thought, was similar, for it was the case of self-defence. The law, even, would say he was
justified. But to slay a man in self-defence and then to marry his widow, though justifiable
in law, is a very delicate case for the conscience; and in spite of the wandering life he had
led, Mr. Juxon's conscience was sensitive. He was an honest man and a gentleman, he had tried
all his life to do right as he saw it, and did not mean to turn murderer now, no matter how
easy it would be for him to defend his action.

At the end of an hour he had decided that it would be murder, and no less, to let Stamboul
track Goddard to his hiding-place. The hound might accompany him in his walks, and if anybody
attacked him it would be so much the worse for his assailant. Murder or no murder, he was entitled
to take any precautions he pleased against an assault. But he would not willingly put the bloodhound
on the scent, and he knew well enough that the dog would not run upon a strange trail unless
he were put to it. The squire went to his lunch, feeling that he had made a good resolution;
but he ate little and soon afterwards began to feel the need of going down to see Mrs. Goddard.
No day was complete without seeing her, and considering the circumstances which had occurred
on the previous afternoon, it was natural that he should call to inquire after her state. In
the hall, the gigantic beast which had played such an important part in his thoughts during
the morning, came solemnly up to him, raising his great red eyes as though asking whether he
were to accompany his master. The squire stood still and looked at him for a moment.

"Come along, Stamboul!" he said suddenly, as he put on his hat. The hound leaped up and laid
his heavy paws on the squire's shoulders, trying to lick his face in his delight, then, almost
upsetting the sturdy man he sprang back, slipped on the polished floor, recovered himself and
with an enormous stride bounded past Mr. Juxon, out into the park. But Mr. Juxon quickly called
him back, and presently he was following close at heel in his own stately way, looking neither
to the right nor to the left. The squire felt nervous, and the sensation was new to him. He
did not believe that Goddard would really attack him at all, certainly not that he would dare
to attack him in broad daylight. But the knowledge of the threat the fellow had uttered made
him watchful. He glanced to the right and left as he walked and gripped his heavy blackthorn
stick firmly in his hand. He wished that if the man were to appear he would come quickly--it
might be hard to hold Stamboul back if he were attacked unawares.

He reached the gate, crossed the road and rang the bell of the cottage. As he stood waiting,
Stamboul smelled the ground, put up his head, smelled it again and with his nose down trotted
slowly to the window on the left hand of the door. He smelled the ground, the wall and presently
put both his fore paws upon the outer ledge of the window. Then he dropped again, and looked
at his master. Martha was a long time in coming to the door.

"After him, Stamboul!" said the squire, almost unconsciously. The dog put his nose down and
began to move slowly about. At that moment the door opened.

"Oh, sir," said Martha, "it's you, sir. I was to say, if you please, that if you called, Mrs.
Goddard was poorly to-day, sir."

"Dear me!" said Mr. Juxon, "I hope she is not ill. Is it anything serious, Martha?"

"Well, sir, she's been down this mornin', but her head ached terrible bad and she went back
to her room--oh, sir, your dog--he's a runnin' home."

As she spoke a sound rang in the air that made Martha start back. It was a deep, resounding,
bell-like note, fierce and wild, rising and falling, low but full, with a horror indescribable
in its echo--the sound which no man who has heard it ever forgets--the baying of a bloodhound
on the track of a man.

The squire turned deadly pale, but he shouted with all his might, as he would have shouted
to a man on the topsail yard in a gale at sea.

"Stamboul! Stamboul! Stamboul!" Again and again he yelled the dog's name.

Stamboul had not gone far. The quickset hedge had baffled the scent for a moment and he was
not a dozen yards beyond it in the park when his master's cry stopped him. Instantly he turned,
cleared the six-foot hedge and double ditch at a bound and came leaping back across the road.
The squire breathed hard, for it had been a terrible moment. If he had not succeeded in calling
the beast back, it might have been all over with Walter Goddard, wherever he was hidden.

"It is only his play," said Mr. Juxon, still very white and holding Stamboul by the collar.
"Please tell Mrs. Goddard, Martha, that I am very sorry indeed to hear that she is ill, and
that I will inquire this evening."

"Yes, sir," said Martha, who eyed the panting beast timidly and showed an evident desire to
shut the door as soon as possible.

The squire felt more nervous than ever as he walked slowly along the road in the direction
of the village, his hand still on the bloodhound's collar. He felt what a narrow escape Goddard
had probably had, and the terrible sound of Stamboul's baying had brought back to him once
again and very vividly the scene in the woods by the Bosphorus. He felt that for a few minutes
at least he would rather not enter the park with the dog by him, and he naturally turned towards
the vicarage, not with any intention of going in, but from sheer force of custom, as people
under the influence of strong emotions often do things unconsciously which they are in the
habit of doing. He walked slowly along, and had almost reached Mr. Ambrose's pretty old red
brick house, when he found himself face to face with the vicar's wife. She presented an imposing
appearance, as usual; her grey skirt, drawn up a little from the mud, revealed a bright red
petticoat and those stout shoes which she regarded as so essential to health; she wore moreover
a capacious sealskin jacket and a dark bonnet with certain jet flowers, which for many years
had been regarded by the inhabitants of Billingsfield as the distinctive badge of a gentlewoman.
Mrs. Ambrose was wont to smile and say that they were indestructible and would last as long
as she did. She greeted Mr. Juxon cordially.

"How do you, Mr. Juxon--were you going to see us? I was just going for a walk--perhaps you
will come with me?"

Mr. Juxon turned back and prepared to accompany her.

"Such good news this morning, from John Short," she said. "He has finished his examinations,
and it seems almost certain that he will be senior classic. His tutor at Trinity has written
already to congratulate my husband upon his success."

"I am sure, I am delighted, too," said the squire, who had regained his composure but kept
his hold on Stamboul's collar. "He deserves all he gets, and more too," he continued. "I think
he will be a remarkable man."

"I did not think you liked him so very much," said Mrs. Ambrose rather doubtfully, as she walked
slowly by his side.

"Oh--I liked him very much. Indeed, I was going to ask him to stay with me for a few days at
the Hall."

The inspiration was spontaneous. Mr. Juxon was in a frame of mind in which he felt that he
ought to do something pleasant for somebody, to set off against the bloodthirsty designs which
had passed through his mind in the morning. He knew that if he had not been over friendly to
John, it had been John's own fault; but since he had found out that it was impossible to marry
Mrs. Goddard, he had forgiven the young scholar his shortcomings and felt very charitably inclined
towards him. It suddenly struck him that it would give John great pleasure to stop at the Hall
for a few days, and that it would be no inconvenience to himself. The effect upon Mrs. Ambrose
was greater even than he had expected. She was hospitable, good and kind, but she was also
economical, as she had need to be. The squire was rich. If the squire would put up John during
a part of his visit it would be a kindness to John himself, and an economy to the vicarage.
Mr. Ambrose himself would not have gone to such a length; but then, as his wife said to herself
in self-defence, Augustin did not pay the butcher's bills, and did not know how the money went.
She did not say that Augustin was precisely what is called reckless, but he of course did not
understand economy as she did. How should he, poor man, with all his sermons and his funerals
and other occupations to take his mind off? Mrs. Ambrose was delighted at the squire's proposal.

"Really!" she exclaimed. "That would be too good of you, Mr. Juxon. And you do not know how
it would quite delight him! He loves books so much, and then you know," she added in a confidential
manner, "he has never stayed in a country house in his life, I am quite sure."

"And when is he coming down?" asked Mr. Juxon. "I should be very much pleased to have him."

"To-morrow, I think," said Mrs. Ambrose.

"Well--would you ask him from me to come up and stop a week? Can you spare him, Mrs. Ambrose?
I know you are very fond of him, of course, but--"

"Oh very," said she warmly. "But I think it likely he will stay some time," she added in explanation
of her willingness to let him go to the Hall.

The squire felt vaguely that the presence of a guest in his house would probably be a restraint
upon him, and he felt that some restraint would be agreeable to him at the present time.

"Besides," added Mrs. Ambrose, "if you would like to have him first--there is a little repair
necessary in his room at the vicarage--we have put it off too long--"

"By all means." said the squire, following out his own train of thought. "Send him up to me
as soon as he comes. If I can manage it I will be down here to ask him myself."

"It is so good of you," said Mrs. Ambrose.

"Not at all. Are you going to the cottage?"

"Yes--why?"

"Nothing," said Mr. Juxon. "I did not know whether you would like to walk on a little farther
with me. Good-bye, then. You will tell Short as soon as he comes, will you not?"

"Certainly," replied Mrs. Ambrose, still beaming upon him. "I will not let him unpack his things
at the vicarage. Good-bye--so many thanks."

CHAPTER XVIII.

Mrs. Goddard's head ached "terrible bad" according to Martha, and when the vicar left her she
went and lay down upon her bed, with a sensation that if the worst were not yet over she could
bear no more. But she had an elastic temperament, and the fact of having consulted Mr. Ambrose
that morning had been a greater relief than she herself suspected. She felt that he could be
trusted to save Mr. Juxon from harm and Walter from capture, and having once confided to him
the important secret which had so heavily weighed upon her mind she felt that the burthen of
her troubles was lightened. Mr. Juxon could take any measures he pleased for his own safety;
he would probably choose to stay at home until the danger was past. As for her husband, Mary
Goddard did not believe that he would return a third time, for she thought that she had thoroughly
frightened him. It was even likely that he had only thrown out his threat for the sake of terrifying
his wife, and was now far beyond the limits of the parish. So great was the relief she felt
after she had talked with the vicar that she almost ceased to believe there was any danger
at all; looking at it in the light of her present mood, she almost wondered why she had thought
it necessary to tell Mr. Ambrose--until suddenly a vision of her friend the squire, attacked
and perhaps killed, in his own park, rose to her mental vision, and she remembered what agonies
of fear she had felt for him until she had sent for the vicar. The latter indeed seemed to
have been a sort of deus ex maohinâ by whom she suddenly obtained peace of mind and a sense
of security in the hour of her greatest distress.

All that afternoon she lay upon her bed, while Nellie sat beside her and read to her, and stroked
her hands; for Nellie was in reality passionately fond of her mother and suffered almost as
much at the sight of her suffering as she could have done had she been in pain herself. Both
Mrs. Goddard and the child started at the sound of Stamboul's baying, which was unlike anything
they had ever heard before, and Nellie ran to the window.

"It is only Mr. Juxon and Stamboul having a game," said Nellie. "What a noise he made, though!
Did not he?"

Poor Nellie--had she had any idea of what the "game" was from which the squire found it so
hard to make his hound desist, she must have gone almost mad with horror. For the game was
her own father, poor child. But she came back and sat beside her mother utterly unconscious
of what might have happened if Stamboul had once got beyond earshot, galloping along the trail
towards the disused vault at the back of the church. Mrs. Goddard had started at the sounds
and had put her hand to her forehead, but Nellie's explanation was enough to quiet her, and
she smiled faintly and closed her eyes again. Then, half an hour later, Mrs. Ambrose came,
and would not be denied. She wanted to make Mrs. Goddard comfortable, she said, when she found
she was ill, and she did her best, being a kind and motherly woman when not hardened by the
presence of strangers. She told her that John was coming on the next day, speaking with vast
pride of his success and omitting to look sternly at Mrs. Goddard as she had formerly been
accustomed to do when she spoke of the young scholar. Then at last she went away, after exacting
a promise from Mrs. Goddard to come and dine, bringing Nellie with her, on the following day,
in case she should have recovered by that time from her headache.

But during all that night Mrs. Goddard lay awake, listening for the sound she so much dreaded,
of a creeping footstep on the slated path outside and for the tapping at the window. Nothing
came, however, and as the grey dawn began to creep in through the white curtains, she fell
peacefully asleep. Nellie would not let her be waked, and breakfasted without her, enjoying
with childish delight the state of being waited on by Martha alone.

Meanwhile, at an early hour, John arrived at the vicarage and was received with open arms by
Mr. Ambrose and his wife. The latter seemed to forget, in the pleasure of seeing him again,
that she had even once spoken doubtfully of him or hinted that he was anything short of perfection
itself. And to prove how much she had done for him she communicated with great pride the squire's
message, to the effect that he expected John at the Hall that very day.

John's heart leaped with delight at the idea. It was natural. He was indeed most sincerely
attached to the Ambroses, and most heartily glad to be with them; but he had never in his life
had an opportunity of staying in a "big" house, as he would have described it. It seemed as
though he were already beginning to taste the sweet first-fruits of success after all his labour
and all his privations; it was the first taste of another world, the first mouthful of the
good things of life which had fallen to his lot. Instantly there rose before him delicious
visions of hot-water cans brought by a real footman, of luxurious meals served by a real butler,
of soft carpets perpetually beneath his feet, of liberty to lounge in magnificent chairs in
the magnificent library; and last, though not least, there was a boyish feeling of delight
in the thought that when he went to see Mrs. Goddard he would go from the Hall, that she would
perhaps associate him henceforth with a different kind of existence, in a word, that he was
sure to acquire importance in her eyes from the fact of his visit to the squire. Many a young
fellow of one and twenty is as familiar with all that money can give and as tired of luxury
as a broken-down hard liver of forty years; for this is an age of luxurious living. But poor
John had hardly ever tasted the least of those things too familiar to the golden youth of the
period to be even noticed. He had felt when he first entered the little drawing-room of the
cottage that Mrs. Goddard herself belonged, or had belonged, to that delicious unknown world
of ease where the question of expense was never considered, much less mentioned. In her own
eyes she was indeed living in a state approaching to penury, but the spectacle of her pictures,
her furniture and her bibelots had impressed John with a very different idea. The squire's
invitation, asking him to spend a week at the Hall, seemed in a moment to put him upon the
same level as the woman to whom he believed himself so devotedly attached. To his mind the
ideal woman could not but be surrounded by a luxurious atmosphere of her own. To enter the
charmed precincts of those surroundings seemed to John equivalent to being transported from
the regions of the Theocritan to the level of the Anacreontic ode, from the pastoral, of which
he had had too much, to the aristocratic, of which he felt that he could not have enough. It
was a natural feeling in a very young man of his limited experience.

He stayed some hours at the vicarage. Both Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose thought him changed in the
short time which had elapsed since they had seen him. He had grown more grave; he was certainly
more of a man. The great contest he had just sustained with so much honour had left upon his
young face its mark, an air of power which had not formerly been visible there; even his voice
seemed to have grown deeper and rounder, and his words carried more weight. The good vicar,
who had seen several generations of students, already distinguished in John Short the budding
"don," and rubbed his hands with great satisfaction.

John asked few questions but found himself obliged to answer many concerning his recent efforts.
He would have liked to say something about Mrs. Goddard, but he remembered with some awe and
much aversion the circumstances in which he had last quitted the vicarage, and he held his
peace; whereby he again rose in Mrs. Ambrose's estimation. He made up for his silence by speaking
effusively of the squire's kindness in asking him to the Hall; forgetting perhaps the relief
he had felt when he escaped from Billingsfield after Christmas without being again obliged
to shake hands with Mr. Juxon. Things looked very differently now, however. He felt himself
to be somebody in the world, and that distressing sense of inferiority which had perhaps been
at the root of his jealousy against the squire was gone, swallowed in the sense of triumph.
His face was pale, perhaps, from overwork, but there was a brilliancy in his eyes and an incisiveness
in his speech which came from the confidence of victory. He now desired nothing more than to
meet the squire, feeling sure that he should receive his congratulations, and though he stayed
some hours in conversation with his old friends, in imagination he was already at the Hall.
The squire had not come down to meet him, as he had proposed, but he had sent his outlandish
American gig with his groom to fetch John. While he was at the vicarage the latter was probably
too much occupied with conversation to notice that Mr. Ambrose seemed preoccupied and changed,
and the vicar was to some extent recalled to his usual manner by the presence of his pupil.
Mrs. Ambrose had taxed her husband with concealing something from her ever since the previous
day, but the good man was obstinate and merely said that he felt unaccountably nervous and
irritable, and begged her to excuse his mood. Mrs. Ambrose postponed her cross-examination
until a more favourable opportunity should present itself.

John got into the gig and drove away. He was to return with the squire to dinner in the evening,
and he fully expected that Mrs. Goddard and Nellie would be of the party--it seemed hardly
likely that they should be omitted. Indeed, soon after John had left a note arrived at the
vicarage explaining that Mrs. Goddard was much better and would certainly come, according to
Mrs. Ambrose's very kind invitation.

It is unnecessary to dwell upon the meeting which took place between Mr. Juxon and John Short.
The squire was hospitable in the extreme and expressed his great satisfaction at having John
under his own roof at last. He was perhaps, like the vicar, a little nervous, but the young
man did not notice it, being much absorbed by the enjoyment of his good fortune and of the
mental rest he so greatly needed. Mr. Juxon congratulated him warmly and expressed a hope,
amounting to certainty, that John might actually be at the head of the Tripos; to which John
modestly replied that he would be quite satisfied to be in the first ten, knowing in his heart
that he should be most bitterly disappointed if he were second to any one. He sat opposite
to his host in a deep chair beside the fire in the library and revelled in comfort and ease,
enjoying every trifle that fell in his way, feeling only a very slight diffidence in regard
to himself for the present and none at all for the future. The squire was so cordial that he
felt himself thoroughly at home. Indeed Mr. Juxon already rejoiced at his wisdom in asking
John to the Hall. The lad was strong, hopeful, well-balanced in every respect and his presence
was an admirable tonic to the almost morbid state of anxiety in which the squire had lived
ever since his interview with Policeman Gall, two days before. In the sunshine of John's young
personality, fears grew small and hope grew big. The ideas which had passed through Mr. Juxon's
brain on the previous evening, just after Mr. Ambrose had warned him of Goddard's intentions,
seemed now like the evil shadows of a nightmare. All apprehension lest the convict should attempt
to execute his threats disappeared like darkness before daylight, and in the course of an hour
or two the squire found himself laughing and chatting with his guest as though there were no
such things as forgery or convicts in the world. The afternoon passed very pleasantly between
the examination of Mr. Juxon's treasures and the conversation those objects elicited. For John,
who was an accomplished scholar, had next to no knowledge of bibliology and took delight in
seeing for the first time many a rare edition which he had heard mentioned or had read of in
the course of his studies. He would not have believed that he could be now talking on such
friendly terms with a man for whom he had once felt the strongest antipathy, and Mr. Juxon
on his part felt that in their former meetings he had not done full justice to the young man's
undoubted talents.

As they drove down to the vicarage that evening Mrs. Goddard's name was mentioned for the first
time. John, with a fine affectation of indifference, asked how she was.

"She has not been very well lately," answered Mr. Juxon.

"What has been the matter?" inquired John, who could not see his companion's face in the dark
shade of the trees.

"Headache, I believe," returned the squire laconically, and silence ensued for a few moments.
"I should not wonder if it rained again this evening," he added presently as they passed through
the park gate, out into the road. The sky was black and it was hard to see anything beyond
the yellow streak of light which fell from the lamps and ran along the road before the gig.

"If it turns out a fine night, don't come for us. We will walk home," said the squire to the
groom as they descended before the vicarage and Stamboul, who had sat on the floor between
them, sprang down to the ground.

John was startled when he met Mrs. Goddard. He was amazed at the change in her appearance for
which no one had prepared him. She met him indeed very cordially but he felt as though she
were not the same woman he had known so short a time before. There was still in her face that
delicate pathetic expression which had at first charmed him, there was still the same look
in her eyes; but what had formerly seemed so attractive seemed now exaggerated. Her cheeks
looked wan and hollow and there were deep shadows about her eyes and temples; her lips had
lost their colour and the lines about her mouth had suddenly become apparent where John had
not before suspected them. She looked ten years older as she put her thin hand in his and smiled
pleasantly at his greeting. Some trite phrase about the "ravages of time" crossed John's mind
and gave him a disagreeable sensation, for which it was hard to account. He felt as though
his dream were suddenly dead and a strange reality had taken life in its place. Could this
be she to whom he had written verses by the score, at whose smile he had swelled with pride,
at whose careless laugh he had trembled with shame? She was terribly changed, she looked positively
old--what John called old. As he sat by her side talking and wondering whether he would fall
back into those same grooves of conversation he had associated with her formerly, he felt something
akin to pity for her, which he had certainly never expected to feel. She was not the same as
before--even the tone of her voice was different; she was gentle, pathetic, endowed even now
with many charms, but she was not the woman he had dreamed of and tried to speak to of the
love he fancied was in his heart. She talked--yes; but there were long pauses, and her eyes
wandered strangely from him, often towards the windows of the vicarage drawing-room, often
towards the doors; her answers were not always to the point and her interest seemed to flag
in what was said. John could not fail to notice too that both Mr. Ambrose and Mr. Juxon treated
her with the kind of attention which is bestowed upon invalids, and the vicar's wife was constantly
doing something to make her comfortable, offering her a footstool, shading the light from her
eyes, asking if she felt any draught where she sat. These were things no one had formerly thought
of doing for Mrs. Goddard, who in spite of her sad face had been used to laugh merrily enough
with the rest, and whose lithe figure had seemed to John the embodiment of youthful activity.
At last he ventured to ask her a question.

"Have you been ill, Mrs. Goddard?" he inquired in a voice full of interest. Her soft eyes glanced
uneasily at him. He was now the only one of the party who was not in some degree acquainted
with her troubles.

"Oh no!" she answered nervously. "Only a little headache. It always makes me quite wretched
when I have it."

"Yes. I often have headaches, too," answered John. "The squire told me as we came down."

"What did he tell you?" asked Mrs. Goddard so quickly as to startle her companion.

"Oh--only that you had not been very well. Where is it that you suffer?" he asked sympathetically.
"I think it is worst when it seems to be in the very centre of one's head, like a red-hot nail
being driven in with a hammer--is that like what you feel?"

"I--yes, I daresay. I don't quite know," she answered, her eyes wandering uneasily about the
room. "I suppose you have dreadful headaches over your work, do you not, Mr. Short?" she added
quickly, feeling that she must say something.

"Oh, it is all over now," said John rather proudly. But as he leaned back in his chair he said
to himself that this meeting was not precisely what he had anticipated; the subject of headaches
might have a fine interest in its way, but he had expected to have talked of more tender things.
To his own great surprise he felt no desire to do so, however. He had not recovered from the
shock of seeing that Mrs. Goddard had grown old.

"Yes," said she, kindly. "How glad you must be! To have done so splendidly too--you must feel
that you have realised a magnificent dream."

"No," said John. "I cannot say I do. I have done the thing I meant to do, or I have good reason
to believe that I have; but I have not realised my dream. I shall never write any more odes,
Mrs. Goddard."

"Why not? Oh, you mean to me, Mr. Short?" she added with something of her old manner. "Well,
you know, it is much better that you should not."

"Perhaps so," answered John rather sadly. "I don't know. Frankly, Mrs. Goddard, did not you
sometimes think I was very foolish last Christmas?"

"Very," she said, smiling at him kindly. "But I think you have changed. I think you are more
of a man, now--you have something more serious--"

"I used to think I was very serious, and so I was," said John, with the air of a man who refers
to the follies of his long past youth. "Do you remember how angry I was when you wanted me
to skate with Miss Nellie?"

"Oh, I only said that to teaze you," Mrs. Goddard answered. "I daresay you would be angry now,
if I suggested the same thing."

"No," said John quietly. "I do not believe I should be. As you say, I feel very much older
now than I did then."

"The older we grow the more we like youth," said Mary Goddard, unconsciously uttering one of
the fundamental truths of human nature, and at the same time so precisely striking the current
of John's thoughts that he started. He was wondering within himself why it was that she now
seemed too old for him, whereas a few short months ago she had seemed to be of his own age.

"How true that is!" he exclaimed. Mrs. Goddard laughed faintly.

"You are not old enough to have reached that point yet, Mr. Short," she said. "Really, here
we are moralising like a couple of old philosophers!"

"This is a moralising season," answered John. "When we last met, it was all holly-berries and
Christmas and plum-pudding."

"How long ago that seems!" exclaimed the poor lady with a sigh.

"Ages!" echoed John, sighing in his turn, but not so much for sadness, it may be, as from relief
that the great struggle was over. That time of anxiety and terrible effort seemed indeed very
far removed from him, but its removal was a cause of joy rather than of sadness. He sighed
like a man who, sitting over his supper, remembers the hard fought race he has won in the afternoon,
feeling yet in his limbs the ability to race and win again but feeling in his heart the delicious
consciousness that the question of his superiority has been decided beyond all dispute.

"And now you will stay here a long time, of course," said Mrs. Goddard presently.

"I am stopping at the Hall, just now," said John with a distinct sense of the importance of
the fact, "and after a week I shall stay here a few days. Then I shall go to London to see
my father."

"No one will be so glad as he to hear of your success."

"No indeed. I really think it is more for his sake that I want to be actually first," said
John. "Do you know, I have so often thought how he will look when I meet him and tell him I
am the senior classic."

John's voice trembled and as Mrs. Goddard looked at him, she thought she saw a moisture in
his eyes. It pleased her to see it, for it showed that John Short had more heart than she had
imagined.

"I can fancy that," she said, warmly. "I envy you that moment."

Presently the squire came over to where they were sitting and joined them; and then Mrs. Ambrose
spoke to John, and Nellie came and asked him questions. Strange to say John felt none of that
annoyance which he formerly felt when his conversations with Mrs. Goddard were interrupted,
and he talked with Nellie and Mrs. Ambrose quite as readily as with her. He felt very calm
and happy that night, as though he had done with the hard labour of life. In half an hour he
had realised that he was no more in love with Mrs. Goddard than he was with Mrs. Ambrose, and
he was trying to explain to himself how it was that he had ever believed in such a palpable
absurdity. Love was doubtless blind, he thought, but he was surely not so blind as to overlook
the evidences of Mrs. Goddard's age. All the dreams of that morning faded away before the sight
of her face, and so deep is the turpitude of the best of human hearts that John was almost
ashamed of having once thought he loved her. That was probably the best possible proof that
his love had been but a boyish fancy.

What the little party at the vicarage would have been like, if John's presence had not animated
it, would be hard to say. The squire and Mr. Ambrose treated Mrs. Goddard with the sort of
paternal but solemn care which is usually bestowed either upon great invalids or upon persons
bereaved of some very dear relation. The two elder men occasionally looked at her and exchanged
glances when they were not observed by Mrs. Ambrose, wondering perhaps what would next befall
the unfortunate lady and whether she could bear much more of the excitement and anxiety to
which she had of late been subjected. On the whole the conversation was far from being lively,
and Mrs. Goddard herself felt that it was a relief when the hour came for going home.

The vicar had ordered his dog-cart for her and Nellie, but as the night had turned out better
than had been expected Mr. Juxon's groom had not come down from the Hall. Both he and John
would be glad of the walk; it had not rained for two days and the roads were dry.

"Look here," said the squire, as they rose to take their leave, "Mr. Short had better go as
far as the cottage in the dog-cart, to see Mrs. Goddard home. I will go ahead on foot--I shall
probably be there as soon as you. There is not room for us all, and somebody must go with her,
you know. Besides," he added, "I have got Stamboul with me."

Mrs. Goddard, who was standing beside the squire, laid her hand beseechingly upon his arm.

"Oh, pray don't," she said in low voice. "Why have you not got your carriage?"

"Never mind me," he answered in the same tone. "I am all right, I like to walk."

Before she could say anything more, he had shaken hands with Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose and was gone.
Perhaps in his general determination to be good to everybody he fancied that John would enjoy
the short drive with Mrs. Goddard better than the walk with himself.

But when he was gone, Mrs. Goddard grew very nervous. One of her wraps could not be found,
and while search was being made for it the motherly Mrs. Ambrose insisted upon giving her something
hot, in the way of brandy and water. She looked very ill, but showed the strongest desire to
go. It was no matter about the shawl, she said; Mr. Ambrose could send it in the morning; but
the thing was found and at last Mrs. Goddard and Nellie and John got into the dog-cart with
old Reynolds and drove off. All these things consumed some time.

The squire on the other hand strode briskly forward towards the cottage, not wishing to keep
John waiting for him. As he walked his mind wandered back to the consideration of the almost
tragic events which were occurring in the peaceful village. He forgot all about John, as he
looked up at the half moon which struggled to give some light through the driving clouds; he
fell to thinking of Mrs. Goddard and to wondering where her husband might be lying hidden.
The road was lonely and he walked fast, with Stamboul close at his heel. The dog-cart did not
overtake him before he reached the cottage, and he forgot all about it. By sheer force of habit
he opened the white gate and, closing it behind him, entered the park alone.

CHAPTER XIX.

John's impression of Mrs. Goddard was strengthened by the scene at the vicarage at the moment
of leaving. The extraordinary nervousness she betrayed, the anxiety for her welfare shown by
Mrs. Ambrose and the grave face of the vicar all favoured the idea that she had become an invalid
since he had last met her. He himself fell into the manner of those about him and spoke in
low tones and moved delicately as though fearing to offend her sensitive nerves. The vicar
alone understood the situation and had been very much surprised at the squire's sudden determination
to walk home; he would gladly have seized his hat and run after his friend, but he feared Mrs.
Ambrose's curiosity and moreover on reflection felt sure that the dog-cart would overtake Mr.
Juxon before he was half way to the cottage. He was very far from suspecting him of the absence
of mind which he actually displayed, but it was a great relief to him to see the little party
safe in the dog-cart and on the way homeward.

Mrs. Goddard was on the front seat with old Reynolds, and John, who would have preferred to
sit by her side a few months ago, was glad to find himself behind with Nellie. It was a curious
instinct, but he felt it strongly and was almost grateful to the old man for stolidly keeping
his seat. So he sat beside Nellie and talked to her, to the child's intense delight; she had
not enjoyed the evening very much, for she felt the general sense of oppression as keenly as
children always feel such things, and she had long exhausted the slender stock of illustrated
books which lay upon the table in the vicarage drawing-room.

"There is no more skating now," said John. "What do you do to amuse yourselves?"

"I am studying history with mamma," answered Nellie, "and that takes ever so much time, you
know. And then--oh, we are beginning to think of the spring, and we look after the violet plants
in the frames."

"It does not feel much like spring," remarked John.

"No--and mamma has not been well lately, so we have not done much of anything."

"Has she been ill long?" asked John.

"No--oh no! Only the last two or three days, ever since--" Nellie stopped herself. Her mother
had told her not to mention the tramp's visit.

"Ever since when?" asked John, becoming suddenly interested.

"Ever since the last time the Ambroses came to tea," said Nellie with a readiness beyond her
years. "But she looks dreadfully, does not she?"

"Dreadfully," answered John. Then, leaning back and turning his head he spoke to Mrs. Goddard.
"I hope you are quite warm enough?" he said.

"Quite--thanks," answered she, but her voice sounded tremulous in the night. It might have
been the shaking of the dog-cart. In a few minutes they drew up before the door of the cottage.
John sprang to the ground and almost lifted Mrs. Goddard from the high seat.

"Where is Mr. Juxon?" she asked anxiously.

John looked round, peering into the gloom. A black cloud driven by the strong east wind was
passing over the moon, and for some moments it was almost impossible to see anything. The squire
was nowhere to be seen. John turned and helped Nellie off the back seat of the dog-cart.

"I am afraid we must have passed him," he said quietly. Formerly Mrs. Goddard's tone of anxiety
as she asked for the squire would have roused John's resentment; he now thought nothing of
it. Reynolds prepared to move off.

"Won't you please wait a moment, Reynolds?" said Mrs. Goddard, going close to the old man.
She could not have told why she asked him to stay, it was a nervous impulse.

"Why?" asked John. "You know I am going to the Hall."

"Yes, of course. I only thought, perhaps, you and Mr. Juxon would like to drive up--it is so
dark. I am sure Mr. Ambrose would not mind you taking the gentlemen up to the Hall, Reynolds?"

"No m'm. I'm quite sure as he wouldn't," exclaimed Reynolds with great alacrity. He immediately
had visions of a pint of beer in the Hall kitchen.

"You do not think Mr. Juxon may have gone on alone, Mr. Short?" said Mrs. Goddard, leaning
upon the wicket gate. Her face looked very pale in the gloom.

"No--at would be very odd if he did," replied John, who had his hands in his greatcoat pockets
and slowly stamped one foot after another on the hard ground, to keep himself warm.

"Then we must have passed him on the road," said Mrs. Goddard. "But I was so sure I saw nobody--"

"I think he will come presently," answered John in a reassuring tone. "Why do you wait, Mrs.
Goddard? You must be cold, and it is dangerous for you to be out here. Don't wait, Reynolds,"
he added; "we will walk up."

"Oh please don't," cried Mrs. Goddard, imploringly.

John looked at her in some surprise. The cloud suddenly passed from before the moon and he
could see her anxious upturned face quite plainly. He could not in the least understand the
cause of her anxiety, but he supposed her nervousness was connected with her indisposition.
Reynolds on his part, being anxious for beer, showed no disposition to move, but sat with stolid
indifference, loosely holding the reins while Strawberry, the old mare, hung down her head
and stamped from time to time in a feeble and antiquated fashion. For some minutes there was
total silence. Not a step was to be heard upon the road, not a sound of any kind, save the
strong east wind rushing past the cottage and losing itself among the withered oaks of the
park opposite.

Suddenly a deep and bell-mouthed note resounded through the air. Strawberry started in the
shafts and trembled violently.

"Stamboul! Stamboul!" The squire's ringing voice was heard far up the park. The bloodhound's
distant baying suddenly ceased. John thought he heard a fainter cry, inarticulate, and full
of distress, through the sighing wind. Then there was silence again. Mrs. Goddard leaned back
against the wicket gate, and Nellie, startled by the noises, pressed close to her mother's side.

"Why--he has gone up the park!" exclaimed John in great surprise. "He was calling to his dog--"

"Oh, Mr. Short!" cried Mrs. Goddard in agonised tones, as soon as she could speak, "I am sure
something dreadful has happened--do go. Mr. Short--do go and see--"

Something of the extreme alarm that sounded in her voice seized upon John.

"Stay with Mrs. Goddard, Reynolds," he said quickly and darted across the road towards the
park gate. John was strong and active. He laid his hands upon the highest rails and vaulted
lightly over, then ran at the top of his speed up the dark avenue.

Mr. Juxon, in his absence of mind, had gone through the gate alone, swinging his blackthorn
stick in his hand, Stamboul stalking at his heel in the gloom. He was a fearless man and the
presence of John during the afternoon had completely dissolved that nervous presentiment of
evil he had felt before his guest's coming. But in the short walk of scarcely half a mile,
from the vicarage to the cottage, his thoughts had become entirely absorbed in considering
Mrs. Goddard's strange position, and for the moment John was quite forgotten. He entered the
park and the long iron latch of the wooden gate fell into its socket behind him with a sharp
click. Mr. Juxon walked quickly on and Stamboul trod noiselessly behind him. At about a hundred
yards from the gate the avenue turned sharply to the right, winding about a little elevation
in the ground, where the trees stood thicker than elsewhere. As he came towards this hillock
the strong east wind blew sharply behind him. Had the wind been in the opposite direction,
Stamboul's sharp nostrils would have scented danger. As it was he gave no sign but stalked
solemnly at the squire's heels. The faint light of the half moon was obscured at that moment,
as has been seen, by a sweeping cloud. The squire turned to the right and tramped along the
hard road.

At the darkest spot in the way a man sprang out suddenly before him and struck a quick blow
at his head with something heavy. But it was very dark. The blow was aimed at his head, but
fell upon the heavy padded frieze of his ulster greatcoat, grazing the brim of his hat as it
passed and knocking it off his head. Mr. Juxon staggered and reeled to one side. At the same
instant--it all happened in the space of two seconds, Stamboul sprang past his master and his
bulk, striking the squire at the shoulder just as he was staggering from the blow he had received,
sent him rolling into the ditch; by the same cause the hound's direction as he leaped was just
so changed that he missed his aim and bounded past the murderer into the darkness. Before the
gigantic beast could recover himself and turn to spring again, Walter Goddard, who had chanced
never to see Stamboul and little suspected his presence, leaped the ditch and fled rapidly
through the dark shadow. But death was at his heels. Before the squire, who was very little
hurt, could get upon his feet, the bloodhound had found the scent and, uttering his deep-mouthed
baying note, sprang upon the track of the flying man. Mr. Juxon got across the ditch and followed
him into the gloom.

"Stamboul! Stamboul!" he roared as he ran. But before he had gone thirty yards he heard a heavy
fall. The hound's cry ceased and a short scream broke the silence.

A moment later the squire was dragging the infuriated animal from the prostrate body of Walter
Goddard. Stamboul had tasted blood; it was no easy matter to make him relinquish his prey.
The cloud passed from the moon, driven before the blast, and a ray of light fell through the
trees upon the scene. To princes and ambassadors she would talk freely of the days when she was
a household drudge, and loved to remind her husband of the time when his Empress used to wash shirts
for his favourite. "Though, no doubt, you have other laundresses about you," she wrote to him
once, "the old one never forgets you."

The letters that passed between this oddly assorted couple, if couched
in terms which could scarcely see print in our more restrained age,
are eloquent of affection and devotion.

To Peter his kitchen-Queen was "friend of my Heart," "dearest Heart," and "dear little Mother."
He complains pathetically, when away with his army, "I am dull without you--and there is nobody to take
care of my shirts." When Catherine once left him on a round of visits, he grew so impatient
at her absence that he sent a yacht to bring her back, and with it
a note: "When I go into my rooms and find them deserted, I feel as
if I must rush away at once.

It is all so empty without thee."

And each letter is accompanied by a present--now a watch, now some costly lace, and again a lock
of his hair, or a simple bunch of dried flowers, while she returns
some such homely gift as a little fruit or a fur-lined waistcoat.

On both sides, too, a vein of jocularity runs through the letters, as when Catherine addresses
him as "Your Excellency, the very illustrious and eminent Prince-General and Knight of the crowned
Compass and Axe"; and when Peter, after the Peace of Nystadt, writes:
"According to the Treaty I am obliged to return all Livonian prisoners
to the King of Sweden.

What is to become of thee, I don't know." To which she answers, with true wifely (if affected)
humility: "I am your servant; do with me as you will; yet I venture
to think you won't send me back."

Quite idyllic, this post-nuptial love-making between the great Emperor and his low-born Queen,
who has so possessed his heart that no other woman, however fair, could wrest it from her.
And in her exalted position of Empress she practised the same diplomatic arts by which she had won
Peter's devotion.

Politics she left severely alone; she turned a forbidding back on all attempts to involve her
in State intrigues, but she was ever ready to protect those who appealed
to her for help, and to use her influence with her husband to procure
pardon or lighter punishment for those who had fallen under his displeasure.

Nor

did she forget her poor relations in Livonia. One brother, a postillion, she openly acknowledged,
introduced to her husband, and obtained a liberal pension for him;
and to her other brothers and sisters she sent frequent presents and
sums of money.

More she could not well do during her husband's lifetime, but when she in turn came to the
throne, she brought the whole family--postillion, shoemaker, farm-labourer and serf, their wives
and families--to her capital, installed them in sumptuous apartments in her palaces, decked
them in the finest Court feathers, and gave them large fortunes and titles of nobility.

When the Tsar's quarrel with his eldest son came to its tragic dénouement in Alexis' death,
her own son became heir presumptive to the throne of Russia. And thus the chain that bound
Peter to his Empress received its completing link. It only remained now to place the crown
formally on the head of the mother of the new heir, and this supreme honour was hers in the month
of May, 1729.

Wonderful tales are told of the splendours of Catherine's coronation. No existing crown was
good enough for the ex-maid-of-all-work, so one of special magnificence
was made by the Court jewellers--a miracle of diamonds and pearls,
crowned by a monster ruby--at a cost of a million and a half roubles.

The Coronation gown, which cost four thousand roubles, was made at Paris; and from Paris, too,
came the gorgeous coach with its blaze of gold and heraldry, in which the Tsarina made her triumphal
progress through the streets of the capital from the Winter Palace. The culminating point of
this remarkable ceremony came when, after Peter had placed the crown on his wife's head, she
sank weeping at his feet and embraced his knees.

Catherine, however, had not worn her crown many months when she found
herself in considerable danger of losing not only her dignities but
even her liberty.

For some time, it is said, she had been engaged in a liaison with
William Mons, a handsome, gay young courtier, brother to a former
mistress of the Tsar.

The love affair had been common knowledge at the Court--to all but Peter himself, and it was
accident that at last opened his eyes to his wife's dishonour. One moonlight night, so the story
is told, he chanced to enter an arbour in the palace gardens, and there discovered her in the
arms of her lover.

His vengeance was swift and terrible. Mons was arrested the same night in his rooms, and dragged
fainting into the Tsar's presence, where he confessed his disloyalty. A few days later he was beheaded,
at the very moment when the Empress was dancing a minuet with her ladies, a smile on her lips,
whatever grief was in her heart. The following day she was driven by her husband past the scaffold
where her lover's dead body was exposed to public view--so close, in fact, that her dress brushed
against it; but, without turning her head, she kept up a smiling
conversation with the perpetrator of this outrage on her feelings.

Still not content with his revenge, Peter next placed the dead man's head, enclosed in a bottle
of spirits of wine, in a prominent place in the Empress's apartments; and when she still smilingly
ignored its horrible proximity, his anger, hitherto repressed, blazed
forth fiercely.

With a blow of his strong fist he shattered a priceless Venetian
vase, shouting, "Thus will I treat thee and thine"--to which she calmly
responded, "You have broken one of the chief ornaments of your palace;
do you think you have increased its charm?"

For a time Peter refused to be propitiated; he would not speak to
his wife, or share her meals or her room.

But she had "tamed the tiger" many a time before, and she was able to do it again. Within two
months she had won her way back into full favour, and was once more the Tsar's dearest Katiérinoushka.

A
month later Peter was dead, carrying his love for his peasant-Empress to the grave, and Catherine
was reigning in his stead, able at last to conduct her amours openly--spending
her nights in shameless orgies with her lovers, and leaving the rascally
Menshikoff to do the ruling, until death brought her amazing career
to an end within sixteen months of mounting her throne.

CHAPTER II

THE "BONNIE PRINCE'S" BRIDE

In the pageant of our history there are few more attractive figures than that of "Bonnie Prince
Charlie," the "yellow-haired laddie" whose blue eyes made a slave of every woman who came under
their magic, and whose genial, unaffected manners turned the veriest coward into a hero, ready
to follow him to the death in that year of ill-fated romance, "the forty-five."

The very name of the "Bonnie Prince," the hope of the fallen Stuarts, the idol of Scotland--leading
a forlorn hope with laughter on his lips, now riding proudly at the head of his rabble army, now
a fugitive Ishmael among the hills and caves of the Highlands, but ever the last to lose heart--has
a magic still to quicken the pulses. That later years proved the idol's feet to be of clay, that
he fell from his pedestal to end his days an object of contempt and derision, only served to
those who knew him in the pride of his youth to mingle pity with the glamour of romance that
still surrounds his name.

In the year 1772, when this story opens, Charles Edward, Count of
Albany, had already travelled far on the downward road that led from
the glory of Prestonpans to his drunkard's grave.

A pitiful pensioner of France, who had known the ignominy of wearing fetters in a French prison,
a social outcast whose Royal pretensions were at best the subject of an amused tolerance, the "laddie
of the yellow hair" had fallen so low that the brandy bottle, which was his constant companion
night and day, was his only solace.

Picture him at this period, and mark the pathetic change which less than thirty years had wrought
in the Stuart "darling" of "the forty-five," when many a proud lady of Scotland would have
given her life for a smile from his bonnie face.

A middle-aged man with dropsy in his limbs, and with the bloated
face of the drunkard; "dull, thick, silent-looking lips, of purplish
red scarce redder than the skin; pale blue eyes tending to a watery
greyness, leaden, vague, sad, but with angry streakings of red; something
inexpressibly sad, gloomy, helpless, vacant, and debased in the whole
face."

Such was this "Young Chevalier" when France took it into her head to make a pawn of him in the
political chess-game with England. As a man he was beneath contempt; as a "King"--well, he
was a Roi pour rire; but at least the Royal House he represented
might be made a useful weapon against the arrogant Hanoverian who
sat on his father's throne.

That rival stock must not be allowed to die out; his claims might
weigh heavily some day in the scale between France and England.

Charles Edward must marry, and provide a worthier successor to his empty honours.

And thus it was that France came to the exiled Prince with the seductive offer of a pretty bride
and a pension of forty thousand crowns a year. The besotted Charles jumped at the offer; left
his brandy bottle, and, with the alacrity of a youthful lover, rushed away to woo and win the bride
who had been chosen for him.

And never surely was there such a grotesque wooing. Charles was a physical wreck of fifty-two;
his bride-elect had only seen nineteen summers. The daughter of Prince Gustav Adolf of Stolberg
and the Countess of Horn, Princess Louise was kin to many of the greatest houses in Europe,
from the Colonnas and Orsinis to the Hohenzollerns and Bruces. In blood she was thus at least
a match for her Stuart bridegroom.

She had spent some years in the seclusion of a monastery, and had emerged for her undesired trip
to the altar a young woman of rare beauty and charm, with glorious brown eyes, the delicate tint of the
wild rose in her dimpled cheeks, a wealth of golden hair, and a figure every line and movement
of which was instinct with beauty and grace. She was a fresh, unspoilt child, bubbling with gaiety
and the joy of life, and her dainty little head was full of the romance of sweet nineteen.

Such then was the singularly contrasted couple--"Beauty and the Beast" they were dubbed by many--who
stood together at the altar at Macerata on Good Friday of the year 1772--the bridegroom, "looking
hideous in his wedding suit of crimson silk," in flaming contrast
to the virginal white of his pretty victim.

It needed no such day of ill-omen as a Friday to inaugurate a union which could not have been
otherwise than disastrous--the union of a beautiful, romantic girl eager to exploit the world
of freedom and of pleasure, and a drink-sodden man old enough to be her father, for whom life
had long lost all its illusions.

It is true that for a time Charles Edward was drawn from his bottle by the lure of a pretty and winsome
wife, who should, if any power on earth could, have made a man again of him. She laughed, indeed,
at his maudlin tales of past heroism and adventure in love and battle; to her he was a plaster
hero, and she let him know it.

She was "mated to a clown," and a drunken clown to boot--and, well, she would make the best of a
bad bargain. If her husband was the sorriest lover who ever poured thick-voiced flatteries into
a girl-wife's ears, there were others, plenty of them, who were eager to pay more acceptable
homage to her; and these men--poets, courtiers, great men in art and letters--flocked to her salon
to bask in her beauty and to be charmed by her wit.

After all, she was a Queen, although she wore no crown.

She had a Court, although no Royalties graced it. From the Pope to the King of France, no monarch
in Europe would recognise her husband's kingship. But at such neglect, the offspring of jealousy,
of course, she only smiled.

She could indeed have been moderately happy in her girlish, light-hearted way, if her husband had
not been such an impossible person.

As for Charles Edward, he soon wearied of a bride who did nothing but laugh at him, and who
was so ready to escape from his obnoxious presence to the company of more congenial admirers. He returned
to his brandy bottle, and alternated between a fuddled brain and
moods of wild jealousy.

He would not allow his wife to leave the door without his escort; if she refused to accompany
him, he turned the key in her bedroom door, to which the only access
was through his own room.

He took her occasionally to the theatre or opera, his brandy bottle
always making a third for company.

Before the performance was half through he was snoring stertorously
on the couch which he insisted on having in his box; and, more often
than not, was borne to his carriage for the journey home helplessly
drunk.

And this within the first year of his wedded life.

If any woman had excuse for seeking elsewhere the love she could not find in her husband it
was Louise of Albany. There were dames in plenty in Rome (where they were now living) who, not
content with devoted husbands, had their cisibeos to play the lover to them; but Louise sought
no such questionable escape from her unhappiness. Her books and the clever men who thronged her salon
were all the solace she asked; and under temptation such as few women of that country and day
would have resisted, she carried the shield of a blameless life.

From Rome the Countess and her husband fared to Florence in 1774; and here matters went from
bad to worse. Charles was now seldom sober day or night; and his jealousy often found expression in
filthy abuse and cowardly assaults. Hitherto he had been simply disgusting; now he was a constant
menace, even to her life. She lived in hourly fear of his brutality; but in her darkest hour
sunshine came again into her life with the coming of Vittorio Alfieri, whose name was to be
linked with hers for so many years.

At this time Alfieri was in the very prime of his splendid manhood, one of the handsomest and most
fascinating men in all Europe. Some four years older than herself, he was a tall, stalwart, soldierly
man, blue-eyed and auburn-haired, an aristocrat to his finger-tips, a daring horseman, a poet,
and a man of rare culture--just the man to set any woman's heart a-flutter, as he had already
done in most of the capitals of the Continent.

He was a spoilt child of fortune, this Italian poet and soldier, a man who had drunk deep of
the cup of life, and to whom all conquests came with such fatal ease that already he had drained
life dry of its pleasures.

Such was the man who one autumn day in the year 1777 came into the unhappy life of the Countess
of Albany, still full of the passions and yearnings of youth. It was surely fate that thus
brought together these two young people of kindred tastes and kindred disillusions; and we cannot
wonder that, of that first meeting, Alfieri should write, "At last I had met the one woman whom
I had sought so long, the woman who could inspire my ambition and my work. Recognising this,
and prizing so rare a treasure, I gave myself up wholly to her."

Those were happy days for the Countess that followed this fateful meeting--days of sweet communion
of twin souls, hours of stolen bliss, when they could dwell apart in a region of high and ennobling
thoughts, while the besotted husband was sleeping off the effects
of his drunken orgies in the next room.

To Alfieri, Louise was indeed "the anchor of his life," giving stability to his vacillating
nature, and inspiring all that was best and noblest in him; while to her the association with
this "splendid creature," who so thoroughly understood and sympathised with her, was the revelation
of a new world.

Thus three happy years passed; and then the crisis came. One night the Prince, in a mood of drunken
madness, inflamed by jealousy, attacked his wife, and, after severely beating her, flung her down
on her bed and attempted to strangle her. This was the crowning outrage of years of brutality.
She could not, dared not, spend another day with such a madman. At any cost she must leave him--and
for ever.

When morning came, with Alfieri's assistance, the plan of escape was arranged. In the company
of a lady friend--and also of her husband, now scared and penitent, but fearing to let her out
of his sight--she drove to a neighbouring convent, ostensibly to inspect the nuns' needlework.
On reaching her destination she ran up the convent steps, entered
the building, and the door was slammed and bolted behind her in the
very face of Charles Edward, who had followed as fast as his dropsical
legs would carry him up the steps.

The Prince, blazing at such an outrage, hammered fiercely at the door until at last the Lady
Abbess herself showed her face at the grating, and told him in no ambiguous words that he would
not be allowed to enter! His wife had come to her for protection; and if he had any grievance he
had better appeal to the Duke of Tuscany.

Thus ended the tragic union of the "Bonnie Prince" and his Countess. Emancipation had come at last;
and, while Louise was now free to devote her life to her beloved Alfieri, her brutal husband was
left for eight years to the company of his bottle and the ministrations of his natural daughter,
until a drunkard's grave at Frascati closed over his mis-spent life. The pity and the tragedy
of it!

Louise of Albany and her poet-lover were now free to link their lives at the altar--but no such
thought seems to have entered the head of either. They were perfectly happy without the bond
of the wedding-ring, of which the Countess had such terrible memories; and together they walked
through life, happy in each other and indifferent to the world's opinion.

Now in Florence, now in Rome; living together in Alsace, drifting to Paris; and, when the Revolution
drove them from the French capital, seeking refuge in London, where we find the uncrowned Queen
of England chatting amicably with the "usurper" George in the Royal box at the opera--always
inseparable, and Louise always clinging to the shreds of her Royal dignity, with a throne in
her ante-room, and "Your Majesty" on her servants' lips. Thus passed the careless, happy years
for Countess and poet until, in 1803, Alfieri followed the "Bonnie Prince" behind the veil,
and left a desolate Louise to moan amid her tears, "There is no more happiness for me."

But Louise was not left even now without the solace of a man's love, which seemed as indispensable
to her nature as the air she breathed. Before Alfieri had been many months in his Florence
tomb his place by the Countess's side had been taken by François Xavier Fabre, a good-looking
painter of only moderate gifts, whose handsome face, plausible tongue, and sunny disposition
soon made a captive of her middle-aged heart.

At the time when Fabre came thus into her life Madame la Comtesse had passed her fiftieth birthday--youth
and beauty had taken wings; and passion (if ever she had any--for her relations with Alfieri seem to
have been quite platonic) had died down to its embers.

But a man's companionship and homage were always necessary to her, and in Fabre she found her
ideal cavalier. Her salon now became more popular even than in the days of her young wifehood.
It drew to it all the greatest men in Europe, men of world-wide fame
in statesmanship, letters, and art, all anxious to do homage to a
woman of such culture and with such rare gifts of conversation.

That she was now middle-aged, stout and dowdy--"like a cook with pretty hands," as Stendhal said
of her--mattered nothing to her admirers, many of whom remembered her in the days of her lovely
youth. She was, in their eyes, as much a Queen as if she wore a crown; and, moreover, she was a woman
of magnetic charm and clever brain.

And thus, with her books and her salon and her cavalier, she spent
the rest of her chequered life until the end came one day in 1824;
and her last resting-place was, as she wished it to be, by the side
of her beloved Alfieri.

In the Church of Santa Croce, in Florence, midway between the tombs of Michael Angelo and Machiavelli,
the two lovers sleep together their last sleep, beneath a beautiful
monument fashioned by Canova's hands--Louise, wife of the "Bonnie
Prince"

(as we still choose to remember him) and Vittorio Alfieri, to whom, to quote his own words, "she
was beyond all things beloved."

CHAPTER III

THE PEASANT AND THE EMPRESS

Many an autocrat of Russia has shown a truly sovereign contempt for convention in the choice
of his or her favourites, the "playthings of an hour"; and at least three of them have carried
this contempt to the altar itself.

Peter, the first, as we have seen, offered a crown to Martha Skovronski, a Livonian scullery-maid,
who succeeded him on the throne; the second Catherine gave her hand
as well as her heart to Patiomkin, the gigantic, ill-favoured ex-sergeant
of cavalry; and Elizabeth, daughter of Peter and his kitchen-Queen,
proved herself worthy of her parentage when she made Alexis Razoum,
a peasant's son, husband of the Empress of Russia.

You will search history in vain for a story so strange and romantic
as this of the great Empress and the lowly shepherd's son, whom her
love raised from a hovel to a palace, and on whom one of the most
amorous and fickle of sovereign ladies lavished honours and riches
and an unwavering devotion, until her eyes, speaking their love to
the last, were closed in death.

It was in the humblest hovel of the village of Lemesh that Alexis Razoum drew his first breath one
day in 1709.

His father, Gregory Razoum, was a shepherd, who spent his pitiful earnings in drink--a man of violent
temper who, in his drunken rages, was the terror not only of his
home but of the entire village. His wife and children cowered at his
approach; and on more than one occasion only accident (or Providence)
saved him from the crime of murder. On one such occasion, we are told,
the child Alexis, who from his earliest years had a passion for reading,
was absorbed in a book, when his father, in ungovernable fury, seized
a hatchet and hurled it at the boy's head. Luckily, the missile missed
its mark, and Alexis escaped, to find refuge in the house of a friendly
priest, who not only gave him shelter and protection, but taught him
to write, and, above all, to sing--little dreaming that he was thus
paving the way which was to lead the drunken shepherd's lad to the
dizziest heights in Russia. For the boy had a beautiful voice. When
he joined the choir of his village church, people flocked from far
and near to listen to the sweet notes that soared, pure and liquid
as a nightingale's song, above the rest. "It was," all declared, "the
voice of an angel--and the face of an angel," for Alexis was as beautiful
in those days as any child of picture or of dreams.

One day a splendidly
dressed stranger chanced to enter the Lemesh church during Mass--none
other than Colonel Vishnevsky, a great Court official, who was on
his way back to Moscow from a diplomatic mission; and he listened
entranced to a voice sweeter than any he had ever heard. The service
over, he made the acquaintance of the young chorister, interviewed
his guardian, the "good Samaritan" priest, and persuaded him to allow
the boy to accompany him to the capital. It may be more than an hour before my man finds another."

"Never mind," said John quietly. "I will wait till he comes at all events. You may need me
before it is over."

"Do you think he looks as if he were going to die?" asked the squire doubtfully, as he again
approached the bedside.

"I don't know," answered John, standing on the other side. "I never saw any one die. He looks
very ill."

"Very ill. I have seen many people die--but somehow I have a strong impression that this fellow
will live."

"Let us hope so," said John.

"Well--" The squire checked himself. Probably the hope he would have expressed would not have
coincided with that to which John had given utterance. "Well," he repeated, "I daresay he will.
Mr. Short, are you at all nervous? Since you are so good as to say you will wait until the
doctor comes, would you mind very much being left alone here for five minutes?"

"No," answered John, stoutly, "not in the least." To be left in a well-lighted room by the
bedside of Walter Goddard, ill indeed, but alive and breathing vigorously, was very different
from being requested to watch his apparently dead body out in the park under the moonlight.

With a word of thanks, the squire left the room, and hastened to his study, where he proceeded
to write a note, as follows:--

"MY DEAR MR. AMBROSE--The man we were speaking of yesterday morning actually attacked me this
evening. Stamboul worried him badly, but he is not dead. He is lying here, well cared for,
and I have sent for the doctor. If convenient to you, would you come in the morning? I need
not recommend discretion.--Sincerely yours,

"C.J. JUXON. N.B.--I am not hurt."

Having ascertained that Reynolds was still in the kitchen, the missive was given to the old
man with an injunction to use all speed, as the vicar might be going to bed and the note was
important.

John, meanwhile, being left alone sat down near the wounded man's bed and waited, glancing
at the flushed face and staring eyes from time to time, and wondering whether the fellow would
recover. The young scholar had been startled by all that had occurred, and his ideas wandered
back to the beginning of the evening, scarcely realising that a few hours ago he had not met
Mrs. Goddard, had not experienced a surprising change in his feelings towards her, had not
witnessed the strange scene under the trees. It seemed as though all these things had occupied
a week at the very least, whereas on that same afternoon he had been speculating upon his meeting
with Mrs. Goddard, calling up her features to his mind as he had last seen them, framing speeches
which when the meeting came he had not delivered, letting his mind run riot in the delicious
anticipation of appearing before her in the light of a successful competitor for one of the
greatest honours of English scholarship. And yet in a few hours all his feelings were changed,
and to his infinite surprise, were changed without any suffering to himself; he knew well that,
for some reason, Mrs. Goddard had lost the mysterious power of making him blush, and of sending
strange thrills through his whole nature when he sat at her side; with some justice he attributed
his new indifference to the extraordinary alteration in her appearance, whereby she seemed
now so much older than himself, and he forthwith moralised upon the mutability of human affairs,
with all the mental fluency of a very young man whose affairs are still extremely mutable.
He fell to musing on the accident in the park, wondering how he would have acted in Mr. Juxon's
place, wondering especially what object could have led the wretched tramp to attack the squire,
wondering too at the very great anxiety shown by Mrs. Goddard.

As he sat by the bedside, the sick man suddenly moved and turning his eyes full upon John's
face stared at him with a look of dazed surprise. He thrust out his wounded hand, bound up
in a white handkerchief through which a little blood was slowly oozing, and to John's infinite
surprise he spoke.

"Who are you?" he asked in a strange, mumbling voice, as though he had pebbles in his mouth.

John started forward in his chair and looked intently at Goddard's face.

"My name is Short," he answered mechanically. But the passing flash of intelligence was already
gone, and Goddard's look became a glassy and idiotic stare. Still his lips moved. John came
nearer and listened.

"Mary Goddard! Mary Goddard! Let me in!" said the sick man quite intelligibly, in spite of
his uncertain tone. John uttered an exclamation of astonishment; his heart beat fast and he
listened intently. The sick man mumbled inarticulate sounds; not another word could be distinguished.
John looked for the bell, thinking that Mr. Juxon should be informed of the strange phenomenon
at once; but before he could ring the squire himself entered the room, having finished and
despatched his note to Mr. Ambrose.

"It is most extraordinary," said John. "He spoke just now--"

"What did he say?" asked Mr. Juxon very quickly.

"He said first, 'Who are you?' and then he said 'Mary Goddard, let me in!' Is it not most extraordinary?
How in the world should he know about Mrs. Goddard?"

The squire turned a little pale and was silent for a moment. He had left John with the wounded
man feeling sure that, for some time at least, the latter would not be likely to say anything
intelligible.

"Most extraordinary!" he repeated presently. Then he looked at Goddard closely, and turned
him again upon his back and put his injured hand beneath the sheet.

"Do you understand me? Do you know who I am?" he asked in a loud tone close to his ear.

But the unfortunate man gave no sign of intelligence, only his inarticulate mumbling grew louder
though not more distinct. Mr. Juxon turned away impatiently.

"The fellow is in a delirium," he said. "I wish the doctor would come." He had hardly turned
his back when the man spoke again.

"Mary Goddard!" he cried. "Let me in!"

"There!" said John. "The same words!"

Mr. Juxon shuddered, and looked curiously at his companion; then thrust his hands into his
pockets and whistling softly walked about the room. John was shocked at what seemed in the
squire a sort of indecent levity; he could not understand that his friend felt as though he
should go mad.

Indeed the squire suffered intensely. The name of Mary Goddard, pronounced by the convict in
his delirium brought home more vividly than anything could have done the relation between the
wounded tramp and the woman the squire loved. It was positively true, then--there was not a
shadow of doubt left, since this wretch lay there mumbling her name in his ravings! This was
the husband of that gentle creature with sad pathetic eyes, so delicate, so refined that it
seemed as though the coarser breath of the world of sin and shame could never come near her--this
was her husband! It was horrible. This was the father of lovely Nellie, too. Was anything wanting
to make the contrast more hideous?

Mr. Juxon felt that it was impossible to foresee what Walter Goddard might say in the course
of another hour. He had often seen people in a delirium and knew how strangely that inarticulate
murmuring sometimes breaks off into sudden incisive speech, astonishing every one who hears.
The man had already betrayed that he knew Mary Goddard; at the next interval in his ravings
he might betray that she was his wife. John was still standing by the bedside, not having recovered
from his astonishment; if John heard any more, he would be in possession of Mrs. Goddard's
secret. The squire was an energetic man, equal to most emergencies; he suddenly made up his mind.

"Mr. Short," he said, "I will tell you something. You will see the propriety of being very
discreet, in fact it is only to ensure your discretion that I wish to tell you this much. I
have reason to believe that this fellow is a convict--do not be surprised--escaped from prison.
He is a man who once--was in love with Mrs. Goddard, which accounts for his having found his
way to Billingsfield. Yes--I know what you are going to say--Mrs. Goddard is aware of his presence,
and that accounts for her excitement and her fainting. Do you understand?"

"But--good heavens!" exclaimed John in amazement. "Why did she not give information, if she
knew he was in the neighbourhood?"

"That would be more than could be expected of any woman, Mr. Short. You forget that the man
once loved her."

"And how did you--well, no. I won't ask any questions."

"No," said the squire, "please don't. You would be placing me in a disagreeable position. Not
that I do not trust you implicitly, Mr. Short," he added frankly, "but I should be betraying
a confidence. If this fellow dies here, he will be buried as an unknown tramp. I found no trace
of a name upon his clothes. If he recovers, we will decide what course to pursue. We will do
our best for him--it is a delicate case of conscience. Possibly the poor fellow would very
much prefer being allowed to die; but we cannot let him. Humanity, for some unexplained reason,
forbids euthanasia and the use of the hemlock in such cases."

"Was he sentenced for a long time?" asked John, very much impressed by the gravity of the situation.

"Twelve years originally, I believe. Aggravated by his escape and by his assault on me, his
term might very likely be extended to twenty years if he were taken again."

"That is to say, if he recovers?" inquired John.

"Precisely. I do not think I would hesitate to send him back to prison if he recovered."

"I do not wonder you think he would rather die here, if he were consulted," said John. "It
would not be murder to let him die peacefully--"

"In the opinion of the law it might be called manslaughter, though I do not suppose anything
would be said if I had simply placed him here and omitted to call in a physician. He cannot
live very long in this state, unless something is done for him immediately. Look at him."

There was no apparent change in Goddard's condition. He lay upon his back staring straight
upward and mumbling aloud with every breath he drew.

"He must have been ill, before he attacked me," continued Mr. Juxon, very much as though he
were talking to himself. "He evidently is in a raging fever--brain fever I should think. That
is probably the reason why he missed his aim--that and the darkness. If he had been well he
would have killed me fast enough with that bludgeon. As you say, Mr. Short, there is no doubt
whatever that he would prefer to die here, if he had his choice. In my opinion, too, it would
be far more merciful to him and to--to him in fact. Nevertheless, neither you nor I would like
to remember that we had let him die without doing all we could to keep him alive. It is a very
singular case."

"Most singular," echoed John.

"Besides--there is another thing. Suppose that he had attacked me as he did, but that I had
killed him with my stick--or that Stamboul had made an end of him then and there. The law would
have said it served him right--would it not? Of course. But if I had not quite killed him,
or, as has actually happened, he survived the embraces of my dog, the law insists that I ought
to do everything in my power to save the remnant of his life. What for? In order that the law
may give itself the satisfaction of dealing with him according to its lights. I think the law
is very greedy, I object to it, I think it is ridiculous from that point of view, but then,
when I come to examine the thing I find that my own conscience tells me to save him, although
I think it best that he should die. Therefore the law is not ridiculous. Pleasant dilemma--the
impossible case! The law is at the same time ridiculous and not ridiculous. The question is,
does the law deduce itself from conscience, or is conscience the direct result of existing law?"

The squire appeared to be in a strangely moralising mood, and John listened to him with some
surprise. He could not understand that the good man was talking to persuade himself, and to
concentrate his faculties, which had been almost unbalanced by the events of the evening.

"I think," said John with remarkable good sense, "that the instinct of man is to preserve life
when he is calm. When a man is fighting with another he is hot and tries to kill his enemy;
when the fight is over, the natural instinct returns."

"The only thing worth knowing in such cases is the precise point at which the fight may be
said to be over. I once knew a young surgeon in India who thought he had killed a cobra and
proceeded to extract the fangs in order to examine the poison. Unfortunately the snake was
not quite dead; he bit the surgeon in the finger and the poor fellow died in thirty-five minutes."

"Dreadful!" said John. "But you do not think this poor fellow could do anything very dangerous
now--do you?"

"Oh, dear me, no!" returned the squire. "I was only stating a case to prove that one is sometimes
justified in going quite to the end of a fight. No indeed! He will not be dangerous for some
time, if he ever is again. But, as I was saying, he must have been ill some time. Delirium
never comes on in this way, so soon--"

Some one knocked at the door. It was Holmes, who came to say that the physician, Doctor Longstreet,
had arrived.

"Oh--it is Doctor Longstreet is it?" said the squire. "Ask him to come up."

CHAPTER XXI.

Doctor Longstreet was not the freethinking physician of Billingsfield. The latter was out when
Mr. Juxon's groom went in search of him, and the man had driven on to the town, six miles away.
The doctor was an old man with a bright eye, a deeply furrowed forehead, a bald head and clean
shaved face. He walked as though his frame were set together with springs and there was a curious
snapping quickness in his speech. He seemed full of vitality and bore his years with a jaunty
air of merriment which inspired confidence, for he seemed perpetually laughing at the ills
of the flesh and ready to make other people laugh at them too. But his bright eyes had a penetrating
look and though he judged quickly he generally was right in his opinion. He entered the room
briskly, not knowing that the sick man was there.

"Now, Mr. Juxon," he said cheerfully, "I am with you." He had the habit of announcing his presence
in this fashion, as though his brisk and active personality were likely to be overlooked. A
moment later he caught sight of the bed. "Dear me," he added in a lower voice, "I did not know
our patient was here."

He went to Walter Goddard's side, looked at him attentively, felt his pulse, and his forehead,
glanced at the bandages the squire had roughly put upon his throat and hand, drew up the sheet
again beneath his chin and turned sharply round.

"Brain fever, sir," he said cheerfully. "Brain fever. You must get some ice and have some beef
tea made as soon as possible. He is in a very bad way--curious, too; he looks like a cross
between a ticket of leave man and a gentleman. Tramp, you say? That would not prevent his being
either. You cannot disturb him--don't be afraid. He hears nothing--is off, the Lord knows where,
raving delirious. Must look to his scratches though--dangerous--inflammation. Do you mind telling
me what happened--how long he has been here?"

The squire in a few words informed Doctor Longstreet of the attack made upon him in the park.
The doctor looked at his watch.

"Only two hours and a half since," he remarked. "It is just midnight now, very good--the man
must have been in a fever all day--yesterday, too, perhaps. He is not badly hurt by the dog--like
to see that dog, if you don't mind--the fright most likely sent him into delirium. You have
nothing to accuse yourself of, Mr. Juxon: it was certainly not your fault. Even if the dog
had not bitten him, he would most likely have been in his present state by this time. Would
you mind sending for some ice at once? Thank you. It was very lucky for the fellow that he
attacked you just when he did--secured him the chance of being well taken care of. If he had
gone off like this in the park he would have been dead before morning."

The squire rang and sent for the ice the doctor demanded.

"Do you think he will live?" he asked nervously.

"I don't know," answered Doctor Longstreet, frankly. "Nobody can tell. He is very much exhausted--may
live two or three days in this state and then die or go to sleep and get well--may die in the
morning--often do--cannot say. With a great deal of care, I think he has a chance."

"I am very anxious to save him," said the squire, looking hard at the physician.

"Very good of you, I am sure," replied Doctor Longstreet, cheerfully. "It is not everybody
who would take so much trouble for a tramp. Of course if he dies people will say your dog killed
him; but I will sign a paper to the effect that it is not true. If he had left you and your
dog alone, he would have been dead in the morning to an absolute certainty."

"How very extraordinary!" exclaimed the squire, suddenly realising that instead of causing
the man's death Stamboul had perhaps saved his life.

"It was certainly very odd that he should have chosen the best moment for assaulting you,"
continued the doctor. "It is quite possible that even then he was under some delusion--took
you for somebody else--some old enemy. People do queer things in a brain fever. By the bye
has he said anything intelligible since he has been here?"

John Short who had been standing silently by the bedside during the whole interview looked
up quickly at the squire, wondering how he would answer. But Mr. Juxon did not hesitate.

"Yes. Twice he repeated a woman's name. That is very natural, I suppose. Do you think he will
have any lucid moments for some time?"

"May," said the doctor, "may. When he does it is likely to be at the turning point; he will
either die or be better very soon after. If it comes soon he may say something intelligible.
If he is much more exhausted than he is now, he will understand you, but you will not understand
him. Meningitis always brings a partial paralysis of the tongue, when the patient is exhausted.
Most probably he will go on moaning and mumbling, as he does now, for another day. You will
be able to tell by his eye whether he understands anything; perhaps he will make some sign
with his head or hand. Ah--here is the ice."

Doctor Longstreet went about his operations in a rapid and business like fashion and John gave
what assistance he could. The squire stood leaning against the chimney-piece in deep thought.

Indeed he had enough to think of, when he had fully weighed the meaning of the doctor's words.
He was surprised beyond measure at the turn things had taken; for although, as he had previously
told John, he suspected that Goddard must have been in a fever for several hours before the
assault, it had not struck him that Stamboul's attack had been absolutely harmless, still less
that it might prove to have been the means of saving the convict's life. It was terribly hard
to say that he desired to save the man, and yet the honest man in his heart prayed that he
might really hope for that result. It would be far worse, should Goddard die, to remember that
he had wished for his death. But it would be hard to imagine a more unexpected position than
that in which the squire found himself; by a perfectly natural chain of circumstances he was
now tending with the utmost care the man who had tried to murder him, and who of all men in
the world, stood most in the way of the accomplishment of his desires.

He could not hide from himself the fact that he hated the sick man, even though he hoped, or
tried to hope for his recovery. He hated him for the shame and suffering he had brought upon
Mary Goddard in the first instance, for the terrible anxiety he had caused her by his escape
and sudden appearance at her house; he hated him for being what he was, being also the father
of Nellie, and he hated him honestly for his base attempt upon himself that night. He had good
cause to hate him, and perhaps he was not ashamed of his hatred. To be called upon, however,
to return good for such an accumulated mass of evil was almost too much for his human nature.
It was but a faint satisfaction to think that if he recovered he was to be sent back to prison.
Mr. Juxon did not know that there was blood upon the man's hands--he had yet to learn that;
he would not deign to mention the assault in the park when he handed him over to the authorities;
the man should simply go back to Portland to suffer the term of his imprisonment, as soon as
he should be well enough to be moved--if that time ever came. If he died, he should be buried
decently in a nameless grave, "six feet by four, by two," as Thomas Reid would have said--if
he died.

Meanwhile, however, there was yet another consideration which disturbed the squire's meditations.
Mrs. Goddard had a right to know that her husband was dying and, if she so pleased, she had
a right to be at his bedside. But at the same time it would be necessary so to account for
her presence as not to arouse Doctor Longstreet's suspicions, nor the comments of Holmes, the
butler, and of his brigade in the servants' hall. It was no easy matter to do this unless Mrs.
Goddard were accompanied by the vicar's wife, the excellent and maternally minded Mrs. Ambrose.
To accomplish this it would be necessary to ask the latter lady to spend a great part of her
time at the Hall in taking care of the wretched Goddard, who would again be the gainer. But
Mrs. Ambrose was as yet ignorant of the fact that he had escaped from prison; she must be told
then, and an effort must be made to elicit her sympathy. Perhaps she and the vicar would come
and stop a few days, thought the squire. Mrs. Goddard might then come and go as she pleased.
Her presence by her husband's bedside would then be accounted for on the ground of her charitable
disposition.

While Mr. Juxon was revolving these things in his mind he watched the doctor and John who were
doing what was necessary for the sick man. Goddard moaned helplessly with every breath, in
a loud, monotonous tone, very wearing to the nerves of those who heard it.

"There is little to be done," said Doctor Longstreet at last. "He must be fed--alternately
a little beef tea and then a little weak brandy and water. We must try and keep the system
up. That is his only chance. I will prescribe something and send it back by the groom."

"You are not going to leave us to-night?" exclaimed the squire in alarm.

"Must. Very sorry. Bad case of diphtheria in town--probably die before morning, unless I get
there in time--I would not have come here for any one else. I will certainly be here before
ten--he will live till then, I fancy, and I don't believe there will be any change in his condition.
Good-night, Mr. Juxon--beef tea and brandy every quarter of an hour. Good-night, Mr.--" he
turned to John.

"Short," said John. "Good-night, doctor."

"Ah--I remember--used to be with Mr. Ambrose--yes. Delighted to meet you again, Mr. Short--good-night."

The doctor vanished, before either the squire or John had time to follow him. His departure
left an unpleasant sense of renewed responsibility in the squire's mind.

"You had better go to bed, Mr. Short," he said kindly. "I will sit up with him."

But John would not hear of any such arrangement; he insisted upon bearing his share of the
watching and stoutly refused to leave the squire alone. There was a large dressing-room attached
to the room where Goddard was lying; the squire and John finally agreed to watch turn and turn
about, one remaining with Goddard, while the other rested upon the couch in the dressing-room
aforesaid. The squire insisted upon taking his watch first, and John lay down. It was past
midnight and he was very tired, but it seemed impossible to sleep with the sound of that loud,
monotonous mumbling perpetually in his ears. It was a horrible night, and John Short never
forgot it so long as he lived. Years afterwards he could not enter the room where Goddard had
lain without fancying he heard that perpetual groaning still ringing in his ears. For many
hours it continued unabated and unchanging, never dying away to silence nor developing to articulate
words. From time to time John could hear the squire's step as he moved about, administering
the nourishment prescribed. If he had had the slightest idea of Mr. Juxon's state of mind he
would hardly have left him even to rest awhile in the next room.

Fortunately the squire's nerves were solid. A firm constitution hardened by thirty years of
seafaring and by the consistent and temperate regularity which was part of his character, had
so toughened his natural strength as to put him almost beyond the reach of mortal ills; otherwise
he must have broken down under the mental strain thus forced upon him. It is no light thing
to do faithfully the utmost to save a man one has good reason to hate, and whose death would
be an undoubted blessing to every one who has anything to do with him. Walter Goddard was to
Charles Juxon at once an enemy, an obstacle and a rival; an enemy, for having attempted his
life, an obstacle, because while he lived he prevented the squire from marrying Mrs. Goddard
and a rival because she had once loved him and for the sake of that love was still willing
to sacrifice much for him. And yet the very fact that she had loved him made it easier to be
kind to him; it seemed to the squire that, after all, in taking care of Goddard he was in some
measure serving her, too, seeing that she would have done the same thing herself could she
have been present.

Yet there was something very generous and large-hearted in the way Charles Juxon did his duty
by the sick man. There are people who seem by nature designed to act heroic parts in life,
whose actions habitually take an heroic form, and whose whole character is of another stamp
from that of average humanity. Of such people much is expected, because they seem to offer
much; no one is surprised to hear of their making great sacrifices, no one is astonished if
they exhibit great personal courage in times of danger. Very often they are people of large
vanity, whose chiefest vanity is not to seem vain; gifted with great powers and always seeking
opportunities of using them, holding high ideas upon most subjects but rarely conceiving themselves
incapable of attaining to any ideal they select for their admiration; brave in combat partly
from real courage, partly, as I have often heard officers say of a dandy soldier in the ranks,
because they are too proud to run away; but, on the whole, heroic by temperament and in virtue
of a singular compound of pride, strength and virtue, often accomplishing really great things.
They are almost always what are called striking people, for their pride and their strength
generally attract attention by their magnitude, and something in their mere appearance distinguishes
them from the average mass.

But Charles Juxon did not in any way belong to this type, any more than the other persons who
found themselves concerned in the events which culminated in Goddard's illness. He was a very
simple man whose pride was wholly unconscious, who did not believe himself destined to do anything
remarkable, who regarded his own personality as rather uninteresting and who, had he been asked
about himself, would have been the first to disclaim any sentiments of the heroic kind. With
very little imagination, he possessed great stability himself and great belief in the stability
of things in general, a character of the traditional kind known as "northern," though it would
be much more just to describe it as the "temperate" or "central" type of man. Wherever there
is exaggeration in nature, there is exaggerated imagination in man. The solid and unimaginative
part of the English character is undeniably derived from the Angles or from the Flemish; it
is morally the best part, but it is by all odds the least interesting--it is found in the type
of man belonging to the plains in a temperate zone, who differs in every respect from the real
northman, his distant cousin and hereditary enemy. If Charles Juxon was remarkable for anything
it was for his modesty and reticence, in a word, for his apparent determination not to be remarkable
at all.

And now, in the extremest anxiety and difficulty, his character served him well; for he unconsciously
refused to allow to himself that his position was extraordinary or his responsibility greater
than he was able to bear. He disliked intensely the idea of being put forward or thrust into
a dramatic situation, and he consequently failed signally to fulfil the dramatic necessities.
There was not even a struggle in his heart between the opposite possibilities of letting Goddard
die, by merely relaxing his attention, and of redoubling his care and bringing about his recovery.
He never once asked himself, after the chances of the patient surviving the fever were stated,
whether he would not be justified in sending for some honest housewife from the village to
take care of the tramp instead of looking to his wants himself. He simply did his best to save
the man's life, without hesitation, without suspecting that he was doing anything extraordinary,
doing, as he had always done, the best thing that came in his way according to the best of
his ability. He could not wholly suppress the reflection that much good might ensue from Goddard's
death, but the thought never for a moment interfered with his efforts to save the convict alive.

But John lay in the next room, kept awake by the sick man's perpetual groaning and by the train
of thought which ran through his brain. There were indeed more strange things than his philosophy
could account for, but the strangest of all was that the squire should know who the tramp was;
he must know it, John thought, since he knew all about him, his former love for Mrs. Goddard
and his recent presence in the neighbourhood. The young man's curiosity was roused to its highest
pitch, and he longed to know more. He at once guessed that there must have been much intimate
confidence between Mr. Juxon and Mrs. Goddard; he suspected moreover that there must be some
strange story connected with her, something which accounted for the peculiar stamp of a formerly
luxurious life which still clung to her, and which should explain her residence in Billingsfield
But John was very far from suspecting the real truth.

His mind was restless and the inaction became intolerable to him. He rose at last and went
again into the room where his friend was watching. Mr. Juxon sat by the bedside, the very picture
of patience, one leg crossed over the other and his hands folded together upon his knee, his
face paler than usual but perfectly calm, his head bent a little to one side and his smooth
hair, which had been slightly ruffled in the encounter in the park, as smooth as ever. It was
a very distinctive feature of him; it was part of the sleek and spotless neatness which Mrs.
Ambrose so much admired.

"It is my turn, now," said John. "Will you lie down for a couple of hours?"

The squire rose. Being older and less excitable than John, he was beginning to feel the need
of rest. People who have watched often by the sick know how terribly long are those hours of
the night between three o'clock and dawn; long always, but seeming interminable when one is
obliged to listen perpetually to a long-drawn, inarticulate moaning, a constant effort to speak
which never results in words.

"You are very good," said Mr. Juxon, quietly. "If you will give him the things from time to
time, I will take a nap."

With that he went and lay down upon the couch, and in three minutes was as sound asleep as
though he were in bed. John sat by the sick man and looked at his flushed features and listened
to the hard-drawn breath followed each time by that terrible, monotonous, mumbling groan.

It might have been three-quarters of an hour since the squire had gone to sleep when John thought
he saw a change in Goddard's face; it seemed to him that the flush subsided from his forehead,
very slowly, leaving only a bright burning colour in his cheeks. His eyes seemed suddenly to
grow clearer and a strange look of intelligence came into them; his whole appearance was as
though illuminated by a flash of some light different from that of the candles which burned
upon the table. John rose to his feet and came and looked at him. The groaning suddenly ceased
and Goddard's eyelids, which had been motionless for hours, moved naturally. He appeared to
be observing John's face attentively.

"Where is the squire?" he asked quite naturally--so naturally that John was startled.

"Asleep in the next room," replied the latter.

"I did not kill him after all," said Goddard, turning himself a little as though to be more
at his ease.

"No," answered John. "He is not hurt at all. Can you tell me who you are?" For his life, he
could not help asking the question. It seemed so easy to find out who the fellow was, now that
he could speak intelligibly. But Goddard's face contracted suddenly, in a hideous smile.

"Don't you wish you knew?" he said roughly. "But I know you, my boy, I know you--ha! ha! There's
no getting away from you, my boy, is there?"

"Who am I?" asked John in astonishment.

"You are the hangman," said Goddard. "I know you very well. The hangman is always so well dressed.
I say, old chap, turn us off quick, you know--no fumbling about the bolt. Look here--I like
your face," he lowered his voice--"there are nearly sixty pounds in my right-hand trouser pocket--there
are--Mary--ah--gave--M--a--"

Again his eyes fixed themselves and the moaning began and continued. John was horror-struck
and stood for a moment gazing at his face, over which the deep flush had spread once more,
seeming to obliterate all appearance of intelligence. Then the young man put his hand beneath
Goddard's head and gently replaced him in his former position, smoothing the pillows, and giving
him a little brandy. He debated whether or not he should call the squire from his rest to tell
him what had happened, but seeing that Goddard had now returned to his former state, he supposed
such moments of clear speech were to be expected from time to time. He sat down again, and
waited; then after a time he went to the window and looked anxiously for the dawn. It seemed
an intolerably long night.

But the day came at last and shed a ghastly grey tinge upon the sick-room, revealing as it
were the outlines of all that was bad to look at, which the warm yellow candle-light had softened
with a kindlier touch. John accidentally looked at himself in the mirror as he passed and was
startled at his own pale face; but the convict, labouring in the ravings of his fever, seemed
unconscious of the dawning day; he was not yet exhausted and his harsh voice never ceased its
jarring gibber. John wondered whether he should ever spend such a night again, and shuddered
at the recollection of each moment.

The daylight waked the squire from his slumbers, however, and before the sun was up he came
out of the dressing-room, looking almost as fresh as though nothing had happened to him in
the night. Accustomed for years to rise at all hours, in all weathers, unimpressionable, calm
and strong, he seemed superior to the course of events.

"Well, Mr. Short, you allowed me a long nap. You must be quite worn out, I should think. How
is the patient?"

John told what had occurred.

"Took you for the hangman, did he?" said the squire. "I wonder why--but you say he asked after
me very sensibly?"

"Quite so. It was when I asked him his own name, that he began raving again," answered John
innocently.

"What made you ask him that?" asked Mr. Juxon, who did not seem pleased.

"Curiosity," was John's laconic answer.

"Yes--but I fancy it frightened him. If I were you I would not do it again, if he has a lucid
moment. I imagine it was fright that made him delirious in the first instance."

"All right," quoth John. "I won't." But he made his own deductions. The squire evidently knew
who he was, and did not want John to know, for some unexplained reason. The young man wondered
what the reason could be; the mere name of the wretched man was not likely to convey any idea
to his mind, for it was highly improbable that he had ever met him before his conviction. So
John departed to his own room and refreshed himself with a tub, while the squire kept watch
by daylight.

It was not yet eight o'clock when Holmes brought a note from the vicar, which Mr. Juxon tore
open and read with anxious interest.

"MY DEAR MR. JUXON--I received your note late last night, but I judged it better to answer
this morning, not wishing to excite suspicion by sending to you at so late an hour. The intelligence
is indeed alarming and you will, I daresay, understand me, when I tell you that I found it
necessary to communicate it to Mrs. Ambrose--"

The squire could not refrain from smiling at the vicar's way of putting the point; but he read
quickly on.

"She however--and I confess my surprise and gratification--desires to accompany me to the Hall
this morning, volunteering to take all possible care of the unfortunate man. As she has had
much experience in visiting the sick, I fancy that she will render us very valuable assistance
in saving his life. Pray let me know if the plan has your approval, as it may be dangerous
to lose time.--Yours sincerely,

"AUGUSTIN AMBROSE."

Mr. Juxon was delighted to find that the difficult task of putting Mrs. Ambrose in possession
of the facts of the case had been accomplished in the ordinary, the very ordinary, course of
events by her own determination to find out what was to be known. In an hour she might be at
Goddard's bedside, and Mrs. Goddard would be free to see her husband. He despatched a note
at once and redoubled his attentions to the sick man whose condition, however, showed no signs
of changing.

CHAPTER XXII.

Mrs. Ambrose kept her word and arrived with the vicar before nine o'clock, protesting her determination
to take care of poor Goddard, so long as he needed any care. Mr. Juxon warned her that John
did not know who the man was, and entreated her to be careful of her speech when John was present.
There was no reason why John should ever know anything more about it, he said; three could
keep a secret, but no one knew whether four could be as discreet.

The squire took Mrs. Ambrose and her husband to Goddard's room and telling her that Doctor
Longstreet was expected in an hour, by which time he himself hoped to have returned, he left
the two good people in charge of the sick man and went to see Mrs. Goddard. He sent John a
message to the effect that all was well and that he should take some rest while the Ambroses
relieved the watch, and having thus disposed his household he went out, bound upon one of the
most disagreeable errands he had ever undertaken. But he set his teeth and walked boldly down
the park.

At the turn of the avenue he paused, at the spot where Goddard had attacked him. There was
nothing to be seen at first, for the road was hard and dry and there was no trace of the scuffle;
but as the squire looked about he spied his hat, lying in the ditch, and picked it up. It was
heavy with the morning dew and the brim was broken and bent where Goddard's weapon had struck
it. Hard by in a heap of driven oak leaves lay the weapon itself, which Mr. Juxon examined
curiously. It was a heavy piece of hewn oak, evidently very old, and at one end a thick iron
spike was driven through, the sharp point projecting upon one side and the wrought head upon
the other. He turned it over in his hands and realised that he had narrowly escaped his death.
Then he laid the hat and the club together and threw a handful of leaves over them, intending
to take them to the Hall at a later hour, and he turned to go upon his way towards the cottage.
But as he turned he saw two men coming towards him, and now not twenty yards away. His heart
sank, for one of the two was Thomas Gall the village constable; the other was a quiet-looking
individual with grey whiskers, plainly dressed and unassuming in appearance. Instinctively
the squire knew that Gall's companion must be a detective. He was startled, and taken altogether
unawares; but the men were close upon him and there was nothing to be done but to face them boldly.

Gall made his usual half military salute as he came up, and the man in plain clothes raised
his hat politely.

"The gentleman from Lunnon, sir," said Gall by way of introduction, assuming an air of mysterious
importance.

"Yes?" said Mr. Juxon interrogatively. "Do you wish to speak to me?"

"The gentleman's come on business, sir. In point of fact, sir, it's the case we was speakin'
of lately."

The squire knew very well what was the matter. Indeed, he had wondered that the detective had
not arrived sooner. That did not make it any easier to receive him, however; on the contrary,
if he had come on the previous day matters would have been much simpler.

"Very well, Gall," answered Mr. Juxon. "I am much obliged to you for bringing Mr.--" he paused
and looked at the man in plain clothes.

"Booley, sir," said the detective.

"Thank you--yes--for bringing Mr. Booley so far. You may go home, Gall. If we need your services
we will send to your house."

"It struck me, sir," remarked Gall with a bland smile, "as perhaps I might be of use--prefeshnal
in fact, sir."

"I will send for you," said the detective, shortly. The manners of the rural constabulary had
long ceased to amuse him.

Gall departed rather reluctantly, but to make up for being left out of the confidential interview
which was to follow, he passed his thumb round his belt and thrust out his portly chest as
he marched down the avenue. He subsequently spoke very roughly to a little boy who was driving
an old sheep to the butcher's at the other end of the village.

Mr. Juxon and the detective turned back and walked slowly towards the Hall.

"Will you be good enough to state exactly what the business is," said the squire, well knowing
that it was best to go straight to the point.

"You are Mr. Juxon, I believe?" inquired Mr. Booley looking at his companion sharply. The squire
nodded. "Very good, Mr. Juxon," continued the official. "I am after a man called Walter Goddard.
Do you know anything about him? His wife, Mrs. Mary Goddard, lives in this village."

"Walter Goddard is at this moment in my house," said the squire calmly. "I know all about him.
He lay in wait for me at this very spot last night and attacked me. My dog pulled him down."

The detective was somewhat surprised at the intelligence, and at the cool manner in which his
companion conveyed it.

"I am very glad to hear that. In that case I will take him at once."

"I fear that is impossible," answered the squire. "The man is raving in the delirium of a brain
fever. Meanwhile I shall be glad if you will stay in the house, until he is well enough to
be moved. The doctor will be here at ten o'clock, and he will give you the details of the case
better than I can. It would be quite impossible to take him away at present."

"May I ask," inquired Mr. Booley severely, "why you did not inform the local police?"

"Because it would have been useless. If he had escaped after attacking me, I should have done
so. But since I caught him, and found him to be very ill--utterly unable to move, I proposed
to take charge of him myself. Mrs. Goddard is a friend of mine, and of the vicar, who knows
her story perfectly well. To publish the story in the village would be to do her a great injury.
Mrs. Ambrose, the vicar's wife, who is also acquainted with the circumstances, is at this moment
taking care of the sick man. I presume that my promise--I am a retired officer of the Navy--and
the promise of Mr. Ambrose, the vicar, are sufficient guarantee--"

"Oh, there is no question of guarantee," said Mr. Booley. "I assure you, Mr. Juxon, I have
no doubt whatever that you have acted for the best. Can you tell me how long Goddard has been
in the neighbourhood?"

The squire told the detective what he knew, taking care not to implicate Mrs. Goddard, even
adding with considerable boldness, for he was not positively certain of the statement, that
neither she nor any one else had known where the man was hiding. Mr. Booley being sure that
Goddard could not escape him, saw that he could claim the reward offered for the capture of
the convict. He asked whether he might see him.

"That is doubtful," said the squire. "When I left him just now he was quite unconscious, but
he has lucid moments. To frighten him at such a time might kill him outright."

"It is very easy for me to say that I am another medical man," remarked Mr. Booley. "Perhaps
I might say it in any case, just to keep the servants quiet. I would like to see Mrs. Goddard,
too."

"That is another matter. She is very nervous. I am going to her house, now, and probably she
will come back to the Hall with me. I might perhaps tell her that you are here, but I think
it would be likely to shock her very much."

"Well, well, we will see about it," answered Mr. Booley. They reached the house and the squire
ushered the detective into the study, begging him to wait for his return.

It was a new complication, though it had seemed possible enough. But the position was not pleasant.
To feel that there was a detective in the house waiting to carry off Goddard, so soon as he
should be well enough to be moved, was about as disagreeable as anything well could be. The
longer the squire thought of it, the more impossible and at the same time unnecessary it seemed
to be to inform Mrs. Goddard of Booley's arrival. He hastened down the park, feeling that no
time must be lost in bringing her to her husband's bedside.

He found her waiting for him, and was struck by the calmness she displayed. To tell the truth
the violence of her emotions had been wholly expended on the previous night and the reaction
had brought an intense melancholy quiet, which almost frightened Mr. Juxon. The habit of bearing
great anxiety had not been wholly forgotten, for the lesson had been well learned during those
terrible days of her husband's trial, and it was as though his sudden return had revived in
her the custom of silent suffering. She hardly spoke, but listened quietly to Mr. Juxon's account
of what had happened.

"You are not hurt?" she asked, almost incredulously. Her eyes rested on her friend's face with
a wistful look.

"No, I assure you, not in the least," he said. "But your poor husband is very ill--very ill
indeed."

"Tell me," said she quietly, "is he dead? Are you trying to break it to me?"

"No--no indeed. He is alive--he may even recover. But that is very uncertain. It might be best
to wait until the doctor has been again. I will come back and fetch you--"

"Oh, no, I will go at once. I would like to walk. It will do me good."

So the two set out without further words upon their errand. Mr. Juxon had purposely omitted
to speak of Mr. Booley's arrival. It would be easy, he thought, to prevent them from meeting
in the great house.

"Do you know," said Mary Goddard, as they walked together, "it is very hard to wish that he
may recover--" she stopped short.

"Very hard," answered the squire. "His life must be one of misery, if he lives."

"Of course you would send him back?" she asked nervously.

"My dear friend, there is no other course open to me. Your own safety requires it."

"God knows--you would only be doing right," she said and was silent again. She knew, though
the squire did not, what fate awaited Walter Goddard if he were given up to justice. She knew
that he had taken life and must pay the penalty. Yet she was very calm; her senses were all
dulled and yet her thoughts seemed to be consecutive and rational. She realised fully that
the case of life and death was ill balanced; death had it which ever course events might take,
and she could not save her husband. She thought of it calmly and calmly hoped that he might
die now, in his bed, with her by his side. It was a better fate.

"You say that the doctor thinks he must have been ill some time?" she asked after a time.

"Yes--he was quite sure of it," answered the squire.

"Perhaps that was why he spoke so roughly to me," she said in a low voice, as though speaking
to herself.

The tears came into the squire's eyes for sheer pity. Even in this utmost extremity the unhappy
woman tried to account for her husband's rude and cruel speech. Mr. Juxon did not answer but
looked away. They passed the spot where the scuffle had occurred on the previous night, but
still he said nothing, fearing to disturb her by making his story seem too vividly real.

"Where is he?" she asked as they reached the Hall, looking up at the windows.

"On the other side."

They went in and mounted the stairs towards the sick man's chamber. Mr. Juxon went in, leaving
Mrs. Goddard outside for a moment. She could hear that hideous rattling monotonous moan, and
she trembled from head to foot. Presently Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose came out, looking very grave
and passed by her with a look of sympathy.

"Will you come in?" said the squire in a low voice.

Mrs. Goddard entered the room quickly. On seeing her husband, she uttered a low cry and laid
her hand upon Mr. Juxon's arm. For some seconds she stood thus, quite motionless, gazing with
intense and sympathetic interest at the sick man's face. Then she went to his side and laid
her hand upon his burning forehead and looked into his eyes.

"Walter! Walter!" she cried. "Don't you know me? Oh, why does he groan like that? Is he suffering?"
she asked turning to Mr. Juxon.

"No--I do not think he suffers much. He is quite unconscious. He is talking all the time but
cannot pronounce the words."

The squire stood at a distance looking on, noting the womanly thoughtfulness Mrs. Goddard displayed
as she smoothed her husband's pillow and tried to settle his head more comfortably upon the
bags of ice; and all the while she never took her eyes from Goddard's face, as though she were
fascinated by her own sorrow and his suffering. She moved about the bed with that instinctive
understanding of sickness which belongs to delicate women, but her glance never strayed to
Mr. Juxon; she seemed forced by a mysterious magnetism to look at Walter and only at him.

"Has he been long like this?" she asked.

"Ever since last night. He called you once--he said, 'Mary Goddard, let me in!' And then he
said something else--he said--I cannot remember what he said." Mr. Juxon checked himself, remembering
the words John had heard, and of which he only half understood the import. But Mrs. Goddard
hardly noticed his reply.

"Will you leave me alone with him?" she said presently. "There is a bell in the room--I could
ring if anything--happened," she added with mournful hesitation.

"Certainly," answered the squire. "Only, I beg of you my dear friend--do not distress yourself
needlessly--"

"Needlessly!" she repeated with a sorrowful smile. "It is all I can do for him--to watch by
his side. He will not live--he will not live, I am sure."

The squire inwardly prayed that she might be right, and left her alone with the sick man. Who,
he thought, was better fitted, who had a stronger right to be at his bedside at such a time?
If only he might die! For if he lived, how much more terrible would the separation be, when
Booley the detective came to conduct him back to his prison! In truth, it would be more terrible
even than Mr. Juxon imagined.

Meanwhile he must go and see to the rest of the household. He must speak to John Short; he
must see Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose, and he must take precautions against any of them seeing Mr.
Booley. This was, he thought, very important, and he resolved to speak with the latter first.
John was probably asleep, worn out with the watching of the night.

Mr. Booley sat in the squire's study where he had been left almost an hour earlier. He had
installed himself in a comfortable corner by the fire and was reading the morning paper which
he had found unopened upon the table. He seemed thoroughly at home as he sat there, a pair
of glasses upon his nose and his feet stretched out towards the flame upon the hearth.

"Thank you, I am doing very well, Mr. Juxon," he said as the squire entered.

"Oh--I am very glad," answered Mr. Juxon politely. The information was wholly voluntary as
he had not asked any question concerning the detective's comfort.

"And how is the patient?" inquired Mr. Booley. "Do you think there is any chance of removing
him this afternoon?"

"This afternoon?" repeated the squire, in some astonishment. "The man is very ill. It may be
weeks before he can be removed."

"Oh!" ejaculated the other. "I was not aware of that. I cannot possibly stay so long. To-morrow,
at the latest, he will have to go."

"But, my dear sir," argued Mr. Juxon, "the thing is quite impossible. The doctor can testify
to that--"

"We are apt to be our own doctors in these cases," said Mr. Booley, calmly. "At all events
he can be taken as far as the county gaol."

"Upon my word, it would be murder to think of it--a man in a brain fever, in a delirium, to
be taken over jolting roads--dear me! It is not to be thought of!"

Mr. Booley smiled benignly, for the first time since the squire had made his acquaintance.

"You seem to forget, Mr. Juxon, that my time is very valuable," he observed.

"Yes--no doubt--but the man's life, Mr. Booley, is valuable too."

"Hardly, I should say," returned the detective coolly. "But since you are so very pressing,
I will ask to see the man at once. I can soon tell you whether he will die on the road or not.
I have had considerable experience in that line."

"You shall see him, as soon as the doctor comes," replied the squire, shocked at the man's
indifference and hardness.

"It certainly cannot hurt him to see me, if he is still unconscious or raving," objected Mr.
Booley.

"He might have a lucid moment just when you are there--the fright would very likely kill him."

"That would decide the question of moving him," answered Booley, taking his glasses from his
nose, laying down the paper and rising to his feet. "There is clearly some reason why you object
to my seeing him now. I would not like to insist, Mr. Juxon, but you must please remember that
it may be my duty to do so."

The squire was beginning to be angry; even his calm temper was not proof against the annoyance
caused by Mr. Booley's appearance at the Hall, but he wisely controlled himself and resorted
to other means of persuasion.

"There is a reason, Mr. Booley; indeed there are several very good reasons. One of them is
that it might be fatal to frighten the man; another is that at this moment his wife is by his
bedside. She has entirely made up her mind that when he is recovered he must return to prison,
but at present it would be most unkind to let her know that you are in the house. The shock
to her nerves would be terrible."

"Oh," said Mr. Booley, "if there is a lady in the case we must make some allowances, I presume.
Only, put yourself in my place, Mr. Juxon, put yourself in my place."

The squire doubted whether he would be willing to exchange his personality for that of Mr. Booley.

"Well--what then?" he said. "I think I would try to be merciful."

"Yes; but suppose that in being merciful, you just allowed that lady the time necessary to
present her beloved husband with a convenient little pill, just to shorten his sufferings?
And suppose that--"

"Really, Mr. Booley, I think you make very unwarrantable suppositions," said Mr. Juxon severely.
"I cannot suppose any such thing."

"Many women--ladies too--have done that to save a man from hanging," returned Mr. Booley, fixing
his grey eye on the squire.

"Hanging?" repeated the latter in surprise. "But Goddard is not to be hanged."

"Of course he is. What did you expect?" Mr. Booley looked surprised in his turn.

"But--what for?" asked the squire very anxiously. "He has not killed anybody--"

"Oh--then you don't know how he escaped?"

"No--I have not the least idea--pray tell me."

"I don't wonder you don't understand me, then," said Mr. Booley. "Well, it is a short tale
but a lively one, as they say. Of course it stands to reason in the first place that he could
not have got out of Portland. He was taken out for a purpose. You know that after his trial
was over, all sorts of other things besides the forgery came out about him, proving that he
was altogether a very bad lot. Now about three weeks ago there was a question of identifying
a certain person--it was a very long story, with a bad murder case and all the rest of it--commonplace,
you know the sort--never mind the story, it will all be in the papers before long when they
have got it straight, which is more than I have, seeing that these affairs do get a little
complicated occasionally, you know, as such things will." Mr. Booley paused. It was evident
that his command of the English tongue was not equal to the strain of constructing a long sentence.

"This person, whom he was to identify, was the person murdered?" inquired Mr. Juxon.

"Exactly. It was not the person, but the person's body, so to say. Somebody who had been connected
with the Goddard case was sure that if Goddard could be got out of prison he could do the identifying
all straight. It did not matter about his being under sentence of hard labour--it was a private
case, and the officer only wanted Goddard's opinion for his personal satisfaction. So he goes
to the governor of Portland, and finds that Goddard had a very good character in that institution--he
was a little bit of a gay deceiver, you see, and knew how to fetch the chaps in there and particularly
the parson. So he had a good character. Very good. The governor consents to send him to town
for this private job, under a strong force--that means three policemen--with irons on his hands.
When they reached London they put him in a fourwheeler. Those things are done sometimes, and
nobody is the wiser, because the governor does it on his own responsibility, for the good of
the law, I suppose. I never approved of it. Do you follow me, Mr. Juxon?"

"Perfectly," answered the squire. "He was driven from the station with three policemen in a
hackney-coach, you say."

"Exactly so. It was a queer place where the body was--away down in the Minories. Ever been
there, Mr. Juxon? Queer place it is, and no mistake. I would like to show you some little bits
of London. Well, as I was saying, the fourwheeler went along, with two policemen inside with
Goddard and one on the box. Safe, you would say. Not a bit of it. Just the beggar's luck, too.
It was dusk. That is always darker than when the lamps are well going. The fourwheeler ran
into a dray-cart, round a corner where they were repairing the street. The horse went down
with a smash, shafts, lamp, everything broken to smithereens, as they say. The policeman jumps
off the box with the cabby to see what is the matter. One of the bobbies--the policemen I would
say--it's a technical term, Mr. Juxon--gets out of the cab to see what's up, leaving Goddard
in charge of the other. Josephine had been divorced, to Pauline's undisguised joy; and her place had been
taken by Marie Louise, the proud Austrian, whom she liked at least as little. When Napoleon
fell from his throne, she alone of all his sisters helped to cheer his exile in Elba; for the
brother she loved and feared was the only man to whom Pauline's fickle heart was ever true.
She even stripped herself of all her jewels to make the way smooth back to his crown. And
when at last news came to her at Rome of his death at St Helena it was she who shed the bitterest
tears and refused to be comforted. That an empire was lost, was nothing compared with the loss
of the brother who had always been so lenient to her failings, so responsive to her love.

Two
years later her own end came at Florence. When she felt the cold hand of death on her, she
called feebly for a mirror, that she might look for the last time on her beauty. "Thank God,"
she whispered, as she gazed, "I am still lovely! I am ready to die."

A few moments later, with the mirror still clutched in her hand, and her eyes still feasting
on the charms which time and death itself were powerless to dim, died Pauline Bonaparte, sister
of an Emperor and herself an Empress by the right of her incomparable
beauty.

CHAPTER XI

A SIREN OF THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

When Wilhelmine Encke first opened her eyes on the world one day in
the year 1754, he would have been a bold prophet who would have predicted
that she would one day be the uncrowned Queen of the Court of Russia,
plus Reine que la Reine, and that her children would have in their
veins the proudest blood in Europe.

Such a prophecy might well have been laughed to scorn, for little
Wilhelmine had as obscure a cradle as almost any infant in all Prussia.

Her father was an army bugler, who wore private's uniform in Frederick the Great's army; and her
early years were to be spent playing with other soldiers' children in the sordid environment
of Berlin barracks.

When her father turned his back on the army, while Wilhelmine was still nursing her dolls, it was
to play the humble rôle of landlord of a small tavern, from which he was lured by the bait
of a place as French-horn player in Frederick's private band; and the goal of his modest ambition
was reached when he was appointed trumpeter to the King.

This was Herr Encke's position when the curtain rises on our story at Potsdam, and shows us Wilhelmine,
an unattractive maid of ten, the Cinderella of her family, for whom there seemed no better prospect
than a soldier-husband, if indeed she were lucky enough to capture him. She was, in fact, the
"ugly duckling" of a good-looking family, removed by a whole world from her beautiful eldest
sister Charlotte, who counted among her many admirers no less exalted a wooer than Prince Frederick
William, the King's nephew and heir to his throne.

There was, indeed, no more beautiful or haughty damsel in all Potsdam
than this trumpeter's daughter who had caught the amorous fancy of
the Prince, then, as to his last day, the slave of every pretty face
that crossed his path.

But Charlotte Encke was much too imperious a young lady to hold her
Royal lover long in fetters.

He quickly wearied of her caprices, her petulances, and her exhibitions of temper; and the climax
came one day when in a fit of anger she struck her little sister,
in his presence, and he took up the cudgels for Wilhelmine.

This was the last straw for the disillusioned and disgusted Prince,
who sent Charlotte off to Paris, where as the Countess Matushke she
played the fine lady at her lover's cost, while the Prince took her
Cinderella sister under his protection.

He took her education into his own hands, provided her with masters to teach her a wide range
of accomplishments, from languages to dancing and deportment, while
he himself gave her lessons in history and geography.

Nor did he lack the reward of his benevolent offices; for Wilhelmine,
under his ministrations, not only developed rare gifts and graces
of mind, like many another Cinderella before her; she blossomed into
a rose of girlhood, more beautiful even than her imperious sister,
and with a sweetness of character and a winsomeness which Charlotte
could never have attained.

On her part, gratitude to her benefactor rapidly grew into love for
the handsome and courtly Prince; on his, sympathy for the ill-used
Cinderella, into a passion for the lovely maiden hovering on the verge
of a still more beautiful womanhood.

It was a mutual passion, strong and deep, which now linked the widely
contrasted lives of the King-to-be and the trumpeter's daughter--a
passion which, with each, was to last as long as life itself.

Wilhelmine was now formally installed in the place of the deposed
Charlotte as favourite of the heir to the throne; and idyllic years
followed, during which she gave pledges of her love to the man who
was her husband in all but name.

That her purse was often empty was a matter to smile at; that she had to act as "breadwinner"
to her family, and was at times reduced to such straits that she
was obliged to pawn some of her small stock of jewellery in order
to provide her lover with a supper, was a bagatelle.

She was the happiest young woman in Prussia.

Even what seemed to be a crowning disaster, fortune turned into a boon for her. When news of this
unlicensed love-making came to the King's ears, he was furious. It was intolerable that the
destined ruler of a great and powerful nation should be governed and duped by a woman of the
people. He gave his nephew a sound rating--alike for his extravagance and his amour; and packed off
Wilhelmine to join her sister in Paris.

But, for once, Frederick found that he had made a mistake. The Prince, robbed of the woman he
loved, took the bit in his teeth, and plunged so deeply into extravagant dallying with ballet-dancers
and stars of the opera that the King was glad to choose the lesser
evil, and to summon Wilhelmine back to her Prince's arms.

One stipulation only he made, that she should make her home away from the capital and the dangerous
allurements which his nephew found there.

Now at last we find Cinderella happily installed, with the King's august approval, in a beautiful home
which has since blossomed into the splendours of Charlottenburg. Here she gave birth to a
son, whom Frederick dubbed Count de la Marke in his nurse's arms, but who was fated never
to leave his cradle. This child of love, the idol of his parents, sleeps in a splendid mausoleum
in the great Protestant Church of Berlin.

As a sop to Prussian morality and to make the old King quite easy,
a complaisant husband was now found for the Prince's favourite in
his chamberlain, Herr Rietz, son of a palace gardener; and Frederick
William himself looked on while the woman he loved, the mother of
his children, was converted by a few priestly words into a "respectable
married woman"--only to leave the altar on his own arm, his wife in
the eyes of the world.

The time was now drawing near when Wilhelmine was to reach the zenith of her adventurous life.
One August day in 1786 Frederick the Great drew his last breath in
the Potsdam Palace, and his nephew awoke to be greeted by his chamberlain
as "Your Majesty."

The trumpeter's daughter was at last a Queen, in fact, if not in name, more secure in her
husband's love than ever, and with long years of splendour and happiness
before her.

That his fancy, ever wayward, flitted to other women as fair as herself, did not trouble her
a whit. Like Madame de Pompadour, she was prepared even to encourage such rivalry, so long as
the first place (and this she knew) in her husband's heart was unassailably her own.

Picture our Cinderella now in all her new splendours, moving as a
Queen among her courtiers, receiving the homage of princes and ambassadors
as her right, making her voice heard in the Council Chamber, and holding
her salon, to which all the great ones of the earth flocked to pay
tribute to her beauty and her gifts of mind.

It was a strange transformation from the barracks-kitchen to the Queendom of one of the greatest
Courts of Europe; but no Queen cradled in a palace ever wore her
honours with greater dignity, grace, and simplicity than this daughter
of an army bandsman.

The days of the empty purse were, of course, at an end.

She had now her ten thousand francs a month for "pin-money," her luxuriously appointed palace at
Charlottenburg, and her Berlin mansion, "Unter den Linden," with its private theatre, in which
she and her Royal lover, surrounded by their brilliant Court, applauded the greatest actors
from Paris and Vienna. It is said that many of these stage-plays were of questionable decency,
with more than a suggestion of the garden of Eden in them; but this
is an aspersion which Madame de Rietz indignantly repudiates in her
"Memoirs."

While Wilhelmine was thus happy in her Court magnificence, varied by days of "delightful repose,"
at Charlottenburg, France was in the throes of her Revolution, drenched with the blood of her
greatest men and fairest women; her King had lost his crown and his head with it; and Europe was
in arms against her. When Frederick William joined his army camped on the Rhine bank, Wilhelmine
was by his side to counsel him as he wavered between war and peace. The fate of the coalition
against France was practically in the hands of the trumpeter's daughter, whose voice was all
for peace. "What matters it," she said, "how France is governed? Let her manage her own affairs,
and let Europe be saved from the horrors of bloodshed."

In vain did the envoys of Spain and Italy, Austria and England, practise all their diplomacy to
place her influence in the scale of war. When Lord Henry Spencer offered her a hundred thousand
guineas if she would dissuade her husband from concluding a treaty with France, she turned a
deaf ear to all his pleading and arguments. Such influence as she possessed should be exercised
in the interests of peace, and thus it was that the vacillating King deserted his allies, and
signed the Treaty of Bâle, in 1795.

Such was the triumphant issue of Madame Rietz's intervention in the affairs of Europe; such the
proof she gave to the world of her conquest of a King. It was thus with a light heart that she
turned her back on the Rhine camp; and with her husband's children
and a splendid retinue set out on her journey to Italy, to see which
was the greatest ambition of her life.

At the Austrian Court she was coldly received, it is true, thanks to her part in the Treaty of
Bâle; but in Italy she was greeted as a Queen. At Naples Queen Caroline received her as a
sister; the trumpeter's daughter was the brilliant centre of fêtes and banquets and receptions
such as might have gratified the vanity of an Empress: while at Florence she spent days of ideal happiness
under the blue sky of Italy and among her beauties of Nature and Art.

It was at Venice that she wrote to her King lover, "Your Majesty knows well that, for myself,
I place no value on the foolish vanities of Court etiquette; but I am placed in an awkward
position by my daughter being raised to the rank of Countess, while I am still in the lowly position
of a bourgeoise." She had, in fact, always declined the honour of a title, which Frederick
William had so often begged her to accept; and it was only for her daughter's sake, when the
question of an alliance between the young Countess de la Marke and
Lord Bristol's heir arose, that she at last stooped to ask for what
she had so long refused.

A few weeks later her brother, the King's equerry, placed in her hands the patent which made
her Countess Lichtenau, with the right to bear on her shield of arms the Prussian eagle and the
Royal crown.

Wherever the Countess (as we must now call her) went on her Italian
tour she drew men to her feet by the magnetism of her beauty, who
would have paid no homage to her as chère amie of a King; for she
was now in the early thirties, in the full bloom of the loveliness
that had its obscure budding in the Potsdam barrack-rooms.

Young and old were equally powerless to resist her fascinations.

She had, indeed, no more ardent slave and admirer than my Lord Bristol,
the octogenarian Bishop of Londonderry, whose passion for the Countess,
young enough to be his granddaughter, was that of a lovesick youth.

From "dear Countess and adorable friend," he quickly leaps in his letters to "my dear Wilhelmine."
He looks forward with the impatience of a boy to seeing her at "that terrestrial paradise which
is called Naples, where we shall enjoy perpetual spring and spend delightful days in listening
to the divine Paesiello.

Do you know," he adds, "I passed two hours of real delight this morning in simply contemplating
your elegant bedroom where only the elegant sleeper was missing."

"It is in Crocelle," he writes a little later, "that you will make people happy by your presence,
and where you will recuperate your health, regain your gaiety, and
forget an Irishman; and a holy Bishop, more worthy of your affection,
on account of the deep attachment he has for you, will take his place."

In

June, 1796, this senile lover writes, "In an hour I depart for Germany; and, as the wind is north,
with every step I take I shall say: 'This breeze comes perhaps from
her; it has touched her rosy lips and mingled its scent with the perfume
of her breath which I shall inhale, the perfume of the breath of my
dear Wilhelmine.'"

But these days of dallying with her legion of lovers, of regal fêtes and pleasure-chasing, were
brought to an abrupt conclusion when news came to her at Venice that her "husband," the King,
was dying, with the Royal family by his bedside awaiting the end. Such news, with all its import
of sorrow and tragedy, set the Countess racing across the Continent,
fast as horses could carry her, to the side of her beloved King, whom
she found, if not in extremis, "very dangerously ill and pitifully
changed" from the robust man she had left.

Her return, however, did more for him than all the skill of his doctors. It gave him a new
lease of life, in which her presence brought happiness into days
which, none knew better than himself, were numbered.

For more than a year the Countess was his tender nurse and constant
companion, ministering to his comfort and arranging plays and tableaux
for his entertainment.

She watched over him as jealously as any mother over her dying child;
but all her devotion could not stay the steps of death, which every
day brought nearer.

As the inevitable end approached, her friends warned her to leave Charlottenburg while the opportunity
was still hers--to escape with her jewels and her money (a fortune of £150,000)--but to all
such urging she was deaf. She would stay by her lover's side to the last, though she well knew
the danger of delay.

One November day in 1797 Frederick William made his last public appearance at a banquet, with the Countess
at his right hand; and seldom has festival had such a setting in
tragedy.

"None of the guests," we are told, "uttered a word or ate a mouthful
of anything; the plates were cleared at the hasty ringing of a bell.

A convulsive movement made by the sick man showed that he was suffering agonies. Before half-past
nine every guest had left, greatly troubled. The majority of those who had been present never
saw the unfortunate monarch again. They all shared the same presentiment
of disaster, and wept."

From that night the King was dead, even to his own Court.

The gates of his palace were closed against the world, and none were allowed to approach the
chamber in which his life was ebbing away, save the Countess, his nurse, and his doctors.
Even his children were refused admittance to his presence.

As the Marquis de Saint Mexent said, "The King of Prussia ends his days as though he were a
rich benefactor. All the relations are excluded by the housekeeper."

A few days before the end came the Countess was seen to leave the palace, carrying a large red
portfolio--a suspicious circumstance which the Crown Prince's spies promptly reported to their
master. There could be only one inference--she had been caught in the act of stealing State papers,
a crime for which she would have to pay a heavy price as soon as her protector was no more!
As a matter of fact the portfolio contained nothing more secret or
valuable than the letters she had written to the King during the twenty-seven
years of their romance, letters which, after reading, she consigned
to the flames in her boudoir within an hour of the suspected theft
of State documents.

A few days later, on the night of the 16th of November (1797), the King entered on his "death
agony," one fit of suffocation succeeding another, until the Countess, unable to bear any longer
the sight of such suffering, was carried away in violent convulsions. She saw him no more;
for by seven o'clock in the morning Frederick William had found release from his agony in death,
and his son had begun to reign in his stead.

At last the long-delayed hour of revenge had come to Frederick William III., who had always regarded
his father's favourite as an enemy; and his vengeance was swift to strike. Before the late King's
body was cold, his successor's emissaries appeared at the palace
door, Unter den Linden, with orders to search her papers and to demand
the keys of every desk and cupboard.

Even then she scorned to fly before the storm which she knew was breaking. For three days
and nights her carriage stood at her gates ready to take her away
to safety; but she refused to move a step.

Then one morning, before she had left her bed, a major of the guards, with a posse of soldiers,
appeared at her bedroom door armed with a warrant for her arrest;
and for many weeks she was a closely guarded prisoner in her own house,
subject to daily insults and indignities from men who, a few weeks
earlier, had saluted her as a Queen.

At the trial which followed some very grave indictments were preferred against her. She was
charged with having betrayed State secrets; with having robbed the Royal Exchequer; stolen the King's
portfolio; and removed the priceless solitaire diamond from his crown, and the very rings from
his fingers as he lay dying. To these and other equally grave charges the Countess gave a
dignified denial, which the evidence she was able to produce supported. The diamond and the
rings were, in fact, discovered in places indicated by her where
they had been put, by the King's orders, for safe custody.

The trial had a happier ending than, from the malignity of her enemies,
especially of the King, might have been expected.

After three months of durance she was removed to a Silesian fortress.

Her houses and lands were taken from her; but her furniture and jewels were left untouched,
and with them she was allowed to enjoy a pension of four thousand
thalers a year.

Such was the judgment of a Court which proved more merciful than she had perhaps a right to expect.
And two months later, the influence and pleading of her friends set
her free from her fortress-prison to spend her life where and as she
would.

The sun of her splendour had indeed set, but many years of peaceful and not unhappy life remained
for our ex-Queen, who was still in the prime of her womanhood and beauty and with the magnetism
that, to her last day, brought men to her feet. At fifty she was able to inspire such passion
in the breast of a young artist, Francis Holbein, that he asked and won her hand in marriage.
But this romance was short-lived, for within a year he left her, to spend the remainder of her
days in Paris, Vienna, and her native Prussia. Here her adventurous career closed in such
obscurity, at the age of sixty-eight, that even those who ministered to her last moments were
unaware that the dying woman was the Countess who had played so dazzling a part a generation
earlier, as favourite of the King of Prussia and Queen of her loveliest
women.

CHAPTER XII

THE CORSICAN AND THE CREOLE

Of the many women who succeeded one another with such bewildering rapidity in the favour of
the first Napoleon, from Desirée Clary, daughter of the Marseilles silk-merchant, the "little
wife" of his days of obscurity, to Madame Walewska, the beautiful
Pole, who so fruitlessly bartered her charms for her country's salvation,
only one really captured his fickle heart--Josephine de Beauharnais,
the woman whom he raised to the splendour of an Imperial crown, only
to fling her aside when she no longer served the purposes of his ambition.

It

was one October day in the year 1795 that Josephine, Vicomtesse de Beauharnais, first cast
the spell of her beauty on the "ugly little Corsican," who had then got his foot well planted
on the ladder, at the summit of which was his crown of empire.

At twenty-six, the man who, but a little earlier, was an out-of-work captain, eating his heart out
in a Marseilles slum, was General-in-Chief of the armies of France,
with the disarmed rebels of Paris grovelling at his feet.

One day a handsome boy came to him, craving permission to retain the sword his father had won,
a favour which the General, pleased by the boy's frankness and manliness, granted. The next
day the young rebel's mother presented herself to thank him with gracious words for his kindness
to her son--a creature of another world than his, with a beauty, grace and refinement which
were a new revelation to his bourgeois eyes.

The fair vision haunted him; the music of her voice lingered in his
ears.

He must see her again. And, before another day had passed, we find the pale-faced, grim Corsican,
with the burning eyes, sitting awkwardly on a horse-hair chair of Madame's dining-room in her
small house in the Rue Chantereine, nervously awaiting the entry
of the Vicomtesse who had already played such havoc with his peace
of mind.

And when at last she made her appearance, few would have recognised in the man, who made his
shy, awkward bow, the famous General with whose name the whole of
France was ringing.

It was little wonder, perhaps, that the little Corsican's heart went pit-a-pat, or that his knees
trembled under him, for the lady whose smile and the touch of whose hand sent a thrill through
him, was indeed, to quote his own words, "beautiful as a dream."

From the chestnut hair which rippled over her small, proudly poised head to the arch of her tiny,
dainty feet, "made for homage and for kisses," she was, "all glorious
without."

There was witchery in every part of her--in the rich colour that mantled in her cheeks; the sweet
brown eyes that looked out between long-fringed eyelids; the small, delicate nose; "the nostrils
quivering at the least emotion"; the exquisite lines of the tall,
supple figure, instinct with grace in every moment; and, above all,
in the seductive music of a voice, every note of which was a caress.



"Because he is my husband," said she very quietly.

John laid his hand on Mrs. Ambrose's arm in utmost bewilderment and looked at her as though
to ask if it were true. She nodded gravely. Before John had time to recover himself from the
shock of the news, footsteps were heard outside, and the loud altercation of angry voices.
John Short leaned his shoulder against the door and put his foot against it below, expecting
an attack.

CHAPTER XXIV.

When Mr. Ambrose undertook to reason with the detective he went directly towards the study
where John said the man was waiting. But Mr. Booley was beginning to suspect that the doctor
was not coming to speak with him as the squire had promised, and after hesitating for a few
moments followed John into the library, determining to manage matters himself. As he opened
the door he met Mr. Ambrose coming towards him, and at the same moment Mr. Juxon and Doctor
Longstreet entered from the opposite end of the long room. The cheerful and active physician
was talking in a rather excited tone.

"My dear sir," said he, "I cannot pretend to say that the man will or will not recover. I must
see him again. Things look quite differently by daylight, and six or seven hours may make all
the change in the world. To say that he can be moved to-day or even to-morrow, is absurd. I
will stake my reputation as a practitioner--Hulloa!"

The exclamation was elicited by Mr. Booley, who had pushed past Mr. Ambrose and stood confronting
the doctor with a look which was intended to express a combination of sarcasm, superior cunning
and authority.

"This is Mr. Booley," explained the squire. "Doctor Longstreet will tell you what he has been
telling me," he added turning to the detective.

"I must see this man instantly," said the latter somewhat roughly. "I believe I am being trifled
with, and I will not submit to it. No, sir, I will not be trifled with, I assure you! I must
see this man at once. It is absolutely necessary to identify him."

"And I say," said Doctor Longstreet with equal firmness, "that I must see him first, in order
to judge whether you can see him or not--"

"It is for me to judge of that," returned Mr. Booley, with more haste than logic.

"After you have seen him, you cannot judge whether you ought to see him or not," retorted Doctor
Longstreet growing red in the face. The detective attempted to push past him. At this moment
John Short hastily left the room and fled upstairs to warn Mrs. Ambrose of what was happening.

"Really," said Mr. Ambrose, making a vain attempt to stop the course of events, "this is very
unwarrantable."

"Unwarrantable!" cried Mr. Booley. "Unwarrantable, indeed! I have the warrant in my pocket.
Mr. Juxon, sir, I fear I must insist."

"Permit me," said Mr. Juxon, planting his square and sturdy form between the door and the detective.
"You may certainly insist, but you must begin by listening to reason."

Charles Juxon had been accustomed to command others for the greater part of his life, and though
he was generally the most unobtrusive and gentle of men, when he raised his voice in a tone
of authority his words carried weight. His blue eyes stared hard at Mr. Booley, and there was
something imposing in his square head--even in the unruffled smoothness of his brown hair.
Mr. Booley paused and discontentedly thrust his hands into his pockets.

"Well?" he said.

"Simply this," answered the squire. "You may accompany us to the door of the room; you may
wait with me, while Doctor Longstreet goes in to look at the patient. If the man is unconscious
you may go in and see him. If he chances to be in a lucid interval, you must wait until he
is unconscious again. It will not be long. That is perfectly reasonable."

"Perfectly," echoed Mr. Ambrose, biting his long upper lip and glaring as fiercely at Mr. Booley
as though he had said it all himself.

"Absolutely reasonable," added Doctor Longstreet.

"Well, we will try it," said the detective moodily. "But I warn you I will not be trifled with."

"Nobody is trifling with you," answered the squire coldly. "This way if you please." And he
forthwith led the way upstairs, followed by Mr. Booley, the physician and the vicar.

Before they reached the door, however, the discussion broke out again. Mr. Booley had been
held in check for a few moments by Mr. Juxon's determined manner, but as he followed the squire
he began to regret that he had yielded so far and he made a fresh assertion of his rights.

"I cannot see why you want to keep me outside," he said. "What difference can it make, I should
like to know?"

"You will have to take my word for it that it does make a difference," said the doctor, testily.
"If you frighten the man, he will die. Now then, here we are."

"I don't like your tone, sir," said Booley angrily, again trying to push past the physician.
"I think I must insist, after all. I will go in with you--I tell you I will, sir--don't stop me."

Doctor Longstreet, who was fifteen or twenty years older than the detective but still strong
and active, gripped his arm quickly, and held him back.

"If you go into that room without my permission, and if the man dies of fright, I will have
an action brought against you for manslaughter," he said in a loud voice.

"And I will support it," said the squire. "I am justice of the peace here, and what is more,
I am in my own house. Do not think your position will protect you."

Again Mr. Juxon's authoritative tone checked the detective, who drew back, making some angry
retort which no one heard. The squire tried the door and finding it locked, knocked softly,
not realising that every word of the altercation had been heard within.

"Who is there?" asked John, who though he had heard all that had been said was uncertain of
the issue.

"Let in Doctor Longstreet," said the squire's voice.

But meanwhile Mrs. Ambrose and Mary Goddard were standing on each side of the sick man. He
must have heard the noises outside, and they conveyed some impression to his brain.

"Mary, Mary!" he groaned indistinctly. "Save me--they are coming--I cannot get away--softly,
he is coming--now--I shall just catch him as he goes by--Ugh! that dog--oh! oh!--"

With a wild shriek, the wretched man sprang up, upon his knees, his eyes starting out, his
face transfigured with horror. For one instant he remained thus, half-supported by the two
terror-struck women; then with a groan his head drooped forward upon his breast and he fell
back heavily upon the pillows, breathing still but quite unconscious.

Doctor Longstreet entered at that moment and ran to his side. But when he saw him he paused.
Even Mrs. Ambrose was white with horror, and Mary Goddard stood motionless, staring down at
her husband, her hands gripping the disordered coverlet convulsively.

Mr. Juxon had entered, too, while Mr. Ambrose remained outside with the detective, who had
been frightened into submission by the physician's last threat. The squire saw what was happening
and paced the room in the greatest agitation, wringing his hands together and biting his lips.
John had closed the door and came to the foot of the bed and looked at Goddard's face. After
a pause, Doctor Longstreet spoke.

"We might possibly restore him to consciousness for a moment--"

"Don't!" cried Mary Goddard, starting as though some one had struck her. "That is--" she added
quickly, in broken tones, "unless he can live!"

"No," answered the physician, gravely, but looking hard at the unhappy woman. "He is dying."

Goddard's staring eyes were glazed and white. Twice and three times he gasped for breath, and
then lay quite still. It was all over. Mary gazed at his dead face for one instant, then a
faint smile parted her lips: she raised one hand to her forehead as though dazed.

"He is safe now," she murmured very faintly. Her limbs relaxed suddenly, and she fell straight
backwards. Charles Juxon, who was watching her, sprang forward and caught her in his arms.
Then he bore her from the room, swiftly, while John Short who was as white and speechless as
the rest opened the door.

"You may go in now," said Juxon as he passed Booley and Mr. Ambrose in the passage, with his
burden in his arms. A few steps farther on he met Holmes the butler, who carried a telegram
on a salver.

"For Mr. Short, sir," said the impassive servant, not appearing to notice anything strange
in the fact that his master was carrying the inanimate body of Mary Goddard.

"He is in there--go in," said Juxon hurriedly as he went on his way.

The detective and the vicar had already entered the room where the dead convict was lying.
All stood around the bed, gazing at his pale face as he lay.

"A telegram for Mr. Short," said Holmes from the door. John started and took the despatch from
the butler's hands. He hastily tore it open, glanced at the contents and thrust it into his
pocket. Every one looked round.

"What is it, John?" whispered the vicar, who was nearest to him.

"Oh--nothing. I am first in the Tripos, that is all," answered John very simply, as though
it were not a matter of the least consequence.

Through all those months of untiring labour, through privation and anxiety, through days of
weariness and nights of study, he had looked forward to the triumph, often doubting but never
despairing. But he had little guessed that the news of victory would reach him at such a moment.
It was nothing, he said; and indeed as he stood with the group of pale and awe-struck spectators
by the dead man's bed, he felt that the greatest thing which had ever happened to him was as
nothing compared with the tragedy of which he had witnessed the last act.

It was all over. There was nothing more to be said; the convict had escaped the law in the
end, at the very moment when the hand of the law was upon him. Thomas Reid, the conservative
sexton, buried him "four by six by two," grumbling at the parish depth as of yore, and a simple
stone cross marked his nameless grave. There it stands to this day in the churchyard of Billingsfield,
Essex, in the shadow of the ancient abbey.

All these things happened a long time ago, according to Billingsfield reckoning, but the story
of the tramp who attacked Squire Juxon and was pulled down by the bloodhound is still told
by the villagers, and Mr. Gall, being once in good cheer, vaguely hinted that he knew who the
tramp was; but from the singular reticence he has always shown in the matter, and from the
prosperity which has attended his constabulary career, it may well be believed that he has
a life interest in keeping his counsel. Indeed as it is nearly ten years since Mr. Reid buried
the poor tramp, it is possible that Mr. Gall's memory may be already failing in regard to events
which occurred at so remote a date.

It was but an incident, though it was perhaps the only incident of any interest which ever
occurred in Billingsfield; but until it reached its termination it agitated the lives of the
quiet people at the vicarage, at the cottage and at the Hall as violently as human nature can
be moved. It was long, too, before those who had witnessed the scene of Goddard's death could
shake off the impression of those awful last moments. Yet time does all things wonderful and
in the course of not many months there remained of Goddard's memory only a great sense of relief
that he was no longer alive. Mary Goddard, indeed, was very ill for a long time; and but for
Mrs. Ambrose's tender care of her, might have followed her husband within a few weeks of his
death. But the good lady never left her, until she was herself again--absolutely herself, saving
that as time passed and her deep wounds healed her sorrows were forgotten, and she seemed to
bloom out into a second youth.

So it came to pass that within two years Charles Juxon once more asked her to be his wife.
She hesitated long--fully half an hour, the squire thought; but in the end she put out her
small hand and laid it in his, and thanked God that a man so generous and true, and whom she
so honestly loved, was to be her husband as well as her friend and protector. Charles James
Juxon smoothed his hair with his other hand, and his blue eyes were a little moistened.

"God bless you, Mary," he said; and that was all.

Then the Reverend Augustin Ambrose married them in the church of Saint Mary's, between Christmas
and New Year's Day; and the wedding-party consisted of Mrs. Ambrose and Eleanor Goddard and
John Short, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. And again years passed by, and Nellie grew
in beauty as John grew in reputation; and Nellie had both brothers and sisters, as she had
longed to have, and to her, their father was as her own; so that there was much harmony and
peace and goodwill towards men in Billingsfield Hall. John came often and stayed long, and
was ever welcome; for though Mary Goddard's youth returned with the daffodils and the roses
of the first spring after Walter's death, John's fleeting passion returned not, and perhaps
its place was better taken. Year by year, as he came to refresh himself from hard work with
a breath of the country air, he saw the little girl grow to the young maiden of sixteen, and
he saw her beauty ripen again to the fulness of womanhood; and at last, when she was one and
twenty years of age he in his turn put out his hand and asked her to take him--which she did,
for better or worse, but to all appearances for better. For John Short had prospered mightily
in the world, and had come to think his first great success as very small and insignificant
as compared with what he had done since. But his old simplicity was in him yet, and was the
cause of much of his prosperity, as it generally is when it is found together with plenty of
brains. It was doubtless because he was so very simple that when he found that he loved Eleanor
Goddard he did not hesitate to ask the convict's daughter to be his wife. His interview with
Mr. Juxon was characteristic.

"You know what you are doing, John?" asked the squire. He always called him John, now.

"Perfectly," replied the scholar, "I am doing precisely what my betters have done before me
with such admirable result."

"Betters?"

"You. You knew about it all and you married her mother. I know all about it, and I wish to
marry herself."

"You know that she never heard the story?"

"Yes. She never shall."

"No, John--she never must. Well, all good go with you."

So Charles Juxon gave his consent. And Mary Juxon consented too; but for the first time in
many years the tears rose again to her eyes, and she laid her hand on John's arm, as they walked
together in the park.

"Oh, John," she said, "do you think it is right--for you yourself?"

"Of course I think so," quoth John stoutly.

"You John--with your reputation, your success, with the whole world at your feet--you ought
not to marry the daughter of--of such a man."

"My dear Mrs. Juxon," said John Short, "is she not your daughter as well as his? Pray, pray
do not mention that objection. I assure you I have thought it all over. There is really nothing
more to be said, which I have not said to myself. Dear Mrs. Juxon--do say Yes!"

"You are very generous, John, as well as great," she answered looking up to his face. "Well--I
have nothing to say. You must do as you think best. I am sure you will be kind to Nellie, for
I have known you for ten years--you may tell her I am very glad--" she stopped, her eyes brimming
over with tears.

"Do you remember how angry I was once, when you told me to go and talk to Nellie?" said John.
"It was just here, too--"

Mary Juxon laughed happily and brushed the tears from her eyes. So it was all settled.

Once more the Reverend Augustin Ambrose united two loving hearts before the altar of Saint
Mary's. He was well stricken in years, and his hair and beard were very white. Mrs. Ambrose
also grew more imposing with each succeeding season, but her face was softer than of old, and
her voice more gentle. For the sorrow and suffering of a few days had drawn together the hearts
of all those good people with strong bands, and a deep affection had sprung up between them
all. The good old lady felt as though Mary Juxon were her daughter--Mary Juxon, by whom she
had stood in the moment of direst trial and terror, whom she had tended in illness and cheered
in recovery. And the younger woman's heart had gone out towards her, feeling how good a thing
it is to find a friend in need, and learning to value in her happiness the wealth of human
kindness she had found in her adversity.

They are like one family, now, having a common past, a common present, and a common future,
and there is no dissension among them. Honest and loyal men and women may meet day after day,
and join hands and exchange greetings, without becoming firm friends, for the very reason that
they have no need of each other. But if the storm of a great sorrow breaks among them and they
call out to each other for help, and bear the brunt of the weather hand in hand, the seed of
a deeper affection is brought into their midst; and when the tempest is past the sweet flower
of friendship springs up in the moistened furrows of their lives.

So those good people in the lonely parish of Billingsfield gathered round Mary Goddard, as
they called her then, and round poor little Nellie, and did their best to protect the mother
and the child from harm and undeserved suffering; and afterwards, when it was all over, and
there was nothing more to be feared in the future, they looked into each other's faces and
felt that they were become as brothers and sisters, and that so long as they should live--may
it be long indeed!--there was a bond between them which could never be broken. As each one was
caught, he became a recruit for the couple in the middle, and the
last couple who remained uncaught took the places of those in hell,
and thus the game commenced again.

[5] The lady to whom the song is addressed. They will
never know, any more than Nellie knew, all that their mother suffered; and as she looks upon
them and strokes their long fair hair and listens to their laughter, she says to herself that
it was perhaps almost worth while to have been dragged down towards the depths of shame for
the sake of at last enjoying such pride and glory of happy motherhood.

THE END.

THE COMPLETE WORKS OF F. MARION CRAWFORD

      I. Mr. Isaacs
     II. Doctor Claudius
    III. To Leeward
     IV. A Roman Singer
      V. An American Politician
     VI. Marzio's Crucifix Zoroaster
    VII. A Tale of a Lonely Parish
   VIII. Paul Patoff
     IX. Love in Idleness: A Tale of Bar Harbor Marion Darche
      X. Saracinesca
     XI. Sant' Ilario
    XII. Nature is distraught;
   and so much has man subordinated
    and possessed her elsewhere
     that here, where
    existence is defeated by the absolute impossibility
   of sustenance, a poignant
  feeling of her imperfection
    steals over us
     and weighs upon the mind.
     Pietro Ghisleri
   XXII. Katharine Lauderdale
  XXIII. The Ralstons
   XXIV. Casa Braccio (Part I)
    XXV. Casa Braccio (Part II)
   XXVI. Adam Johnstone's Son A Rose of Yesterday
  XXVII. Via Crucia
 XXVIII. In the Palace of the King
   XXIX. Marietta: A Maid of Venice
    XXX. Cecilia: A Story of Modern Rome
   XXXI. The Heart of Rome
  XXXII. Whosoever Shall Offend

