EVERY GIRL'S BOOK

EVERY GIRL'S BOOK

BY

GEORGE F. BUTLER, M. D.

1912

THE ABBOTT PRESS

RAVENSWOOD

CHICAGO

Copyright 1912

THE ABBOTT PRESS

CHICAGO

PUBLISHER'S NOTES

This is the second of a series of books on "How to Live," by Dr. George F. Butler. These books
range from childhood to old age. The boy and the girl, the young man and young woman, the young
husband and young wife, middle-aged people, and old people are instructed in these books in
matters of the utmost importance to their health and happiness. The first in this series was
"Every Boy's Book." These two books are especially intended for boys and girls from ten to
fourteen years of age, but every father and mother should read them, so they, too, can know
the truth about these great sex facts, and be prepared to answer children's questions--now
sometimes troublesome.

CONTENTS

 Chapter                                                          Page
      I. How the Story Began                                         1
     II. What the Bee Wanted of Elsie's Nose                        10
    III. The Husbands and Wives of Plants                           21
     IV. The Papa and Mamma Parts of the Plants                     34
      V. The First Life on Earth                                    43
     VI. Where Baby Animals Come From                               54
    VII. Where Baby Girls Come From                                 62

PREFACE

The greatest duty of mankind lies in the proper uprearing of our children. The fact is recognized,
but is the duty fulfilled? Do we rear our children as we should? There is but one answer: We
fail. Teaching them many things for their good, we yet keep from them ignorantly, foolishly,
with a hesitancy and neglect unpardonable--knowledge, the possession of which is essential
for their future welfare. 

If there is a race in the world over which more sense and more nonsense can be freely said for lack
of definite information than the Welsh, it is surely this ancient Basque people, whose greatest contemporary
figure is perhaps Don Miguel de Unamuno. I am merely setting down that intuitional fact for what
it may be worth, though I do not hide my opinion that such promptings of the inner, untutored
man are worth more than cavefuls of bones and tombfuls of undecipherable papers.
 By so doing, we can produce a better and healthier and happier
generation to follow ours. By what strange and mistaken impulse in the past such absolutely
required teaching has been so studiously withheld is beyond all comprehension.

We want the best for our children. We want them to grow up with right thoughts and habits,
yet we keep from them the knowledge without which their thoughts and habits will surely be
imperiled when there arises in them the generative instinct, which has its effect upon both
male and female youth alike.

We give them no information as to sexual matters; and, when it comes to them, it is too often
but in the way of half-truths, mysterious, exciting to the imagination, and dangerous.

Yet how simple and natural the giving of this information might be made; and how easily the
child might be safeguarded! Mankind has demands which must be gratified. We have hunger; we
have thirst; we have the impulse of reproduction. Each is right and natural. There should be
no difference in the consideration of either of these wants. All about them the child should
be taught, from the beginning, so that all will be natural and right and commonplace and a
matter of course long before the age is reached when the sexual instinct is developed.

Is not this reason? Is it not healthful, logical, common sense? Melt the sugar in the water and
boil to ball 250, add the sliced nuts, keeping the boil well stirred.

When thoroughly mixed, remove the pan from the fire and commence to grain with pallette knife or
spatula until the whole mass turns an opaque white.
 All this the child can be taught.

Elementary biology, or the study of subjects of what we call zoology and botany combined, can
be made the most attractive of studies to any child who has learned to read. The boy or girl
may be taught that the trees and flowers are living things that are beautiful and are male
and female. The child may be shown how the bees carry the pollen from flower to flower, and
how other plants and flowers are produced in that way.

He can be taught the wonder of seed, and its consequences. He can be shown the birds in their
mating, and the marvel of the egg, and why it can produce a chicken. And thus the child, boy
or girl, may be led on, through the gradations, to a study of the human body, and how reproduction
is provided for there as in the bodies of all other living things, vegetable or animal.

Before the child, boy or girl, has reached the age of ten, long before the sex instinct has
been aroused, the sexual lesson will have been learned innocently and thoroughly and, when
the change comes, it will be as no bewildering, exciting thing, but something anticipated,
and received with a sense of understanding and responsibility.

This knowledge almost unknowingly acquired as a child, will mean health of mind and of body,
and the avoidance of what may result most evilly.

How is sexual instruction given now? In tens of thousands of instances--no doubt in the majority--not
at all. Lectures to youth of either sex are given sometimes, but only when they have reached
what is called "the age of understanding."

Here is where parents err, and seriously. The teaching has been deferred too long. The young
of either sex, long before puberty, have acquired some knowledge of the mystery--which should
have been no mystery at all--and late teaching, however sound and wise, but gives an added
and inviting direction to the subject suddenly made to assume a new and startling importance.
It arouses curiosity, and more. It may sometimes be harmful.

As for the youth never taught at all, those who acquire their knowledge only through accidental
sources--usually incapable, and too often vicious--their case could not be worse. They are
unprepared for one of the tests and demands for life. Their parents are guilty.

There is nothing impure in nature. To guard the children, to prepare them for every phase of
life, is the parents' duty. The child is pure, and to the child all things are pure. Teach
the child, simply as a matter of course, all about the ways of reproduction, and to the boy
or girl purity will remain when the age of sexual sway and impulse comes. This is the only
law in the case. Let it be followed, and the generation to follow will be clearer, wiser, and
healthier than is the present one.

It is my hope that this "Every Girl's Book" (with "Every Boy's Book" which preceded it) will
afford the means so long needed and desired for teaching children what they should be taught.
I have tried to tell the story of sex naturally, in a clear and simple way, from the development
of life, and of life's relations, from protoplasm all through organic life up to mankind. Its
teachings should result in wide promotion of the innocence of knowledge which is better, infinitely,
than the imperiling innocence of ignorance.

                                             George F. Butler, M. D.

  Chicago, Ill.
    July 1, 1912.

I

HOW THE STORY BEGAN

Her name was Elsie and she was asleep in a cozy nook in the woods, which was the beginning
of it all.

Many strange things may happen to a little girl who falls asleep in the woods, but there never
happened to any other little girl, either asleep or awake, in the woods or at home, a more
important thing than that which had its start for Elsie while she lay there under the green
boughs beside a bubbling spring of crystal-clear water, the scent of pines and flowers sweetening
the still air. A robin redbreast whistled melodiously for "rain, rain, rain," and the cows
in the pasture, who do not like rain as well as they do sunshine, lifted up their voices in
protest, calling "oo-oo-ohh! moo-oo-hh! noo-oo-hh!" as if they were trying to say "no, no,
no!" and could not speak the English language well. It was a peaceful woodland scene, a scene
into which, if you were awake, you would expect that a railroad train would be about the last
thing that could possibly enter.

But Elsie was asleep, and in her dreams she was sure she saw a great locomotive engine charging
down upon her with frightful speed. As soon as she saw it she tried to cry out, but could not
do so. Somehow she could not send a single sound from her lips. Then she tried to jump out
of the way, but was unable to do that either. She could not even move in the slightest degree.
So, full of terror, she thought she stood there, helplessly, while the engine rushed nearer
and nearer, puffing forth vast clouds of black smoke, and roaring and hissing and clanking.
Again she tried to scream, and could not: again she tried to run aside, but could not move.
She seemed so small, so tiny and weak, beside that monster! And she wondered how it could possibly
bear to hurt her, a big, powerful thing like that--it was not fair! But--bang! The cowcatcher
caught her up--

And she awoke to see a fuzzy bumble-bee just alighting on her nose!

Though Elsie did not, as a general thing, care much for bumble-bees, and would rather have
their room than their company, she was so highly relieved to find that the gigantic engine
was only a bumble-bee that she said, "Oh!" with such violence of surprise and gladness that
the bee, doubtless as much afraid of her as she had been of the dream-engine, shot out of sight
in an instant and she never saw him afterward, that she knew of.

She sat a moment staring after him, trying to collect herself, for she was confused with her
sudden awakening, and then she jumped up laughing.

"What a funny bumble-bee!" she exclaimed. "I wouldn't have hurt him!" Then in conscious dignity,
proud to think that she was now big enough for something to be afraid of, she took up the pail
of water that she had come to get from the spring and hurried homeward.

Now if this were all the story it would not amount to much, and it never would have got itself
told in these pages. And, if Elsie had been like some girls, who are not chums with their mothers,
the story would never have been told here either, because she would not have repeated the adventure
to her mamma, in which case her mamma would not have taken the story up where the daughter
left it, and shown its importance. But Elsie and her mother were like two sisters, a big and
a little one, and there were not many things that happened to the one that the other did not
hear of very soon. So away went Elsie singing and laughing and swinging her pail of water,
her bright hair blowing in wisps around her sweet face with its red lips and cheeks and white
teeth, the prettiest, loveliest picture in the whole lovely landscape of foliage and flowers
and pastures and meadows.

Nobody in the world ever yet found a prettier picture anywhere than a fresh and clean girl
is, as everybody will admit if asked, and Elsie was fresh and clean even if she had just been
rudely aroused from sleep. She bathed her whole body twice every day, washed her face and hands
often, brushed her teeth always after eating, smiled a great deal, and got plenty of fresh
air and sunshine, and this was enough to make any girl fresh and clean and pretty, or almost
enough.

Of course a girl must eat sufficient food, and must brush her hair and take care of her nails,
and all those little things--everybody knows that. But the main things, beside food, the things,
too, that some little girls fail in, are air, sunshine, water and smiles. Elsie had all these
and therefore she looked clean and fresh and pretty.

She had on a dress too, naturally, but I don't know just what kind of a one it was, for that
is a small matter compared with the body itself. I think it was some kind of a calico, made
for vacation frolicing, for Elsie was a city girl staying in the country for the summer, and
almost anything was good enough for that.

So Elsie, fresh and clean, dancing and singing up the lane, swinging her pail of crystal water,
the loveliest sight in the whole lovely landscape, came in view of the house where they were
staying. And no sooner had she caught a glimpse of her mother on the porch than, eager to tell
her funny experience, she ran forward in pleasant excitement, crying out:

"Oh, mamma! Such a queer thing--Oh, Oh, it was an engine, the biggest, biggest you ever saw--and--and
it stepped on my nose--I mean it was only a bumble-bee and--it--it almost ran right over me--"

"Isn't my little girl somewhat mixed in her speech!" smiled her mother as Elsie paused for breath.

"I--I guess I--I am!" Elsie faltered. "But then, I'm so excited!"

"Yes, you are excited," smiled her mother, putting her arm around her shoulders and walking
with her to the kitchen. "And when you are calm you may tell me all about it."

So Elsie carried the pail of water to the sink and set it on its shelf. And when she had worked
off her surplus energy in this way she felt sober enough to tell her story clearly, and she
did so, snuggled in her mother's arms in the hammock on the porch. She finished by saying:

"Wasn't that a funny thing, mamma, that I should dream that the bumble-bee was an engine just
going to run over me!"

Then the really important part of the story began. Her mother answered:

II

WHAT THE BEE WANTED OF ELSIE'S NOSE

"Yes, it may seem funny, but it is natural. When you were asleep you heard the bee buzzing
and rumbling, and the sound reminded you of an engine, so you began to picture an engine in
your mind, and with the queer mixture of fact and fancy that are common to dreams you thought
it was coming right at you. And it was only a bumble-bee taking a look at your little red-and-white
nose."

Elsie clapped her hands and laughed. Then she asked:

"What did the bee want to see my nose for, mamma?"

"He thought, perhaps, that it was some new kind of a bud, and he wished to examine it," Mrs.
Edson smiled. "A little girl's face is very much like a pretty flower. Your hair was tumbled
all about your head, I suppose, and your little rosebud of a nose, peeking through, attracted
the bee."

At this idea Elsie laughed again, joyously.

"But, mamma," she asked, "why should the bee wish to see my nose, even if he did think it might
be a flower? Do bees eat flowers, mamma?"

Elsie's mother threw her a sudden look that was almost a startled one. Then she hugged her
close and kissed her.

"What a great big little girl you are getting to be, darling!" she said, gazing fondly at her.
This did not seem to Elsie much like an answer to her question, and she fixed her eyes brightly
on her mother's face as if waiting for her to go on with her words. But her mother only said:
"I scarcely realized that you were no longer my little baby-girl, and that you were instead
almost a young lady, old enough to understand many new things, among them the reason why a
bee goes to flowers."

She paused again, looking at her big little girl wistfully. She was thinking: "Elsie has begun
to be a woman now, and I shall soon, all too soon, lose my baby-girl, for she will grow up
and marry and go away to a home of her own and have a little girl like herself, just as I have
had her!"

This made her feel sad, but she said nothing to Elsie of this feeling, for she would not be
able to understand it and it would only make her feel sad too. By and by she would tell her
what it meant to have a husband and children and home of her own, after her parents were passed
away, and she must begin to prepare her for this knowledge now. So, finally, she said:

"No, darling, bees do not eat flowers, though they eat a part of them, or a product of them.
The most important thing that they visit flowers for, as far as the world is concerned, is
to fertilize them."

"Fer-fer-ilize!" stammered Elsie. "What is that, mamma?"

"Not ferferilize, darling, but fertilize, fer-til-ize, which means to make rich, or fruitful.
As strange as it may seem the bees and other insects are of vast importance to men--sh-h!"

She suddenly held up her hand, motioning for silence, and Elsie, wondering what was coming,
followed her mother's pointing finger with her eyes. What she saw was a bee hovering over a
bright yellow buttercup that grew almost within reach of where she sat.

"Watch him!" whispered her mother.

Elsie did so, holding her breath for fear of scaring him away. I don't know that I'm so crazy about
a city myself, and I perfectly hate lawyers. Come to thing of it, a lawyer helped work ruin
in our family, and I never have believed, I never will believe----"

She stopped talking and began looking again.

I gave her all the time she needed. I was just straining to be wise, for mother says it takes
the very wisest person there is to know when to talk, and when to keep still. As I figured it,
now was the time not to say another word until she made up her mind about what I had told her
already. If Pryors didn't know what we thought of them by that time, it wasn't mother's fault
or mine. As she studied things over she kept on looking. What she saw seemed to be doing her
a world of good.

Her face showed it every second plainer and plainer. Pretty soon it began to look like she was going
to come through as Amos Hurd did when he was redeemed. Then, before my very eyes, it happened!
I don't know how I ever held on to the pie or kept from shouting,
"Praise the Lord!" as father does at the Meeting House when he is
happiest.

Then she leaned toward me all wavery, and shining eyed, and bloomful, and said: "Did you ever
hurt Laddie's feelings, and make him angry and sad?"

"I'm sure I never did," I answered.

"But suppose you had! What would you do?"

"Do? Why, I'd go to him on the run, and I'd tell him I never intended to hurt his feelings,
and how sorry I was, and I'd give him the very best kiss I could."

The Princess stroked Maud's neck a long time and thought while she studied our farm, theirs
beyond it, and at the last, the far field where Laddie was plowing. She thought, and thought,
and afraid to cheep, I stood gripping the shingle and waited.

Finally she said: "The last time Laddie was at our house, I said to him those things he repeated
to you. He went away at once, hurt and disappointed. Now, if you like, along with your precious
pie, you may carry him this message from me.

You may tell him that I said I am sorry!"

I could have cried "Glory!" and danced and shouted there in the road, but I didn't. It was no
time to lose my head. That was all so fine and splendid, as far as it went, but it didn't
quite cover the case.

I never could have done it for myself; but for Laddie I would venture anything, so I looked her
in the eyes, straight as a dart, and said: "He'd want the kiss too, Princess!"

You could see her stiffen in the saddle and her fingers grip the reins, but I kept on staring right
into her eyes.

"I could come up, you know," I offered.

A dull red flamed in her cheeks and her lips closed tight. One second she sat very still, then a dancing
light leaped sparkling into her eyes; a flock of dimples chased each other around her lips like
swallows circling their homing place at twilight.

"What about that wonderful pie?" she asked me.

I ran to the nearest fence corner, and laid the shingle on the gnarled roots of a Johnny Appleseed
apple tree.

Then I set one foot on the arch of the Princess' instep and held
up my hands.

One second I thought she would not lift me, the next I was on her
level and her lips met mine in a touch like velvet woven from threads
of flame.

Then with a turn of her stout little wrist, she dropped me, and a streak went up our road. Nothing
so amazing and so important ever had happened to me. It was an occasion that demanded something
unusual. To cry, "Praise the Lord!" was only to repeat an hourly phrase at our house; this demanded
something out of the ordinary, so I said just exactly as father did the day the brown mare
balked with the last load of seed clover, when a big storm was breaking--"Jupiter Ammon!"

When I had calmed down so I could, I climbed the fence, and reached through a crack for the
pie. As I followed the cool, damp furrow, and Laddie's whistle, clear
as the lark's above the wheat, thrilled me, I was almost insane with
joy. Just joy! Pure joy! Oh what a good world it was!--most of the
time! Most of the time! Of course, there WERE Paget men in it. But
anyway, THIS couldn't be beaten. I had a message for Laddie from the
Princess that would send him to the seventh heaven, wherever that
was; no one at our house spent any time thinking farther than the
first one. I had her kiss, that I didn't know what would do to him,
and I also had a big piece of juicy rhubarb pie not yet entirely cold.
If that didn't wipe out the trouble I had made showing the old crest
thing, nothing ever could. I knew even then, that men were pretty
hard to satisfy, but I was quite certain that Laddie would be satisfied
that morning. As I hurried along I wondered whether it would be better
to give him my gift first, or the Princess'. I decided that joy would
keep, while the pie was cold enough, with all the time I had stopped;
and if I told him about her first, maybe he wouldn't touch it at all,
and it wasn't so easy as it looked to carry it to him and never even
once stick in my finger for the tiniest lick--joy would keep; but
I was going to feed him; so with shining face, I offered the pie and
stood back to see just how happy I could get. They are in their way as truly married as Mr. and Mrs.
Jones are in their way, or as your papa and I are. This marriage is a law of nature, invented
to carry on the race, whatever that race may be, whether it is that of mankind, or plants,
or animals, or birds, or even fishes. For not only do men and flowers marry, everything in
nature does the same--turtles, frogs, robins, elephants, everything!"

Elsie wished very much at this point to ask if her mother had ever seen an elephant's wife,
thinking that she must look rather funny, much different, to say the least, from a flower's
wife, but as the answer came to her at once, without asking the question, she said nothing.
Of course an elephant's wife must be another elephant, as the flower's wife was another flower.
But it was all very singular, and the sparkle of her eyes as she looked into her mother's face
showed her interest in what might be coming. Mrs. Edson went on:

"We will begin with plants, because they came first into the world as living beings, and all
other living beings not only had their origin in plants but live by aid of them to this day.
From the plants grew animals, and from animals grew men and women and little girls. It took
a long, long time for all this to come about, so long that the human mind fails to grasp or
comprehend it; and at first, when one hears of it for the first time, it seems wholly impossible
and unbelievable. But science has proved it to be true, and even shows the exact way in which
the various changes were made. Many, if not all, the steps by which we mounted from the condition
of a tiny speck of jelly-plant, a speck no bigger than the point of a pin, to become human
beings are still in existence and are frequently observed by scientists. With a microscope
anybody may see them. So we know that the theory of evolution, as it is called, is a true one.
It is also an exceedingly wonderful and beautiful truth, full of secrets and surprises of the
most interesting and delightful kind, as I shall show. Now let's go and examine the buttercup
that the bee just married to the second buttercup."

Elsie jumped up with a little gurgle of joy and ran ahead of her mother to the flower. This
was better than playing "secret" with Rosie and Eva and the other girls, for their secrets
were not real ones, they were just made up and they did not amount to very much after all,
but this was a real one, kept up in earnest with the bees and flowers. And now she was to be
let into it! Mrs. Edson bent over the bright yellow blossom, taking it gently in her fingers
to prevent it from nodding so briskly in the breeze that they should be unable to examine it
closely.

"You see, dear," she said, pointing with a twig to the different parts as she named them, "right
here, in the exact center of the blossom, is a bunch of green growing in the form of an oval,
shaped somewhat like an egg with the smaller end upward."

"Yes, oh, yes!" Elsie answered eagerly. "What is it, mamma?"

"Broadly speaking we will call it the ovary. I am not going to confuse you by giving you too
many hard words at first, words like corolla, carpel, style, stigma, and the like. I shall
name only two parts of the flower for you to remember just now, because only two are really
necessary to be named at this point. So the name of this one is--what?"

"Ovary!" answered Elsie quickly.

"Yes, ovary! It is called so because it contains ovules, which are tiny seeds or eggs. That
is the mother part of the plant."

"The mother!" Elsie queried. "Why, mamma, is there a father too?"

"Yes, dearie, many plants have both a mother and a father part, which grow near together in
the same flower, while other plants have only a father part, and still others have only a mother
part. This buttercup has both, has both the male and the female principle. The ovary is the
female, and here, above it and surrounding it, you see a number of taller spires, yellow in
color and each of them bearing a tiny enlargement, a kind of knob, at the top."

"Yes, yes, but that--that can't be the papa part! Is it, mamma?" she cried, examining the rather
insignificant appearing spires dubiously. "They don't look much like a--a papa!" she said in
some disappointment. Her mother laughed.

"They certainly do not look much like a man-papa," she returned, "but they form the papa part
of the plant, nevertheless, and are truly the papas of the baby buttercups. And their name
is the second one that I wish you to remember from now on. It is stamen."

"Stamen!" said Elsie.

"Yes, each of these stems is called a stamen, and they form the male part of the plant, the
father part. Many plants, those of the simpler kinds, have only one stamen and it grows in
the flower so that its head hangs right above the ovary. Here you see that all of the stamens
are above the ovary, and the reason why they are placed there by nature you will see very soon.
What I wish now is to show you why the bee came to the flower."

"I know--it was for honey! Isn't that what you said before, mamma?"

"Yes, darling, but do you see any honey here?"

"No, mamma, and I never knew before that buttercups had honey. I always thought honey came
from a beehive."

"It does come to us from a beehive, but it comes from flowers first, and one of the many kinds
that furnish it is this buttercup. The bee sips it from the flowers, just a tiny bit from each
blossom that he visits, and when he has enough he takes it home to the hive and puts it away
to eat by-and-by, in the winter, when there are no flowers growing for him to rifle. He does
it just as men lay away money for 'a rainy day,' as we say, and as squirrels lay up a store
of nuts for the cold weather. Now, suppose you count those flattened, round-cornered parts
of the buttercup--how many are there?"

"Five," said Elsie quickly.

"Yes, there are five of them, and they are called petals. You will notice that they are much
narrower and slighter at the bottom than they are at the top. It is at the bottom that they
are joined to the central part of the flower. Now, just where they are connected with this
central part there is a tiny sack of honey."

"It must be very tiny," said Elsie, regarding the slender connection earnestly, "for there
isn't room enough for much, I'm sure. And it must be all covered up, for I can't see any signs
of it."

"It is covered up. There is a very small scale, or leaf, over it to protect it from those insects
who have no right to the honey. But the bee knows how to get at it, and he does so very quickly,
once he alights on the blossom, as we have just seen one do. For while he appeared as if he
were merely tumbling clumsily around on the flower he was sampling those honey-sacks, and we
saw how speedily he finished all five of them on this flower and then buzzed busily away to
the other."

"He was just the same as at dinner, then, wasn't he mamma! But why did he go to the other flower--didn't
he get all he wanted from this one?"

"No, darlingest, he gets but very little from each flower. If he could take all he wanted from
one he would never fly right to another. And then, if all the other insects should do the same,
the whole plan of nature would fall through and there would soon be no life on earth."

Elsie's eyes looked very large when she heard this.

"Would I die, and you, mamma, and all of us--Alice and Rosie, and, oh, everybody we know?"

"Yes, dearie, all of us. Those few simple plants which still, in the primitive way, fertilize
themselves, are not enough and are too weak to carry on the vegetation of the earth, and without
the insects and birds and the wind we never should have been born at all; for they are necessary
to make the plants reproduce their kinds and grow, and the plants are necessary food for us
as well as for the animals that we eat, such as the hens and ducks and sheep and cows. So nature
has given each flower only a little honey, not enough for the bee, and he is compelled to fly
to many before he becomes satisfied. And this brings us back to the stamen and ovary again,
to show what they are for and how the bee marries the two plants together after he has collected
his fee of delicious honey."

"I am all 'tention," said Elsie, in so quaint an imitation of older folks that her mother was
forced to smile, knowing that she had a listener that was interested, to say the least--a listener
who felt the importance and gravity of the study which they were now pursuing. Elsie never
attempted big words except when she felt dignified.

IV

THE PAPA AND MAMMA PARTS OF THE PLANTS

"Now," said Mrs. Edson, taking hold of the buttercup again, "you see here, at the top of each
stamen, the slight enlargement that I mentioned. It looks like a kind of knob, and it really
is a hard, hollow sack, or bag, containing a fine yellow powder, which is called pollen. Is
that plain so far, dearie?"

"Pollen, yes, mamma! And do you wish me to remember that name too?"

"Yes, it is very necessary that you should do so. You will soon learn why. Now look again at
the green ovary. That is also hollow, and contains seeds or eggs, as I said before. In plants
we call them seeds and in animals eggs. And it is these seeds that grow into the baby plants.
But they cannot grow alone, without help. With a certain kind of help they can and do grow,
and what do you suppose that help is?"

Elsie gazed earnestly at her mother, trying to think it out. But she was compelled to shake
her head after all.

"I can't imagine," she said.

"Nothing but that some of the pollen shall be mixed with them," said her mother.

"Oh, I see, I see!" Elsie cried delightedly. "That is why the stamens with the pollen in them
are right over the ovaries."

"Yes, dear, you have guessed it. The ripe pollen, falling into the ripe ovary, would fertilize
the seeds. And with some plants, the earlier and simpler kinds, this is just what happens.
But here you can see that the ovary is not ripe. It is hard and green. When it is ripe its
color is yellow. But the pollen is ripe now, you can see it all over the anthers, as the knobs
or sacks are called. If the pollen should fall upon the ovary now it would roll off without
entering, and would be wasted. Now what do you suppose happens?"

"The--the--"

Elsie hesitated, looking with very bright eyes at her mother, almost sure enough to go on,
but not quite. It seemed so peculiar, the thought that had come to her, and she did not see
just how it could be.

"You were going to say the bee, weren't you?" her mother smiled.

"Oh yes--and would that have been right?" Elsie cried in delight.

"Yes, that would have been exactly right. If we had been near enough to examine the bee's motions
closely we should have seen that he alighted on the ovary, and then began to turn here and
there in order to get at the honey at the base of each petal. As he did so he brushed off some
of the pollen, for he was right in amongst the stamens, and this powdery pollen stuck to his
fuzzy body and he carried it away with him."

"But if he carried it away how could it get into the flower's ovary?" Elsie asked, puzzled.

"It did not get into this flower's ovary," her mother answered. "Nature did not intend that
it should, and that is why the bee is introduced. For the other buttercup that he flew to,
or some other one that he would visit afterward, would have its ovary ripe, and when he alighted
on it in search of honey some of the pollen would be brushed off his body right into this ovary
that was all ready to receive it."

"Oh! But what would happen then? The little baby buttercups would begin to grow right away, mamma?"

"Yes, the ovary would close up and the seeds would begin to grow, very slowly. They would keep
on growing until they were ripe and then they would burst their covering and fall out on the
ground. Those of them that were fortunate enough to become embedded in the soil, so that they
would not freeze in the winter, would come out in the spring as little plants, which would
soon bring forth buttercups. That is the way with the wild flowers. But with the cultivated
ones, like cucumbers, apples, beans, and the like, all of those that are valuable for eating,
we are careful to save the seeds and plant them where they will be safe. Instead of leaving
them to chance we make a garden and plant them in it where they will be snug and warm."

"And wouldn't the seeds grow, or the little plants come up, if the bee hadn't gone to the flowers,
mamma?"

"No, darling, it is the bee, or some other insect, or the birds, that marry all the bright-colored
plants in this way, as the wind marries the soberhued ones. Without these we should have no
vegetation."

"But, mamma, marry! Why do you say they marry? I thought only men and women married."

"The marriage that takes place between men and women, dear, is only a repetition of the marriage
of plants. Its object is the same--to reproduce the race. Plants began to marry long, long
before men and women ever came on earth and have been doing it ever since, fortunately for
us, because if they should give up the practice we should have to follow suit. The earth would
go back to the barren state in which it was before life came to it."

"It seems so strange," said Elsie. "Why, I never heard of anything so funny! A bee, just a
little bee, and without him--"

"Funny is scarcely the word," Mrs. Edson smiled, "but it is certainly wonderful. The pumpkin,
the bean, the pear, the squash, the orange, all the fruits and vegetables that we eat, and
which the animals eat, must be fertilized in order to reproduce their kind, and all the fertilizing
is done either by the wind, which blows the pollen from one plant to another, or by birds and
insects. But this is only a small part of the secret I have to tell you, just the beginning.
There are many more wonderful things to come than I have told you yet, but I think this is
enough for the first time. You would better think over what you have heard until tomorrow,
when I will tell you the next step, which is about the animals. There are four things in this
lesson that you must remember:

"First, every male plant has at least one stamen, which bears pollen.

"Second, every female plant has one ovary which contains seeds.

"Third, the seeds in the ovary must be fertilized by the pollen in the stamens in order to
be able to grow and bear children.

"Fourth, flowers are fertilized by birds, insects and the wind.

"Do you think you can remember all that, darling?"

"Oh, yes, mamma, I'm sure I can!" said Elsie. She thought a moment and then added: "It was
very nice of that bumble-bee to mistake my nose for a flower, I'm sure, for it was almost as
if he should say, 'Doesn't she look sweet--there must be honey there!' But I guess he didn't
think I was very sweet when I almost scared him to death, poor fellow!"

V

THE FIRST LIFE ON EARTH

The next day Elsie was so eager for the hour to come when she should learn the secret of the
animals that she had been waiting in the hammock quite a little while when her mother came
down stairs and as soon as she appeared in sight Elsie clapped her hands joyously, crying out:

"Now I shall hear how the animals get their honey, sha'n't I, mumsey? But, mumsey, there isn't
anything like the petals of a buttercup on an animal, unless it's his ears--do animals have
their honey there--where they join the body--like the buttercups?"

Mrs. Edson could not help laughing at this funny notion.

"No, darling," she answered, "animals have no honey anywhere. In the plants there is honey
because they must have something to attract the insects to them, for they are rooted in the
ground and can't move around to carry their pollen to the other plants. And this pollen must
be carried, you remember, for that is the way, and the only way, in which little ones are made
to be born. So the flower has the honey in order to pay the insect for marrying it. But animals
can move around. They can go to each other and carry their own pollen, so they do not need
honey or anything but themselves to attract each other. In animals there is love instead of
honey. They love each other, in their way, and so come together and mingle their eggs and pollen.
Only it is not called pollen in animals, as I said before. It is called zoösperms, pronounced
'zoo-o-sperms.' That is another name that you must not forget, for it is to the animal what
pollen is to the plant. And in order that little animals may be born it is quite as necessary
that the zoösperms cover or fertilize the eggs, as, with the plants, it is for the pollen to
fertilize the seeds."

"But, mamma," said Elsie, wonderingly, "you said, I think, that every plant had an ovary--"

"No, darling, I said that every female plant had an ovary."

"Oh, yes, female plant! That has an ovary, and every male plant has a stamen, and I think you
said that they must have, didn't you?"

"Yes, dear, in order to reproduce their kind they must have--why?"

"Well, then, does every male animal have a stamen and every female an ovary?"

"Certainly darling! And let me repeat that the products of the two must be mingled in order
to bring forth little animals. That is just what I am going to tell you about today."

"And do you mean, mamma, that honey in the plants grows into love in the animals?" Elsie asked,
her eyes very wide.

"Oh, that is a very beautiful thought for my little girl to have!" Mrs. Edson exclaimed, smoothing
Elsie's hair lovingly. "And, yes, that is the truth, put very poetically. Love is sweet, like
the honey that it replaces--at least it is for us human beings. Probably with the animals it
is not of just the same quality that it is with us, for they do not act as if it were, but
at least the animals are an improvement on the plants in this respect, and the love that they
feel for each other finally evolves, in us, to become the sweet thing that we find it to be."

"Isn't that lovely--and so strange!" exclaimed Elsie.

"Yes, darling, it is lovely, and very strange. There are various kinds of love, as well as
various degrees of the same kind, but this is a subject a little too deep for us to take up
just yet. What I wish now is to teach you how the animals marry. And I will begin by saying
that all forms of reproduction, which is the name given to having children, follow the same
principle. The animals marry in a way that is only a variation of the plant way, and men and
women marry in a way that is a variation of the plant and animal ways. But let us begin right,
with the first appearance of life on earth."

"Yes, mamma," Elsie cried eagerly. "But the first life! That must have been very, very long
ago, wasn't it?"

"It was so far back in the history of the world that we can scarcely more than guess how long
ago it must have been. We do not even know where it first appeared or just how it came to be.
Some scientists believe that it occurred at the mouth of the Nile River, in Africa, in the
rich soil that the river deposits there when it overflows its banks. Others think it was in
the sea, or along the shores of some ocean in a tropical country. But we need not go into that
here. What we do know is that the hot sun, shining on a certain spot on the earth or sea, which
was just in the right condition, produced the first body containing life that the globe ever
had, and that this body was only a little speck of jelly-like substance, which we call protoplasm,
pro-to-plas-m. The word means 'first growth', for it was the first thing that ever appeared
that was capable of growing. We also call it a cell. Now there was only one cell in the world.
It had no companions. And what do you suppose happened?"

"It must have been very lonesome," suggested Elsie, sympathetically.

"Yes, it must have been--certainly it must if it could feel or think. But, at all events, whether
or not it did feel lonely, it began right away to make companions. Of course you can't think
how it did that, can you, dear?"

"I--I am afraid not," Elsie hesitated.

"Yet it was the very simplest way imaginable. It merely divided itself into two parts, each
of which was just like the other."

"Oh!" exclaimed Elsie. "But, then, mamma, who could tell which was the father or mother, and
which was the child? Or were they just brother and sister, or two brothers?"

"There was not then what we now call 'sex', for that was only the beginning of families, so
to say, and it was very crude, as all things are when they are first started. But perhaps we
might call one cell the mother of the other, since it is always the female, and not the male,
that brings forth children, though nobody could tell which was the mother and which was the child."

"Well," said Elsie, "that is the strangest thing yet!"

"It seems so to us, because it is so different from our way of reproducing, but it was the
natural way, and the same process is going on to this day. Even little girls are born in a
manner which, though it appears very different, is the same in principle, as we shall see."

"But, mamma, I thought that all living beings were obliged to have a stamen or an ovary!"

"So they are obliged, dear! This cell grew until it was too large and heavy to be supported
by its structure, or lack of structure, and then it fell apart. Force, or growth, was the stamen
here, and the cell itself was the ovary."

"Oh, then force or growth was the first stamen, mamma?"

"No, darling, it was not, unless we should call growth the stamen of today--which we might
do, in a way. But the first stamen was, in form, a ray of the sun, and the first ovary was
the earth, soil. For don't you recall that this cell, which was the first life-form, was produced
by the sun shining on the earth or sea?"

Elsie pondered on this a moment. Then her face brightened.

"Oh, now I see!" she exclaimed. "And what a beautiful set of changes, like real poetry! The
stamen in a flower, and growth, and a ray of sunlight are all one at bottom!"

"Yes, darling, it is beautiful poetry, when one comes thoroughly to understand it. And when
we find that love is the source of all these different forms and processes it becomes more
beautiful than ever. Now let us go on a little further and you will see how that is."

"Please hurry, mamma!" said Elsie. "I wish to find out where I came from, and you are going
to tell me that, aren't you?"

"Certainly, darling! That is what I have been leading up to all this time. Now we will speak
of a number of higher growths than the single cells are, for there are several things yet to
be made plain before you will be able to understand the highest growth of all, which is that
of a human being like yourself."

VI

WHERE BABY ANIMALS COME FROM

At that moment there sounded a hoarse noise near by, which was followed by a splash, as if
some body had tumbled into the pond. Elsie looked at her mother roguishly and said:

"Old Croaky!"

Old Croaky was a granddaddy bullfrog with whom they were very well acquainted, for he sang
for them every evening.

"I am glad that he spoke just as he did," Mrs. Edson smiled, "for he reminds me that frogs
are as good an example as I can take next. He belongs to one of the lower classes of animals,
not so very much higher than the plants. Now, in the plants, you will remember, it was necessary
for the pollen to enter the ovary in order to reach and fertilize the seeds. But with the frog
it is not so. The female lays the eggs first, and just as she is doing so the male places himself
in such a position towards her that he can mingle his zoösperms with her eggs as they come
out. That fertilizes them and they immediately begin to grow. First they become tadpoles, and
then little frogs."

"What, was Old Croaky ever a little tadpole, mumsey?"

"Yes, darling, he was. Every frog was once. And before that he was an egg, one of many, in
his mother's ovary, and it is so with all animals. They all of them have eggs and zoösperms,
just as the plants have pollen and seeds. Only, with most of the animals, the zoösperms must
enter the ovary in order to fertilize the eggs, as is the way of the plants. And it is the
same with the birds. They are higher, that is later, in the scale of life than the frogs are.
Now the higher the creature the more complicated becomes the process of reproduction, even
though the principle is always the same. It is always growth, always the life within, forcing
itself out to take form, and it is only the forms that change. The life and force within are
the same that the first single cell had."

"It is very wonderful, mamma," Elsie said, awed by the mystery, even though she was very far
from grasping the whole of it. "And the birds, mamma, have they stamens, and eggs inside? I
thought their eggs were outside, in a little nest. And some of them are, mumsey, because, you
know, I have seen them lots of times."

"Yes, the eggs come out where you can see them, in time, as the frog's do, but at first they
are inside the mother bird, as they are with the frogs and all animals. Only, it is not with
the birds as it is with the frogs, for the bird's eggs must be fertilized by the male zoösperms
while they are still within the mother bird. The zoösperms must enter the ovary as the pollen
must enter the ovary of the plant. So the male bird, like most male animals, has a stamen which
is a repetition of that of the flower, made of such a shape that it can reach the eggs in the
mother bird's ovary and fertilize them there. Then they come out, they are 'laid' as we say,
and we see them in the nest which the mother and father birds have prepared for them. And just
as the seeds need to be covered and kept warm, when they have fallen from the ripe pods to
the ground, in order that they may live and grow into baby plants, so the bird's eggs must
be covered and kept warm and safe in order that they may grow into birdies. It is just here
that you may see where the honey of the plants begins to become love in the higher species.
For instead of leaving the eggs to be protected or not, according to chance, as is the way
of the plants, the mother bird covers and warms and protects them herself. She sits on the
nest and keeps them safe with her own body and feathers. Isn't that lovely! And the father
bird goes to market in the woods and fields and brings her the daintiest and best food he can
find."

"Isn't he nice!" said Elsie appreciatively.

"Yes, he is nice, and so is his wife, the mother bird. Just think! A bird is the most energetic
and tireless creature in all animated nature. It is always on the move, urged by the force
and overflowing life within its body, and to sit there quietly all alone on the eggs day after
day and night after night--oh, it must be hard, so hard that we can scarcely realize the extent
of the sacrifice she is making for her little children. PROCESS.--First boil the herb horehound
in the water ten minutes, then strain; add the liquor to the sugar and the glucose, and boil
as for other drops to crack 310; pour on oiled slab; turn up the edges and fold in the boil,
then put the tartaric acid in a little heap on the boil, and pour over it the aniseed, clove
and peppermint, knead up the whole, thoroughly mixing the flavors until stiff enough to pass
through machine cough drop rollers.

N.B.--The brown sugar should be of good boiling quality. Cough Drop
Essence. 1/2 oz. Oil Aniseed.

N.B.--We have almost said enough about plain machine drops; they are all practically made alike, the
color, flavor and shape alone differing. See our list for colors and flavors, candy machines
and rollers.

TAR COUGH DROPS.

1 oz.

Dried Rose Leaves boil in 1 gallon water to half a gallon, strain
and mix with 10 pounds Sugar, 21 pounds Glucose and 1 oz. strained
Tar, boil to the crack and finish as for other drops.

IMITATION CHOCOLATE STICKS.

8 lbs. White Sugar. 2 lbs. Glucose. Vanilla Flavoring. 3 pints Water. 1 oz. Tartaric Acid.

PROCESS.--Place the pan containing the sugar and water on the fire, stir in the glucose and bring the
lot to the degree of weak crack, 300; pour on the slab, turn up the
edges, fold over the boil, and add the acid and vanilla; when thoroughly
mixed and stiff enough to handle, then pull over the hook until glossy
white: remove it to the slab, and roll into rods about half an inch
thick; when cold snip off into short equal lengths and dip them into
melted chocolate paste, composed of 1/2 lb. pure block cocoa, 1/2
lb. ground sugar and 3 oz. lard or cocoa butter (no water).

Melt these ingredients in a vessel by standing it on the hot furnace plate (not too near the fire)
stir until all is dissolved and incorporated, then dip sticks in this mixture singly, taking
them out immediately and laying them on wire frames to dry. Desiccated Cocoanut. 3 pints Water.
4 oz. Pure Cocoanut.

PROCESS.--Boil the sugar, water and glucose as directed to degree of weak crack, 300; pour on
oiled slab: cut off one third for pulling; add to the other two-thirds the pure cocoa and mix
it in; pull the smaller piece over the hook until white and glossy; spread out the solid sugar
and lay the pulled in the centre casing it round evenly then roll into sticks 1 inch thick;
when cold, snip off into lengths make a thin solution of gum or gelatine, wet the surface of
each stick, and roll in desiccated cocoa nut; when dry they are ready for sale.

ACID STICKS.

Clear white.

10 lbs. White Sugar. 2 oz. Tartaric Acid.
Lemon Flavoring. 1/2 oz. Cream of Tartar. 3 pints water.

PROCESS.--Put
the sugar and water in a clean bright pan, add the cream of tartar
and boil up sharply to a weak crack, 300; pour the batch on oiled
slab; turn in the edges, fold the boil over, then put in powdered
acid with a few drops of lemon; knead the whole together, working
one end down to a point; draw it out the required thickness, the full
length of the plate, cut it off, then do another length likewise,
repeating the operation until the boil is worked up; keep the first
piece in shape by occasionally rolling them while the remainder of
the boil is being pulled out and shaped. All the talks that we have had were intended as a kind of introduction to this event
and its consequences, for it is the greatest that enters a girl's life before she has grown
fully to be a woman. And you were once one of these tiny eggs. More than that, you now have
within your body, a great number of that very kind of eggs from which you sprang."

Elsie sat with her eyes in breathless interest on her mother, so filled with wonder and speculation
that she could not ask a single question. Mrs. Edson proceeded:

"I must repeat dear, because it is so very important for you to remember, that every woman
has an ovary which contains many seeds or eggs, just as the female flower has. These eggs,
if left unfertilized, will pass from the body and never grow any more. But each one, if fertilized
by the papa, as the bird's eggs were, and as the flower seeds were, will stay in a little nook
inside the mother's body, where it will grow and grow until the time comes for it to burst
forth into the world, following the same principle that the first cell followed in reproducing,
and which all living things follow always. The life within forces it away from the parent,
to become a separate growth. Then it will come forth, and behold, the tiny seed or egg has
grown to be a baby girl or boy, weighing several pounds!"

"Oh-h!" Elsie gasped again. "And that is how--how--I--came to be born, mamma!"

"Yes, darlingest, it is the way in which every living person was born. There is not, and there
cannot be, any other way. Each child is a part both of its father and mother. The egg in the
mother would never grow into a baby unless it had first been fertilized by the father, who
does so through his great love for the mamma, just as with the birds and animals, though his
love is of a higher kind than that of the lower orders."

"And does the mother-woman warm the eggs as the bird in the nest does, mamma, while the papa-man
brings her nice things to eat?"

"Yes, dearie, only the mother-woman has the nest inside her body, as I have said, and she keeps
the little one safe and warm there much longer than the bird sits on her nest. And think of
all the years after the baby is born that she waits on and cares for it! There is no other
love that equals in devotion that of the mother."

Elsie, without a word, her eyes swimming in tears, kissed her mother affectionately. She had
realized a little more of what she owed to her. 

Before I could complete the sentence, I found myself executing an involuntary parabola over some
adjacent parallel bars. My young friend's brows had contracted into a frown, although she waited
politely for me to pick myself up. Because many girls who become married do not know these things there is a dreadful
amount of sickness and misery in the world, all needless. And it does seem too bad--when merely
a few words at the right time would have saved it all!"

Of course Elsie was not old enough to understand how this could be, so she said nothing, but
sat looking earnestly at her mother as she went on:

"In the first place, dear, you must know that the little baby's nest, which we call the womb,
is placed in the lower portion of the woman's body, just above the 'private parts'. Perhaps
it is put there because it is the safest place for it in the whole body--for the eggs and womb
are very delicate, and must not be exposed to any danger of injury. So it grows in the interior
of the trunk, where outside dangers would be less likely to reach and spoil it, so that the
woman would be sick all her life and never have any children. Many hopeless female complaints,
ending with premature and painful death, are caused by lack of proper care of the womb and
its entrance. That care consists chiefly in preventing the womb from being touched by anything,
and keeping the entrance clean. It is very simple--just keep the entrance clean and the womb
untouched by anything. An observance of such slight rules as these would have saved many and
many a poor soul from a life of continual misery and suffering.

"I have told you, dear, long ago how to keep the entrance clean. And now that you will soon
begin to menstruate, as the passing out of the eggs is called, I shall have but little to add
to what you already know, but I will repeat it from the beginning in order that you may have
it all clear in your mind.

"First, bathe the entrance every time you bathe the rest of your body, and at such other times
as you may feel the need of doing so. Not one of them loves land. Leon is going away as quick as
ever he finishes college; but the more you educate Laddie, the better he likes to make things
grow, the more he loves to make the world beautiful, to be kind to every one, to gentle animals--why,
the biggest fight he ever had, the man he whipped 'til he most couldn't bring him back again,
was one who kicked his horse in the stomach. Gee, I thought he'd
killed him!

Laddie did too for a while, but he only said the man deserved it."


"It would have been so infinitely much better for so many poor sick creatures if they had known
and remembered even that!" Mrs. Edson sighed, holding her little daughter closely, as if she
would protect her from not only that harm but all others. "But," she continued, "I must now
tell you what you may be expecting to come to you before long, when it will be harder to keep
the entrance clean than it has been so far, and when to keep it clean will be more necessary
than ever.

"Every twenty-eight days, dearie, beginning with you very soon now, there will be a flow of
blood into the little baby's nest, the womb, and this will come out of your body through this
entrance to the womb. As soon as you see any signs of it on your body or clothing you must
come right and tell me, as you would if you had cut your finger or stubbed your toe on a stone.
It is something to be very proud of for it shows the possibility of motherhood, and it must
be given the very best care, which is, as I have said, chiefly to keep the parts clean. By
and by when you are grown old enough and strong enough, and have a husband, who will fertilize
the eggs, one of them will grow into a little baby, but it will be a long time yet before that
can be, and until then you will have this flow every twenty-eight days, for the sake of your
health. This brings more work for the womb to do, while the menses, as they are called, continue,
and therefore you may feel out of sorts both mentally and bodily for two or three days. But
this will pass away when the flow ceases, and if proper care is taken of the womb and passages
you will never feel anything worse than this. Some women feel great pain at this time, but
almost always the reason is that some of their internal parts have been injured in one way
or another. Sometimes lack of proper food, sufficient fresh air and sun, or not enough exercise
and clean water are responsible for a portion of the pain. In order to have strong reproductive
organs a woman should be healthy in all bodily ways, and anything that she can do to improve
her general health will be favorable to her at the time of the menses as well as at all times.
Do you think you understand all this, darling, and can remember it?" 

But a word of caution may here be necessary, since that term, "passion,"
having been diminished--that is, made meaner--by the world, an erroneous
impression might be conveyed by what precedes, of the life and ways
of Unamuno.

 That is one great reason why mammas are--to
help little girls who have tried."

Elsie kissed her mother warmly, and then sat looking dreamily out towards the woods. She had
learned many strange things and was thinking them over. Suddenly she spoke, as if unconsciously,
saying: "Who would ever have thought that so much could come out of it!"

"Out of what?" her mother asked.

"Why, out of a bee trying to step on my nose!" said Elsie.

(The End.)

