When the leader of the dome heard what they were planning, he showed them sealed openings to
a space between the sections of metal, which hadn't been used since the city was built. The
dome was constructed in three layers, for insulation, and to give added protection. It was
like a maze, to work their way toward the pounding through the network of struts. At times
they had to crawl on their hands and knees, at others there were clearly defined passages.

They were afraid, and not ashamed to show it. They were hunting creatures which they knew nothing
about--didn't even know whether bullets would affect them! They might face thinking beings,
or forms of life that only wanted to search in the domes for food. It was not a pleasant thought.

Every rifle was cocked as they neared the source of the pounding. Every nerve drawn to the
finest point.

Suddenly Dick stopped. He was ahead of the others and first to glimpse what they faced. He
motioned to use the oxygen masks, as he fastened his own in place.

As they crept closer, light glinted on the giant pointed hammer, operated from beyond the outer
layer of metal. It rose and fell at even intervals, through the rent in the upper surface.
The ram had already crushed through two thicknesses of metal, and was battering at the inner layer.

The inside section was more like glass than metal and dim light passed through, but the outer
layers were opaque. When the huge ram disappeared from the glow of light it left a gaping hole
where it had been. It was of material they had never seen and glistened with a brownish hue.
It appeared to shorten and expand in diameter, each time it struck the surface.

For a moment they hesitated, trying to decide the best means of attack. Whatever animated the
ram was above their vision, and they had to be close to the opening to see it.

Each time the shiny object descended, the dome vibrated beneath their feet. As long as the
vibration remained they were safe, but when it felt like a thud--the metal would be cracking!

Thousands of helpless people were depending on the action of earthmen, for their future existence.
They seemed to think that it was only necessary to tell their troubles to these amazing strangers,
to have them solved. Stories about the use of water to drive the space ship, had circulated
throughout the cities, crediting the newcomers with superhuman powers.

As the little party crept nearer, they separated, to approach the opening from every direction.
Dick was to fire first--if he saw anything to shoot at! It might be a powerful machine, clamped
to the outer surface, instead of a being that could be injured. The glass globes of the masks
were clouding with moisture, and it was hard to see.

A thud came, that didn't vibrate quite as much, and the men could feel the hair on their necks
stiffen. It was now or never, and Dick fired although he was still several feet from the opening.
He fired at the topmost section of the ram, hoping it might stop the hammering for a moment
even if it didn't injure the equipment. Two more shots rang out, before the object could deliver
another blow.

It was alive! The heavy ram jumped from the shock of the bullets, curving convulsively to one
side of the opening. Then it drew back out of sight.

CHAPTER VIII

Battle with a Monster

Minutes passed, while the earthmen hardly dared breathe. Their ebbing heartbeat seemed to almost
echo in their breasts. Then the object appeared at the opening, hesitated, and was thrust in!

The hammer was a head!!! It swayed back and forth, like the head of a huge caterpillar, and
every gun fired in unison. Shot after shot pumped into the head with rapid and unerring accuracy.

The giant head moved from one side to the other, while two gigantic eyes peered around. It
didn't know enough to draw back from the danger zone, but muscular reaction finally moved it
out of sight.

Dick crept forward, motioning for the others to wait until he investigated. There was no need
for all of them to enter the danger zone.

He turned the flashlight on, that had been strapped to his waist, and played it around the
jagged opening, then climbed to the next level and searched again.

When he crawled to the outer surface, the creature was writhing a few feet away. He motioned,
and the other men soon joined him, where they could watch the creature.

They were standing almost on the direct center of the dome, where it was almost flat. The flashlights
penetrated the mists enough to mark out the shape of the attacker, when they were all centered.

Suddenly they felt sick to their stomachs.

It was a caterpillar! As loathsome a creature as they could have imagined with its curled body,
and the farthest possible thing from a human being. A form of life that existed in the poison
gases, where men would die within minutes. The muscles of the creature had to be terrifically
strong, to move against the gravity of the huge globe.

Even at the center of the dome, they felt less effect of the neutralized gravity of the interior.
It required effort to stand on their feet. Some effect of the neutralizers in the giant pillars,
which eliminated most of the weight of the dome, enabled them to handle their bodies.

The creature before them was accustomed to normal gravity of the heavy planet, and even the
metal of the dome was not beyond the pounding of its hammer. What they had mistaken for a battering
ram, was the brown tip of the mammoth insect. From end to end it measured over sixty feet.
The men finally turned away in disgust, as it writhed in muscular reaction.

John McCarthy was climbing into the opening behind the other men, when he happened to glance
back. His flashlight dimly lighted the spot where the monster had been, and it was gone!

He hesitated with one foot in the air, then realized what had happened. The movement of the
body had moved it farther and farther from the center of the dome. It had reached a place where
the curve was sufficient to let it slide on the smooth metal. A moment later, a slight jar
was felt through the entire structure--it had slid from the man-made mound, to crash on the
ground below. Memory of that sight made a sober return to the interior.

Before they dared rest, metal sheets were carried to the opening and blocked in place. Then
dome men welded them to the solid metal. They didn't want to see any of those creatures in
the cities!

Twelve hours had passed by the time the opening was sealed, and the earthmen dragged their
tired forms through the maze of supports for the last time.

They were almost asleep before they could reach their own apartments, and tumble onto comfortable
beds. They had conquered the first problem.

Dick was awakened by an excited man, talking faster than he could understand the new language.
When he grasped what the other was saying, he leaped from bed wide awake.

Every dome had been attacked!!! The caterpillars were pounding many spots on each one. They
seemed to be trying to get at the creatures that had destroyed one of their number.

       *       *       *       *       *

In that moment Dick felt like an old man. He thought of the space ship; the only way of attacking
from the outside, and gave that up. There wasn't enough fuel to handle it, and the blasts might
injure the metal domes. His mind searched frantically for some way of fighting all of the creatures--and
knew it couldn't be done.

He was racing across the open ground, while thousands of people gazed at the banging overhead.
Suddenly he stopped, then turned back toward his apartment, running just as hard. There was
a system of communication between the domes--that sometimes worked! It was not efficient, but
if he could get in touch with the others immediately, there was one chance!

He tried frantically to get a connection, but it wasn't until one of the natives helped with
the intricate system of signals, that he heard the voice of Andrew Smith. A few moments later
Philip Jones answered, then Jerold Brown and Peter Yarbro. Each man was given quick, yet explicit,
instruction.

When Dick turned away from the phone, John McCarthy entered the room, followed by George Martin.
The noise in the city had finally aroused them from their slumber.

John started to smile, but the expression on Barrow's face drove all thought of greeting away.

"What is it? I thought the people were doing a day's work--but you----!!!" His face turned
ashen as he ran to the balcony, George Martin only a step behind. After gazing up for a moment,
McCarthy turned slowly to face Dick.

"The worms? It sounds like hundreds of them! We better work fast, or they'll have the whole
roof down around our ears."

"No, John. We can't fight them with guns. They have attacked every dome on the planet!"

When full realization came to the big Irishman, he sank slowly into a chair. "Then what? Have
you got any plan--or are we helpless?"

"We've got work to do and plenty of it. There's a slight chance of saving the cities. I've
already instructed the others."

As the three men raced toward the power plant, Dick explained. John and George were to do the
work, while he traveled from dome to dome to make sure the people were prepared, and see that
the power plants were used as he intended.

By the time they reached the entrance of the building, John nodded, and Barrow turned back
as the other men entered the door. The first dome people that Dick saw were told to remove
everyone from the buildings, and gather them in the open spaces of the parks. Leaving no one
within any structure!

The expression on his face scared them even more than the pounding of the worms, and they hurried
to obey.

Dick jumped into the nearest ground car. He couldn't be bothered traveling on the railroads.
This happened to belong to the assistant head of the dome, whom he dispossessed. It jerked
crazily across streets and parks, while he learned to handle the controls.

An hour later Dick was back at the powerhouse in the big dome. Every city was ready. In several
places the hammering heads had broken through the outer layers, and were banging at the translucent
inner ceiling. The creatures had learned how to break through.

The first worm that attacked, while the space ship was away, either took its time or didn't
realize what was beneath the heavy metal. These creatures were working in earnest.

Heavy insulated cables ran from the powerhouse to the nearest metal pillars, where McCarthy
and Martin were working desperately to fasten them in place. The booming voice of the Irishman
had kept the natives back, although they crowded as close as they dared. They were really afraid,
when the hammering grew plainer with each passing minute.

When the cables were fastened, John shouted to Dick, who was waiting in the powerhouse. He
pulled a heavy switch, at the end of the wires.

The city was suddenly in complete darkness, then it flashed bright again as power flowed back
into the thousands of coils in the ceiling material. Twice more it darkened, when the giant
switch was thrown, and the lights came on again. This time it stayed bright.

Dick ran to the doorway, and gazed at the dome above. It was silent! The people were frightened,
and moved restlessly about. Twice more he turned the power into the metal, and after one long
darkened period, the city remained bright. No sound came from the dome! Either the worms were
dead--or frightened away!

Within a week the doors to the deserted city were opened, and the earthmen passed through.
When they glimpsed the interior, they stopped in consternation, then started to laugh.

