5. Charles V.--The conquest of Lombardy made France the greatest power in Christendom; but
its king was soon to find a mighty and active rival. The old hatred between France and Burgundy
again awoke. Mary of Burgundy, the daughter of Charles the Bold, had married Maximilian, Archduke
of Austria and King of the Romans, though never actually crowned Emperor. Their son, Philip,
married Juana, the daughter of Ferdinand, and heiress of Spain, who lost her senses from grief
on Philip's untimely death; and thus the direct heir to Spain, Austria, and the Netherlands,
was Charles, her eldest son. On the death of Maximilian in 1518, Francis proposed himself to
the electors as Emperor, but failed, in spite of bribery. Charles was chosen, and from that
time Francis pursued him with unceasing hatred. The claims to Milan and Naples were renewed.
Francis sent troops to occupy Milan, and was following them himself; but the most powerful
of all his nobles, the Duke of Bourbon, Constable of France, had been alienated by an injustice
perpetrated on him in favour of the king's mother, and deserted to the Spaniards, offering
to assist them and the English in dividing France, while he reserved for himself Provence.
His desertion hindered Francis from sending support to the troops in Milan, who were forced
to retreat. Bayard was shot in the spine while defending the rear-guard, and was left to die
under a tree. The utmost honour was shown him by the Spaniards; but when Bourbon came near
him, he bade him take pity, not on one who was dying as a true soldier, but on himself as a
traitor to king and country. When the French, in 1525, invaded Lombardy, Francis suffered a
terrible defeat at Pavia, and was carried a prisoner to Madrid, where he remained for a year,
and was only set free on making a treaty by which he was to give up all claims in Italy both
to Naples and Milan, also the county of Burgundy and the suzerainty of those Flemish counties
which had been fiefs of the French crown, as well as to surrender his two sons as hostages
for the performance of the conditions.

6. Wars of Francis and Charles.--All the rest of the king's life was an attempt to elude or
break these conditions, against which he had protested in his prison, but when there was no
Spaniard present to hear him do so. The county of Burgundy refused to be transferred; and the
Pope, Clement VII., hating the Spanish power in Italy, contrived a fresh league against Charles,
in which Francis joined, but was justly rewarded by the miserable loss of another army. His
mother and Charles's aunt met at Cambrai, and concluded, in 1529, what was called the Ladies'
Peace, which bore as hardly on France as the peace of Madrid, excepting that Charles gave up
his claim to Burgundy. Still Francis's plans were not at an end. He married his second son,
Henry, to Catherine, the only legitimate child of the great Florentine house of Medici, and
tried to induce Charles to set up an Italian dukedom of Milan for the young pair; but when
the dauphin died, and Henry became heir of France, Charles would not give him any footing in
Italy. Francis never let any occasion pass of harassing the Emperor, but was always defeated.
Charles once actually invaded Provence, but was forced to retreat through the devastation of
the country before him by Montmorençy, afterwards Constable of France. Francis, by loud complaints,
and by talking much of his honour, contrived to make the world fancy him the injured man, while
he was really breaking oaths in a shameless manner. At last, in 1537, the king and Emperor
met at Aigues Mortes, and came to terms. Francis married, as his second wife, Charles's sister
Eleanor, and in 1540, when Charles was in haste to quell a revolt in the Low Countries, he
asked a safe conduct through France, and was splendidly entertained at Paris. Yet so low was
the honour of the French, that Francis scarcely withstood the temptation of extorting the duchy
of Milan from him when in his power, and gave so many broad hints that Charles was glad to
be past the frontier. The war was soon renewed. Francis set up a claim to Savoy, as the key
of Italy, allied himself with the Turks and Moors, and slaves taken by them on the coasts of
Italy and Spain were actually brought into Marseilles. Nice was burnt; but the citadel held
out, and as Henry VIII. had allied himself with the Emperor, and had taken Boulogne, Francis
made a final peace at Crespy in 1545. He died only two years later, in 1547.

7. Henry II.--His only surviving son, Henry II., followed the same policy. The rise of Protestantism
was now dividing the Empire in Germany; and Henry took advantage of the strife which broke
out between Charles and the Protestant princes to attack the Emperor, and make conquests across
the German border. He called himself Protector of the Liberties of the Germans, and leagued
himself with them, seizing Metz, which the Duke of Guise bravely defended when the Emperor
tried to retake it. This seizure of Metz was the first attempt of France to make conquests
in Germany, and the beginning of a contest between the French and German peoples which has
gone on to the present day. After the siege a five years' truce was made, during which Charles
V. resigned his crowns. His brother had been already elected to the Empire, but his son Philip
II. became King of Spain and Naples, and also inherited the Low Countries. The Pope, Paul IV.,
who was a Neapolitan, and hated the Spanish rule, incited Henry, a vain, weak man, to break
the truce and send one army to Italy, under the Duke of Guise, while another attacked the frontier
of the Netherlands. Philip, assisted by the forces of his wife, Mary I. of England, met this
last attack with an army commanded by the Duke of Savoy. It advanced into France, and besieged
St. Quentin. The French, under the Constable of Montmorençy, came to relieve the city, and
were utterly defeated, the Constable himself being made prisoner. His nephew, the Admiral de
Coligny, held out St. Quentin to the last, and thus gave the country time to rally against
the invader; and Guise was recalled in haste from Italy. He soon after surprised Calais, which
was thus restored to the French, after having been held by the English for two hundred years.
This was the only conquest the French retained when the final peace of Cateau Cambresis was
made in the year 1558, for all else that had been taken on either side was then restored. Savoy
was given back to its duke, together with the hand of Henry's sister, Margaret. During a tournament
held in honour of the wedding, Henry II. was mortally injured by the splinter of a lance, in
1559; and in the home troubles that followed, all pretensions to Italian power were dropped
by France, after wars which had lasted sixty-four years.

CHAPTER V.

THE WARS OF RELIGION.

