"I'm a perfect fright," she repeated pettishly.  "I don't wonder that people lapse into semi-barbarism
in the backwoods.  One's manners, morals, clothing, and complexion all suffer from too close
contact with your beloved North, Bill."

"Thanks!" he returned shortly.  "I suppose I'm a perfect fright, too. Long hair, whiskers,
grimy, calloused hands, and all the rest of it.  A shave and a hair cut, a bath and a new suit
of clothes will remedy that.  But I'll be the same personality in every essential quality that
I was when I sweated over the Klappan with a hundred pounds on my back."

"I hope so," she retorted.  "I don't require the shave, thank goodness, but I certainly need
a bath--and clothes.  I wish I had the gray suit that's probably getting all moldy and moth-eaten
at the Pine River cabin.  I wonder if I can get anything fit to wear here?"

"Women live here," Bill returned quietly, "and I suppose the stores supply 'em with duds. 
Unlimber that bank roll of yours, and do some shopping." We are only propositions proposals,
and many more trials that are usually applied to the affections, as if Titius dixese brought
the wrath: I will take revenge, and the like. Here we have to distinguish feelings and affections
which are excited to go to Tityus Quando crisi of trials that Titius usually regular with
them, because the first movement of aversion Acia crisi excited that the first perception that
this was not voluntary, and Philosophers primus motus call him cousin, but the judgments that
accompany those movements are volunteers, and may Titius, and must remove them, and sometimes
apply all forces to repress them.

"I didn't realize how dirty and shabby I was."

"All right; you go shopping, then," he proposed, "while I take these furs up to old Hack's
place and turn them into money.  Then we'll dress, and make this hotel feed us the best they've
got.  Cheer up. Maybe it was tough on you to slice a year out of your life and leave it in
a country where there's nothing but woods and eternal silence--but we've got around twenty
thousand dollars to show for it, Hazel.  And one can't get something for nothing.  There's
a price mark on it somewhere, always.  We've got all our lives before us, little person, and
a better chance for happiness than most folks have.  Don't let little things throw you into
the blues.  Be my good little pal--and see if you can't make one of these stores dig up a white
waist and a black skirt, like you had on the first time I saw you."

He kissed her, and went quickly out.  And after a long time of sober staring at her image in
the glass Hazel shook herself impatiently.

"I'm a silly, selfish, incompetent little beast," she whispered.  "Bill ought to thump me,
instead of being kind.  I can't do anything, and I don't know much, and I'm a scarecrow for
looks right now.  And I started out to be a real partner."

She wiped an errant tear away, and made her way to a store--a new place sprung up, like the
bank and the hotel, with the growing importance of the town.  The stock of ready-made clothing
drove her to despair.  It seemed that what women resided in Hazleton must invariably dress
in Mother Hubbard gowns of cheap cotton print with other garments to match.  But eventually
they found for her undergarments of a sort, a waist and skirt, and a comfortable pair of shoes. Say Voltaire
is a good poet, and what I can assure you is, it is neither logical
nor true philosopher.

[43] On the other erring other way, and precipitated his imagination. As we all feel, and imagine
things in childhood, and then do not reason, we make a habit of imagining
in such a manner Quando after armies that reason we are forced to
imagine the objects on which we reason, and we can not perceive anything
if we are not sensible of her image in the mind.  "Old Hack jumped at the pelts, and
paid a fat price for the lot.  Also the ranch deal has gone through.  He's a prince, old Hack.
Sent up a man and had it surveyed and classified and the deed waiting for me.  And--oh, say,
here's a letter for you."

"For me?  Oh, yes," as she looked at the hand-writing and postmark.  "I wrote to Loraine Marsh
when we were going north.  Good heavens, look at the date--it's been here since last September!"

"Hackaberry knew where we were," Bill explained.  "Sometimes in camps like this they hold mail
two or three years for men that have gone into the interior."

She put aside the letter, and dressed while Bill had his bath.  Then, with the smoke and grime
of a hard trail obliterated, and with decent clothes upon them, they sought the dining-room.
There, while they waited to be served, Hazel read Loraine Marsh's letter, and passed it to
Bill with a self-conscious little laugh.

"There's an invitation there we might accept," she said casually.

Bill read.  There were certain comments upon her marriage, such as the average girl might be
expected to address to her chum who has forsaken spinsterhood, a lot of chatty mention of Granville
people and Granville happenings, which held no particular interest for Bill since he knew neither
one nor the other, and it ended with an apparently sincere hope that Hazel and her husband
would visit Granville soon as the Marshes' guests.

He returned the letter as the waitress brought their food.

"Wouldn't it be nice to take a trip home?" Hazel suggested thoughtfully.  "I'd love to."

"We are going home," Bill reminded gently.

"Oh, of course," she smiled.  "But I mean to Granville.  I'd like to go back there with you
for a while, just to--just to--"

"To show 'em," he supplied laconically.

"Oh, Bill!" she pouted.

Nevertheless, she could not deny that there was a measure of truth in his brief remark.  She
did want to "show 'em."  Bill's vernacular expressed it exactly.  She had compassed success
in a manner that Granville--and especially that portion of Granville which she knew and which
knew her--could appreciate and understand and envy according to its individual tendencies.

She looked across the table at her husband, and thought to herself with proud satisfaction
that she had done well.  Viewed from any angle whatsoever, Bill Wagstaff stood head and shoulders
above all the men she had ever known.  Big, physically and mentally, clean-minded and capable--indubitably
she had captured a lion, and, though she might have denied stoutly the imputation, she wanted
Granville to see her lion and hear him roar.

Whether they realize the fact or not, to the average individual, male or female, reflected
glory is better than none at all.  And when two people stand in the most intimate relation
to each other, the success of one lends a measure of its luster to the other.  Those who had
been so readily impressed by Andrew Bush's device to singe her social wings with the flame
of gossip had long since learned their mistake.  She had the word of Loraine Marsh and Jack
Barrow that they were genuinely sorry for having been carried away by appearances.  And she
could nail her colors to the mast if she came home the wife of a man like Bill Wagstaff, who
could wrest a fortune from the wilderness in a briefer span of time than it took most men to
make current expenses.  Hazel was quite too human to refuse a march triumphal if it came her
way.  She had left Granville in bitterness of spirit, and some of that bitterness required balm.

"Still thinking Granville?" Bill queried, when they had finished an uncommonly silent meal.

Hazel flushed slightly.  She was, and momentarily she felt that she should have been thinking
of their little nest up by Pine River Pass instead.  She knew that Bill was homing to the cabin.
She herself regarded it with affection, but of a different degree from his.  Her mind was more
occupied with another, more palpitating circle of life than was possible at the cabin, much
as she appreciated its green and peaceful beauty.  The sack of gold lying in the bank had somehow
opened up far-flung possibilities.  She skipped the interval of affairs which she knew must
be attended to, and betook herself and Bill to Granville, thence to the bigger, older cities,
where money shouted in the voice of command, where all things were possible to those who had
the price.

She had had her fill of the wilderness--for the time being, she put it. It loomed behind her--vast,
bleak, a desolation of loneliness from which she must get away.  She knew now, beyond peradventure,
that her heart had brought her back to the man in spite of, rather than because of, his environment.
And secure in the knowledge of his love for her and her love for him, she was already beginning
to indulge a dream of transplanting him permanently to kindlier surroundings, where he would
have wider scope for his natural ability and she less isolation. After being painted in fancy the image of the object, and understanding
will clearly seen, are excited in the mind affects leakage, or prosecution; ie is encouraged to embrace,
or reject. This is based on the senses we have given for our conservation: the pain is a sign
of thing that destroys us, and the delight of thing that keeps us, with which we are naturally
driven by our own good Acia the delight and pain of whatever always flee. Knowing the passion
Moral Philosophy who are excited for the escape of evil, fear, cowardice, hatred, envy, anger,
rage, & c. and moving for good, like love, joy, desire, pleasure, & c. Whosoever known to the
presence of sensible objects of passion, or passion that is stirred, contemplated according
to the good, or bad, worthy of prosecution, or to escape. This knowledge is of such importance
that without it there can govern well the trial, because just as no While the judge may sentence
passionate, can not judge rightly understanding is governed by a passion: being noticed, which
is much the influence of these affects mood, but sometimes disrupt the reason, because it follows
the man but the impetus them than good sense dictates. Quando wit combines the images, and notions
simple walk is also combining the passions that accompany them, and there are so many and so
various that mix, that his influence is seen as diverse and quirky ways of doing things in not
attending to hear and moderate them. If anyone has the misfortune of not knowing thinking, and
along with it is restless strong passions, then all point is obfuscated rationality. Self-esteem,
which is the source of all the affections of the mind, is mixed provided in all our deliberations,
and causes tremendous mistakes, we will discover with specification below. Rare is the man who
does not dominate a passion in preference to the others. This domain makes his thoughts, his
trial and attaches easily reason prevailing affection of the qual born great and huge flaws,
and in understanding how in the act.
  Just the same," he finished
thoughtfully, "I'd as soon be pulling into that ranch of ours on the hurricane deck of a right
good horse as approaching Vancouver's water front.  This isn't any place to spend money or
to see anything. It's a big, noisy, over-grown village, overrun with business exploiters and
real-estate sharks.  It'll be a city some day.  At present it's still in the shambling stage
of civic youth."

In so far as Hazel had observed upon her former visit, this, if a trifle sweeping, was in the
main correct.  So she had no regrets when Bill confined their stay to the time necessary to
turn his gold into a bank account, and allow her to buy a trunkful, more or less, of pretty
clothes.  Then they bore on eastward and halted at Ashcroft.  Bill had refused to commit himself
positively to a date for the eastern pilgrimage.  He wanted to see the cabin again.  For that
matter she did, too--so that their sojourn there did not carry them over another winter.  That
loomed ahead like a vague threat.  Those weary months in the Klappan Range had filled her with
the subtle poison of discontent, for which she felt that new scenes and new faces would prove
the only antidote.

"There's a wagon road to Fort George," he told her.  "We could go in there by the B. X. steamers,
but I'm afraid we couldn't buy an outfit to go on.  I guess a pack outfit from the end of the
stage line will be about right."

From Ashcroft an auto stage whirled them swiftly into the heart of the Cariboo country--to
Quesnelle, where Bill purchased four head of horses in an afternoon, packed, saddled, and hit
the trail at daylight in the morning.

It was very pleasant to loaf along a passable road mounted on a light-footed horse, and Hazel
enjoyed it if for no more than the striking contrast to that terrible journey in and out of
the Klappan. Here were no heartbreaking mountains to scale.  The scourge of flies was well-nigh
past.  They took the road in easy stages, well-provisioned, sleeping in a good bed at nights,
camping as the spirit moved when a likely trout stream crossed their trail, venison and grouse
all about them for variety of diet and the sport of hunting.

So they fared through the Telegraph Range, crossed the Blackwater, and came to Fort George
by way of a ferry over the Fraser.

"This country is getting civilized," Bill observed that evening.  "They tell me the G. T. P.
has steel laid to a point three hundred miles east of here.  This bloomin' road'll be done
in another year.  They're grading all along the line.  I bought that hundred and sixty acres
on pure sentiment, but it looks like it may turn out a profitable business transaction.  That
railroad is going to flood this country with farmers, and settlement means a network of railroads
and skyrocketing ascension of land values."

The vanguard of the land hungry had already penetrated to Fort George. Up and down the Nachaco
Valley, and bordering upon the Fraser, were the cabins of the preëmptors.  The roads were dotted
with the teams of the incoming.  A sizable town had sprung up around the old trading post.

"They come like bees when the rush starts," Bill remarked.

Leaving Fort George behind, they bore across country toward Pine River. Here and there certain
landmarks, graven deep in Hazel's recollection, uprose to claim her attention.  And one evening
at sunset they rode up to the little cabin, all forlorn in its clearing.

The grass waved to their stirrups, and the pigweed stood rank up to the very door.

Inside, a gray film of dust had accumulated on everything, and the rooms were oppressive with
the musty odors that gather in a closed, untenanted house.  But apart from that it stood as
they had left it thirteen months before.  No foot had crossed the threshold.  The pile of wood
and kindling lay beside the fireplace as Bill had placed it the morning they left. Quanta sweetness quanta
purity in their customs! Quanta penetrating grace your instructions! Elevation quanta at its peak!
Quan deeper the wisdom of his speeches! Why so adamant opinion, what delicacy than accuracy
in their answers!  Then Bill started a blaze roaring in the black-mouthed
fireplace--to make it look natural, he said--and went out to hobble his horses for the night.

