After a short stop we started, and soon came to a section where there were many open fields
and cabins thickly scattered about. Here were seen more pictures of distress.  On the inside
of the houses the inmates had built on boxes a scaffold on which they placed the furniture.
The bed- posts were sawed off on top, as the ceiling was not more than four feet from the improvised
floor.  The buildings looked very insecure, and threatened every moment to float off. Near
the houses were cattle standing breast high in the water, perfectly impassive.  They did not
move in their places, but stood patiently waiting for help to come.  The sight was a distressing
one, and the poor creatures will be sure to die unless speedily rescued. Cattle differ from
horses in this peculiar quality.  A horse, after finding no relief comes, will swim off in
search of food, whereas a beef will stand in its tracks until with exhaustion it drops in the
water and drowns.

At half-past twelve o'clock a hail was given from a flat-boat inside the line of the bank. Yet,
I confess that Babette bewitched the sting and memory from many an hour of prison-life, and
played the comedy of love à la Francaise to such perfection, that I doubt not her heart rebounded
from the encounter as scarless as my own.

Germaine joked me very often about the tender passion, the danger of trifling with youthful
hearts, and the risk I ran from encounters with such glittering eyes;
till, one day, he suggested that we should take advantage of the flirtation,
by turning it to our benefit in flight.
If this occurs, there will be great loss of life.  The General spoke of the gallant work of
many of the people in their attempts to save their stock, but thought that fully twenty-five
per cent.  had perished. Already twenty-five hundred people had received rations from Troy,
on Black River, and he had towed out a great many cattle, but a very great quantity remained
and were in dire need. The water was now eighteen inches higher than in 1874, and there was
no land between Vidalia and the hills of Catahoula.

At two o'clock the 'Susie' reached Troy, sixty-five miles above the mouth of Black River. 
Here on the left comes in Little River; just beyond that the Ouachita, and on the right the
Tensas. These three rivers form the Black River.  Troy, or a portion of it, is situated on
and around three large Indian mounds, circular in shape, which rise above the present water
about twelve feet.  They are about one hundred and fifty feet in diameter, and are about two
hundred yards apart. The houses are all built between these mounds, and hence are all flooded
to a depth of eighteen inches on their floors.

These elevations, built by the aborigines, hundreds of years ago, are the only points of refuge
for miles.  When we arrived we found them crowded with stock, all of which was thin and hardly
able to stand up. They were mixed together, sheep, hogs, horses, mules, and cattle. One of
these mounds has been used for many years as the grave-yard, and to-day we saw attenuated cows
lying against the marble tomb-stones, chewing their cud in contentment, after a meal of corn
furnished by General York.  Here, as below, the remarkable skill of the women and girls in
the management of the smaller pirogues was noticed. Children were paddling about in these most
ticklish crafts with all the nonchalance of adepts.

General York has put into operation a perfect system in regard to furnishing relief. May we not
feel a spasm of regret at leaving even a prison?

Next day, an affectionate crowd of friends and pupils followed the
emancipated slaver to a vessel, which, by order of the king, was to
bear me, a willing exile, from France for ever.  He has made Troy his headquarters,
and to this point boats come for their supply of feed for cattle. On the opposite side of Little
River, which branches to the left out of Black, and between it and the Ouachita, is situated
the town of Trinity, which is hourly threatened with destruction. It is much lower than Troy,
and the water is eight and nine feet deep in the houses.  A strong current sweeps through it,
and it is remarkable that all of its houses have not gone before. The residents of both Troy
and Trinity have been cared for, yet some of their stock have to be furnished with food.

As soon as the 'Susie' reached Troy, she was turned over to General York, and placed at his
disposition to carry out the work of relief more rapidly. Nearly all her supplies were landed
on one of the mounds to lighten her, and she was headed down stream to relieve those below.
At Tom Hooper's place, a few miles from Troy, a large flat, with about fifty head of stock
on board, was taken in tow.  The animals were fed, and soon regained some strength. To-day
we go on Little River, where the suffering is greatest.

DOWN BLACK RIVER

Saturday Evening, March 25.

