But the supply of water for the fountains was all defective at all moments, in spite of those
seas of reservoirs which had cost so many millions to establish and to form upon the shifting
sand and marsh.  Who could have believed it?  This defect became the ruin of the infantry which
was turned out to do the work.  Madame de Maintenon reigned.  M. de Louvois was well with her,
then.  We were at peace.  He conceived the idea of turning the river Eure between Chartres
and Maintenon, and of making it come to Versailles.  Who can say what gold and men this obstinate
attempt cost during several years, until it was prohibited by the heaviest penalties, in the
camp established there, and for a long time kept up; not to speak of the sick,--above all,
of the dead,--that the hard labour and still more the much disturbed earth, caused?  How many
men were years in recovering from the effects of the contagion!  How many never regained their
health at all!  And not only the sub-officers, but the colonels, the brigadiers and general
officers, were compelled to be upon the spot, and were not at liberty to absent themselves
a quarter of an hour from the works.  The war at last interrupted them in 1688, and they have
never since been undertaken; only unfinished portions of them exist which will immortalise
this cruel folly. 

No one who has not seen them can have any just conception of mountain mosses, nor of the marvellous
luxuriance of beauty with which they clothe rock, and tree, and earth, and everything upon
these lone wild slopes and summits.  He examined several neighbourhoods, he traversed the hills near Saint-Germain, and
the vast plain which is at the bottom, where the Seine winds and bathes the feet of so many
towns, and so many treasures in quitting Paris.  He was pressed to fix himself at Lucienne,
where Cavoye afterwards had a house, the view from which is enchanting; but he replied that,
that fine situation would ruin him, and that as he wished to go to no expense, so he also wished
a situation which would not urge him into any.  He found behind Lucienne a deep narrow valley,
completely shut in, inaccessible from its swamps, and with a wretched village called Marly
upon the slope of one of its hills.  This closeness, without drain or the means of having any,
was the sole merit of the valley.  The King was overjoyed at his discovery.  It was a great
work, that of draining this sewer of all the environs, which threw there their garbage, and
of bringing soil thither!  The hermitage was made.  At first, it was only for sleeping in three
nights, from Wednesday to Saturday, two or three times a-year, with a dozen at the outside
of courtiers, to fill the most indispensable posts.

By degrees, the hermitage was augmented, the hills were pared and cut down, to give at least
the semblance of a prospect; in fine, what with buildings, gardens, waters, aqueducts, the
curious and well known machine, statues, precious furniture, the park, the ornamental enclosed
forest,--Marly has become what it is to-day, though it has been stripped since the death of
the King.  Great trees were unceasingly brought from Compiegne or farther, three-fourths of
which died and were immediately after replaced; vast spaces covered with thick wood, or obscure
alleys, were suddenly changed into immense pieces of water, on which people were rowed in gondolas;
then they were changed again into forest (I speak of what I have seen in six weeks); basins
were changed a hundred times; cascades the same; carp ponds adorned with the most exquisite
painting, scarcely finished, were changed and differently arranged by the same hands; and this
an infinite number of times; then there was that prodigious machine just alluded to, with its
immense aqueducts, the conduit, its monstrous resources solely devoted to Marly, and no longer
to Versailles; so that I am under the mark in saying that Versailles, even, did not cost so
much as Marly.

Such was the fate of a place the abode of serpents, and of carrion, of toads and frogs, solely
chosen to avoid expense.  Such was the bad taste of the King in all things, and his proud haughty
pleasure in forcing nature; which neither the most mighty war, nor devotion could subdue!

CHAPTER LXXV

Let me now speak of the amours of the King in which were even more fatal to the state than
his building mania.  Their scandal filled all Europe; stupefied France, shook the state, and
without doubt drew upon the King those maledictions under the weight of which he was pushed
so near the very edge of the precipice, and had the misfortune of seeing his legitimate posterity
within an ace of extinction in France.  These are evils which became veritable catastrophes
and which will be long felt.

Louis XIV., in his youth more made for love than any of his subjects-- being tired of gathering
passing sweets, fixed himself at last upon La Valliere.  The progress and the result of his
love are well known.

Madame de Montespan was she whose rare beauty touched him next, even during the reign of Madame
de La Valliere.  She soon perceived it, and vainly pressed her husband to carry her away into
Guienne.  With foolish confidence he refused to listen to her.  She spoke to him more in earnest.
In vain.  At last the King was listened to, and carried her off from her husband, with that
frightful hubbub which resounded with horror among all nations, and which gave to the world
the new spectacle of two mistresses at once!  The King took them to the frontiers, to the camps,
to the armies, both of them in the Queen's coach.  The people ran from all parts to look at
the three queens; and asked one another in their simplicity if they had seen them.  In the
end, Madame de Montespan triumphed, and disposed of the master and his Court with an eclat
that knew no veil; and in order that nothing should be wanting to complete the licence of this
life, M. de Montespan was sent to the Bastille; then banished to Guienne, and his wife was
appointed superintendent of the Queen's household. 

Heroes and soldiers, your country blesses and thanks you!

Let us now resolve that with every day our Union shall grow closer.
Let faction die; political intrigue cease to rear its serpent head;
let doubt become trust; suspicion, faith!  It was also the centre of wit, and of a kind so peculiar, so
delicate, and so subtle, but always so natural and so agreeable, that it made itself distinguished
by its special character.

Madame de Montespan was cross, capricious, ill-tempered, and of a haughtiness in everything
which, readied to the clouds, and from the effects of which nobody, not even the King, was
exempt.  The courtiers avoided passing under her windows, above all when the King was with
her. They used to say it was equivalent to being put to the sword, and this phrase became proverbial
at the Court.  It is true that she spared nobody, often without other design than to divert
the King; and as she had infinite wit and sharp pleasantry, nothing was more dangerous than
the ridicule she, better than anybody, could cast on all.  With that she loved her family and
her relatives, and did not fail to serve people for whom she conceived friendship.  The Queen
endured with difficulty her haughtiness--very different from the respect and measure with which
she had been treated by the Duchesse de la Valliere, whom she always loved; whereas of Madame
de Montespan she would say, "That strumpet will cause my death."  The retirement, the austere
penitence, and the pious end of Madame de Montespan have been already described.

During her reign she did not fail to have causes for jealousy.  There was Mademoiselle de Fontange,
who pleased the King sufficiently to become his mistress.  But she had no intellect, and without
that it was impossible to maintain supremacy over the King.  Her early death quickly put an
end to this amour.  Then there was Madame de Soubise, who, by the infamous connivance of her
husband, prostituted herself to the King, and thus secured all sorts of advantages for that
husband, for herself, and for her children.  The love of the King for her continued until her
death, although for many years before that he had ceased to see her in private. Then there
was the beautiful Ludre, demoiselle of Lorraine, and maid of honour to Madame, who was openly
loved for a moment.  But this amour was a flash of lightning, and Madame de Montespan remained
triumphant.

Let us now pass to another kind of amour which astonished all the world as much as the other
had scandalised it, and which the King carried with him to the tomb.  Who does not already
recognise the celebrated Francoise d'Aubigne, Marquise de Maintenon, whose permanent reign
did not last less than thirty-two years?

Born in the American islands, where her father, perhaps a gentleman, had gone to seek his bread,
and where he was stifled by obscurity, she returned alone and at haphazard into France.  She
landed at La Rochelle, and was received in pity by Madame de Neuillant, mother of the Marechale
Duchesse de Navailles, and was reduced by that avaricious old woman to keep the keys of her
granary, and to see the hay measured out to her horses, as I have already related elsewhere.
She came afterwards to Paris, young, clever, witty, and beautiful, without friends and without
money; and by lucky chance made acquaintance with the famous Scarron.  He found her amiable;
his friends perhaps still more so.  Marriage with this joyous and learned cripple appeared
to her the greatest and most unlooked-for good fortune; and folks who were, perhaps, more in
want of a wife than he, persuaded him to marry her, and thus raise this charming unfortunate
from her misery.

The marriage being brought about, the new spouse pleased the company which went to Scarron's
house.  It was the fashion to go there: people of the Court and of the city, the best and most
distinguished went.  Scarron was not in a state to leave his house, but the charm of his genius,
of his knowledge, of his imagination, of that incomparable and ever fresh gaiety which he showed
in the midst of his afflictions, that rare fecundity, and that humour, tempered by so much
good taste that is still admired in his writings, drew everybody there.

Madame Scarron made at home all sorts of acquaintances, which, however, at the death of her
husband, did not keep her from being reduced to the charity of the parish of Saint-Eustace.
She took a chamber for herself and for a servant, where she lived in a very pinched manner.
Her personal charms by degrees improved her condition.  Villars, father of the Marechal; Beuvron,
father of D'Harcourt; the three Villarceaux, and many others kept her.

This set her afloat again, and, step by step, introduced her to the Hotel d'Albret, and thence
to the Hotel de Richelieu, and elsewhere; so she passed from one house to the other.  In these
houses Madame Scarron was far from being on the footing of the rest of the company.  She was
more like a servant than a guest.  She was completely at the beck and call of her hosts; now
to ask for firewood; now if a meal was nearly ready; another time if the coach of so-and-so
or such a one had returned; and so on, with a thousand little commissions which the use of
bells, introduced a long time after, differently disposes of.

