§ 14. Let him, who studies under the Disadvantage of an ungrateful Genius, remember for his
Comfort, that singing in Tune, Expression, Messa di Voce, the Appoggiatura's, Shakes, Divisions,
and accompanying himself, are the principal Qualifications; and no such insuperable Difficulties,
but what may be overcome. I know, they are not sufficient to enable one to sing in Perfection;
and that it would be Weakness to content one's self with only singing tolerably well; but Embellishments
must be called in to their aid, which seldom refuse the Call, and sometimes come unsought.
Study will do the business.

§ 15. Let him avoid all those Abuses which have overspread and established themselves in the
Airs, if he will preserve Musick in its Chastity.

§ 16. Not only a Scholar, but every Singer ought to forbear Caricatura's, or mimicking others,
from the very bad Consequences that attend them. To make others laugh, hardly gains any one
Esteem, but certainly gives Offence; for no-body likes to appear ridiculous or ignorant. This
Mimicking arises for the most part from a concealed Ambition to shew their own Merit, at another's
Expence; not without a Mixture of Envy and Spight. Examples shew us but too plainly the great
Injury they are apt to do, and that it well deserves Reproof; for Mimickry has ruin'd more
than one Singer.

§ 17. I cannot sufficiently recommend to a Student the exact keeping of Time; and if I repeat
the same in more than one place, there is more than one Occasion that moves me to it; because,
even among the Professors of the first Rank there are few, but what are almost insensibly deceived
into an Irregularity, or hastening of Time, and often of both; which though in the Beginning
is hardly perceptible, yet in the Progress of the Air becomes more and more so, and at the
last the Variation, and the Error is discovered.

§ 18. If I do not advise a Student to imitate several of the Moderns in their Manner of singing
Airs, it is from their Neglect of keeping Time, which ought to be inviolable, and not sacrificed
to their beloved Passages and Divisions.

§ 19. The Presumption of some Singers is not to be borne with, who expect that an whole Orchestre
should stop in the midst of a well-regulated Movement, to wait for their ill-grounded Caprices,
learned by Heart, carried from one Theatre to another, and perhaps stolen from some applauded
female Singer, who had better Luck than Skill, and whose Errors were excused in regard to her
Sex.----Softly, softly with your Criticism, says one; this, if you do not know it, is called
Singing after the Mode----Singing after the Mode?----I say, you are mistaken. This important
invention is not of American origin, as persons unacquainted with the facts might imagine:
it was first practised at the Mersey Steel and Iron Company's works at Liverpool, and then patented
by Mr William Clay in the United States.
This Percept was approved by several eminent Persons, among whom was Signer Pistochi,[62] the
most famous of our, and all preceding Times, who has made himself immortal, by shewing the
way of introducing Graces without transgressing against Time. This Example alone, which is
worth a Thousand (O my rever'd Moderns!) should be sufficient to undeceive you. But if this
does not satisfy you, I will add, that Sifacio[63] with his mellifluous Voice embrac'd this
Rule; that Buzzolini[64] of incomparable Judgment highly esteemed it: After them Luigino[65]
with his soft and amorous Stile followed their Steps; likewise Signora Boschi[66] who, to the
Glory of her Sex, has made it appear, that Women, who study, may instruct even Men of some
Note. That Signora Lotti,[67] strictly keeping to the same Rules, with a penetrating Sweetness
of Voice, gained the Hearts of all her Hearers. If Persons of this Rank, and others at present
celebrated all over Europe, whom I forbear to name; if all these have not Authority enough
to convince you, that you have no Right to alter the Time by making Pauses, consider at least,
that by this Error in respect of Time, you often fall into a greater, which is, that the Voice
remains unaccompanied, and deprived of Harmony; and thereby becomes flat and tiresome to the
best Judges. You will perhaps say in Excuse, that few Auditors have this Discernment, and that
there are Numbers of the others, who blindly applaud every thing that has an Appearance of
Novelty. But whose fault is this? An Audience that applauds what is blameable, cannot justify
your Faults by their Ignorance; it is your Part to set them right, and, laying aside your ill-grounded
Practice, you should own, that the Liberties you take are against Reason, and an insult upon
all those instrumental Performers that are waiting for you, who are upon a Level with you,
and ought to be subservient only to the Time. In short, I would have you reflect, that the
abovementioned Precept will always be of Advantage to you; for though under the neglecting
of it, you have a Chance to gain Applause of the Ignorant only; by observing it, you will justly
merit that of the Judicious, and the Applause will become universal.

§ 20. Besides the Errors in keeping Time, there are other Reasons, why a Student should not
imitate the modern Gentlemen in singing Airs, since it plainly appears that all their Application
now is to divide and subdivide in such a Manner, that it is impossible to understand either
Words, Thoughts, or Modulation, or to distinguish one Air from another, they singing them all
so much alike, that, in hearing of one, you hear a Thousand.----And must the Mode triumph?
It was thought, not many Years since, that in an Opera, one rumbling Air, full of Divisions
was sufficient for the most gurgling Singer to spend his Fire[68]; but the Singers of the present
Time are not of that Mind, but rather, as if they were not satisfied with transforming them
all with a horrible Metamorphosis into so many Divisions, they, like Racers, run full Speed,
with redoubled Violence to their final Cadences, to make Reparation for the Time they think
they have lost during the Course of the Air. In the following Chapter, on the tormented and
tortured Cadences, we shall shortly see the good Taste of the Mode; in the mean while I return
to the Abuses and Defects in Airs.

§ 21. I cannot positively tell, who that Modern Composer, or that ungrateful Singer was, that
had the Heart to banish the delightful, soothing, Pathetick from Airs, as if no longer worthy
of their Commands, after having done them so long and pleasing Service. Whoever he was, it
is certain, he has deprived the Profession of its most valuable Excellence. Ask all the Musicians
in general, what their Thoughts are of the Pathetick, they all agree in the same Opinion, (a
thing that seldom happens) and answer, that the Pathetick is what is most delicious to the
Ear, what most sweetly affects the Soul, and is the strongest Basis of Harmony. And must we
be deprived of these Charms, without knowing the Reason why? Oh! I understand you: I ought
not to ask the Masters, but the Audience, those capricious Protectors of the Mode, that cannot
endure this; and herein lies my Mistake. Alas! the Mode and the Multitude flow like Torrents,
which, when at their Height, having spent their Violence, quickly disappear. The Mischief is
in the Spring itself; the Fault is in the Singers. They praise the Pathetick, yet sing the
Allegro. He must want common Sense that does not see through them. They know the first to be
the most Excellent, but they lay it aside, knowing it to be the most difficult.

