Therefore, when we first heard the scraping of the brake, and saw that the driver was pulling
and sawing at the tough mouths with all his strength, no one was surprised, but we said that
we wished they had waited until after we had crossed the Arkansas River. But we got over the
narrow bridge without meeting more than one man, who climbed over the railing and seemed less
anxious to meet us than we were to meet him. As soon as we got on the road again, those mules,
with preliminary kicks and shakes of their big heads, began to demonstrate how fast they could
go. We had the best driver at the post, and the road was good and without sharp turns, but
the ambulance was high and swayed, and the pace was too fast for comfort.

The little mules ran and ran, and we held ourselves on our seats the best we could, expecting
to be tipped over any minute. When we reached the post they made a wonderful turn and took
us safely to the government corral, where they stopped, just when they got ready. In this state,
it is often made into packs, and sent about the country, to be consumed as dried meat (it is
often best relished raw, for, when grilled without fat, it burns
and becomes ashy); but when pemmican is wanted, it has to go through
another process.

When dry, the meat is pounded between two stones till it is broken into small pieces: these are
put into a bag made of the animal's hide, with the hair on the outside, and well mixed with melted
grease; the top of the bag is then sewn up, and the pemmican allowed to cool.
 My teachers,
Faye and Lieutenant Baldwin, have been most exacting, but that I wanted. Of course I ride the
army way, tight in the saddle, which is more difficult to learn. Any attempt to "rise" when
on a trot is ridiculed at once here, and it does look absurd after seeing the splendid and
graceful riding of the officers. I am learning to jump the cavalry hurdles and ditches, too.
I must confess, however, that taking a ditch the first time was more exciting than enjoyable.
John seemed to like it better than I did.

FORT LYON, COLORADO TERRITORY, November, 1871.

IN many of my letters I have written about learning to ride and to shoot, and have told you,
also, of having followed the greyhounds after coyotes and rabbits with Faye and Lieutenant
Baldwin. These hunts exact the very best of riding and a fast horse, for coyotes are very swift,
and so are jack-rabbits, too, and one look at a greyhound will tell anyone that he can run--and
about twice as fast as the big-eared foxhounds in the East. But I started to write you about
something quite different from all this--to tell you of a really grand hunt I have been on--a
splendid chase after buffalo!

A week or so ago it was decided that a party of enlisted men should be sent out to get buffalo
meat for Thanksgiving dinner for everybody--officers and enlisted men--and that Lieutenant
Baldwin, who is an experienced hunter, should command the detail. You can imagine how proud
and delighted I was when asked to go with them. Lieutenant Baldwin saying that the hunt would
be worth seeing, and well repay one for the fatigue of the hard ride.

So, one morning after an early breakfast, the horses were led up from the stables, each one
having on a strong halter, and a coiled picket rope with an iron pin fastened to the saddle.
These were carried so that if it should be found necessary to secure the horses on the plains,
they could be picketed out. The bachelors' set of quarters is next to ours, so we all got ready
together, and I must say that the deliberate way in which each girth was examined, bridles
fixed, rifles fastened to saddles, and other things done, was most exasperating. But we finally
started, about seven o'clock, Lieutenant Baldwin and I taking the lead, and Faye and Lieutenant
Alden following.

The day was very cold, with a strong wind blowing, so I wore one of Faye's citizen caps, with
tabs tied down over my ears, and a large silk handkerchief around my neck, all of which did
not improve my looks in the least, but it was quite in keeping with the dressing of the officers,
who had on buckskin shirts, with handkerchiefs, leggings, and moccasins. Two large army wagons
followed us, each drawn by four mules, and carrying several enlisted men. Mounted orderlies
led extra horses that officers and men were to ride when they struck the herd.

Well, we rode twelve miles without seeing one living thing, and then we came to a little adobe
ranch where we dismounted to rest a while. By this time our feet and hands were almost frozen,
and Faye suggested that I should remain at the ranch until they returned; but that I refused
to do--to give up the hunt was not to be thought of, particularly as a ranchman had just told
us that a small herd of buffalo had been seen that very morning only two miles farther on.
So, when the horses were a little rested, we started, and, after riding a mile or more, we
came to a small ravine, where we found one poor buffalo, too old and emaciated to keep up with
his companions, and who, therefore, had been abandoned by them, to die alone. He had eaten
the grass as far as he could reach, and had turned around and around until the ground looked
as though it had been spaded.

He got up on his old legs as we approached him, and tried to show fight by dropping his head
and throwing his horns to the front, but a child could have pushed him over. One of the officers
tried to persuade me to shoot him, saying it would be a humane act, and at the same time give
me the prestige of having killed a buffalo! But the very thought of pointing a pistol at anything
so weak and utterly helpless was revolting in the extreme. He was such an object of pity, too,
left there all alone to die of starvation, when perhaps at one time he may have been leader
of his herd. He was very tall, had a fine head, with an uncommonly long beard, and showed every
indication of having been a grand specimen of his kind.

We left him undisturbed, but only a few minutes later we heard the sharp report of a rifle,
and at once suspected, what we learned to be a fact the next day, that one of the men with
the wagons had killed him. Possibly this was the most merciful thing to do, but to me that
shot meant murder. The pitiful bleary eyes of the helpless old beast have haunted me ever since
we saw him.

We must have gone at least two miles farther before we saw the herd we were looking for, making
fifteen or sixteen miles altogether that we had ridden. The buffalo were grazing quietly along
a meadow in between low, rolling hills. We immediately fell back a short distance and waited
for the wagons, and when they came up there was great activity, I assure you. The officers'
saddles were transferred to their hunters, and the men who were to join in the chase got their
horses and rifles ready. Lieutenant Baldwin gave his instructions to everybody, and all started
off, each one going in a different direction so as to form a cordon, Faye said, around the
whole herd. Faye would not join in the hunt, but remained with me the entire day. He and I
rode over the hill, stopping when we got where we could command a good view of the valley and
watch the run.

It seemed only a few minutes when we saw the buffalo start, going from some of the men, of
course, who at once began to chase them. This kept them running straight ahead, and, fortunately,
in Lieutenant Baldwin's direction, who apparently was holding his horse in, waiting for them
to come. We saw through our field glasses that as soon as they got near enough he made a quick
dash for the herd, and cutting one out, had turned it so it was headed straight for us.

Now, being on a buffalo hunt a safe distance off, was one thing, but to have one of those huge
animals come thundering along like a steam engine directly upon you, was quite another. I was
on one of Lieutenant Baldwin's horses, too, and I felt that there might be danger of his bolting
to his companion, Tom, when he saw him dashing by, and as I was not anxious to join in a buffalo
chase just at that time, I begged Faye to go with me farther up the hill. But he would not
go back one step, assuring me that my horse was a trained hunter and accustomed to such sights.

Lieutenant Baldwin gained steadily on the buffalo, and in a wonderfully short time both passed
directly in front of us--within a hundred feet, Faye said. Lieutenant Baldwin was close upon
him then, his horse looking very small and slender by the side of the grand animal that was
taking easy, swinging strides, apparently without effort and without speed, his tongue lolling
at one side. But we could see that the pace was really terrific--that Lieutenant Baldwin was
freely using the spur, and that his swift thoroughbred was stretched out like a greyhound,
straining every muscle in his effort to keep up. He was riding close to the buffalo on his
left, with revolver in his right hand, and I wondered why he did not shoot, but Faye said it
would be useless to fire then--that Lieutenant Baldwin must get up nearer the shoulder, as
a buffalo is vulnerable only in certain parts of his body, and that a hunter of experience
like Lieutenant Baldwin would never think of shooting unless he could aim at heart or lungs.

My horse behaved very well--just whirling around a few times--but Faye was kept busy a minute
or two by his, for the poor horse was awfully frightened, and lunged and reared and snorted;
but I knew that he could not unseat Faye, so I rather enjoyed it, for you know I had wanted
to go back a little!

Lieutenant Baldwin and the buffalo were soon far away, and when our horses had quieted down
we recalled that shots had been fired in another direction, and looking about, we saw a pathetic
sight. Lieutenant Alden was on his horse, and facing him was an immense buffalo, standing perfectly
still with chin drawn in and horns to the front, ready for battle. It was plain to be seen
that the poor horse was not enjoying the meeting, for every now and then he would try to back
away, or give a jump sideways. The buffalo was wounded and unable to run, but he could still
turn around fast enough to keep his head toward the horse, and this he did every time Lieutenant
Alden tried to get an aim at his side.

There was no possibility of his killing him without assistance, and of course the poor beast
could not be abandoned in such a helpless condition, so Faye decided to go over and worry him,
while Lieutenant Alden got in the fatal shot. As soon as Faye got there I put my fingers over
my ears so that I would not hear the report of the pistol. After a while I looked across, and
there was the buffalo still standing, and both Faye and Lieutenant Alden were beckoning for
me to come to them. At first I could not understand what they wanted, and I started to go over,
but it finally dawned upon me that they were actually waiting for me to come and kill that
buffalo! I saw no glory in shooting a wounded animal, so I turned my horse back again, but
had not gone far before I heard the pistol shot.

Then I rode over to see the huge animal, and found Faye and Lieutenant Alden in a state of
great excitement. They said he was a magnificent specimen--unusually large, and very black--what
they call a blue skin--with a splendid head and beard. I had been exposed to a bitterly cold
wind, without the warming exercise of riding, for over an hour, and my hands were so cold and
stiff that I could scarcely hold the reins, so they jumped me up on the shoulders of the warm
body, and I buried my hands in the long fur on his neck. He fell on his wounded side, and looked
precisely as though he was asleep---so much so that I half expected him to spring up and resent
the indignity he was being subjected to.

Very soon after that Faye and I came on home, reaching the post about seven o'clock. We had
been in our saddles most of the time for twelve hours, on a cold day, and were tired and stiff,
and when Faye tried to assist me from my horse I fell to the ground in a heap. But I got through
the day very well, considering the very short time I have been riding--that is, really riding.
The hunt was a grand sight, and something that probably I will never have a chance of seeing
again--and, to be honest, I do not want to see another, for the sight of one of those splendid
animals running for his life is not a pleasant one.

The rest of the party did not come in until several hours later; but they brought the meat
and skins of four buffalo, and the head of Lieutenant Alden's, which he will send East to be
mounted. The skin he intends to take to an Indian camp, to be tanned by the squaws. Lieutenant
Baldwin followed his buffalo until he got in the position he wanted, and then killed him with
one shot. Faye says that only a cool head and experience could have done that. Much depends
upon the horse, too, for so many horses are afraid of a buffalo, and lunge sideways just at
the critical moment.

Several experienced hunters tell marvelous tales of how they have stood within a few yards
of a buffalo and fired shot after shot from a Springfield rifle, straight at his head, the
balls producing no effect whatever, except, perhaps, a toss of the head and the flying out
of a tuft of hair. Every time the ball would glance off from the thick skull. The wonderful
mat of curly hair must break the force some, too. This mat, or cushion, in between the horns
of the buffalo Lieutenant Alden killed, was so thick and tangled that I could not begin to
get my fingers in it.

FORT LYON, COLORADO TERRITORY, December, 1871.

OUR first Christmas on the frontier was ever so pleasant, but it certainly was most vexatious
not to have that box from home. And I expect that it has been at Kit Carson for days, waiting
to be brought down. We had quite a little Christmas without it, however, for a number of things
came from the girls, and several women of the garrison sent pretty little gifts to me. It was
so kind and thoughtful of them to remember that I might be a bit homesick just now. All the
little presents were spread out on a table, and in a way to make them present as fine an appearance
as possible. Then I printed in large letters, on a piece of cardboard, "One box--contents unknown!"
and stood it up on the back of the table. I did this to let everyone know that we had not been
forgotten by home people. My beautiful new saddle was brought in, also, for although I had
had it several weeks, it was really one of Faye's Christmas gifts to me.

They have such a charming custom in the Army of going along the line Christmas morning and
giving each other pleasant greetings and looking at the pretty things everyone has received.
This is a rare treat out here, where we are so far from shops and beautiful Christmas displays.
We all went to the bachelors' quarters, almost everyone taking over some little remembrance--homemade
candy, cakes, or something of that sort.

I had a splendid cake to send over that morning, and I will tell you just what happened to
it. At home we always had a large fruit cake made for the holidays, long in advance, and I
thought I would have one this year as near like it as possible. But it seemed that the only
way to get it was to make it. So, about four weeks ago, I commenced. It was quite an undertaking
for me, as I had never done anything of the kind, and perhaps I did not go about it the easiest
way, but I knew how it should look when done, and of course I knew precisely how it should
taste. Eliza makes delicious every-day cake, but was no assistance whatever with the fruit
cake, beyond encouraging me with the assurance that it would not matter in the least if it
should be heavy.

Well, for two long, tiresome days I worked over that cake, preparing with my own fingers every
bit of the fruit, which I consider was a fine test of perseverance and staying qualities. After
the ingredients were all mixed together there seemed to be enough for a whole regiment, so
we decided to make two cakes of it. They looked lovely when baked, and just right, and smelled
so good, too! I wrapped them in nice white paper that had been wet with brandy, and put them
carefully away--one in a stone jar, the other in a tin box--and felt that I had done a remarkably
fine bit of housekeeping. The bachelors have been exceedingly kind to me, and I rejoiced at
having a nice cake to send them Christmas morning. But alas! I forgot that the little house
was fragrant with the odor of spice and fruit, and that there was a man about who was ever
on the lookout for good things to eat. It is a shame that those cadets at West Point are so
starved. They seem to be simply famished for months after they graduate.

It so happened that there was choir practice that very evening, and that I was at the chapel
an hour or so. When I returned, I found the three bachelors sitting around the open fire, smoking,
and looking very comfortable indeed. Before I was quite in the room they all stood up and began
to praise the cake. I think Faye was the first to mention it, saying it was a "great success";
then the others said "perfectly delicious," and so on, but at the same time assuring me that
a large piece had been left for me.

For one minute I stood still, not in the least grasping their meaning; but finally I suspected
mischief, they all looked so serenely contented. A wicker frame might well be interposed.

Arctic Sleeping-bags.--Arctic travellers use coarse drugget bags, covered with brown holland to
make them less pervious to the wind, and having a long flap at the
upper end to fold down over the face. Oh, yes! Their
early Christmas had been a fine one. There was nothing for me to say or do--at least not just
then--so I went back to the little living-room and forced myself to be halfway pleasant to
the four men who were there, each one looking precisely like the cat after it had eaten the
canary! The cake was scarcely cold, and must have been horribly sticky--and I remember wondering,
as I sat there, which one would need the doctor first, and what the doctor would do if they
were all seized with cramps at the same time. But they were not ill--not in the least--which
proved that the cake was well baked. If they had discovered the other one, however, there is
no telling what might have happened.

At half after ten yesterday the chaplain held service, and the little chapel was crowded--so
many of the enlisted men were present. We sang our Christmas music, and received many compliments.
Our little choir is really very good. Both General Phillips and Major Pierce have fine voices.
One of the infantry sergeants plays the organ now, for it was quite too hard for me to sing
and work those old pedals. Once I forgot them entirely, and everybody smiled--even the chaplain!

