I found a little house called Mount Eaton, on the Neme Heath side of Mycening, with a green
field between it and the town, and the heath stretching out beyond, where Harold might rush
out and shake his mane instead of feeling cribbed and confined.  It wanted a great deal of
painting and papering, which I set in hand at once, but of course it was a more lingering business
than I expected.  All the furniture and books that had belonged to my own mother had been left
to me, and it had been settled by the valuation, when I knew little about it, what these were;
and all that remained was to face Eustace's disgust at finding how many of "the best things"
it comprised.  Hippolyta showed to advantage there.  I believe she was rather glad to get rid
of them, and to have the opportunity of getting newer and more fashionable ones; but, at any
rate, she did it with a good grace, and made me welcome not only to my own property, but to
remain at Arghouse till my new abode should be habitable, which I hoped would be a day or two
after the wedding.

The great grievance was, however, that I had put myself and Dora into mourning, feeling it
very sad that this last of the four exiles should be the only one of whose death I even knew.
Eustace thought the whole connection ought to be forgotten, and that, whatever I might choose
to do, it was intolerable that his sister, the present Miss Alison of Arghouse, should put
on mourning for the wife of a disgraced fellow, a runaway parson turned sharper!

I am afraid I was not as patient or tolerant as I ought to have been, and it ended in the time
of reprieve being put an end to, and Dora being carried off by the Horsmans to her new schoolroom
in London, her resistance, and the home-truths she told her brother, only making him the more
inexorable.  Poor little girl!  I do not like to think of the day I put her into Hippolyta's hands.

CHAPTER XIII.

THE BLOODHOUND.

It was a broiling evening in early June, very beautiful, but so hot that I dreaded the fatigue
and all the adjuncts of the morrow's wedding, when I was to be a bridesmaid, and should see
my poor little Dora again.  I was alone, for Eustace was sleeping at Therford Vicarage, but
I had not time for sentiment over the old home and old gardens.  I was turning out the old
Indian cabinets, which were none of mine, though they had always been called so, and putting
into cotton wool and paper all my treasures there, ready for transport, when a shadow fell
on me from the open window.  I looked up, and there stood Harold!

Oh, how unlike it was from the way in which we had met three years before as bewildered strangers!
I do not think that sister could ever have met brother with more entire feeling that home,
and trust, and staff, and stay were come back to her, than when I found Harold's arm round
me, his head bending down to me.  I was off my own mind!

When our greeting was over, Harold turned and said, "Here he is."

I saw a fine-looking old man, with a certain majesty of air that one could not define.  He
was pale, wrinkled, and had deep furrows of suffering on cheek and brow, but his dark eyes,
under a shaggy white penthouse, were full of keen fire and even ardour.  His bald forehead
was very fine, and his mouth--fully visible, for he was closely shaven--had an ineffable, melancholy
sweetness about it, so that the wonderful power of leading all with whom he came in contact
was no longer a mystery to me; for, fierce patriot and desperate republican as he might have
been, nothing could destroy the inborn noble, and instinctively I bent to him with respect
as I took his hand in welcome.

After the hasty inquiries, "Where's Dora?"  "Where's Eustace?" "Where's Dermot Tracy?" had
been answered, and I had learnt that this last had gone on to London, where his family were,
Harold hurried out to see about sending for the luggage, and Prometesky, turning to me, almost
took my breath away by saying, "Madam, I revere you.  You have done for the youth so dear to
me what I could never have done, and have transformed him from a noble savage to that far higher
being--the Christian hero."

I did not take this magnificent compliment as if I had been of the courtly continental blood
of him who made it: it made me hot and sheepish, yet even now I still feel warm at the heart
when I remember it; for I know he really meant it, little as I deserved it, for the truth was
what I faltered out: "It was all in him."

"It was all in him.  That is true; but it needed to be evoked, so as not to be any longer stifled
and perverted by the vehemence of his physical nature.  When he left me, after the great catastrophe
which changed him from the mere exaggerated child, gratifying every passion with violence,
I knew it depended on what hands he would fall into, whether the spiritual or the animal would
have the mastery.  Madam, it was into your hands that he fell, and I thank God for it, even
more than for the deliverance that my dear pupil has gained for me."

He had tears in his eyes as he took my hand and kissed it, and very much overpowered I was.
I had somewhat dreaded finding him a free-thinker, but there was something in both speeches
that consoled me, and he afterwards said to me: "Madam, in our youth intellectual Catholics
are apt to reject what our reason will not accept.  We love not authority.  In age we gain
sympathy with authority, and experience has taught us that there can be a Wisdom surpassing
our own.  We have proved for ourselves that love cannot live without faith."

And Harold told me on the evening of their return, with much concern, that the old man had
made up his mind that, so soon as his health should be sufficiently restored, he would make
retreat among the monks of La Trappe experimentally, and should probably take the vows. "I
don't see that his pardon has done much good," he said, and did not greatly accept my representation
of the marvellous difference it must make to a Roman Catholic to be no longer isolated from
the offices of religion.  He had made up his mind to come into Sydney to die, but he was too
poor to have lived anywhere but under the Boola Boola rock.

It was a very quietly glad evening, as we three sat round the open window, and asked and answered
questions.  Harold said he would come to the wedding with me the next day; he must see old
Eu married; and, besides, he wanted to give up to him the three nuggets, which had been rather
a serious charge.  Harold, Prometesky, and Dermot had each carried one, in case of any disaster,
that there might be three chances; but now they were all three laid in my lap--wonderful things,
one a little larger than the others, but all curiously apple-like in form, such gifts as a
bride has seldom had.

There was the account of the sale of Boola Boola to be rendered up too; and the place had risen
so much in value that it had brought in far more than Harold had expected when leaving England,
so that he and Eustace were much richer men than he had reckoned on being.

Mrs. Sam Alison had arrived safely, but rather surprised not to find people walking on their
heads, as she had been told everything was upside down.  Her son had so far recovered that
he could undertake such employment in writing as it was possible to procure.  The mother and
son were very happy together, but Harold winced as if a sore were touched when he spoke of
their meeting.

I was anxious that he should hear of nothing to vex him that night, for there was more than
enough to annoy him another day, and I talked on eagerly about the arrangements for the wedding.
Hippolyta had insisted on making it a mingled archery and hunt-wedding.  She was to wear the
famous belt.  The bridegroom, her brothers, and most of the gentlemen were to be in their pink;
we bridesmaids had scarlet ribbons, and the favours had miniature fox brushes fastened with
arrows in the centre; even our lockets, with their elaborate cypher of E's, A's, and H's, depended
from the head of a fox.

Prometesky looked amazed, as well he might.  "Your ladies are changed," he said.  "It would
formerly scarcely have been thought feminine to show such ardour for the chase."

"Perhaps it is not now," I said.

"Or is it in honour of the lady's name?  Hippolyta should have a Midsummer wedding, and 'love
the musick of her hounds,'" continued the old gentleman, whom I found to have Shakespeare almost
by heart, as one of the chief companions of his solitude.

As soon as Harold heard his boxes arriving, he went to work to disinter the wedding present
he had provided--a pretty bracelet of New Zealand green jade set in gold.  There was a little
parcel for me, too, which he gave me, leading me aside.  It was also a locket, and bore a cypher,
but how unlike the other!  It was a simple A; and within was a lock of silver hair.  There
was no need to tell me whose it was.  "She said she wished she had anything to send you," were
Harold's words, "and I cut off this bit of her hair;" and when I wondered over her having taken
thought of me, he said, "She blessed you for your kindness to me.  If I could only have brought
her to you--"

I secured then, as the completion of his gift, one of his thick curls of yellow-brown hair.
He showed me the chain he had brought for Dora, and gave me one glance at a clear, pure, crystal
cross, from spar found in New Zealand, near the gold-fields.  Would he ever be able to give
it?  I answered the question in his eyes by telling him a certain Etruscan flower-pot had stood
in a certain window at Arked House all the winter, and was gone to London now.

Our home breakfast had to be very early, to give time for the drive to Therford, but Harold
had been already into Mycening, had exchanged countless hearty greetings, roused up an unfortunate
hair-cutter, to trim his locks, bought a hat, and with considerable difficulty found a pair
of gloves that he could put on--not kid, but thick riding-gloves; white, at least--and so he
hoped that they would pass in the crowd, and Eustace would not feel himself disgraced.  He
had not put on the red coat, but had tried to make himself look as satisfactory to Eustace
as possible in black, and (from a rather comical sense of duty) he made me look him over to
see if he were worthy of the occasion.  He certainly was in splendid looks, his rich, profuse
beard and hair were well arranged, and his fine bronzed face had not lost its grave expression
when at rest, but had acquired a certain loftiness of countenance, which gave him more than
ever the air, I was going to say, of a demigod; but he had now an expression no heathen Greek
could give; it was more like that of the heads by Michael Angelo, where Christian yearning
is added to classic might and beauty.

Prometesky preferred staying at home.  He seemed suffering and weary, and said that perhaps
he should wander about and renew his acquaintance with the country; and so Harold and I set
off together on the drive, which, as I well knew, would be the most agreeable part of the day.

Very lovely it was as we passed in the morning freshness of the glowing summer day through
lanes wreathed with dog-roses and white with May, looking over grass-fields with silvery ripples
in the breeze into woods all golden and olive-green above with young foliage, and pink below
with campion flowers, while the moorland beyond was in its glory of gorse near at hand, and
purple hills closing the distance.  I remember the drive especially, because Harold looked
at the wealth of gay colouring so lovingly, comparing it with the frequently parched uniformity
of the Bush, regretting somewhat the limited range, but owning there were better things than
unbounded liberty.

When we reached Therford he would not go to the house with me, nor seek to see Eustace before
the wedding, saying he should wait in the churchyard and join us afterwards.  So in I went
into the scene of waiting, interspersed with bustle, that always precedes a wedding, and was
handed into the bed-room where the bridesmaids were secluded till the bride was ready, all
save Pippa and the most favoured cousin, who were arraying her.  There were a dozen, and all
were Horsmans except Dora and me.  The child made one great leap at me, and squeezed me, to
such detriment of our flimsy draperies that she was instantly called to order.  Her lip pouted,
and her brow lowered; but I whispered two words in her ear, and with a glance in her eye, and
an intent look on her face, she stood, a being strangely changed from the listless, sullen,
defiant creature she had been a minute before.

Therford was one of those old places where the church is as near as possible to the manor house,
standing on a little elevation above it, and with a long avenue of Lombardy poplars leading
from the south porch, the family entrance, to the front door of the house, so this was that
pretty thing, a walking, instead of a carriage, wedding.  As one of the procession, I could
not see, but the red and white must have made it very pretty, and the Northchester paper was
quite poetical in its raptures.

All this was, however, forgotten in the terrible adventure that immediately followed.  The
general entrance was by the west door, and close to this I perceived Harold following his usual
practice of getting into the rear and looking over people's heads.  When the service was over,
and we waited for the signing of the registers, most of the spectators, and he among them,
went out by this western door, and waited in the churchyard to see the procession come out.

Forth it came, headed by the bride and bridegroom, both looking their very handsomest, and
we bridesmaids in six couples behind, when, just as we were clear of the porch, and school-children
were strewing flowers before the pair, there was a strange shuddering cry, and the great bloodhound,
Kirby, with broken chain and foaming jaws--all the dreadful tokens of madness about him--came
rushing up the avenue with the speed of the wind, making full for his mistress, the bride.
There was not a moment for her to do more than give a sort of shrieking, despairing command,
"Down, Kirby!" when, just as the beast was springing on her, his throat was seized by the powerful
hands that alone could have grappled with him, and the terrible head, foaming, and making horrid
choking growls, was swung round from her, and the dog lifted by the back of the neck in the
air, struggling and kicking violently.

Everyone had given back; Hippolyta had thrown herself on Eustace, who drew her back, crowding
on us, into the porch; Harold, still holding the dog at arm's length, made his voice heard
in steady tones, "Will some one give me my other glove?"

One hand, that which grasped the dog, was gloved, but the free hand was bare, and it was Dora
who first understood, saw the glove at his feet, sprang to his side, and held it up to him,
while he worked his hand into it, and she pulled it on for him.  Then he transferred his grasp
from one hand to the other, and in that moment the powerful bloodhound made a desperate struggle,
and managed to get one paw on the ground, and writhe itself round so as to fly at his face
and make its teeth actually meet in his beard, a great mouthful of which it tore out, and we
saw it champing the hairs, as he again swung it up, so that it could only make frantic contortions
with its body and legs, while he held it at arm's length with the iron strength of his wrists.

This had taken hardly three seconds, and in that time Jack Horsman and a keeper or two had
been able to come up, but no one unarmed could give efficient aid, and Harold said, "I'll take
him to the yard."

Mr. Horsman led the way, and as the keepers followed with several of the gentlemen, I was forced
to let Harold vanish, carrying at arm's length that immense dog, still making horrible rabid
struggles.

I don't clearly remember how we got back to the house.  Somebody had fainted, I believe, and
there was much confusion; but I know nothing but that there was the report of a pistol, and,
almost immediately after, I saw Harold coming up to the hall door with Dora lying back in his
arms.  Then my eyes and ears grew clear, and I flew forward to ask the dreadful question. 
"No," he said, "she is only a little upset." Unperceived, that child had followed him down,
holding the broken chain in which he might have tripped, and had stood by even while he set
the poor beast on his feet, and held it for the merciful death shot.  It seemed that her purpose
had been to suck the wound if he had been bitten, and when once she heard Mr. Horsman exclaim,
"All safe, thank God!" she clung to Harold with an inarticulate gasp, in one of those hysterical
agonies by which her womanhood from time to time asserted itself.  She could not breathe or
speak, and he only begged for a place to lay her down.  Old Marianne Horsman, the quiet one
of the family, took us to her own den, and, with me, insisted on looking well at Harold's hands
and face.  What might not that horrid leap have done? But we convinced ourselves that those
fangs had only caught his beard, where there was a visible gap, but no sign of a wound; and
those riding-gloves had entirely guarded his hands.  How blessed the Providence, for ordinarily
he never touched gloves, and common white kid ones would have availed little.  There was scarce
time to speak of it, for the child required all our care, and was only just becoming calmer,
as Harold held her, when the bride and bridegroom came in, she, red and eager, he, white and
shaken, to summon us to the breakfast. "Don't go!" was her moan, half asleep.

Harold bade me go, and as the bride declared they could not sit down without him, he answered,
"Not yet, thank you, I couldn't."  And I remembered that his prompt deed of daring had been
in defiance of a strong nervous antipathy.  There was a spasmodic effort in the smile he attempted,
a twitching in the muscles of his throat; he was as pale as his browned cheeks could become,
and his hand was still so unsteady that he was forced to resign to me the spoonful of cordial
to put into Dora's mouth.

And at that moment Eustace turned and said, "Have you brought the nuggets?"

Without speaking Harold put his hand into his pocket, and laid them in Eustace's hand.

"These? you said they were golden apples; I thought they would be bigger."

"They are wonderful," said Hippolyta; "no one ever had such a wedding-gift."

"Not that--a debt," said Harold, hoarsely; but Pippa Horsman came and summoned them, and I
was obliged to follow, answering old Marianne's entreaties to say what would be good for him
by begging for strong coffee, which she promised and ordered, but in the skurry of the household,
it never came.

The banquet, held in a tent, was meant to be a brilliantly merry one. The cake had a hunt in
sugar all round it, and the appropriate motto, "Hip, hip, hurrah!" and people tried to be hilarious;
but with that awful shock thrilling on everybody's nerves we only succeeded in being noisy,
though, as we were assured, there was no cause for alarm or grief.  The dog had been tied up
on suspicion, and had bitten nothing but one cat, which it had killed.  Yet surely grave thankfulness
would have been better for us all, as well as more comfortable than loud witticisms and excited
laughter.  I looked at the two or three clerical members of the clan and wondered at them.

When the moment for healths came, the bride called to her brother, the head of the house, by
his pleasing name of Baby, and sent him to fetch Harold, whom he brought back with him.  Dora
was sound asleep, they said, and room was made for Harold in the bridal neighbourhood in time
to hear the baronet, who had married a Horsman of the last generation, propose the health of
the bride with all the conventional phrases, and of the bridegroom, as a gentleman who, from
his first arrival, had made it his study to maintain the old character of the family, and to
distinguish himself by intelligent care for the welfare of his tenants, &c., &c.

Hippolyta must have longed to make the speech in return.  We could see her prompting her husband,
and, by means of imitations of Lord Erymanth, he got through pretty well with his gracious
acceptance of all the praises.

Baby Jack proposed the health of the bridesmaids, adding, more especially, that of the absent
one, as a little heroine; and, after the response, came a ponderous speech by another kinsman,
full of compliments to Harold's courage in a fulsome style that made me flush with the vexation
it must give him, and the annoyance it would be to reply.  I had been watching him.  As a pile
of lumps of ice fortunately stood near him, he had, at every interval, been transferring one
to his glass, filling it up with water, guarding it from the circling decanters, and taking
such a draught at every toast that I knew his mouth was parched, and I dreaded that sheer worry
would make him utter one of his "young barbarian" bluntnesses; but what he did was to stand
up and say simply, "It is very kind of Colonel Horsman to speak in this way of my share in
the great mercy and deliverance we have received to-day.  It is a matter of the greatest thankfulness.
Let me in return thank the friends here assembled for their welcome, and, above all, for their
appreciation of my cousin, whose position now fulfils my great wish.  Three years ago we were
friendless strangers.  Now he has made himself one with you, and I thank you heartily for it."

I felt rather than heard Nessy Horsman muttering, "pretty well for the large young man;" and
it seemed to occur to no one that friends, position, and all had been gained for Eustace by
Harold himself. He was requesting permission to take Dora back with us, and it was granted
with some demur, because she must be with Mrs. Randal Horsman on her return to town on the
Monday; a day's lessons could not be sacrificed, for she was very backward, and had no application;
but Harold undertook that she should meet the lady at the station, and gained his point.

Clan Horsman knew too well what he had done to deny him anything he asked.  A man who had not
only taken a mad dog by the throat, but had brought home two hundred and twenty pounds worth
of gold to lay on the table, deserved something at their hands, though ice was all he actually
received; but Eustace, when he came to us while the bride was changing her dress, was in a
fretful, fault-finding mood, partly it may be from the desire to assert himself, as usual,
above his cousin.

He was dissatisfied with the price paid for Boola-Boola.  Someone had told him it would realise
four times as much, and when Harold would have explained that this was unreasonable, he was
cut short with the declaration that the offer ought not to have been accepted without reference
to the other party concerned.

Next he informed Harold, in an off-hand way, that some of the new improvements at Arghouse
would not work, and that he had a new agent--a responsible agent--who was not to be interfered
with.

There was a certain growl in Harold's "very well," but the climax was Eustace's indignation
when he heard of Prometesky's arrival.  He had worked himself, by way of doing the country
squire completely, into a disgust of the old exile, far out-Heroding what he had heard from
Lord Erymanth, and that "the old incendiary" should be in his house was a great offence.

"He shall not sleep there another night, neither will I," said Harold, in a calm voice, but
with such a gleam in his eyes as I had seen when he fell on Bullock.

It had at least the effect of reducing Eustace to his old habit of subordination, and he fell
into an agony of "No, I did not mean that, and--" stammering out something in excuse about
not liking the servants and all to think he was harbouring a returned convict.

I had taken care of that.  I knew how "that that there Fotsky" was the ogre of the riots, and
I had guarded against his identification by speaking of our guest as the foreign gentleman
who had come home with Mr. Harold, and causing him to be called Count Stanislas; and, on hearing
this, Eustace became so urgent in his entreaties, that Harold, though much hurt, relented so
far as to promise at any rate to remain till Monday, so that Dora should not detect the offence.

We saw the happy pair off, among the old shoes, to spend some months abroad, while the old
house was revivified for them, and then we had our own drive home, which was chiefly occupied
with Dora, who, sitting on Harold's knee, seemed to expect her full rescue from all grievances,
and was terribly disappointed to find that he had no power to remove her from her durance in
the London school-room, where she was plainly the dunce and the black sheep, a misery to herself
and all concerned, hating everyone and disliked by all.  To the little maiden of the Bush,
only half tamed as yet, the London school-room and walks in the park were penance in themselves,
and the company of three steady prim girls, in the idealess state produced by confinement to
a school-room, and nothing but childish books, was as distasteful to her as she was shocking
to them, and her life was one warfare with them and with their Fraulein.  The only person she
seemed able to endure was Nessy Horsman, who was allowed to haunt his cousin Randal's house,
and who delighted in shocking the decorous monotony of the trio of sisters, finding the vehement
little Australian far more entertaining, while, whether he teased or stimulated her, she found
him the least uncongenial being she met in Paddington.  But what struck me most was the manner
in which Harold spoke to her, not merely spoiling her, and giving her her own way, as if he
were only a bigger child, but saying "It will all get better, Dora, if you only try to do your
best."

"I haven't got any best to do."

"Everybody has."

"But I don't want it to be better.  I want to be with you and Lucy."

Then came some reasoning about impossibilities, too low for me to hear in the noise of the
wheels, but ending with "It is only another thing to conquer.  You can conquer anything if
you only try, and pray to God to help you."

"I haven't said my prayers since I went away.  They ordered me, and said I was wicked; but
you don't, Harold, do you?" she cried triumphantly, little expecting the groan she met in answer,
"Yes, indeed I do, Dora.  I only wish I had done so sooner."

"I thought it was no use," she said, crying at his tone.  "It was so unkind to take me away
from Lucy," and whereas she hardly ever shed tears and was now far from restored after the
fright, when she once began we could hardly stop her weeping, and were thankful when she was
soothed into another sleep, which we durst not peril by a word.

It deepened and lasted so that Harold carried her upstairs still asleep, and laid her on her
own little bed.  Then he came out with me into my dear old sitting-room, where, without another
word, he knelt in the old place and said, "That psalm, please Lucy."

"I think we ought to give thanks in church," I said, presently.

"Whatever is right," he said fervently.

"It was the greatest escape you ever had," I said.

"Yes," he said, shuddering; "at least it seemed so.  I really thought the dog had bitten me
when he flew in my face.  It felt just like it, and I was very near giving up.  I don't mean
letting him go, but not heeding whether he touched me or not.  It kept on haunting me till
I was alone with Dora, and could examine at the looking-glass."

Of course I was not content till I had likewise again convinced myself by searching into the
beard, and then I added, "Ah! this is worse than the lion, though then you were really hurt."

"Yes, but there one knew the worst.  Besides," he said, again overcoming a shudder, "I know
my feeling about dogs is a weakness owing to my sin.  'Deliver me from the power of the dog,'
to me expresses all the power of evil."

Then he sat down and took a pen to write to Mr. Crosse.  "Harold Alison wishes to give thanks
to Almighty God for a great mercy."

And after that he never alluded to the adventure again.  I told the story to Prometesky in
his absence, and we never mentioned it more.

Indeed the next thing Harold said, as he addressed his envelope, was, "It is a pity to lose
this room."

"There is one that I can fit up like it," I said.  "All the things here are mine."  And then
I was glad to divert his attention by proposing to go and inspect Mount Eaton, as soon as he
had had some much-needed food, since Prometesky was out, and we at once plunged into the "flitting"
affairs, glad in them to stifle some of the pain that Eustace had given, but on which we neither
of us would dwell.

Was Harold changed, or had he only gone on growing in the course he had begun?  He was as simple
and unconsciously powerful as ever, but there was something there was not before, reminding
me of the dawning of Undine's soul.

He was called off in the middle of our consultation as to the house, which was our common property,
by a message that Mr. Crabbe would be glad of a few minutes with him.

"Was there any fresh annoyance about the Hydriots?" I asked, when he came back.

"Oh, no!  The rascal is come over to my side.  What do you think he wanted to say?  That he
had been to look at my grandfather's will, and he thinks you could drive a coach and horses
through it; and he proposes to me to upset it, and come in as heir-at-law!  The scoundrel!"

"After all," I said, after a pause, "it would be very good for poor Arghouse if you thought
it right."

"I should not be very good for Arghouse if I did such a thing as that," returned Harold.  "No,
poor old Eu, I'm not going to disturb him because he has got out of my hands, and I think she
will take care of the people.  I daresay I bullied him more than was bearable."

Would Harold have so forgiven even Eustace's ingratitude three years ago?

CHAPTER XIV.

SUNSET GOLD AND PURPLE.

We had a happy time after that; our Sunday was a very glad and peaceful one, with our thanksgiving
in the morning, and Dora's pleasure in the dear old children's service in the afternoon.  Poor
child, she liked everything that she had only submitted to when she was with us, and Harold
took her away on the Monday in a more resigned frame of mind, with a kind of promise that she
would be good if the Horsmans would let her.

Then came the removal, and I must say there was some compensation for the pain of leaving my
old home in that sense of snugness and liberty in our new plenishing, rather like the playing
at doll's houses.  We had stable room for Harold's horse and my pony--the kangaroo, alas! had
pined and died the winter that Harold was away; the garden was practicable, and the rooms were
capable of being made home-like and pleasant.

The Tracys were out of reach for the present.  Dermot was gone to Ireland, and Lady Diana and
her daughter were making a long round of visits among friends, so that there was nothing for
it but waiting, and as it was hopeful waiting, enlivened by Viola's letters to me, Harold endured
it very happily, having indeed much to think about.

There was Prometesky's health.  It was ascertained that he must undergo an operation, and when
we found that all the requisite skill could be had near at hand, I overruled the scruples about
alarming or distressing me.  I knew that it would be better for him to be watched by George
Yolland, and for Harold to be at home, and I had come to love the old man very heartily.

One day of expectation, in which he was the most calm and resolute of us, one anxious day when
they sent me to Miss Woolmer, until Harold came, thankful and hopeful to fetch me, a few more
of nursing accepted with touching gratitude, and he was soon downstairs again, a hale old man,
though nearly seventy, but more than ever bent on his retreat to La Trappe.  It distressed
us much.  He seemed so much to enjoy intelligent talk with Miss Woolmer and the Yollands; he
so delighted in books, and took such fresh interest in all, whether mechanical or moral, that
was doing at the Hydriots--of which, by-the-by, as first inventor, the company had contrived,
at Harold's suggestion, to make him a shareholder to an extent that would cover all his modest
needs, I could not think how he would bear the change.

"My dear young lady," he said to me, when I tried to persuade him out of writing the first
letter, "you forget how much I have of sin upon me.  Can years of negation of faith, or the
ruin of four young lives, and I know not of how many more, be repented of at ease in your pleasant
town, amid the amiable cares you young people are good enough to lavish on the old man?"

I made some foolish answer about his having meant all for good and noble purposes, but he shook
his head.

"Error, my dear madam, error excusable, perhaps, in one whose country has been destroyed. 
I see, now that I have returned, after years alone with my God, that the work I tried to precipitate
was one of patience. The fire from heaven must first illuminate the soul, then the spirit,
and then the bonds will be loosed of themselves; otherwise we do but pluck them asunder to
set maniacs free to rush into the gulf.  And as to my influence on my two pupils, your brothers,
I see now that what began in filial rebellion and disobedience could never end well.  I bless
God that I have been permitted to see, in the next generation, the true hero and reformer I
ought to have made of my Ambrose.  Ah! Ambrose, Ambrose! noble young spirit, would that any
tears and penance of mine would expiate the shipwreck to which I led thee!" and he burst into
tears.

He had, of course, seen the Roman Catholic priest several times before encountering the danger
of the operation, and was a thoroughly devout penitent, but of his old Liberalism he retained
the intense benevolence that made the improvements at the potteries a great delight to him,
likewise the historical breadth of understanding that prevented his thinking us all un-Catholic
and unsafe.

It was a great blessing that Harold was not held back but rather aided and stimulated by the
example of the man to whom he most looked up; but with his characteristic silence, it was long
before I found that, having felt, beside his mother's death-bed, how far his spiritual wants
had outgrown me, he had carried them to Ben Yolland, though the old morning habit remained
unbroken, and he always came to the little room I had made like my old one.

Ben Yolland had become more entirely chaplain to the Hydriots.  Those two brothers lived together
in a curious way at what we all still called the "Dragon's Head," each with his own sitting-room
and one in common, one fitted as a clergyman's study, the other more like a surgery; for though
George had given up his public practice since he had been manager of the works, he still attended
all the workpeople and their families, only making them pay for their medicines "when it was
good for them."

Thus the care of the soul and bodies of the Hydriots was divided between the two, and they
seemed to work in concert, although George showed no symptom of change of opinions, never saying
anything openly to discredit his brother's principles, nay, viewing them as wholesome restraints
for those who were not too scientific to accept them, and even going to church when he had
nothing else to do, but by preference looking up his patients on a Sunday.  He viewed everything,
from religion to vice, as the outcome of certain states of brain, nerves, and health; and so
far from being influenced by the example of Prometesky, regarded him as a proof of his own
theory, and talked of the Slavonic temperament returning to its normal forms as the vigour
of life departed.

Nevertheless, he did not seem to do harm to the workpeople. Drunkenness was at least somewhat
restrained, though far from conquered, and the general spirit of the people was wonderful,
compared with those of other factories.  Plans were under discussion for a mission chapel,
and the people themselves were thoroughly anxious for it.

Lord Erymanth returning, kindly came to call on me in my new house, and as I was out of the
drawing-room at the time, he had ten minutes' conversation with the gentleman whom he found
reading at the window, and was so much pleased with him that when making the tour of our small
domain, he said, "You did not introduce me, Lucy.  Is that an Australian acquaintance of Harold
Alison's? I did not expect such high cultivation."

"An Australian acquaintance, yes," said I, "and also a Polish count."

"Prometesky!"

"Prometesky," said I, to whom the name had begun to sound historical. "I did not know you did
not recognise him."

I was afraid my old friend would be angry with me, but he stood still and said, "I never saw
him except at his trial.  I can understand now the fascination he was said to have possessed.
I could not conscientiously assist your nephew in his recall, but I highly honour the generous
perseverance with which he has effected it; and I am happy to acknowledge that the subject
is worthy of his enthusiasm. Animosity may be laid aside now, and you may tell Mr. Harold Alison
that I heartily congratulate him."

"And he--Count Stanislas we call him--sees now that he was mistaken," I said.

"Does he?  That is the best of the higher stamp of men, my dear. They know when they are wrong,
and own it.  In fact, that's the greatest difference between men.  The feeble and self-opinionated
never acknowledge an error, but the truly sincere can confess and retrieve their hallucinations
and prejudices.  Well, I am glad to have seen Prometesky, and to be disabused of some ideas
respecting him."

Count Stanislas, on the other hand, received me with, "So that is Erymanth!  The tyrant, against
whom we raged, proves a charitable, benevolent, prosy old gentleman.  How many illusions a
few decades dispel, and how much hatred one wastes!"

Lord Erymanth had told me that his sister would soon be at home, and in September I was surprised
by a call from Dermot.  "Yes, I'm at Arked," he said, "Killy Marey is full of Dublin workmen.
My uncle has undertaken to make it habitable for me, like an old brick, and, in the meantime,
there's not a room fit to smoke or sleep in, so I'm come home like a dutiful son."

"Then your mother is come?"

"Oh yes; she is come for six weeks, and then she and the St. Glears are to join company and
winter at Rome."

"At Rome?"

"Prevention, you see," said Dermot, with a twinkle in his eye, as if he were not very uneasy.
"The question is whether it is in time. She will have Piggy's attentions at Christmas.  He
is to come out for the vacation."

Then he further told me that his mother had brought home with her a Mrs. Sandford with a daughter,
heiress to L60,000, and to a newly-bought estate in Surrey, and newly-built house "of the most
desirable description," he added, shrugging his shoulders.

"And what sort of a young lady is she?"

"Oh, very desirable, too, I suppose."

"But what is she like?"

"Like?  Oh, like other people," and he whistled a little, seeming relieved when "Count Stanislas"
came in, and soon after going to hunt up Harry at the Hydriot works.

It made me uncomfortable; it was so evidently another attempt on his mother's part to secure
a rich home for him in England, and his tone did not at all reassure me that, with his easy
temper, he would not drift into the arrangement without his heart in it.  "Why should I be
so vexed about it?  It might be very good for him," said I to myself.

No, his heart was not in it, for he came back with Harold, and lingered over our fire beyond
all reasonable time, talking amusing random stuff, till he had left himself only ten minutes
to ride home in to dinner.

The next day Harold and I rode over to Arked together.  Dermot was the first person we saw,
disporting himself with a pug-dog at the door. "The fates have sped you well," said he, as
he helped me down from my pony.  "My mother has taken Mrs. Sandford in state to call on Mrs.
Vernon, having arranged that Viola and I should conduct the sixty-thousand pounder to admire
the tints in the beech woods.  The young ladies are putting on their hats.  Will it be too
far for you, Lucy, to go with us?"

Wherewith he fraternally shouted for "Vi," who appeared all in a rosy glow, and took me upstairs
to equip me for walking, extracting from me in the meantime the main features of the story
of the bloodhound, and trembling while she gave exulting little nods.

Then she called for Nina (were they so intimate already?) and found that young lady in a point
device walking dress, nursing the pug and talking to Dermot, and so we set forth for the beech-woods,
very soon breaking our five into three and two.  Certainly Lady Diana ought to have viewed
Dermot's attentions to the sixty-thousand pounder as exemplary, for he engrossed her and me
so entirely with the description of Harold's victory over a buck-jumper at Boola Boola, that
it was full a quarter of an hour before she looked round to exclaim, "What is become of Viola?"
And then we would not let her wait, and in truth we never came again upon Viola and Harold
till we overtook them at the foot of the last hill, and they never could satisfy Miss Sandford
where they had been, nor what they had seen, nor how they had missed us; and Dermot invented
for the nonce a legend about a fairy in the hill, who made people gyrate round it in utter
oblivion of all things; thus successfully diverting the attention of Miss Sandford, who took
it all seriously.  Yes, she certainly was a stupid girl.

Every moment that lengthened the veritable enchantment of that autumn afternoon was precious
beyond what we knew, and we kept Miss Sandford prowling about the garden on all sorts of pretexts,
till the poor girl was tired out, as well she might be, for we had kept her on her feet for
three hours and a half, and she made her escape at last to join Viola.

I always think of Harold and Viola, as I saw them at that moment, on the top of the western
slope of the lawn, so that there was a great ruddy gold sky behind them, against which their
silhouettes stood out in a sort of rich dark purple shade.

"Oh, they are looking at such a sunset!" cried Miss Sandford, climbing up the hill.

"Query!" murmured Dermot, for the faces were in profile, not turning towards the sun in the
sky, but to the sunbeams in one another's eyes--sunbeams that were still there when we joined
them, and, in my recollection, seem to blend with the glorious haze of light that was pouring
down in a flood over the purple moorland horizon, and the wood, field, and lake below.  I was
forced to say something about going home, and Viola took me up to her room, where we had one
of those embraces that can never be forgotten.  The chief thing that the dear girl said to
me was, "Oh, Lucy.  How he has suffered!  How shall I ever make it up to him?"

Poor dear Viola, little did she think that she was to cause the very sharpest of his sufferings.

Nay, as little did he, when we rode home together with the still brilliant sky before us. 
I never see a lane ending in golden light, melting into blue, and dark pine trees framing as
it were the brightness, with every little branch defined against it, without thinking of that
silence of intense, almost awe-struck joy in which Harold went home by my side, only at long
intervals uttering some brief phrase, such as "This is blessedness," or "Thank God, who gives
women such hearts."

He had told her all, and it had but added a reverent, enthusiastic pity and fervour to that
admiring love which had been growing up so long, and to which he had set the spark.

His old friend was admitted to share their joy, and was as happy as we were, perhaps doubly
so, since he had beheld with despair Harold's early infatuation and its results, which had
made him fear, during those three wretched years, that all the lad's great and noble gifts
would be lost in the coarse excesses of his wild life, with barbarous prosperity without, and
a miserable, hardening home.  That he should have been delivered from it, still capable of
refinement, still young and fresh enough for a new beginning, had been a cause of great joy,
and now that all should be repaired by a true and worthy love, had seemed beyond hope.  We
built our castles over the fire that evening, Harold had already marked out with his eye the
tract of Neme Heath which he would reclaim; and the little he had already set me on doing among
the women and children at the potteries, had filled us with schemes as to what Viola was to
carry out.

Some misgivings there were even then.  Lady Diana was not to be expected to like Harold's L1,200
a year as well as Piggy's heirship to the Erymanth coronet, or any of the other chances that
might befall an attractive girl of twenty.

For coldness and difficulties we were prepared, but not for the unqualified refusal with which
she met Harold the next morning, grounding all on the vague term, "circumstances," preventing
his even seeing Viola, and cutting short the interview in the manner of a grande dame whose
family had received an insult.

Dermot, however, not only raging, but raving, on his side, assured him of the staunchness of
his sister, and her resolve to hold by him through everything; and further, in sundry arguments
with his mother, got to the bottom of the "circumstances."  She had put away from herself the
objection to the convict birth and breeding, by being willing to accept Eustace, to whom exactly
the same objections applied; and when she called Eustace a man of more education and manners,
her son laughed in her face at the comparison of "that idiot" with a man like Harold.

Then came the "past life," a much more tangible objection, but Dermot was ready there, declaring
that whatever Harold had done, considering his surroundings, was much less heinous than his
own transgressions, after such a bringing up as his, and would his mother say that nobody ought
to marry him?  Besides, to whom had she given Di?  They were not arguments that Lady Diana
accepted, but she weakened her own cause by trying to reinforce it with all the Stympson farrago,
the exaggeration of which Dermot, after his own meeting with Henry Alison, and with Prometesky
to corroborate him, was fully prepared to explode, to the satisfaction even of Lord Eryinanth.

Harold himself was deeply sensible of the stain and burthen of his actual guilt, more so, indeed,
than he had ever been before, both from the religious influences to which he had submitted
himself, and from the sense of that sweet innocence of his Viola's; but his feeling had come
to be that if his Heavenly Father loved and forgave him, so, in a lesser way, Viola forgave
him because she loved him. He did not wonder at nor complain of Lady Diana's not thinking him
worthy of her good and lovely child.  He would be thankful to submit to any probation, five,
seven, ten years without any engagement, if he might hope at last. Even Lord Erymanth, when
he saw how his darling's soul was set on it, thought that thus much might be granted.

But Lady Diana had still another entrenchment which she had concealed, as it were, to the last,
not wishing to shock and pain us all, she said.  Though she said she had reason to complain
of not having been told from the first that Harold had once been insane, nothing could induce
her to sanction her daughter's marriage with a man whose mind had been disordered; nay, who
had done mortal injury in his frenzy.  It was a monstrous idea!

Dermot's reply to this was, that nobody, then, ought to marry who had had a delirious fever;
and he brought Prometesky over to Arked to testify to her how far the attack had been from
anything approaching to constitutional insanity.  The terrible fall, of which Harold's head
still bore the mark, the shock, the burning sun, were a combination of causes that only made
it wonderful that he should have recovered the ensuing brain fever, and the blow to his rival
had been fatal by the mere accident of his strength.  A more ordinary man would have done no
serious harm by such a stroke, given when not accountable.  Lady Diana answered stiffly that
this might be quite true, but that there had been another cause for the temporary derangement
which had not been mentioned, and that it was notorious that Mr. Alison, in consequence, had
been forced to avoid all liquors, and she appealed to Dermot as to the effects of a very small
quantity on his friend's brain.

Poor Dermot! it was bitter enough for him to have that orgie at Foling brought forward against
his friend.  Nor could any representation appease Lady Diana.

I thought her very cruel and unreasonable then, and I am afraid I believe that if Harold had
had ten, or even five thousand a year, these objections would never have been heard of; but
after years and experience have cooled my mind, it seems to me that on several grounds she
was justified in her reluctance, and that, as Viola was so young, and Harold's repentance had
been comparatively recent, she might fairly have insisted on waiting long enough to see whether
he were indeed to be depended upon, or if Viola's affection were strong enough to endure such
risk as there might be.

For Dermot, resolute to defend his friend, and declaring that his sister's heart should not
be broken, was the prime mover in Harold going up to consult the most eminent men of the day
on mental disease, Prometesky going with him as having been his only attendant during his illness,
to give an account of the symptoms, and Dermot, who so comported himself in his excitement
as to seem far more like the lover whose hopes might have depended on the verdict on his doubtful
sanity, than did the grave, quiet, self-contained man, who answered all questions so steadily.

The sentence was so far satisfactory that the doctor confirmed Prometesky's original view,
that concussion of the brain, aggravated by circumstances, had produced the attack, and that
there was no reasonable ground for apprehension of its recurrence, certainly not of its being
hereditary.  But he evidently did not like the confession of the strange horror of dogs, which
Harold thought it right to mention as having been brought on by the circumstances of his accident,
and he would not venture to say that any "exciting cause" might not more easily affect the
brain than if nothing had ever been amiss.  Yet when Dermot tarried, explaining that he was
the brother of a young lady deeply concerned, the doctor assured him that whereas no living
man could be insured from insanity, he should consider the gentleman he had just seen to be
as secure as any one else, since there was no fear of any hereditary taint, and his having
so entirely outgrown and cast off all traces of the malady was a sign of his splendid health
and vigour of constitution.

But Lady Diana was still not satisfied.  She still absolutely refused all consent, and was
no more moved at the end of three weeks than before.  Dear Harold said he did not wonder, and
that if he had seen himself in this true light, he would have loved Viola at a distance without
disquieting her peace, but since he had spoken and knew she loved him, he could not but persevere
for her sake.  We could see he said it with a steady countenance, but a burning heart.  Neither
he nor I was allowed to see Viola, but there was Dermot as constant reporter, and, to my surprise,
Viola was not the submissive daughter I had expected.  Lady Diana had never had any real ascendancy
over her children's wills or principles.  Even Viola's obedience had been that of duty, not
of the heart, and she had from the first declared that mamma might forbid her to marry Harold,
or to correspond with him, and she should consider herself bound to obey; but that she had
given him her promise, and that she could not and would not take it back again. She would wait
on for ever, if otherwise it could not be, but he had her troth plight, and she would be faithful
to it. She would not give up her crystal cross, and she sent Harold her love every day by her
brother, often in her mother's very hearing, saying she was too proud of him to be ashamed.
She had resolved on her own line of passive obedience, but of never renouncing her engagement,
and her brother upheld her in it; while her uncle let himself be coaxed out of his displeasure,
and committed himself to that compromise plan of waiting which his sister viewed as fatal,
since Viola would only lose all her bloom, and perhaps her health. Nothing, she said, was so
much to be deplored for a girl as a long engagement.  The accepting a reformed rake had been
always against her principles, and she did not need even the dreadful possibility of derangement,
or the frightful story of his first marriage, to make her inexorable.  Viola, we were told,
had made up her mind that it was a case for perseverance, and all this time kept up dauntlessly,
not failing in spirits nor activity, but telling her brother she had always known she should
have to go through something, but Harold's love was worth it, and she meant to be brave; how
should she not be when she knew Harold cared for her; and as to what seemed to be objections
in the eyes of others, did they not make her long the more to compensate him?

"She has to make all her love to me, poor little woman, and very pretty love it is," said Dermot.

Whether Harold made as much love in return to their ready medium I cannot tell, for their conferences
were almost always out of doors or at the office, and Harold was more reserved than ever. 
He was not carrying matters with the same high hand as his little love, for, as he always said,
he knew he had brought it all on himself.

He never complained of Lady Diana, but rather defended her to her son for not thinking him
fit for her daughter, only adhering to his original standpoint, that where there was so much
love, surely some hope might be granted, since he would thankfully submit to any probation.

We all expected that this would be the upshot of our suspense, and that patience and constancy
would prevail; and by the help of immense walks and rides, and a good deal of interest in some
new buildings at the potteries, and schemes for the workmen, Harold kept himself very equable
and fairly cheerful, though his eyes were weary and anxious, and when he was sitting still,
musing, there was something in his pose which reminded me more than ever of Michel Angelo's
figures, above all, the grand one on the Medicean monument.  He consorted much more now with
Mr. Yolland, the curate, and was making arrangements by which the school chapel might expand
into a Mission Church, but still I did not know that he was finding the best aid through this
time in the devotions and heart-searchings to which the young clergyman had led him, and which
were the real cause of the calm and dignified humility with which he waited.

At last Lady Diana, finding herself powerless with her daughter, sent a letter to Harold, beginning:
"I appeal to your generosity."  A very cruel letter in some ways it was, representing that
he had acquiesced in her judgment, that there were certain unfortunate passages in his past
life which made it her painful duty to prevent her child from following the dictates of an
inexperienced heart.  Then she put it to him whether it were not a most unfortunate position
for a young girl to be involved in an engagement which could never be fulfilled, and which
was contrary to the commands of her only remaining parent, and she showed how family peace,
confidence, and maternal and filial affection must suffer if the daughter should hold fast
persistently to the promise by which she held herself bound.  In fact, it was an urgent entreaty,
for Viola's own sake, that he would release her from her promise.  Dermot was shooting at Erymanth,
and neither he nor I knew of this letter till Harold had acted.  He rode at once to Arked,
saw Lady Diana, and declared himself convinced that the engagement, having no chance of sanction,
ought to be given up.  Rather than keep Viola in the wearing state of resistance and disobedience
her mother described, he would resign all hopes of her.

Lady Diana went to her daughter with the tidings, that Mr. Alison saw the hopelessness of his
suit, and released her from her promise.

"You have made him do so, mamma," cried Viola. "If he releases me I do not release myself."

Finally, Lady Diana, astonished to find Harold so reasonable and amenable, perceived that the
only means of dealing with her daughter was to let them meet again.  Of course no one fully
knows what passed then.  Harold told me, the only time he spoke of it, that "he had just taken
out his own heart and crushed it!" but Viola dwelt on each phrase, and, long after, used to
go over all with me.  He had fully made up his mind that to let Viola hold to her troth would
neither be right nor good for her, and he used his power of will and influence to make her
resign it.  There was no concealment nor denial of their mutual love.  It was Viola's comfort
to remember that. "But," said Harold, "your mother has only too good reasons for withholding
you from me, and there is nothing for it but to submit, and give one another up."

"But we do not leave off loving one another," said poor Viola.

"We cannot do what we cannot."

"And when we are old--"

"That would be a mental reservation," said Harold.  "There must be no mutual understanding
of coming together again.  I promised your mother. Because I am a guilty man, I am not to break
up your life."

He made her at last resign her will into his, she only feeling that his judgment could not
be other than decisive, and that she could not resist him, even for his own sake.  He took
her for a moment into his arms, and exchanged one long burning kiss, then, while she was almost
faint and quite passive with emotion, he laid her on the sofa, and called her mother.  "Lady
Diana," he said, "we give up all claim to one another's promise, in obedience to you.  Do we
not, Viola?"

"Yes," she faintly said.

He gave her brow one more kiss, and was gone.

He took his horse home, and sent in a pencil note to me: "All over; don't wait, for me.--H. A."

I was dreadfully afraid he would go off to Australia, or do something desperate, but Count
Stanislas reassured me that this would be unlike Harold's present self, since his strength
had come to be used, not in passion, but in patience.  We dined as best we could without him,
waited all the evening, and sat up till eleven, when we heard him at the door.  I went out
and took down the chain to let him in.  It was a wet misty night, and he was soaked through.
I begged him to come in and warm himself, and have something hot, but he shook his head, as
if he could not speak, took his candle, and went upstairs.

I made the tea, for which I had kept the kettle boiling all this time, and Prometesky took
his great cup in to him, presently returning to say, "He is calm.  He has done wisely, he has
exhausted himself so that he will sleep.  He says he will see me at once to my retreat in Normandy.
I think it will be best for him."

Count Stanislas was, in fact, on the eve of departure, and in a couple of days more Harold
went away with him, having only broached the matter to me to make me understand that the break
had been his, not Viola's; and that I must say no more about it.

Dermot had come over and raged against his mother, and even against Harold, declaring that
if the two had "stood out" they would have prevailed, but that he did not wonder Harold was
tired of it.

Harold's look made him repent of that bit of passion, but he was contemptuous of the "for her
sake," which was all Harold uttered as further defence.  "What! tell him it was for her sake
when she was creeping about the house like a ghost, looking as if she had just come out of
a great illness?"

Dermot meant to escort his mother and sister to Florence, chiefly in order to be a comfort
to the latter, but he meant to return to Ireland as soon as they had joined the St. Glears.
"Taking you by the way," he said, "before going to my private La Trappe."

Prometesky took leave of me, not quite as if we were never to meet again, for his experimental
retreat was to be over at Christmas, and he would then be able to receive letters.  He promised
me that, if I then wrote to him that, Harold stood in need of him for a time, he would return
to us instead of commencing the novitiate which would lead to his becoming dead to the outer world.

Harold was gone only ten days, and came back late on a Friday evening. He tried to tell me
about what he had done and seen, but broke off and said, "Well, I am very stupid; I went to
all the places they told me to see at Rouen and everywhere else, but I can't recollect anything
about them."

So I let him gaze into the fire in peace, and all Saturday he was at the potteries or at the
office, very busy about all his plans and also taking in hand the charge for George Yolland,
for both brothers were going on Monday to take a fortnight's holiday among their relations.
He only came in to dinner, and after it told me very kindly that he must leave me alone again,
for he wanted to see Ben Yolland.  A good person for him to wish to see, "but was all this
restlessness?" thought this foolish Lucy.

When he came in, only just at bed-time, there was something more of rest, and less of weary
sadness about his eyes than I had seen since the troubles began, and as we wished one another
good night he said, "Lucy, God forgives while He punishes.  He is better to us than man. Yolland
says I may be with you at church early to-morrow."

Then my cheeks flushed hot with joy, and I said how thankful I was that all this had not distracted
his thoughts from the subject. "When I wanted help more than ever?" he said.

So in some ways that was to me at least a gladsome Sunday, though not half so much at the time
as it has become in remembrance, and I could not guess how much of conscious peace or joy Harold
felt, as, for the first and only time, he and I knelt together on the chancel step.

He said nothing, but he had quite recovered his usual countenance and manner, only looking
more kind and majestic than ever, as I, his fond aunt, thought, when we went among the children
after the school service, to give them the little dainties they had missed in his absence;
and he smiled when they came round him with their odd little bits of chatter.

We sat over the fire in the evening, and talked a little of surface things, but that died away,
and after a quarter of an hour or so, he looked up at me and said, "And what next?"

"What are we to do, do you mean?" I said, for I had been thinking how all his schemes of life
had given way.  We spoke of it together. "Old Eu did not want him," as he said, and though
there was much for him to do at the Hydriot works and the Mission Chapel, the Reading Room,
the Association for Savings, and all the rest which needed his eye, yet for Viola's peace he
thought he ought not to stay, and the same cause hindered the schemes he had once shared with
Dermot; he had cut himself loose from Australia, and there seemed nothing before him.  "There
were the City Missions," he said, wearily, for he did not love the City, and yet he felt more
than ever the force of his dying father's commission to carry out his longings for the true
good of the people.

I said we could make a London home and see Dora sometimes, trying to make him understand that
he might reckon on me as his sister friend, but the answer was, "I don't count on that."

"You don't want to cast me off?"

"No, indeed, but there is another to be thought of."

Then he told me how, over my letters to him in New South Wales, there had come out Dermot's
account of the early liking that everyone nipped, till my good-girlish submission wounded and
affronted him, and he forgot or disliked me for years; how old feelings had revived, when we
came in contact once more; but how he was withheld from their manifestation, by the miserable
state of his affairs, as well as by my own coldness and indifference.

I made some sound which made Harold say, "You told me to keep him away."

"I knew I ought," I remember saying faintly.

"Oh--h--!" a prolonged sound, that began a little triumphantly, but ended in a sigh, and then
he earnestly said, "You do not think you ought to discourage him now?  Your mother did not
forbid it for ever."

"Oh no, no; it never came to that."

"And you know what he is now?"

"I know he is changed," was all I could say.

"And you will help him forward a little when he comes back.  You and he will be happy."

There might be a great surging wave of joy in my heart, but it would not let me say anything
but, "And leave you alone, Harold?"

"I must learn to be alone," he said.  "I can stay here this winter, and see to the things in
hand, and then I suppose something will turn up."

"As a call?" I said.

"Yes," he answered.  "I told God to-day that I had nothing to do but His service, and I suppose
He will find it for me."

There was something in the steadfast, yet wistful look of his eyes, that made me take down
the legend of St. Christopher and read it aloud. Reading generally sent him into a doze, but
even that would be a respite to the heartache he so patiently bore, and I took the chance,
but he sat with his chin on his hand and his eyes fixed attentively on mine all the time, then
held out his hand for the book, and pondered, as was his thorough way in such matters.  At
last he said, "Well, I'll wait by the stream.  Some day He will send me some one to carry over."

We little thought what stream was very near!

CHAPTER XV.

THE FATAL TOKEN.

Tuesday morning brought a strange little untidy packet, tied with blue ribbon, understamped,
and directed to Harold Alison, Esquire, in the worst form of poor Dora's always bad handwriting.
Within was a single knitted muffatee, and a long lock of the stiffly curling yellow hair peculiar
to Dora's head.  In blotted, sloping roundhand was written:--

"My Dear Harry,--

"Good-bye, I do fele so very ill, I can't do any more.  Don't forget I allwaies was your wiffe.

                              "I am your affex., D. A."

We looked at each other in wonder and dismay, sure that the child must be very ill, and indignant
that we had not been told.  Harold talked of going up to town to find out; I was rather for
going, or sending, to Therford for tidings, and all the time, alas! alas! he was smoothing
and caressing the yellow tress between his fingers, pitying the child and fancying she was
being moped to death in the school-room.

We determined on riding to Therford, and Harold had hastened to the office to despatch some
business first, when Mr. Horsman himself came in--on his way to the Petty Sessions--to explain
matters.

Mrs. Randall Horsman had arrived with her children at Therford the day before, flying from
the infection of smallpox, for which the doctor had declared Dora to be sickening.  The whole
family had been spending the autumn months at the seaside.  Nessy Horsman had been with them
and had taken Dora about with him much more than had been approved.  In one of these expeditions
he had taken her into the shop of a village ratcatcher, where, it had since been ascertained,
two children were ill of smallpox.  She had been ailing ever since the party had returned to
London; the doctor had been called in on Monday, and had not only pronounced the dreadful name
of the disease, but, seeking in vain for the marks of vaccination on her arms, he greatly apprehended
that she would have it in full and unmitigated virulence.

Mrs. Randall Horsman had herself and her children vaccinated without loss of time and fled
to the country.  Her husband would spend all day in his chambers, and only sleep at home on
the ground-floor with every precaution, and Dora had been left in the charge of a young under-house-maid,
whose marked face proved her safety, until the doctor could send in a regular nurse.  It was
this wretched little stupid maid who was ignorant enough to assist the poor child in sending
off her unhappy packet, all unknowing of the seeds of destruction it conveyed.

I had had a slight attack of undoubted smallpox when a young child, and I immediately resolved
on going to nurse my poor Dora, secure that she would now be left to me, and unable to bear
the thought of her being among strangers.  I went at once to the office to tell Harry, and
Baby Jack walked with me as far as our roads lay together, asking me on the way if it were
true that Harold Alison was engaged to Miss Tracy, and on my denial, saying that Mrs. Randall
had come down full of the report; that Nessy had heard of it, and, on Sunday afternoon, had
teased Dora about it to such a degree that she had leaped up from the sofa and actually boxed
his ears, after which she had gone into such a paroxysm of tears and sobs that she had been
sent to bed, and in the morning the family mind began to perceive she was really ill.  The
poor child's passionate jealousy had no doubt prompted her letter, as well as her desire to
take leave of the object of her love; and knowing her strange character as I did, I was sure
the idea was adding tenfold to the misery of the dreadful illness that was coming on her.

I had to pursue Harold to the potteries, where one of the workmen directed me to him, as he
was helping to put in order some machine for hoisting that was out of gear.  "Bless you, ma'am,"
said the man, "he is as strong as any four of we."

When I found him, his consternation was great, and he quite agreed with me that I had better
go up that very afternoon and take charge of Dora, since Baby Jack answered for it that Randall
Horsman would be most grateful and thankful.

Harold found out the hours for the trains, and did everything to expedite me.  He made it certain
that poor little Dora had not been vaccinated.  When she was born, no doctor lived within sixty
miles of Boola Boola, and nobody had ever thought of such a thing.

"And you, Harry?" I asked, with a sudden thrill of alarm.

"Do you expect me to remember?" he asked with a smile.

I begged him to look for the moons upon his arm, and at any rate to undergo the operation again,
since, even if it had been done in his infancy, the effect might have worn out, and it was
only too probable that in the case of a child born on board a sailing vessel, without a doctor,
it had been forgotten.  He gave in to my solicitude so far as to say that he would see about
it, but reminded me that it was not he who was going into the infection.  Yes, I said, but
there was that lock of hair and the worsted cuff.  Such things did carry contagion, and he
ought to burn them at once.

"Poor Dora!" he said, rather indignantly.

Oh that I had seen them burnt!  Oh that I had taken him to Dr. Kingston's for vaccination before
I went away, instead of contenting myself with the unmeaning, half-incredulous promise to "see
about it!" by which, of course, he meant to mention it when George Yolland came home.  Yet
it might have made no difference, for he had been fondling and smoothing that fatal curl all
the time we were talking over the letter.

He came to the station with me, gave me the kindest messages for Dora, arranged for my telegraphing
reports of her every day--took care of me as men will do when they seem to think their womankind
incapable without them, making all the more of me because I did not venture to take Colman,
whom I sent to visit her home.  He insisted on Mr. Ben Yolland, who had been detained a day
behind his brother, going in a first-class carriage with me.  I leant out at the window for
the parting kiss, and the last sight I had of my dear Harold, as the train steamed out of the
station, was bearing on his shoulder a fat child--a potter's--who had just arrived by the train,
and had been screaming to his mother to carry him, regardless of the younger baby and baskets
in her arms.  It might well make my last sight of him remind me of St. Christopher.

That journey with the curate was comfortable in itself, and a great comfort to me afterwards.
We could not but rejoice together over that Sunday, and Ben Yolland showed himself deeply struck
with the simplicity and depth that had been revealed to him, the reality of whatever Harold
said, and his manner of taking his dire disappointment as the just and natural outcome of his
former life. Many men would have been soured and driven back to evil by such a rejection. 
Harold had made it the occasion of his most difficult victory and sharpest struggle; yet all
the time he was unconscious how great a victory it was.  And so thorough was the penitence,
so great the need of refreshment after the keen struggle for self-mastery, and so needful the
pledge of pardon, that though he had never been confirmed, there was no doubt as to making
him welcome at once to the Heavenly Feast. Well that it was so!

The "What next" concerned Mr. Yolland as much as it did me.  He could not bear to think of
relinquishing one who--all unknown to himself--did more to guide and win the hearts of those
Hydriots than teaching or sermons could ever do, and yet no one could advise Harold to remain
after this winter.  In the reprieve, however, we both rejoiced, and Ben then added, "For my
brother's sake, especially."

"Do you think the example tells on him?" I ventured on asking.

"I can hardly say it does," was the answer.  "George used to point to Harold Alison as a specimen
of a vigorous physical development so perfectly balanced as to be in a manner self-adjusting,
without need of what he called imaginative influences.  I always thought he was a little staggered
that evening that he had to summon you, Miss Alison, to his help; but he had some theory of
sentiment to account for it, and managed, as people do, to put it aside.  Lately, however,
he has been looking on, he says, with curiosity--I believe with something more. You see he
reveres Alison for what he is, not for what he knows."

"Of course not; your brother must know far more than Harold."

"But the strength of character and will impresses him.  The bending of such a nature to faith,
the acceptance of things spiritual, by one real, unimaginative and unsophisticated, and, above
all, the self conquest, just where a great Greek hero would have failed, have certainly told
on George, so that I see more hope than I have ever done before."

So careful of me was Mr. Yolland, that he only parted with me at Randall Horsman's door, where
I was gladly welcomed by the master of the house, and found my poor little niece a grievous
spectacle, and so miserable with the horrible illness, that she only showed her pleasure in
my coming by fretting whenever anyone else touched her.

She had it badly in the natural form, but never was in immediate danger, and began in due time
to recover.  I had ceased my daily telegrams, and had not been alarmed by some days' intermission
of Harold's letters, for I knew that Dermot was at Arked alone, and that by this time the Yollands
would be returned and my nephew would have less time to spend on me.

One dismal wintry afternoon, however, when I was sitting in the dark, telling Dora stories,
a card was brought up to me by the little housemaid.  The gentleman begged to see me.  "Mr.
Tracy" was on the card, and the very sight startled me with the certainty that something was amiss.

I left the girl in charge and hurried down to the room, where Dermot was leaning over the mantel-shelf,
with his head against his arms, in a sorrowful attitude, as if he could not bear to turn round
and face me, I flew up to him, crying out that I knew he was come to fetch me to Harold; Dora
was so much better that I could leave her.

He turned up to me a white haggard face, and eyes with dismay, pity, and grief in them, such
as even now it wrings my heart to recall, and hoarsely said in a sunken voice, "No, Lucy, I
am not come to fetch you!" and he took my hand and grasped it convulsively.

"But he has caught it?"  Dermot bent his head.  "I must go to him, even if he bids me not.
I know he wants me."

"No!" again said Dermot, as if his tongue refused to move.  "Oh, Lucy, Lucy, I cannot tell you!"

And he burst into a flood of tears, shaking, choking, even rending him.

I stood, feeling as if turned to stone, and presently the words came out in a sob, "Oh, Lucy,
he is dead!" and, sinking on the nearest seat, his tempest of grief was for the moment more
frightful than the tidings, which I could not take in, so impossible did the sudden quenching
of that glorious vitality seem.  I began in some foolish way to try to console him, as if it
were a mere fancy.  I brought him a glass of water from the sideboard, and implored him to
compose himself, and tell me what made him say such terrible things, but he wrung my hand and
leant his head against me, as he groaned, "I tell you, it is true.  We buried him this morning.
The noblest, dearest friend that ever--"

"And you never told me!  You never fetched me; I might have saved him," was my cry; then, "Oh!
why did you not?"

Then he told me that there had been no time, and how useless my presence would have been. 
We sat on the sofa, and he gasped out something of the sad story, though not by any means all
that I afterwards learnt from himself and from the Yollands, but enough to make me feel the
reality of the terrible loss.  And I will tell the whole here.

Left to himself, the dear fellow had no doubt forgotten all about vaccination, or any peril
to himself, for he never mentioned it to Dermot, who only thought him anxious about Dora. 
On the Saturday they were to have had a day's shooting, and then to have dined at Erymanth,
but Harold sent over in the morning to say he had a headache and could not come, so Dermot
went alone.  When the Yollands came home at nine at night a message was given that Mr. Alison
would like to see Mr. George as soon as he came in; but as the train had been an hour late,
and the message had not been delivered immediately on their coming in, George thought it could
not concern that night, so he waited till morning; but he was awaked in the winter twilight
by Harold at his door, saying, "Doctor, I'm not quite right.  I wish you would come up presently
and see after me."

He was gone again, while he was being called to wait; and, dressing as fast as possible, George
Yolland went out after him into the dark, cold, frosty, foggy morning, and overtook him, leaning
on the gate of a field, shivering, panting, and so dizzy, that it was with difficulty he was
helped to the house.  He made known that he had felt very unwell all the day before, and had
had a miserable night, in which all the warnings about infection had returned on him.  The
desire to keep clear of all whom he might endanger, as well as a fevered--perhaps already half-delirious--longing
for cool air, had sent him forth himself to summon George Yolland.  And already strong shivering
fits and increased distress showed what fatal mischief that cold walk had done.  All he cared
now to say was that he trusted to his doctor to keep everybody out of the house; that I was
not to be called away from Dora, and that it was all his own fault.

One person could not be kept away, and that was Dermot Tracy.  He came over to spend the Sunday
with his friend, and finding the door closed, and Richardson giving warning of smallpox, only
made him the more eagerly run upstairs.  George could by that time ill dispense with a strong
man's help, and after vaccinating him, admitted him to the room, where the checking of the
eruption had already produced terrible fever and violent raving.

It was a very remarkable delirium, as the three faithful watchers described it.  The mind and
senses seemed astray, only not the will. It was as if all the vices of his past life came in
turn to assail him, and he was writhing and struggling under their attacks, yet not surrendering
himself.  When--the Sunday duties over--Ben Yolland came in, he found him apparently acting
over some of the wild scenes of his early youth, with shreds of the dreadful mirth, and evil
words of profane revelry; and yet, as if they struck his ears, he would catch himself up and
strike his fist on his mouth, and when Ben entered, he stretched out his arms and said, "Don't
let me."  Prayer soothed him for a short interval, but just as they hoped that sleep might
come, the fierce struggle with oppression brought back the old habits of violent language,
and then the distressed endeavour to check himself, and the clutch at the clergyman's aid.
Ben Yolland saw, standing in the room, a great rough wooden cross which Harold had made for
some decorating plan of mine.  He held it over him, put it into his hand, and bade him repeat
after him, "Christ has conquered.

So it went on hour after hour, evening closing into night, the long, long night brightening
at last into day, and still the fever raged, and the fits of delirious agony came on, as though
every fiend that had ever tempted him were assailing him now.  Yet still he had the power to
grasp the Cross when it was held to him, and speak the words, "Christ has conquered," and his
ears were open to the prayer, "By Thy Cross and Passion, by Thine Agony and Bloody Sweat, good
Lord deliver us!"--the prayer that Ben prayed like Moses at Rephidim. Time came and went, the
Northchester physician came and said he might be saved, if the eruption could only be brought
out, but he feared that it had been thrown inwards, so that nothing would avail; but of all
this Harold knew nothing, he was only in that seething brain, whose former injury now added
to the danger, living over again all his former life, as those who knew it could trace in the
choked and broken words.  Yet, as the doctors averred, that the conscience and the will should
not be mastered by the delirium was most unusual, and proved the extraordinary force of his
character and resolution, even though the conflict was evidently a great addition to his sufferings.

Worst of all was the deadly strife, when with darkness came the old horror of being pursued
by hell hounds, driven on by Meg and the rival he had killed--nay, once it was even by his
little children. Then he turned even from the Cross in agony.  "I cannot!  See there! They
will not let me!" and he would have thrown himself from his bed, taking the hands that held
him for the dogs' fangs.  And yet even then a command rather than a prayer from the priest
reached his ears. He wrestled, with choking, stifling breath, as though with a weight on his
chest, grappling with his hands as if the dog were at his throat; but at last he uttered those
words once more, "Christ has conquered;" then with a gasp, as from a freed breast, for his
strength was going fast, fell back in a kind of swoon.  Yes, he was delivered from the power
of the dog, for after that, when he woke, it was in a different mood.  He knew Ben, but he
thought he had little Ambrose sitting on his pillow; held his arm as if his baby were in it,
and talked to them smiling and tenderly, as if glad they had come to him, and he were enjoying
their caresses, their brightness, and beauty.  Nor did the peace pass away. He was so quiet
that all hoped except George Yolland, who knew the mischief had become irreparable; and though
he never was actually sensible, the borderland was haunted no more with images of evil or of
terror, but with the fair visions fit for "him that overcometh."  Once they thought he fancied
he was showing his children to Viola or to me. Once, when Dermot's face came before him, he
recurred to some of the words used in the struggle about Viola.

"I don't deserve her.  Good things are not for me.  All will be made pure there."

They thought then that he was himself, and knew he was dying, but the next moment some words,
evidently addressed to his child, showed them he was not in our world; and after that all the
murmurs were about what had last taken up his mind--the Bread of Heaven, the Fruit of Everlasting
Life.

"To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life, which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God."  That was what Mr. Yolland ventured now to say over him, and
it woke the last respondent glance of his eyes.  He had tasted of that Feast of Life on the
Sunday he was alone, and Ben Yolland would even then have given it to him, but before it could
be arranged, he could no longer swallow, and the affection of the brain was fast blocking up
the senses, so that blindness and deafness came on, and passed into that insensibility in which
the last struggles of life are, as they tell us, rather agonising to the beholder than to the
sufferer.  It was at sundown at last that the mightiest and gentlest spirit I ever knew was
set free.

Those three durst not wait to mourn.  Their first duty was to hasten the burial, so as to prevent
the spread of contagion, and they went at once their different ways to make the preparations.
No form of conventional respect could be used, but it was the three who so deeply loved him
who laid him in the rough-made coffin, hastily put together the same evening, with the cross
that had served him in his conflict on his breast, and three camellia buds from Viola's tree.
Dermot had thought of her and ridden over to fetch them.  There had been no disfigurement.
If there had been he might have lived, but still it was a comfort to know that the dear face
was last seen in more than its own calm majesty, as of one who lay asleep after a mighty conquest.
Over the coffin they placed the lion's skin.  It had been left in the room during his illness,
and must have been condemned, and it made his fit pall when they took it to be buried with
him.  It was before daybreak that, with good old Richardson's help, they carried him down to
a large cart belonging to the potteries, drawn by the two big horses he used to pet, and driven
by George Yolland himself.  They took him to our own family burial-place in Arghouse churchyard,
where the grave had been dug at night.  They meant no one to be there, but behold! there was
a multitude of heads gathered round, two or three hundred at least, and when the faithful four
seemed to need aid in carrying that great weight the few steps from the gate, there was a rush
forward, in spite of the peril, and disappointment when no help was accepted.

Ben Yolland read the service over the grave, and therewith there was the low voice of many,
many weepers, as they closed it in, and left him there among his forefathers, under his lion's
skin; and even at that moment a great, golden, glorious sun broke out above the horizon, and
bathed them all over with light, while going forth as a giant to run his course, conquering
the night mists.

Then they turned back to the town, and Dermot came by the next train to town to tell me.  But
of all this I at first gathered but little, for his words were broken and his voice faint and
choked, not only with grief, but with utter exhaustion; and I was so slow to realise all, that
I hardly knew more than the absolute fact, before a message came hurriedly down that Dora was
worse, and I must come instantly. Dermot, who had talked himself into a kind of dull composure,
stood up and said he would come again on the morrow, when he was a little rested, for, indeed,
he had not lain down since Saturday, and was quite worn out.

I went up, with heart quailing at the thought of letting that passionately loving creature
guess what had befallen her, and yet how could I command myself with her?  But that perplexity
was spared me. The tidings had, through the Horsman family, reached the house, and, in my absence,
that same foolish housemaid had actually told Dora of them point-blank.  She said nothing,
but presently the girl found her with her teeth locked and eyes fixed in what looked like a
convulsion, but was in reality such suppressed hysteria as she had had before.

She soon came out of that attack, but was exceedingly ill all that night and the next day,
her recovery being altogether thrown back by feverishness and loss of appetite; but, strange
child that she was, she never named Harold, nor let me speak of him.  I think she instinctively
shrank from her own emotion, and had a kind of dread and jealous horror of seeing anyone else
grieve for him.

Dermot did not come the next day, but a note was brought me, left, the servant said, by the
gentleman in a cab.  It told me that he felt so ill that he thought it wisest to go at once
to the smallpox hospital, and find out whether it were the disease, or only vaccination and
fatigue.  It was a brave unselfish resolve, full of the spirit he had imbibed, and it was wise,
for the illness was upon him already, the more severe from his exhausted state and the shock
he had undergone. Mr. Randall Horsman, who was very kind, managed that I should hear of him,
and I knew he was going on fairly well, and not in any special danger.

But oh! that time seems to me the most wretched that ever I passed, up in those great London
attic nurseries, where Dora and I were prisoners--all winter fogginess, with the gas from below
sending up its light on the ceiling, and Dora never letting me sit still to grieve. She could
not bear the association or memory, I believe, and with the imperious power of recovery used
to keep me reading Mayne Reid's storybooks to her incessantly, or else playing at backgammon.
I hate the sound of dice to this hour, and when I heard that unhappy French criminals, the
night before their execution, are apt to send for Fenimore Cooper's novels, it seemed to reveal
Dora's state of mind.

After two or three days, George Yolland came up to see me.  He had been to see Dermot, and
gave me comfort as to his condition and the care taken of him; but the chief cause of the visit
was that they wanted my authority for the needful destruction of whatever had been in that
room, and could not be passed through fire.  Mr. Yolland had brought me my Harold's big, well-worn
pocket-book, which he said must undergo the same doom, for though I was contagion proof, yet
harm might be laid up for others, and only what was absolutely necessary must be saved.

First of all, indeed, lay in their crumpled paper poor Dora's fatal gifts, treasured, no doubt,
as probably her last; and there, in a deep leathern pocket, was another little parcel with
Viola's crystal cross, which her mother had made her return.  She might have that now, it would
bear disinfecting; but the Irish heath-bells that told of autumn days at Killey Marey must
go, and that brief note to me that had been treasured up--yes, and the quaint old housewife,
with D. L. (his aunt's maiden initials), whence his needles and thread used to come for his
mending work.  An old, worn pencil-case kept for his mother's sake--for Alice was on the seal--was
the only thing I could rescue; but next there came an envelope with "My will" scrawled on it.
Mr. Yolland thought I ought to open it, to see who had authority to act, and it proved that
we alone had, for he was made executor, with L1,000.  A favourite rifle was bequeathed to Eustace,
an annuity of L50 to Smith, and all the rest of the property was to be shared between Dora
and me. It was in the fewest words, not at all in form, but all right, and fully witnessed.
It was in the dear handwriting, and was dated on the sad lonely Saturday when he felt himself
sickening.  The other things were accounts and all my letters, most of which could follow the
fate of all that he had touched in those last days.  However, the visit was a comfort to me.
George Yolland answered my questions, and told me much more than poor Dermot could do in his
stupefaction from grief, fatigue, and illness, even if I then could have understood.

He told me of the grief shown by all Mycening and Arghouse, and of the sobbing and weeping
of mothers and children, who went in a broken pilgrimage on Sunday afternoon to the grave at
Arghouse, of the throngs at the church and the hush, like a sob held back, when the text was
given out: "Thanks be to Him who giveth us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord."

Yet on the Saturday evening there was something more noted still. The men stood about when
they had come up for their wages to the office, where, but a week before, Harold had paid them,
with a sore struggle to see and to count aright, as some even then had observed; and at last
their spokesman had explained their great desire to do something themselves in memory of "the
best friend they ever had," as they truly called him.  Some of them had seen memorial-windows,
and they wanted Mr. Yolland to take from each a small weekly subscription throughout the winter,
to adorn the new chapel with windows. "With the history of Samson a killin' of the lion," called
out a gruff voice.  It was the voice of the father of the boy whom Harold had rescued on Neme
Heath.

"So," said George Yolland, as he told me, "the poor fellows' hearty way was almost more than
one could bear, but I knew Alison would have me try to turn it to some sort of good to themselves;
so I stood up and said I'd take it on one condition only.  They knew very well what vexed Mr.
Alison most in themselves, and the example he had set--how he had striven to make them give
up making beasts of themselves. Wouldn't they think with me it was insulting him to let a drunkard
have a hand in doing a thing to his memory?  So I would manage their collection on condition
they agreed that whoever took more than his decent pint a day--or whatever else sober men among
them chose to fix it at--should have his money returned on the spot.  Poor fellows, they cheered
and said I was in the right, but whether they will keep to it is another thing."

They did keep to it.  All that winter, while the chapel was building, there were only five
cases in which the money had to be returned, and two of those took the pledge, pleaded hard,
and were restored. Indeed, I believe it was only the habitually sober who ventured on the tolerated
pint.  Of course there were some who never came into the thing at all, and continued in their
usual course; but these were the dregs, sure to be found everywhere, and the main body of the
Hydriot potters kept their word so staunchly, that the demon of intoxication among them was
slain by those Samson windows, as Harold had never slain it during his life.

Beautiful bright windows they are, glowing with Samson in his typical might, slaying his lion,
out of the strong finding sweetness, drinking water after the fight, bearing away the gates,
and slaying his foes in his death.  But Samson is not there alone.  As the more thoughtful
remarked, Samson was scarce a worthy likeness for one who had had grace to triumph.  No, Samson,
whose life always seems like a great type in shattered fragments, must be set in juxtaposition
with the great Antitype.  His conflict with Satan, His Last Supper, His pointing out the Water
of Life, His Death and His victory over death, shine forth, giving their own lesson of Who
hath won the victory.

We ventured to add two little windows with St. George and St. Christopher, to show how Christ's
soldiers may follow in the conquest, treading down the dragon, and bending to the yoke of the
Little Child who leads them out of many waters.

That winter of temperance proved the fulcrum that had been wanting to the lever of improvement.
Schools of art, concerts, lectures, choir preparation, recreation, occupation, and interests
of all sorts were vigorously devised by the two Yollands; and, moreover, the "New Dragon's
Head" and the "Genuine Dragon's Head," with sundry of their congeners, died a natural death
by inanition; so that when the winter was over, habits had been formed, and a standard of respectability
set up, which has never entirely fallen, and a spirit which has withstood the temptation of
strikes.  Of course, the world has much to do with the tone of many.  What amount of true and
real religion there may be, can only be tested by trial, and there are many who do not show
any signs of being influenced by anything more than public opinion, some who fall below that;
but, as everyone knows, the Hydriot works have come to be not only noted for the beauty and
excellence of their execution, and the orderliness, intelligence, and sobriety of their artisans,
but for their large congregations, ample offertories, and numerous communicants.

Of course all this would never have kept up but for the Yollands. The Hydriots are wife, children,
everything to him who is now called Vicar of St. Christopher's, Mycening.  He has refused better
preferment, for he has grown noted now, since the work that Harold had begun is still the task
he feels his charge.

And whatever is good is led by the manager of the works, whose influence over the workmen's
minds has never failed.  Even when he talked to me on that day, I thought there was a change
in his tone. He had never sneered (at least in my hearing) nor questioned other men's faith,
but when he told me of Harold his manner had something of awe, as well as of sorrow and admiration,
and I could not but think that a sense had dawned out that the spiritual was a reality, and
an absolute power over the material.

The great simple nature that had gradually and truly undergone that influence had been watched
and studied by him, and had had its effect. The supernatural had made itself felt, and thenceforth
he made it his study, in a quiet, unobtrusive manner, scarcely known even to his brother, but
gradually resulting in heart-whole acceptance of faith, and therewith in full devotion of heart
and soul.

Did Harold rejoice in that victory, which to him would have been one of the dearest of all?

CHAPTER XVI.

CONCLUSION.

I must finish my story, though it seems hardly worth telling, since my nephew, my tower of
strength and trust, had suddenly sunk away from me in the prime of his manhood.

The light seemed gone out of the whole world, and my heart felt dull and dead, as if I could
never heed or care for anything again.  Even Dermot's illness did not seem capable of stirring
me to active anxiety in this crushed, stupid state, with no one to speak to of what lay heavy
on my heart, no one even to write to; for who would venture to read my letters? nay, I had
not energy even to write to poor Miss Woolmer.  We got into a way of going on day after day
with Dora's little meals, the backgammon, and the Mayne Reid, till sometimes it felt as if
it had always been thus with us from all time, and always would be; and at others it would
seem as if it were a dream, and that if I could but wake, I should be making tea for Harold
in our cheerful little drawing-room at Mount Eaton.  At last I had almost a morbid dread of
breaking up this monotonous life, and having to think what to do or where to go.  The Randall
Horsmans must long for our departure, and my own house was in a state of purification, and
uninhabitable.

The doctor said that Dora must be moved as soon as it could be managed, for in that London
attic she could have no impulse towards recovery; and while it still seemed a fearful risk,
he sent us off to St. Clement's, a little village on the south coast, where he knew of rooms
in a great old manor-house which had sunk to farmer's use, and had a master and mistress proof
against infection.

When I brought my tired, worn-out, fretting charge in through the great draughty porch, and
was led up the old shallow oak stairs to a big panelled room, clean and scantily furnished,
where the rats ran about behind the wainscot, and a rain-laden branch of monthly rose went
tap, tap against the window, and a dog howled all night long, I thought we had come to a miserable
place at the end of the earth. I thought so still the next morning, when the mist lay in white
rolls and curls round the house; and the sea, when we had a peep of it, was as lead-coloured
as the sky, while the kind pity of the good wife for Dora's weak limbs and disfigured face
irritated me so that I could hardly be civil.

Dora mended from that day, devoted herself to the hideous little lambs that were brought in
to be nursed by the fire; ate and drank like a little cormorant, and soon began to rush about
after Mr. and Mrs. Long, whether in house or farm-yard, like a thing in its native element,
while they were enchanted with her colonial farm experience, and could not make enough of "Little
Missy."

I had a respite from Mayne Reid, and could wander as far as I pleased alone on the shingle,
or sit and think as I had so often longed to do; but the thoughts only resulted in a sense
of dreariness and of almost indifference as to my fate, since the one person in all the world
who had needed me was gone, and I had heard nothing whatever of Dermot Tracy.  He might be
gone out to his mother and sister, or back to Ireland.  Our paths would never come together
again, for he thought I did not care for him.  Nay, was I even sure of his recovery?  His constitution
had been much tried!  He was in a strange place, among mere professional nurses!  Who could
tell how it had been with him?

Everything went from me that had loved me.  Even Dora was to leave me as soon as people ceased
to be afraid of her.

Letters had found out the married pair on their return from the cataracts of the Nile.  Eustace
had immediately been vaccinated fourteen times, but he was shocked and appalled, and the spirit
of his letter was--

          O while my brother with me stayed,
          Would I had loved him more,

and I forgave him much.

Hippolyta likewise wrote with feeling, but it rather stung me to be thanked for my care of
"her poor little sister," as if Dora were not my child before she was hers.  As soon as it
was considered safe, Dora was to be returned to Horsman keeping, and as the Randall party declined
to receive her again, Philippa would convey her to a school at Baden-Baden.

And Dora declared she was glad!  There was none of the angry resistance with which she had
left me in the spring; when I had done nothing for her compared with what I had gone through
for her now; but I believe I was dull company, and showed myself displeased at her hardness
and wild outbreaks of spirits, and that the poor child longed to escape from all that reminded
her of the unbearable sorrow at the bottom of her heart. But it was a grievance to a grievance-making
temper, such as I feel mine was.

The most wholesome thing I received was a letter from Prometesky, to whom I had written the
tidings that Harold would never need his comfort more.  The old man was where the personal
loss was not felt, and he knew more deeply than anyone the pain which that strong fervent heart
suffered in its self-conquests, so that he did not grieve for Harold himself; but he gave me
that sympathy of entire appreciation of my loss which is far better than compassion.  For himself,
he said his last link with the world was gone, he found the peace, and the expression of penitence,
his soul required, in the course he was about to embrace, and I might look on this as a voice
from the grave.  I should never hear of him more, but I should know that, as long as life was
left him, it would be spent in prayers for those whose souls he had wrecked in his overboiling
youth.  He ended with thanks to all of us, who he said had sent him to his retreat with more
kindly and charitable recollections than he should otherwise have carried thither.  I never
did hear of him again; Dermot went to the convent some years later, and tried to ascertain
if he lived, but the monks do not know each others' names, and it failed.

The village of St. Clement's, a small fishing-place, was half-a-mile off, through lanes a foot
deep in mud, and with a good old sleepy rector of the old school, not remarkable for his performances
in Church.  I was entering the little shop serving as the post-office, where I went every day
in the unreasonable expectation of letters, when I heard a voice that made me start, "Did you
say turn to the right?"

And there, among the piles of cheeses, stood a figure I knew full well, though it had grown
very thin, and had a very red and mottled face at the top.

We held out our hands to one another in silence, and walked at once out of hearing.  Dermot
said he was well, and had been as kindly looked after as possible, and now he had been let
out as safe company, but his family and friends would hardly believe it, so he had come down
to see whether he could share our quarantine.

Happily a few cottages of the better sort had accommodation for lodgers, and one of them--for
a consideration--accepted "the gentleman's" bill of health.  He walked on by my side, both
of us feeling the blessing of having someone to speak to.  He, poor fellow, had seen no being
who had ever heard of Harold, except George Yolland, who came when he was too ill to talk,
and we went on with the conversation that had been broken off weeks before, with such comfort
as it could give us in such a loss as ours.

He walked all the way back with me, and I was frightened to see how tired he looked.  I took
him to Mrs. Long for the refreshment she loved to give, and begged for the pony for him to
ride home on, and a boy to fetch it back.

It was wonderful how much more blue there was in the sea the next day, how the evergreens glistened,
and how beautiful and picturesque the old house grew; and when I went out in the morning sunshine,
for once, inclined to admit some beauty in the staggering black-legged and visaged lambs, and
meditating a walk to the village, I saw Dermot coming across the yard, so wearily and breathlessly,
that I could only say, "How could you?"

He looked up piteously.  "You don't forbid me?" he said.

I almost cried as I told him it was only his fatigue that I objected to; and indeed he was
glad enough to take Dora's now vacated place on the great sofa, while we talked of Viola. 
Writing to her had been, of course, impossible for him, and he had only had two short notes
from her, so meaningless that I thought she wrote them fearing to disturb him while he was
ill; but he muttered an ominous line from Locksley Hall, vituperated Piggy, and confessed that
his ground for doing so was that his mother reported Viola as pleased with foreign life, and
happy with her cousins.  I said it was his mother's way, and he replied, "Exactly so; and a
girl may be worried into anything."  A slight dispute on that score cheered him a little, for
he showed himself greatly depressed.  He was going--as soon as he had gathered a little strength--back
to the duties he had promised to fulfil on his own property, but he hated the thought, was
down-hearted as to the chances of success, and distrustful of himself among discouragements,
and the old associations he had made for himself.  "It is a different thing without Alison
to look to and keep one up," he said.

"There are higher motives," was my stupid speech.

"It is precious hard on a poor fellow to be left alone with his higher motives, as you call
them, before he has well begun to act on his lower."

And then, I don't know how, he began talking drearily, almost as if I was not there, of his
having once begun to fancy he could do something creditable enough to make me some day look
on him as I used to do in the good old times.  My heart gave a great bound, and remembering
how Harold said I discouraged him, out came, "How do you know that I don't?"

How he sprang up!  And--no, I can't tell what we said, only we found it was no new beginning,
only taking up an old, old precious thread--something brought it all out.  He had talked it
all over with Harold when he came back from Florence, and had taken home a little hope which
he said had helped him through the solitary hours of his recovery.  So it was Harold who, after
all, gave us to one another.

Outspoken Dora informed us, before the day was much older, that the Longs had asked whether
that was her brother, or my young man.  So we took them into our confidence, and even borrowed
"the trap" for one of the roughest and the sweetest drives that ever we had, through those
splashing lanes, dropping Dermot at his lodgings to write his letters, while the harvest moon
made a path over the sea, no longer leaden, but full of silvery glittering light.  There had
something come back into the air which made us feel that life was worth living, after all!

Next morning the good people, who were much excited about our affairs, sent the pony for him,
and he came in full force with that flattering Irish tongue of his, bent on persuading me that,
old lovers as we were, with no more to find out about one another, there was nothing to wait
for.  'How could he go back by himself (what a brogue he put on! yet the tears were in his
eyes) to his great desolate castle, with not a living man in it at all at all, barring the
Banshee and a ghost or two; and as I had nothing to do, and nowhere to go, why not be married
then and there without more ado? If I refused, he should think it was all my pride, and that
I couldn't take that "ornary object," as he had overheard himself described that day.  (As
if I did not love him the better for that marred complexion!)  His mother?  His uncle?  They
had long ago repented of having come between us ten years ago, and were ready to go down on
their knees to any dacent young woman who would take him, let alone a bit of an heiress, who,
though not to compete with the sixty-thousand pounder, could provide something better than
praties and buttermilk for herself at Killy Marey.'

I could not help thinking dear Harold might have remembered Killy Marey's needs when he gave
me that half of his means.  And as to going back to Mount Eaton, ghosts of past times would
meet me there, whose pain was then too recent to have turned into the treasure these recollections
are to me.

There would be just time, Dermot declared, if he put up our banns the very next Sunday, to
go through with it before the time Pippa had appointed for receiving Dora, and it would save
all the trouble of hunting up a surrogate and startling him with his lovely face.

However, he did startle the poor old parish clergyman effectually by calling on him to publish
the banns of marriage between Dermot Edward St. Glear Tracy and Lucy Percy Alison, both residing
in this parish. He evidently thought we were in hiding from someone who knew of some just cause
or impediment; but whereas we certainly did full justice to our ages twenty-eight and twenty-six,
he could only try to examine us individually very politely, but betraying how uncomfortable he was.

It was most amusing to see how his face cleared up when, two days later, he met us on the beach
with a dignified old white-haired gentleman, though Dermot declared that the imposing title
mentioned on the introduction made him suspect us of having hired a benignant stage father
for the occasion.

The dear old uncle Ery had actually come down to chaperone us, and really act as much as possible
as a father to me; and as I had likewise sent for Colman and a white silk dress, the St. Clement's
minds were free to be pleasantly excited about us.  Lord Erymanth had intended to have carried
us off to be married from his castle, but we begged off, and when he saw Dermot, he allowed
that it was not the time to make a public spectacle of what (Dermot was pleased to say) would
have the pleasing pre-eminence of being "the ugliest of weddings," both as to bridegroom and
bridesmaid.  For he and Dora used to make daily fun of their respective beauties, which were
much on a par, since, though she had three weeks' start of him, the complaint having been unmitigated
in her, had left much more permanent-looking traces.  Those two chose to keep each other up
to the most mirthful nonsense-pitch, and yet I am sure none of us felt so light of spirit as
we must have appeared, though, perhaps, the being on the edge of such a great shadow made the
sunshine seem brighter.

We had considered of beginning with a flying visit to see how poor Viola really was, but the
Italian letters prevented this.  Lady Diana accepted me cordially and kindly as a daughter,
and said all that was proper; but she actually forestalled us by desiring her son not to come
out to her, for she thought it much better for Viola not to have painful recollections revived,
and Viola herself wrote in a way that disappointed us--loving indeed, but with a strain of
something between lightness and bitterness, and absolutely congratulating her brother that
there was no one on my side to bring up bygones against him.  One half of her letter was a
mere guide-book to the Roman antiquities, and was broken off short for some carnival gaiety.
Lord Erymanth clearly liked his letters as little as we did.  In the abstract, in spite of
the first cousinship, I am afraid he would rather have given Viola to Pigou St. Glear than
to Harold Alison, but he had thought better of his niece than to think she could forget such
a man so soon.

However, the day came.  Dora slept with me, and that last night when I came to bed, I found
the true self had made a reassertion in one of those frightful fits of dumb hysteria.  Half
the night Colman and I were attending to her, but still she never opened to me, more than by
clinging frantically round my neck in the intervals.  She fell asleep at last, and slept till
we actually pulled her out of bed to be dressed for the wedding; but we agreed that we could
not expose our uncle (who was to escort her to Northchester station) to being left alone with
her in one of these attacks, and, as our programme had never been quite fixed, we altered it
so far as to pass through Northchester and see her safe into Baby Horsman's hands.

She was altogether herself by day, gave no sign of emotion, and was as merry as possible throughout
the journey, calling out to Dermot airily from the platform that she should send him a present
of sour krout from Baden.  Poor child, it was five years before we saw her again!

We had scarcely had time to settle in at Killy Marey before Lady Diana implored us to meet
her in London, without explaining what was the matter.  When we came to Lord Erymanth's house,
we were met by Viola, very thin, but with a bright red colour on her usually pale cheeks, and
a strange gleaming light in her eyes, making them larger than ever; and oh, how she did talk!
Chatter, chatter, about all they had seen or done, and all the absurdities of the people they
had met; mimicking them and making fun, and all the time her mother became paler and graver,
looking as if she had grown ten years older. It went on so all dinner-time.  She talked instead
of eating, and all the evening those bright eyes of hers seemed to be keeping jealous watch
that no one should exchange any words in private.

Nor could we till poor Lady Diana, with a fagged miserable face, came to my room at night,
and I called Dermot in.  And then she told us how the child had "seemed to bear everything
most beautifully," and had never given way.  I believe it was from that grain of perversity
in Viola's high-spirited nature, as well as the having grown up without confidence towards
her mother, which forbade her to mourn visibly among unsympathising watchers; and when her
hope was gone led her in her dull despair to do as they pleased, try to distract her thoughts,
let herself be hunted hither and thither, and laugh at and play with Pigou St. Glear quite
enough to pass for an encouraging flirtation, and to lead all around her to think their engagement
immediately coming on. The only thing she refused to do was to go to the Farnese Palace, where
was the statue to which there had more than once been comparisons made. At last, one day, when
they were going over the Vatican Galleries, everyone was startled by a strange peal of laughter,
and before a frieze of the Labours of Hercules stood Pigou, looking pale and frightened, and
trying to get Viola away, as she stood pointing to the carrying home of the Erymanthian boar,
and laughing in this wild forced way.  They got her away at last, but Piggy told his father
that he would have no more to do with her, even if their uncle left her half his property,
though he never would tell what she had said to him.

Since that time she had gone on in this excited state, apparently scarcely eating or sleeping,
talking incessantly, not irrationally, but altogether at random, mockingly and in contradiction
to everyone; caring chiefly to do the very thing her mother did not wish, never resting, and
apparently with untiring vigour, though her cheeks and hands were burning, and she was wasting
away from day to day.

Lady Diana really thought her mind was going, and by this time would have given all she had
in the world to have been able to call Harold back to her.  Diana Enderby tried reproofs for
her flightiness, but only made her worse; with Dermot she would only make ridiculous nonsense,
and utter those heartrending laughs; and when I tried to soothe her, and speak low and quietly,
she started away from me, showed me her foreign purchases, or sang snatches of comic songs.

Dermot went at last to consult the same doctor to whom, half a year before, he had taken Harold;
and it was contrived that he should see and hear her at a dinner-party without her knowledge.
He consoled us very much by saying that her mind was not touched, and that it was a fever on
the nerves, produced by the never having succumbed to the unhappiness and the shock which,
when he heard in what manner she had lost Harold, he considered quite adequate to produce such
effects. Indeed, he had been so much struck with Harold himself, that he was quite startled
to hear of his death, and seemed to think an excess of grief only his due.  He bade us take
her to her home, give her no external excitement, and leave her as much as possible to go her
own way, and let her feel herself unwatched, and, if we could, find her some new yet calming,
engrossing occupation.

We took the advice, and poor Lady Diana besought us to remain with her for the present; nor,
indeed, could we have left her.  Our chief care was to hinder her oppressing her daughter with
her anxiety; for we found that Viola was so jealous of being watched that she would hardly
have tolerated us, but that I had real business in packing up my properties at Mount Eaton.
For the first week she took up her old occupations in the same violent and fitful way, never
sitting long to anything, but rushing out to dash round the garden, and taking long walks in
all weathers, rejecting companionship.

From various causes, chiefly Lady Diana's wretchedness and anxiety, Dermot and I had to wait
a week before we could have the pony-chaise and go together to Harold's grave.  The great,
massive, Irish granite cross was not ready then, and there was only the long, very long, green
mound, at my mother's feet.  There lay two wreaths on it.  One was a poor thorn garland--for
his own Hydriot children had, we heard, never left it untended all the winter--the other was
of a great white-flowered rhododendron that was peculiar to the Arked garden.

Was it disloyal to Harry that we thought more of Viola than we did of him that first time we
stood by his grave?  It was an immense walk from Arked to Arghouse Church, over four miles
even by the shortest way, which lay through rough cart-tracks which we had avoided in coming,
but now felt we had better take.

Nearly half way home, under a great, old pollard ash, we saw a little brown figure.  It was
Viola, crouched together with her head on her knees, sitting on the bank.  She started up and
tried to say something petulantly joking about our always dogging her, but she broke down in
a flood of tears to which sheer weariness conduced. She was tired out at last, footsore, and
hardly able to move a limb, when Dermot almost lifted her into the carriage, the dreadful,
hard self-control all over now, when, in those long lanes, with the Maybushes meeting overhead,
she leant against me and sobbed with long-pent anguish, while her brother walked at the pony's
head.

She had quite broken down now, and her natural self was come back to us.  When we came home,
I got her up to her own room and Dermot went to his mother.  She had a long, quiet sleep, lying
on her bed, and when she woke it was growing dark on the May evening.  She looked at me a little
while without speaking, and her eyes were soft again.

"Lucy," she said, "I think I have been very naughty, but they made me so."

I said, as I kissed her, that I thought "they" had done so.

"He would not have let anybody make him so," she said.  "I was the bad one.  I was almost unfaithful.
I told him so to-day."

"Not unfaithful, dearest, only harassed and miserable beyond all bearing."

"Nothing is beyond bearing.  I said so to myself over and over again. That was why I would
let no one see that I minded."

"You tried to bear it proudly, all by yourself," I said; "that was what made it so dreadful."

"He said it was God's will," said poor Viola, "but I knew it was mamma's.  I did what he told
me, Lucy; I did not get so wrong as long as he lived, but after that I did not care what became
of me, and yet I did love him as much as ever."

She seemed to look on me as his representative, and was now ready to take any persuasion of
mine as coming from him.  She admitted her mother, was gentle and natural with her, ate and
drank at her bidding, and went to bed pale and worn down, but not ill.  She never gave in or
professed indisposition, but for more than ten days she "went softly," was very tired, and
equal to nothing but lying on the sofa and sitting in the garden; and it was in those days
that sometimes with her brother, sometimes with me, she went over all that we could tell her,
or she tell us, of him who had been so dear to us all.  The first time she was alone with Dermot,
she kissed every remaining mark she could find in his face, and said she had ached to do it
every time she saw him.  All those wells of deeper thought that had been so long choked by
the stony hardness of a proudly-borne sorrow seemed suddenly to open, when she gave herself
up to the thought of Harold.  She even arrived at sorrow for the way she had treated her mother;
when he had given up his own hope rather than make her disobedient.  She asked Lady Diana's
pardon.  She had never done so voluntarily in her whole life.  She was met by tears and humility
that softened and humiliated her in her sorrow more than aught else.  Her precious flower-pot
was in her window with its fragrant verbena, and I gave her the crystal cross again, telling
her where I had found it, and she held it a moment and said, "Some day it will be buried with
me.  But I must do something to feel as if I deserved it.  You know it comes to me like a token
out of the sea of glass like unto crystal, where they stand that overcome!  I think I'll only
wear it at night when I think I have done something, or conquered a bit of my perverseness
with mamma."

A sudden idea came over me.  Mr. Benjamin Yolland was in dire want of a lady as reference to
a parish woman for his Hydriots.  I had begun, but had been called away.  Miss Woolmer had
tried, but was not well enough, and there was no one else whom he thought capable.  I was to
stay at Arked for six weeks more; should I put Viola in the way?  It would be work for him.

She caught at it.  Lady Diana bridled a little as she thought of the two young men who managed
the Hydriots, but the doctor's prescription recurred to her mind, and she consented.

Need I tell you how dear Aunt Viola's soul and spirit have gone forth with those Hydriot people,
how from going once a week to meet the parish woman at Miss Woolmer's, she soon came to presiding
at the mothers' meetings, to knowing everybody, and giving more and more of her time, her thoughts,
her very self to them and being loved by them enormously.  The spirit, fun, and enterprise
that were in her fitted her, as they began to revive, for dealing with the lads, who were sure
to be devoted to anything so pretty and refined.  When she began, the whisper that she was
the love of their hero, gave them a romantic interest, and though with the younger generation
this is only a tradition, yet "our lady" has won ground of her own, and is still fair and sweet
enough to be looked on by those youths as a sort of flower of the whole world, yet their own
peculiar property.  For is she not a Hydriot shareholder, and does she not like to know that
it was to Harold's revival of those shares that she chiefly owes her present means?  Since
her mother's death she has lived among them at the house that was old Miss Woolmer's, and is
tranquilly happy in finding happiness for other people, and always being ready when any one
needs her, as our dear old uncle does very often, though I think her Hydriot boys have the
most of her.

Hippolyta made Eustace a good wife, and watched over him well; but there was no preventing
his deficiency from increasing; it became acknowledged disease of the brain, and he did not
survive his cousin six years.  Happily none of his feebleness of intellect seems to have descended
to Eustace the third, who is growing up a steady, sensible lad under his mother's management;
and perhaps it is not the worse for Arghouse to have become a Horsman dependency.

It was the year before Eustace's death that the conductress of the school at Baden wrote to
Mrs. Alison about Dora.  The sad state of her brother had prevented her coming home or being
visited, and though I exchanged letters with her periodically, we had not sufficient knowledge
of one another for any freedom of expression after she had conquered the difficulties of writing.

When she was a little more than sixteen, came a letter to tell that she was wasting away in
either atrophy or consumption, and that the doctors said the only hope for her was home and
native air.  Poor child! what home was there for her, with her sister-in-law absorbed in the
care of her brother, whose imbecility was no spectacle for one in a critical state of health
and failing spirits?  We were at Arked at the time, and offered to go and fetch her (it was
Dermot's kind thought), leaving the children to Viola's care.

Poor dear, what a sight she was!  Tall in proportion to the giant breed she came of, but thin
to the most painful degree, and bending like a fishing-rod, or a plant brought up in the dark,
which, by-the-by, she most resembled, with her white face and thin yellow hair. Her complexion
had recovered, but her hair never had, nor, as it proved, her health, for she had been more
or less ailing ever since she came, and the regimen of the frugal Germans had not supported
the fast-growing English girl's frame, any more than the strict and thorough-going round of
accurate education had suited the untrained, desultory intellect, unused to method or application.
Nor did the company of the good, plodding, sentimental maedchens give any pleasure to the vehement
creature, whose playfellow from babyhood had been a man--and such a man!  Use did no good,
but rather, as the childish activity and power of play and the sense of novelty passed, the
growth of the womanly soul made the heart-hunger and solitude worse, and spirit and health
came yearly to a lower level.

She was too languid to be more than indifferent when she saw us, and the first sign of warmth
that she gave was her kiss, when I went back to visit her after putting her to bed at the hotel.
She looked up, put her arms round my neck, and said, "This is like the old days."

We brought her by slow stages to London, where Hippolyta came up to see her for one day, and
was terribly shocked.  The doctors were not hopeful, but said she might go where she pleased,
and do what she liked, and as her one wish was to be with us, my dear husband laughed to scorn
the notion that, whatever had been dear to Harold, should not be his sacred charge, and so
we took her back.

And there, she did not die.  She lay on the sofa day after day, watched the children at play,
and listened dreamily to the family affairs, rested and was petted by us both, called it very
comfortable, and was patient, but that whole winter seemed to remain where she was, neither
better nor worse.  With the spring came a visit from George Yolland, a prosperous man, as he
well deserved to be, and the foremost layman in all good works in the neighbourhood since dear
old Lord Erymanth had been disabled.  In the forenoons, when I was teaching the children, and
Dermot was busy, he was generally in the drawing-room, talking to Dora, whose blue eyes had
a vivid silent intelligence, like no one but Harold's.  From the first day he had confirmed
my conviction that, at any rate, she was not dying now, and she began to start into strength.
She sat up all the evening, she walked round the garden, she drove out, she came down to breakfast.
The day after that achievement, she came to me sobbing for joy with something inaudible about
"his sake," while George was assuring Dermot that there was only one woman in the world for him!

So, on a bright summer day, we gave her to the friend Harold had gained on the same day as
Dermot, and she went to be the happy mistress of Mount Eaton, and reign there, an abrupt woman,
not universally liked, but intensely kind and true, and much beloved by all who have cared
to penetrate through her shell.

There! my work is done, though I fear it is a weaker likeness of my young Alcides than even
the faded photograph by my side, but I could not brook that you, my children, should grow up
unknowing of the great character to whom your father and I owe one another, and all besides
that is best in our lives.  There are things that must surprise you about your dear father.
Remember that he insisted on my putting them in, and would not have them softened, because,
he said, you ought to have the portrait in full, and that, save at his own expense, you could
not know the full gratitude he feels to the man who made a new era in our lives.  He says he
is not afraid either of the example for you, or that you will respect him less, and I know
you will not, for you will only see his truth and generosity.

                                                  L. P. T.

All that your mother has written is true--blessings on her!--every word of it, except that
she never could, and I hope none of you ever will, understand the depth and blackness of the
slough Harold Alison drew me out of, by just being the man he was; nor will she show you--for
indeed she is blind to it herself--that it was no other than she, with her quiet, upright sweetness
and resolution, that was the making of him and of both of us.  Very odd it is that a woman
should set it all down in black and white, and never perceive it was all her own doing.  But
if you see it, young people, what you have to do is to be thankful for the mother you have
got and try to be worthy of her, and if the drop of Alison blood in you should make one of
you even the tenth part of what Harold was, then you'll be your father's pride, and much more
than he deserves.

                                              D. E. ST. G. T.

Thank you, dear brother, for having let me see this, though I know Lucy did not intend it for
my eyes, or she would not have been so hard on poor mamma.  It shows me how naughty I must
have been to let her get such a notion of our relations with one another, but an outsider can
never judge of such things.  For the rest, dear Lucy has done her best, and in many ways she
did know him better than anybody else did, and he looked up to her more than to anyone.  But
even she cannot reach to the inmost depth of the sweetness out of the strong, nor fully know
the wonderful power of tender strength that seemed to wrap one's mind round and bear one on
with him, and that has lasted me ever since, and well it may, for he was the very glory of my life.

                                                   V. T.

I am glad to have read it, because it explains a great deal that I was too much of a child
to understand; but I don't like it.  I don't mean for putting in the fatal thing I did in my
ignorant folly.  I knew that, and she has softened my wilfulness.  But there's too much flummery,
and he was a hundred times more than all that.  I had rather recollect him for myself, than
have such a ladylike, drawing-room picture; but Lucy means it well, and it is just as he smoothed
and combed himself down for her.  Nobody should have done it but George. He would have made
a man of him.

                                                   D. Y.

As if George could have done it!  A lady must always see a man somewhat as a carpet knight,
and ill would betide both if it were not so.  But, allowing for this, and the want of "more
power to her elbow," I am thankful to Mrs. Tracy for this vivid recall of the man to whom I
and all here owe an unspeakable debt.  For my own part, I can only say that from the day when
I marvelled at his fortitude under the terrible pain of the lion's bites, to that when I saw
the almost unexampled triumph of his will over the promptings of a disordered brain, he stood
before me the grandest specimen of manhood I ever met, ever a victor, and, above all, over himself.

                                                   G. Y.