One day I was walking over a bit of marshy ground close to Inchy Wood when I felt, all of a
sudden, and only for a second, an emotion which I said to myself was the root of Christian
mysticism. There had swept over me a sense of weakness, of dependence on a great personal Being
somewhere far off yet near at hand. No thought of mine had prepared me for this emotion, for
I had been pre-occupied with Aengus and Edain, and with Mannanan, son of the sea. That night
I awoke lying upon my back and hearing a voice speaking above me and saying, "No human soul
is like any other human soul, and therefore the love of God for any human soul is infinite,
for no other soul can satisfy the same need in God." A few nights after this I awoke to see
the loveliest people I have ever seen. A young man and a young girl dressed in olive-green
raiment, cut like old Greek raiment, were standing at my bedside. I looked at the girl and
noticed that her dress was gathered about her neck into a kind of chain, or perhaps into some
kind of stiff embroidery which represented ivy-leaves. But what filled me with wonder was the
miraculous mildness of her face. There are no such faces now. It was beautiful, as few faces
are beautiful, but it had neither, one would think, the light that is in desire or in hope
or in fear or in speculation. It was peaceful like the faces of animals, or like mountain pools
at evening, so peaceful that it was a little sad. I thought for a moment that she might be
the beloved of Aengus, but how could that hunted, alluring, happy, immortal wretch have a face
like this? Doubtless she was from among the children of the Moon, but who among them I shall
never know.

1902.

KIDNAPPERS

A little north of the town of Sligo, on the southern side of Ben Bulben, some hundreds of feet
above the plain, is a small white square in the limestone. No mortal has ever touched it with
his hand; no sheep or goat has ever browsed grass beside it. There is no more inaccessible
place upon the earth, and few more encircled by awe to the deep considering. It is the door
of faery-land. In the middle of night it swings open, and the unearthly troop rushes out. All
night the gay rabble sweep to and fro across the land, invisible to all, unless perhaps where,
in some more than commonly "gentle" place--Drumcliff or Drum-a-hair--the nightcapped heads
of faery-doctors may be thrust from their doors to see what mischief the "gentry" are doing.
To their trained eyes and ears the fields are covered by red-hatted riders, and the air is
full of shrill voices--a sound like whistling, as an ancient Scottish seer has recorded, and
wholly different from the talk of the angels, who "speak much in the throat, like the Irish,"
as Lilly, the astrologer, has wisely said. If there be a new-born baby or new-wed bride in
the neighbourhood, the nightcapped "doctors" will peer with more than common care, for the
unearthly troop do not always return empty-handed. Sometimes a new-wed bride or a new-born
baby goes with them into their mountains; the door swings to behind, and the new-born or the
new-wed moves henceforth in the bloodless land of Faery; happy enough, but doomed to melt out
at the last judgment like bright vapour, for the soul cannot live without sorrow. Through this
door of white stone, and the other doors of that land where geabheadh tu an sonas aer pighin
("you can buy joy for a penny"), have gone kings, queens, and princes, but so greatly has the
power of Faery dwindled, that there are none but peasants in these sad chronicles of mine.

Somewhere about the beginning of last century appeared at the western corner of Market Street,
Sligo, where the butcher's shop now is, not a palace, as in Keats's Lamia, but an apothecary's
shop, ruled over by a certain unaccountable Dr. Opendon. Where he came from, none ever knew.
There also was in Sligo, in those days, a woman, Ormsby by name, whose husband had fallen mysteriously
sick. The doctors could make nothing of him. Nothing seemed wrong with him, yet weaker and
weaker he grew. Away went the wife to Dr. Opendon. She was shown into the shop parlour. A black
cat was sitting straight up before the fire. She had just time to see that the side-board was
covered with fruit, and to say to herself, "Fruit must be wholesome when the doctor has so
much," before Dr. Opendon came in. He was dressed all in black, the same as the cat, and his
wife walked behind him dressed in black likewise. She gave him a guinea, and got a little bottle
in return. Her husband recovered that time. Meanwhile the black doctor cured many people; but
one day a rich patient died, and cat, wife, and doctor all vanished the night after. In a year
the man Ormsby fell sick once more. Now he was a goodlooking man, and his wife felt sure the
"gentry" were coveting him. She went and called on the "faery-doctor" at Cairnsfoot. As soon
as he had heard her tale, he went behind the back door and began muttering, muttering, muttering-making
spells. Her husband got well this time also. But after a while he sickened again, the fatal
third time, and away went she once more to Cairnsfoot, and out went the faery-doctor behind
his back door and began muttering, but soon he came in and told her it was no use-- her husband
would die; and sure enough the man died, and ever after when she spoke of him Mrs. Ormsby shook
her head saying she knew well where he was, and it wasn't in heaven or hell or purgatory either.
She probably believed that a log of wood was left behind in his place, but so bewitched that
it seemed the dead body of her husband.

She is dead now herself, but many still living remember her. She was, I believe, for a time
a servant or else a kind of pensioner of some relations of my own.

Sometimes those who are carried off are allowed after many years-- seven usually--a final glimpse
of their friends. Many years ago a woman vanished suddenly from a Sligo garden where she was
walking with her husband. When her son, who was then a baby, had grown up he received word
in some way, not handed down, that his mother was glamoured by faeries, and imprisoned for
the time in a house in Glasgow and longing to see him. Glasgow in those days of sailing-ships
seemed to the peasant mind almost over the edge of the known world, yet he, being a dutiful
son, started away. For a long time he walked the streets of Glasgow; at last down in a cellar
he saw his mother working. She was happy, she said, and had the best of good eating, and would
he not eat? and therewith laid all kinds of food on the table; but he, knowing well that she
was trying to cast on him the glamour by giving him faery food, that she might keep him with
her, refused and came home to his people in Sligo.

Some five miles southward of Sligo is a gloomy and tree-bordered pond, a great gathering-place
of water-fowl, called, because of its form, the Heart Lake. It is haunted by stranger things
than heron, snipe, or wild duck. Out of this lake, as from the white square stone in Ben Bulben,
issues an unearthly troop. Once men began to drain it; suddenly one of them raised a cry that
he saw his house in flames. They turned round, and every man there saw his own cottage burning.
They hurried home to find it was but faery glamour. To this hour on the border of the lake
is shown a half-dug trench--the signet of their impiety. A little way from this lake I heard
a beautiful and mournful history of faery kidnapping. I heard it from a little old woman in
a white cap, who sings to herself in Gaelic, and moves from one foot to the other as though
she remembered the dancing of her youth.

A young man going at nightfall to the house of his just married bride, met in the way a jolly
company, and with them his bride. They were faeries, and had stolen her as a wife for the chief
of their band. To him they seemed only a company of merry mortals. His bride, when she saw
her old love, bade him welcome, but was most fearful lest be should eat the faery food, and
so be glamoured out of the earth into that bloodless dim nation, wherefore she set him down
to play cards with three of the cavalcade; and he played on, realizing nothing until he saw
the chief of the band carrying his bride away in his arms. Immediately he started up, and knew
that they were faeries; for slowly all that jolly company melted into shadow and night. He
hurried to the house of his beloved. As he drew near came to him the cry of the keeners. She
had died some time before he came. Some noteless Gaelic poet had made this into a forgotten
ballad, some odd verses of which my white-capped friend remembered and sang for me.

Sometimes one hears of stolen people acting as good genii to the living, as in this tale, heard
also close by the haunted pond, of John Kirwan of Castle Hacket. The Kirwans[FN#8] are a family
much rumoured of in peasant stories, and believed to be the descendants of a man and a spirit.
They have ever been famous for beauty, and I have read that the mother of the present Lord
Cloncurry was of their tribe.

[FN#8]  I have since heard that it was not the Kirwans, but their predecessors at Castle Hacket,
the Hackets themselves, I think, who were descended from a man and a spirit, and were notable
for beauty. I imagine that the mother of Lord Cloncurry was descended from the Hackets. It
may well be that all through these stories the name of Kirwan has taken the place of the older
name. Legend mixes everything together in her cauldron.

John Kirwan was a great horse-racing man, and once landed in Liverpool with a fine horse, going
racing somewhere in middle England. That evening, as he walked by the docks, a slip of a boy
came up and asked where he was stabling his horse. In such and such a place, he answered. "Don't
put him there," said the slip of a boy; "that stable will be burnt to-night." He took his horse
elsewhere, and sure enough the stable was burnt down. Next day the boy came and asked as reward
to ride as his jockey in the coming race, and then was gone. The race-time came round. At the
last moment the boy ran forward and mounted, saying, "If I strike him with the whip in my left
hand I will lose, but if in my right hand bet all you are worth." For, said Paddy Flynn, who
told me the tale, "the left arm is good for nothing. I might go on making the sign of the cross
with it, and all that, come Christmas, and a Banshee, or such like, would no more mind than
if it was that broom." Well, the slip of a boy struck the horse with his right hand, and John
Kirwan cleared the field out. When the race was over, "What can I do for you now?" said he.
"Nothing but this," said the boy: "my mother has a cottage on your land-they stole me from
the cradle. Be good to her, John Kirwan, and wherever your horses go I will watch that no ill
follows them; but you will never see me more." With that he made himself air, and vanished.

