St. Sophia is a colossal church, thirteen or fourteen hundred years old, and unsightly enough
to be very, very much older.  Its immense dome is said to be more wonderful than St. Peter's,
but its dirt is much more wonderful than its dome, though they never mention it.  The church
has a hundred and seventy pillars in it, each a single piece, and all of costly marbles of
various kinds, but they came from ancient temples at Baalbec, Heliopolis, Athens and Ephesus,
and are battered, ugly and repulsive. They were a thousand years old when this church was new,
and then the contrast must have been ghastly--if Justinian's architects did not trim them any. Eager
and excited as they were, they had as yet no definite plan of action for their winter amusement.
So sudden had been the transition, there had been no time to think. However, with boyish candour
and joyous anticipation, they were all ready with their suggestions.

"Skates!" shouted Alec, as he caught a glimpse of an icy expanse that
glittered in the distance as a ray of sunshine shot out through the
parting clouds and for a moment rested upon it.

"Toboggans!" cried
Sam, as he saw a steep hillside one mass of beautiful snow.  Squatting and sitting in groups, here
and there and far and near, were ragged Turks reading books, hearing sermons, or receiving
lessons like children.  and in fifty places were more of the same sort bowing and straightening
up, bowing again and getting down to kiss the earth, muttering prayers the while, and keeping
up their gymnastics till they ought to have been tired, if they were not.

Every where was dirt, and dust, and dinginess, and gloom; every where were signs of a hoary
antiquity, but with nothing touching or beautiful about it; every where were those groups of
fantastic pagans; overhead the gaudy mosaics and the web of lamp-ropes--nowhere was there any
thing to win one's love or challenge his admiration.

The people who go into ecstasies over St. Sophia must surely get them out of the guide-book
(where every church is spoken of as being "considered by good judges to be the most marvelous
structure, in many respects, that the world has ever seen.")  Or else they are those old connoisseurs
from the wilds of New Jersey who laboriously learn the difference between a fresco and a fire-plug
and from that day forward feel privileged to void their critical bathos on painting, sculpture
and architecture forever more.

We visited the Dancing Dervishes.  There were twenty-one of them.  They wore a long, light-colored
loose robe that hung to their heels.  Each in his turn went up to the priest (they were all
within a large circular railing) and bowed profoundly and then went spinning away deliriously
and took his appointed place in the circle, and continued to spin.  When all had spun themselves
to their places, they were about five or six feet apart--and so situated, the entire circle
of spinning pagans spun itself three separate times around the room.  It took twenty-five minutes
to do it.  They spun on the left foot, and kept themselves going by passing the right rapidly
before it and digging it against the waxed floor.  Some of them made incredible "time."  Most
of them spun around forty times in a minute, and one artist averaged about sixty-one times
a minute, and kept it up during the whole twenty-five.  His robe filled with air and stood
out all around him like a balloon.

They made no noise of any kind, and most of them tilted their heads back and closed their eyes,
entranced with a sort of devotional ecstacy. There was a rude kind of music, part of the time,
but the musicians were not visible.  None but spinners were allowed within the circle.  A man
had to either spin or stay outside.  It was about as barbarous an exhibition as we have witnessed
yet.  Then sick persons came and lay down, and beside them women laid their sick children (one
a babe at the breast,) and the patriarch of the Dervishes walked upon their bodies.  He was
supposed to cure their diseases by trampling upon their breasts or backs or standing on the
back of their necks.  This is well enough for a people who think all their affairs are made
or marred by viewless spirits of the air--by giants, gnomes, and genii--and who still believe,
to this day, all the wild tales in the Arabian Nights.  Even so an intelligent missionary tells me.

We visited the Thousand and One Columns.  I do not know what it was originally intended for,
but they said it was built for a reservoir.  It is situated in the centre of Constantinople. If
he does we will harness them up to-morrow, and if the ice is strong enough to be safe we will
return with them for the others. I understand he has a number of fine young dogs; doubtless there
will be enough to make a good train for each of you, after they are broken in. So there will
be plenty of work for all to-day, to get ready for the first day's outing with dog-trains."
Soon everybody was at work. Indian women, under Mrs Ross's direction,
were busily employed in making large mooseskin moccasins and mittens. This old dried-up reservoir
is occupied by a few ghostly silk-spinners now, and one of them showed me a cross cut high
up in one of the pillars. I suppose he meant me to understand that the institution was there
before the Turkish occupation, and I thought he made a remark to that effect; but he must have
had an impediment in his speech, for I did not understand him.

We took off our shoes and went into the marble mausoleum of the Sultan Mahmoud, the neatest
piece of architecture, inside, that I have seen lately.  Mahmoud's tomb was covered with a
black velvet pall, which was elaborately embroidered with silver; it stood within a fancy silver
railing; at the sides and corners were silver candlesticks that would weigh more than a hundred
pounds, and they supported candles as large as a man's leg; on the top of the sarcophagus was
a fez, with a handsome diamond ornament upon it, which an attendant said cost a hundred thousand
pounds, and lied like a Turk when he said it.  Mahmoud's whole family were comfortably planted
around him.

We went to the great Bazaar in Stamboul, of course, and I shall not describe it further than
to say it is a monstrous hive of little shops --thousands, I should say--all under one roof,
and cut up into innumerable little blocks by narrow streets which are arched overhead.  One
street is devoted to a particular kind of merchandise, another to another, and so on.

When you wish to buy a pair of shoes you have the swing of the whole street--you do not have
to walk yourself down hunting stores in different localities.  It is the same with silks, antiquities,
shawls, etc.  The place is crowded with people all the time, and as the gay-colored Eastern
fabrics are lavishly displayed before every shop, the great Bazaar of Stamboul is one of the
sights that are worth seeing.  It is full of life, and stir, and business, dirt, beggars, asses,
yelling peddlers, porters, dervishes, high-born Turkish female shoppers, Greeks, and weird-looking
and weirdly dressed Mohammedans from the mountains and the far provinces --and the only solitary
thing one does not smell when he is in the Great Bazaar, is something which smells good. 

People living in more southern latitudes, where the transition from
one season to another is so slow and almost imperceptible, can hardly
realise the suddenness with which the Frost King can set up his throne
and begin his despotic reign.

There are no long premonitions of his coming. No noisy heralds for weeks warn of his approach.
The birds and beasts seem to have some mysterious intimations that he draweth near, and act accordingly.
But man knoweth not of his approach; he heareth not his stealthy steps.

The great slave marts we have all read so much about--where tender young girls were stripped
for inspection, and criticised and discussed just as if they were horses at an agricultural
fair--no longer exist.  The exhibition and the sales are private now. Stocks are up, just at
present, partly because of a brisk demand created by the recent return of the Sultan's suite
from the courts of Europe; partly on account of an unusual abundance of bread-stuffs, which
leaves holders untortured by hunger and enables them to hold back for high prices; and partly
because buyers are too weak to bear the market, while sellers are amply prepared to bull it.
Under these circumstances, if the American metropolitan newspapers were published here in Constantinople,
their next commercial report would read about as follows, I suppose:

                        SLAVE GIRL MARKET REPORT.

     "Best brands Circassians, crop of 1850, L200; 1852, L250; 1854,
     L300.  Best brands Georgian, none in market; second quality, 1851,
     L180.  Nineteen fair to middling Wallachian girls offered at L130 @
     150, but no takers; sixteen prime A 1 sold in small lots to close
     out--terms private.

     "Sales of one lot Circassians, prime to good, 1852 to 1854, at L240
     @ 242, buyer 30; one forty-niner--damaged--at L23, seller ten, no
     deposit.  Several Georgians, fancy brands, 1852, changed hands to
     fill orders.  The Georgians now on hand are mostly last year's crop,
     which was unusually poor.  The new crop is a little backward, but
     will be coming in shortly.  As regards its quantity and quality, the
     accounts are most encouraging.  In this connection we can safely
     say, also, that the new crop of Circassians is looking extremely
     well.  His Majesty the Sultan has already sent in large orders for
     his new harem, which will be finished within a fortnight, and this
     has naturally strengthened the market and given Circassian stock a
     strong upward tendency.  Taking advantage of the inflated market,
     many of our shrewdest operators are selling short. Spurred on by the
     signs of coming winter, they had pushed on toward home with unremitting
toil and but little rest, and had fortunately managed to land the
boys safely at Sagasta-weekee the day before the wintry gale broke
upon them.

      Prices are pretty high
now, and holders firm; but, two or three years ago, parents in a starving condition brought
their young daughters down here and sold them for even twenty and thirty dollars, when they
could do no better, simply to save themselves and the girls from dying of want. It is sad to
think of so distressing a thing as this, and I for one am sincerely glad the prices are up again.

Commercial morals, especially, are bad.  There is no gainsaying that. Greek, Turkish and Armenian
morals consist only in attending church regularly on the appointed Sabbaths, and in breaking
the ten commandments all the balance of the week.  It comes natural to them to lie and cheat
in the first place, and then they go on and improve on nature until they arrive at perfection.
In recommending his son to a merchant as a valuable salesman, a father does not say he is a
nice, moral, upright boy, and goes to Sunday School and is honest, but he says, "This boy is
worth his weight in broad pieces of a hundred--for behold, he will cheat whomsoever hath dealings
with him, and from the Euxine to the waters of Marmora there abideth not so gifted a liar!"
How is that for a recommendation?  The Missionaries tell me that they hear encomiums like that
passed upon people every day.  They say of a person they admire, "Ah, he is a charming swindler,
and a most exquisite liar!"

