3. The Spirit maketh intercession for us. This is not a work done in us nor upon us, but is
something done for us before the throne of God. We can not dogmatize as to how the Spirit maketh
intercession, but Paul says he does it "according to the will of God." This is a fact that
appeals to our faith and not to our Christian experience. It "can not be uttered." We can rest
upon it and draw comfort from it as a child draws strength from its mother's breast. We can
also draw comfort from the fact that Christ "ever liveth to make intercession for us," though
we have no knowledge as to how he does it.

4. Another work of the Spirit is to "change us from glory to glory." (2 Cor. 3:18). The figure
used here by the apostle is taken from the process of mirror-making among the ancients. They
hadn't the glass mirrors of our day, but a mirror of highly polished metal. A piece of coarse
metal would be placed upon a stone and the workmen would begin to polish it; at first it made
no reflection at all, but when polished for awhile would give a distorted and perverted reflection;
but in the process of polishing, that reflection would grow clearer and clearer, when finally
a man could behold his face in it perfectly reflected. And so with us. When taken into the
great spiritual laboratory of Christianity we are blocks in the rough, but in the polishing
process of the church and spiritual surroundings we begin to reflect the image of our Master,
and when we have completed the work, we reflect him as perfectly as a human being can. Take,
for illustration, the brothers Peter and John. At first they were called Boanerges, sons of
thunder; they wanted to call down fire from heaven to destroy men who differed from them; but
in the great laboratory of the Christian life they grew more and more Christlike, transformed
by the Spirit of God, until at last we see the old apostle John at Ephesus, beautified and
ennobled, sitting in his chair and lifting up trembling hands, and saying to the young disciples:
"Little children, love one another, for love is of God." We see the transforming power of the
spiritual atmosphere of the church and the Christian life upon human nature. Christian, with
this illustration before you, how can you excuse yourself for keeping out of the spiritual
atmosphere of God, for staying away from the communion and the spiritual convocation of God's
people? Is it a burden and a duty to attend the house of God, or is it a pleasure gladly and
joyfully anticipated? When you rise on the Lord's Day morning, do you say, "Must I go to church
to-day?" or do you say:

    "You may sing of the beauty of mountain and dale,
    The water of streamlet and the flowers of the Vale,
    But the place most delightful this earth can afford,
    Is the place of devotion, the house of the Lord"?

5. The last work of the Spirit which the word of God mentions is the "quickening of our mortal
bodies." This Spirit which has ever been with us, watching over us, will never leave us until
he raises our bodies from the dead and fashions our vile bodies like unto the glorious body
of our Lord. It matters much where we now live; it matters little where and how we die. Our
bodies may be buried in the unfathomed caves of ocean; they may lie upon some mountain-peak
or be placed in a crowded cemetery of some great city. No stone may mark our resting-place,
no friend may be able to find the spot and place a flower of love upon it; but that abiding-place
is known to the infinite Spirit of God, and from our ashes he will quicken our bodies and present
us faultless before the throne of God.

    "I know not where His isles may lift
      Their fronded palms in air:
     I only know I can not drift
      Beyond His love and care."

We have not space in this chapter to notice other than the principal passages which refer to
the work of the Spirit as it relates to Christians, but in the five above mentioned there is
no hint that he does anything in us other than through the instrumentality of the gospel, and
there are no other passages that teach a direct work upon us more clearly than those mentioned.

There are many passages that trace the blessed and glorious work of the Spirit in us and through
us, but they all confirm the clear statement quoted from the Sunday School Times that he works
mediately, and not immediately.

X

THE PARTING WORD

Blasphemy against the Spirit. This is a subject that is intensely interesting to many people.
They imagine that in some way unknown to themselves they may have committed this act, and it
causes them great concern. I will say that such people need have no alarm. The man who has
actually committed this sin never feels any alarm about it. He is the last man to feel concern
over it. By reading the twelfth chapter of Matthew the reader can obtain a clear view of this
sin. Jesus was being hounded by the Pharisees, who had determined to procure his death at all
hazards. They were watching, exaggerating and criticizing everything he did.

He went on a Sabbath day through the field of corn and his disciples plucked and ate some of
the corn. There was an immediate outcry of "The Sabbath is violated." Again, Jesus healed the
man with a withered hand and the Pharisees went out and held a council to plan his destruction.
Again, there was brought to him a man possessed of a devil, rendering him blind and dumb. Jesus
healed him by casting out the devil, so that he "both saw and heard." The invalid perishes according
to the progress of this destructive work; and death speedily ensues, unless the evil genius can
be driven out of it before it has committed irreparable damage. Whoever treats a sick person
has therefore two equally important duties to perform.

He must first discover the nature of the spirit in possession, and, if necessary, its name,
and then attack it, drive it out, or even destroy it. He can only succeed by powerful magic,
so he must be an expert in reciting incantations, and skilful in
making amulets. Jesus tells them that
if he casts out devils by Beelzebub, then Satan is divided against himself. "But if I by the
Spirit of God cast out devils, then is the kingdom of God come upon me" (Matt. 12:28). (Matt.
12:31, 32). That these men had committed, or were in great danger of committing, this blasphemy
is evident from the caution uttered above.

When a man to-day reaches the comprehensive state of mind that he is going to reject Jesus
over any and all evidence, he has gone into the house, shut and locked the door and thrown
away the key. God can not reach him. Such a man will be let alone by the Spirit of God. That
Paul understood this condition to be unpardonable, we read in Heb. That is, they have reached
the same state of mind the Pharisees had who crucified him the first time. Men can commit that
same act to-day, but when they do it they lose all concern regarding the consequences. As long
as one has concern, he may rest assured that he has not blasphemed the Holy Spirit.

The Fruits of the Spirit. I have not treated this passage hitherto, because I do not understand
the apostle to be referring to the Holy Spirit, but to man's spirit. In this fifth chapter
of Galatians the apostle divides man into two domains, one of the flesh and another of the
spirit. It is impossible to imagine "the flesh" preventing the Holy Spirit from doing "the
things he would." It is also impossible to conceive that the Holy Spirit is lusting against
man's flesh. But we all recognize that there is a terrible conflict between man's flesh and
his spirit. These are contrary the one to the other and lust against each other. When man's
flesh triumphs over his spirit, certain works are inevitable which Paul enumerates. When the
Spirit (in man) dominates the flesh, then certain "fruits of the Spirit" appear. They are the
fruits of man's spiritual nature triumphing over his fleshly nature. The same contrast is set
forth in Galatians, chapter 6, where it speaks of sowing to the flesh and to the Spirit. How
can any man sow to the Holy Spirit? Paul describes the same conflict in the seventh chapter
of Romans. I think that the spirit (of man) can be aided by the Holy Spirit in its battle against
the flesh, but the "fruits" mentioned are of man's spirit and not the Holy Spirit.

The Spirit of God at Work To-Day. Says one, "Is not the Spirit actively at work in the world
to-day?" Of course he is. It is not a question of what he is doing but how he is doing it.
The religious world is pretty generally agreed that the Spirit is pleading with the world of
the unsaved through the motives and inducements of the gospel, the moral truth which appeals
to the intellect and heart of the unconverted to turn to God and be saved; that all the saving
power of God is found in Christ and the gospel which reveals him; that God will not go beyond
the cross of Christ to save any man. All that is necessary for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification
and redemption--and that is all we need--is found in Christ. This being so, we need no other
power but gospel power in our attempts to become children of God or to live as children of
God. We get into confusion when we try to obtain some other and more direct power. We are led
into a dependence upon our feelings, which are unreliable.

Bishop J.H. Vincent, than whom stands no higher in the Northern M.E. Church, aptly states the
whole matter thus: "There are people who put stress on sentiment and emotion in religion. If
they 'feel good,' they have no doubt as to their present security and their acceptance with
God. These people covet moods and states of feeling. They revel in songs and prayers and hallelujahs.
The thrill of sentiment and the warm currents of emotion are 'the all and in all' of religion.
Such saints forget that mere mental exhilaration and good feeling may coexist with carnal hearts,
selfish aims, and utter worldliness of temper." His brethren will scarcely accuse the Bishop
of not believing in "heartfelt religion," and yet they used to strongly accuse us of denying
it, because we plead for the testimony of the Book rather than the testimony of feelings.

We get into the same confusion when we attempt to fall back upon some inward power, independent
of God's word, in living the Christian life. The writer has known many good, honest people
that claimed to have an inward monitor to lead them, who at the same time would reject the
clear teaching of God's word. The Spirit of God never led any man to contradict the Word which
he has so clearly revealed. The whole Christian life is a life of faith. It begins, continues
and ends in faith. "God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears God and
works righteousness is accepted of him." "The sword of the Spirit" is "the word of God."