X. However, my enthusiasm has carried me further than I intended, the subject being an inviting
one. Let me, then, end by pointing out that the disgrace of these crimes does not belong especially
to our own time. Our ancestors before us have lamented, and our children after us will lament,
as we do, the ruin, of morality, the prevalence of vice, and the gradual deterioration of mankind;
yet these things are really stationary, only moved slightly to and fro like the waves which
at one time a rising tide washes further over the land, and at another an ebbing one restrains
within a lower water mark. At one time the chief vice will be adultery, and licentiousness
will exceed all bounds; at another time a rage for feasting will be in vogue, and men will
waste their inheritance in the most shameful of all ways, by the kitchen; at another, excessive
care for the body, and a devotion to personal beauty which implies ugliness of mind; at another
time, injudiciously granted liberty will show itself in wanton recklessness and defiance of
authority; sometimes there will be a reign of cruelty both in public and private, and the madness
of the civil wars will come upon us, which destroy all that is holy and inviolable. Sometimes
even drunkenness will be held in honour, and it will be a virtue to swallow most wine. Vices
do not lie in wait for us in one place alone, but hover around us in changeful forms, sometimes
even at variance one with another, so that in turn they win and lose the field; yet we shall
always be obliged to pronounce the same verdict upon ourselves, that we are and always were
evil, and, I unwillingly add, that we always shall be. There always will be homicides, tyrants,
thieves, adulterers, ravishers, sacrilegious, traitors: worse than all these is the ungrateful
man, except we consider that all these crimes flow from ingratitude, without which hardly any
great wickedness has ever grown to full stature. Be sure that you guard against this as the
greatest of crimes in yourself, but pardon it as the least of crimes in another. For all the
injury which you suffer is this: you have lost the subject-matter of a benefit, not the benefit
itself, for you possess unimpaired the best part of it, in that you have given it. Though we
ought to be careful to bestow our benefits by preference upon those who are likely to show
us gratitude for them, yet we must sometimes do what we have little hope will turn out well,
and bestow benefits upon those who we not only think will prove ungrateful, but who we know
have been so. And though at first shy of Gougou, the pretty thing was soon induced to stand upon
its hind feet and dance for bits of cake. His Indian blood vearned towards the fawn; but Me-thuselah,
the mighty turtle, was more exciting. Methuselah lived a prisoner in one side of the bait-tank,
from which he was lifted by a rope around his tail. He was so enormous that it required both Brown
and Puttany to carry him up the bank, and as he hung from the pole
the sudden projection of his snapping head was a danger.

When he fastened his teeth into a stick, the stick was hopelessly his as long as he chose to keep
it. He was like an elephant cased in mottled shell, and the serrated ridge on his tail resembled
a row of huge brown teeth. Methuselah was a many-wrinkled turtle. When he contracted, imbedding
head in shoulders and legs in body, revealing all his claws and showing wicked little eyes
near the point of his nose, his helpless rage stirred all the Indian; he was the most deliciously
devilish thing that Gougou had ever seen.

Then there was the joy of wintergreen, which both men brought to the child, and he learned
to forage for it himself. The fleshy dark green leaves and red berries clustered thickly in
the woods. He and his mother went in the boat when the day was to be given to bass or pickerel fishing,
and he learned great lessons of water-lore from the two men. If they trusted a troll line to
his baby hands, he was in a state of beatitude. His object in life was to possess a bear cub, and
many a porcupine creeping along the beach he mistook for that desirable property, until taught
to distinguish quills from fur. Gougou heard, and he believed, that all porcupines were old lumbermen,
who never died, but simply contracted to that shape. He furtively stoned them when he could,
reflecting that they were tough, and delighting to see the quills fly.

Françoise would sit in the camp like a picture of still life, glowing and silent at her appointed
labor. She sewed for all of them, looking womanly and unhurried, with a pink-veined moccasin-flower
in her hair; while Brown, cooking and baking, rushed from tent to
wood-pile, his sleeves turned back from his white, muscular arms.

He lived more intensely than any other member of the sylvan household. His blue eyes shone, and
his face was vivid as he talked to her. He was a common man, blunted in the finer nature by a life
of hardship, yet his shrewd spirit seized on much that less facile people like Puttany learned
slowly or not at all.

Puttany and the child were often together in one long play, broken only by the man's periods
of labor. They basked in a boat near rushes, waiting for pickerel to strike, or waded a bog
to a trout stream at the other end of the lake, hid in a forest full of windfalls and hoary
moss and tropical growths of brake and fern. Gougou had new strong clothes and buckskin shoes.
For the patois had not been a week in camp before Brown went to St. Ignace and brought back
denim and white and black calico, which he presented to Françoise.

"She ought to have a kind of second mourning," he explained to Puttany, who received his word on
any matter as law. "Joe La France wasn't worth wearing first mourning for, but second mourning
is decent for her, and it won't show in the camp like bright colors would."

The world of city-maddened people who swarmed to this lake for their annual immersion in nature
did not often intrude on the camp. Yet the fact of a woman's presence there could not be concealed,
and Puttany was disciplined to say to strangers, "Dot vas my sister and her little poy."

A tiny cabin was built for Françoise, with the luxuries of a puncheon floor and one glazed window.
She inhabited it in primitive gladness, as a child adorns a play-house, and was careful to keep
it in that trim, military state which Brown demanded. Françoise had a regard for M'sieu' Put-tanee,
who was neat and ladylike in all his doings, and smiled amiably at her over her boy's head; but her
veneration of M'sieu' Brownee extended beyond the reach of humor.
If he had been a priest he could have had no more authority. She used
to watch him secretly from her window at dawn, as he put himself through
a morning drill to limber his muscles. Some spectators might have
laughed, but she heard as seriously as if they were the motions of
her own soul his tactics with a stick:

"Straight out--across the
shoulder--under the arm--down on the turf!"

There were days when
the misty gray lake, dim and delicious, lay veiled within its irregular
shores. Few remain grateful after
the present is gone: many more remember their presents only while they make use of them. If
possible, I should like my present not to be consumed; let it remain in existence, let it stick
to my friend and share his life. No one is so foolish as to need to be told not to send gladiators
or wild beasts to one who has just given a public show, or not to send summer clothing in winter
time, or winter clothing in summer. Common sense must guide our benefits; we must consider
the time and the place, and the character of the receiver, which are the weights in the scale,
which cause our gifts to be well or ill received. How far more acceptable a present is, if
we give a man what he has not, than if we give him what he has plenty of! if we give him what
he has long been searching for in vain, rather than what he sees everywhere! Let us make presents
of things which are rare and scarce rather than costly, things which even a rich man will be
glad of, just as common fruits, such as we tire of after a few days, please us if they have
ripened before the usual season. People will also esteem things which no one else has given
to them, or which we have given to no one else.

XIII. When the conquest of the East had flattered Alexander of Macedon into believing himself
to be more than man, the people of Corinth sent an embassy to congratulate him, and presented
him with the franchise of their city. When Alexander smiled at this form of courtesy, one of
the ambassadors said, "We have never enrolled any stranger among our citizens except Hercules
and yourself." Alexander willingly accepted the proffered honour, invited the ambassadors to
his table, and showed them other courtesies. He did not think of who offered the citizenship,
but to whom they had granted it; and being altogether the slave of glory, though he knew neither
its true nature or its limits, had followed in the footsteps of Hercules and Bacchus, and had
not even stayed his march where they ceased; so that he glanced aside from the givers of this
honour to him with whom he shared it, and fancied that the heaven to which his vanity aspired
was indeed opening before him when he was made equal to Hercules. In what indeed did that frantic
youth, whose only merit was his lucky audacity, resemble Hercules? Hercules conquered nothing
for himself; he travelled throughout the world, not coveting for himself but liberating the
countries which he conquered, an enemy to bad men, a defender of the good, a peacemaker both
by sea and land; whereas the other was from his boyhood a brigand and desolator of nations,
a pest to his friends and enemies alike, whose greatest joy was to be the terror of all mankind,
forgetting that men fear not only the fiercest but also the most cowardly animals, because
of their evil and venomous nature.

XIV. Let us now return to our subject. He who bestows a benefit without discrimination, gives
what pleases no one; no one considers himself to be under any obligation to the landlord of
a tavern, or to be the guest of any one with whom he dines in such company as to be able to
say, "What civility has he shown to me? no more than he has shown to that man, whom he scarcely
knows, or to that other, who is both his personal enemy and a man of infamous character. Do
you suppose that he wished to do me any honour? not so, he merely wished to indulge his own
vice of profusion." If you wish men to be grateful for anything, give it but seldom; no one
can bear to receive what you give to all the world. Yet let no one gather from this that I
wish to impose any bonds upon generosity; let her go to what lengths she will, so that she
go a steady course, not at random. It is possible to bestow gifts in such a manner that each
of those who receive them, although he shares them with many others, may yet feel himself to
be distinguished from the common herd. Let each man have some peculiarity about his gift which
may make him consider himself more highly favoured than the rest. He may say, "I received the
same present that he did, but I never asked for it." "I received the same present, but mine
was given me after a few days, whereas he had earned it by long service." "Others have the
same present, but it was not given to them with the same courtesy and gracious words with which
it was given to me." "That man got it because he asked for it; I did not ask." "That man received
it as well as I, but then he could easily return it; one has great expectations from a rich
man, old and childless, as he is; whereas in giving the same present to me he really gave more,
because he gave it without the hope of receiving any return for it." Just as a courtesan divides
her favours among many men, so that no one of her friends is without some proof of her affection,
so let him who wishes his benefits to be prized consider how he may at the same time gratify
many men, and nevertheless give each one of them some especial mark of favour to distinguish
him from the rest.

XV. I am no advocate of slackness in giving benefits: the more and the greater they are, the
more praise they will bring to the giver. Yet let them be given with discretion; for what is
given carelessly and recklessly can please no one. Whoever, therefore, supposes that in giving
this advice I wish to restrict benevolence and to confine it to narrower limits, entirely mistakes
the object of my warning. What virtue do we admire more than benevolence? Which do we encourage
more? Who ought to applaud it more than we Stoics, who preach the brotherhood of the human
race? What then is it? Since no impulse of the human mind can be approved of, even though it
springs from a right feeling, unless it be made into a virtue by discretion, I forbid generosity
to degenerate into extravagance. It is, indeed, pleasant to receive a benefit with open arms,
when reason bestows it upon the worthy, not when it is flung hither or thither thoughtlessly
and at random; this alone we care to display and claim as our own. Can you call anything a
benefit, if you feel ashamed to mention the person who gave it you? How far more grateful is
a benefit, how far more deeply does it impress itself upon the mind, never to be forgotten,
when we rejoice to think not so much of what it is, as from whom we have received it! Crispus
Passienus was wont to say that some men's advice was to be preferred to their presents, some
men's presents to their advice; and he added as an example, "I would rather have received advice
from Augustus than a present; I would rather receive a present from Claudius than advice."
I, however, think that one ought not to wish for a benefit from any man whose judgement is
worthless. What then? Ought we not to receive what Claudius gives? We ought; but we ought to
regard it as obtained from fortune, which may at any moment turn against us. Why do we separate
this which naturally is connected? That is not a benefit, to which the best part of a benefit,
that it be bestowed with judgment, is wanting: a really great sum of money, if it be given
neither with discernment nor with good will, is no more a benefit than if it remained hoarded.
There are, however, many things which we ought not to reject, yet for which we cannot feel
indebted.

BOOK II.

I.

Let us consider, most excellent Liberalis, what still remains of the earlier part of the subject;
in what way a benefit should be bestowed. I think that I can point out the shortest way to
this; let us give in the way in which we ourselves should like to receive. Above all we should
give willingly, quickly, and without any hesitation; a benefit commands no gratitude if it
has hung for a long time in the hands of the giver, if he seems unwilling to part with it,
and gives it as though he were being robbed of it. Even though some delay should intervene,
let us by all means in our power strive not to seem to have been in two minds about giving
it at all. To hesitate is the next thing to refusing to give, and destroys all claim to gratitude.
For just as the sweetest part of a benefit is the kindly feeling of the giver, it follows that
one who has by his very delay proved that he gives unwillingly, must be regarded not as having
given anything, but as having been unable to keep it from an importunate suitor. Indeed, many
men are made generous by want of firmness. The most acceptable benefits are those which are
waiting for us to take them, which are easy to be received, and offer themselves to us, so
that the only delay is caused by the modesty of the receiver. The best thing of all is to anticipate
a person's wishes; the next, to follow them; the former is the better course, to be beforehand
with our friends by giving them what they want before they ask us for it, for the value of
a gift is much enhanced by sparing an honest man the misery of asking for it with confusion
and blushes. He who gets what he asked for does not get it for nothing, for indeed, as our
austere ancestors thought, nothing is so dear as that which is bought by prayers. Men would
be much more modest in their petitions to heaven, if these had to be made publicly; so that
even when addressing the gods, before whom we can with all honour bend our knees, we prefer
to pray silently and within ourselves.

II. It is unpleasant, burdensome, and covers one with shame to have to say, "Give me." You
should spare your friends, and those whom you wish to make your friends, from having to do
this; however quick he may be, a man gives too late who gives what he has been asked for. We
ought, therefore, to divine every man's wishes, and when we have discovered them, to set him
free from the hard necessity of asking; you may be sure that a benefit which comes unasked
will be delightful and will not be forgotten. If we do not succeed in anticipating our friends,
let us at any rate cut them short when they ask us for anything, so that we may appear to be
reminded of what we meant to do, rather than to have been asked to do it. Let us assent at
once, and by our promptness make it appear that we meant to do so even before we were solicited.
As in dealing with sick persons much depends upon when food is given, and plain water given
at the right moment sometimes acts as a remedy, so a benefit, however slight and commonplace
it may be, if it be promptly given without losing a moment of time, gains enormously in importance,
and wins our gratitude more than a far more valuable present given after long waiting and deliberation.
One who gives so readily must needs give with good will; he therefore gives cheerfully and
shows his disposition in his countenance.

III. Many who bestow immense benefits spoil them by their silence or slowness of speech, which
gives them an air of moroseness, as they say "yes" with a face which seems to say "no." How
much better is it to join kind words to kind actions, and to enhance the value of our gifts
by a civil and gracious commendation of them! To cure your friend of being slow to ask a favour
of you, you may join to your gift the familiar rebuke, "I am angry with you for not having
long ago let me know what you wanted, for having asked for it so formally, or for having made
interest with a third party." "I congratulate myself that you have been pleased to make trial
of me; hereafter, if you want anything, ask for it as your right; however, for this time I
pardon your want of manners." By so doing you will cause him to value your friendship more
highly than that, whatever it may have been, which he came to ask of you. The goodness and
kindness of a benefactor never appears so great as when on leaving him one says, "I have to-day
gained much; I am more pleased at finding him so kind than if I had obtained many times more
of this, of which I was speaking, by some other means; I never can make any adequate return
to this man for his goodness."

IV. Many, however, there are who, by harsh words and contemptuous manner, make their very kindnesses
odious, for by speaking and acting disdainfully they make us sorry that they have granted our
requests. Various delays also take place after we have obtained a promise; and nothing is more
heartbreaking than to be forced to beg for the very thing which you already have been promised.
Benefits ought to be bestowed at once, but from some persons it is easier to obtain the promise
of them than to get them. One man has to be asked to remind our benefactor of his purpose;
another, to bring it into effect; and thus a single present is worn away in passing through
many hands, until hardly any gratitude is left for the original promiser, since whoever we
are forced to solicit after the giving of the promise receives some of the gratitude which
we owe to the giver. Take care, therefore, if you wish your gifts to be esteemed, that they
reach those to whom they are promised entire, and, as the saying is, without any deduction.
Let no one intercept them or delay them; for no one can take any share of the gratitude due
for your gifts without robbing you of it.

V. Nothing is more bitter than long uncertainty; some can bear to have their hopes extinguished
better than to have them deferred. Yet many men are led by an unworthy vanity into this fault
of putting off the accomplishment of their promises, merely in order to swell the crowd of
their suitors, like the ministers of royalty, who delight in prolonging the display of their
own arrogance, hardly thinking themselves possessed of power unless they let each man see for
a long time how powerful they are. They do nothing promptly, or at one sitting; they are indeed
swift to do mischief, but slow to do good. Be sure that the comic poet speaks the most absolute
truth in the verses:--

   "Know you not this? If you your gifts delay,
    You take thereby my gratitude away."

And the following lines, the expression of virtuous pain--a high-spirited man's misery,--

   "What thou doest, do quickly;"

and:--

    "Nothing in the world
    Is worth this trouble; I had rather you
    Refused it to me now."

When the mind begins through weariness to hate the promised benefit, or while it is wavering
in expectation of it, how can it feel grateful for it? As the most refined cruelty is that
which prolongs the torture, while to kill the victim at once is a kind of mercy, since the
extremity of torture brings its own end with it--the interval is the worst part of the execution--so
the shorter time a benefit hangs in the balance, the more grateful it is to the receiver. It
is possible to look forward with anxious disquietude even to good things, and, seeing that
most benefits consist in a release from some form of misery, a man destroys the value of the
benefit which he confers, if he has the power to relieve us, and yet allows us to suffer or
to lack pleasure longer than we need. Kindness always eager to do good, and one who acts by
love naturally acts at once; he who does us good, but does it tardily and with long delays,
does not do so from the heart. Thus he loses two most important things: time, and the proof
of his good will to us; for a lingering consent is but a form of denial.

VI. The manner in which things are said or done, my Liberalis, forms a very important part
of every transaction. We gain much by quickness, and lose much by slowness. Just as in darts,
the strength of the iron head remains the same, but there is an immeasureable difference between
the blow of one hurled with the full swing of the arm and one which merely drops from the hand,
and the same sword either grazes or pierces according as the blow is delivered; so, in like
manner, that which is given is the same, but the manner in which it is given makes the difference.
How sweet, how precious is a gift, when he who gives does not permit himself to be thanked,
and when while he gives he forgets that he has given! To reproach a man at the very moment
that you are doing him a service is sheer madness; it is to mix insult with your favours. We
ought not to make our benefits burdensome, or to add any bitterness to them. Even if there
be some subject upon which you wish to warn your friend, choose some other time for doing so.

VII. Fabius Verrucosus used to compare a benefit bestowed by a harsh man in an offensive manner
to a gritty loaf of bread, which a hungry man is obliged to receive, but which is painful to
eat. When Marius Nepos of the praetorian guard asked Tiberius Caesar for help to pay his debts,
Tiberius asked him for a list of his creditors; this is calling a meeting of creditors, not
paying debts. When the list was made out, Tiberius wrote to Nepos telling him that he had ordered
the money to be paid, and adding some offensive reproaches. The result of this was that Nepos
owed no debts, yet received no kindness; Tiberius, indeed, relieved him from his creditors,
but laid him under no obligation. Tiberius, however, had some design in doing so; I imagine
he did not wish more of his friends to come to him with the same request. His mode of proceeding
was, perhaps, successful in restraining men's extravagant desires by shame, but he who wishes
to confer benefits must follow quite a different path. In all ways you should make your benefit
as acceptable as possible by presenting it in the most attractive form; but the method of Tiberius
is not to confer benefits, but to reproach.

VIII. Moreover, if incidentally I should say what I think of this part of the subject, I do
not consider that it is becoming even to an emperor to give merely in order to cover a man
with shame. "And yet," we are told, "Tiberius did not even by this means attain his object;
for after this a good many persons were found to make the same request. He ordered all of them
to explain the reasons of their indebtedness before the senate, and when they did so, granted
them certain definite sums of money." This is not an act of generosity, but a reprimand. You
may call it a subsidy, or an imperial contribution; it is not a benefit, for the receiver cannot
think of it without shame. I was summoned before a judge, and had to be tried at bar before
I obtained what I asked for.

IX. Accordingly, all writers on ethical philosophy tell us that some benefits ought to be given
in secret, others in public. Those things which it is glorious to receive, such as military
decorations or public offices, and whatever else gains in value the more widely it is known,
should be conferred in public; on the other hand, when they do not promote a man or add to
his social standing, but help him when in weakness, in want, or in disgrace, they should be
given silently, and so as to be known only to those who profit by them.

X. Sometimes even the person who is assisted must be deceived, in order that he may receive
our bounty without knowing the source from whence it flows. It is said that Arcesilaus had
a friend who was poor, but concealed his poverty; who was ill, yet tried to hide his disorder,
and who had not money for the necessary expenses of existence. Without his knowledge, Arcesilaus
placed a bag of money under his pillow, in order that this victim of false shame might rather
seem to find what he wanted than to receive. "What," say you, "ought he not to know from whom
he received it?" Yes; let him not know it at first, if it be essential to your kindness that
he should not; afterwards I will do so much for him, and give him so much that he will perceive
who was the giver of the former benefit; or, better still, let him not know that he has received
any thing, provided I know that I have given it. "This," you say, "is to get too little return
for one's goodness." True, if it be an investment of which you are thinking; but if a gift,
it should be given in the way which will be of most service to the receiver. You should be
satisfied with the approval of your own conscience; if not, you do not really delight in doing
good, but in being seen to do good. "For all that," say you, "I wish him to know it." Is it
a debtor that you seek for? "For all that, I wish him to know it." What! though it be more
useful, more creditable, more pleasant for him not to know his benefactor, will you not consent
to stand aside? "I wish him to know." So, then, you would not save a man's life in the dark?
I do not deny that, whenever the matter admits of it, one ought to take into consideration
the pleasure which we receive from the joy of the receiver of our kindness; but if he ought
to have help and is ashamed to receive it--if what we bestow upon him pains him unless it be
concealed--I forbear to make my benefits public. Why should I not refrain from hinting at my
having given him anything, when the first and most essential rule is, never to reproach a man
with what you have done for him, and not even to remind him of it. The rule for the giver and
receiver of a benefit is, that the one should straightway forget that he has given, the other
should never forget that he has received it.

XI. A constant reference to one's own services wounds our friend's feelings. Like the man who
was saved from the proscription under the triumvirate by one of Caesar's friends, and afterwards
found it impossible to endure his preserver's arrogance, they wish to cry, "Give me back to
Caesar." How long will you go on saying, "I saved you, I snatched you from the jaws of death?"
This is indeed life, if I remember it by my own will, but death if I remember it at yours;
I owe you nothing, if you saved me merely in order to have some one to point at. How long do
you mean to lead me about? how long do you mean to forbid me to forget my adventure? If I had
been a defeated enemy, I should have been led in triumph but once. We ought not to speak of
the benefits which we have conferred; to remind men of them is to ask them to return them.
We should not obtrude them, or recall the memory of them; you should only remind a man of what
you have given him by giving him something else. We ought not even to tell others of our good
deeds. He who confers a benefit should be silent, it should be told by the receiver; for otherwise
you may receive the retort which was made to one who was everywhere boasting of the benefit
which he had conferred: "You will not deny," said his victim, "that you have received a return
for it?" "When?" asked he. "Often," said the other, "and in many places, that is, wherever
and whenever you have told the story." What need is there for you to speak, and to take the
place which belongs to another? There is a man who can tell the story in a way much more to
your credit, and thus you will gain glory for not telling it your self. You would think me
ungrateful if, through your own silence, no one is to know of your benefit. So far from doing
this, even if any one tells the story in our presence, we ought to make answer, "He does indeed
deserve much more than this, and I am aware that I have not hitherto done any great things
for him, although I wish to do so." This should not be said jokingly, nor yet with that air
by which some persons repel those whom they especially wish to attract. In addition to this,
we ought to act with the greatest politeness towards such persons. If the farmer ceases his
labours after he has put in the seed, he will lose what he has sown; it is only by great pains
that seeds are brought to yield a crop; no plant will bear fruit unless it be tended with equal
care from first to last, and the same rule is true of benefits. Can any benefits be greater
than those which children receive from their parents? Yet these benefits are useless if they
be deserted while young, if the pious care of the parents does not for a long time watch over
the gift which they have bestowed. So it is with other benefits; unless you help them, you
will lose them; to give is not enough, you must foster what you have given. If you wish those
whom you lay under an obligation to be grateful to you, you must not merely confer benefits
upon them, but you must also love them. Above all, as I said before, spare their ears; you
will weary them if you remind them of your goodness, if you reproach them with it you will
make them hate you. Pride ought above all things to be avoided when you confer a benefit. What
need have you for disdainful airs, or swelling phrases? the act itself will exalt you. Let
us shun vain boasting: let us be silent, and let our deeds speak for us. A benefit conferred
with haughtiness not only wins no gratitude, but causes dislike.

XII. Gaius Caesar granted Pompeius Pennus his life, that is, if not to take away life be to
grant it; then, when Pompeius was set free and returning thanks to him, he stretched out his
left foot to be kissed. Those who excuse this action, and say that it was not done through
arrogance, say that he wished to show him a gilded, nay a golden slipper studded with pearls.
"Well," say they, "what disgrace can there be in a man of consular rank kissing gold and pearls,
and what part of Caesar's whole body was it less pollution to kiss?" So, then, that man, the
object of whose life was to change a free state into a Persian despotism, was not satisfied
when a senator, an aged man, a man who had filled the highest offices in the state, prostrated
himself before him in the presence of all the nobles, just as the vanquished prostrate themselves
before their conqueror! He discovered a place below his knees down to which he might thrust
liberty. What is this but trampling upon the commonwealth, and that, too, with the left foot,
though you may say that this point does not signify? It was not a sufficiently foul and frantic
outrage for the emperor to sit at the trial of a consular for his life wearing slippers, he
must needs push his shoes into a senator's face.

XIII. O pride, the silliest fault of great good fortune! how pleasant it is to take nothing
from thee! how dost thou turn all benefits into outrages! how dost thou delight in all excess!
how ill all things become thee! The higher thou risest the lower thou art, and provest that
the good things by which thou art so puffed up profit thee not; thou spoilest all that thou
givest. It is worth while to inquire why it is that pride thus swaggers and changes the form
and appearance of her countenance, so that she prefers a mask to her own face. It is pleasant
to receive gifts when they are conferred in a kindly and gentle manner, when a superior in
giving them does not exalt himself over me, but shows as much good feeling as possible, placing
himself on a level with me, giving without parade, and choosing a time when I am glad of his
help, rather than waiting till I am in the bitterest need. The only way by which you can prevail
upon proud men not to spoil their gifts by their arrogance is by proving to them that benefits
do not appear greater because they are bestowed with great pomp and circumstance; that no one
will think them greater men for so doing, and that excessive pride is a mere delusion which
leads men to hate even what they ought to love.

XIV. There are some things which injure those who receive them, things which it is not a benefit
to give but to withhold; we should therefore consider the usefulness of our gift rather than
the wish of the petitioner to receive it; for we often long for hurtful things, and are unable
to discern how ruinous they are, because our judgment is biassed by our feelings; when, however,
the longing is past, when that frenzied impulse which masters our good sense has passed away,
we abhor those who have given us hurtful gifts. As we refuse cold water to the sick, or swords
to the grief-stricken or remorseful, and take from the insane whatever they might in their
delirium use to their own destruction, so must we persist in refusing to give anything whatever
that is hurtful, although our friends earnestly and humbly, nay, sometimes even most piteously
beg for it. We ought to look at the end of our benefits as well as the beginning, and not merely
to give what men are glad to receive, but what they will hereafter be glad to have received.
There are many who say, "I know that this will do him no good, but what am I to do? he begs
for it, I cannot withstand his entreaties. Let him see to it; he will blame himself, not me."
Not so: you he will blame, and deservedly; when he comes to his right mind, when the frenzy
which now excites him has left him, how can he help hating the man who has assisted him to
harm and to endanger himself? It is a cruel kindness to allow one's self to be won over into
granting that which injures those who beg for it. Just as it is the noblest of acts to save
men from harm against their will, so it is but hatred, under the mask of civility, to grant
what is harmful to those who ask for it. Let us confer benefits of such a kind, that the more
they are made use of the better they please, and which never can turn into injuries. I never
will give money to a man if I know that he will pay it to an adulteress, nor will I be found
in connexion with any wicked act or plan; if possible, I will restrain men from crime; if not,
at least I will never assist them in it. Whether my friend be driven into doing wrong by anger,
or seduced from the path of safety by the heat of ambition, he shall never gain the means of
doing mischief except from himself, nor will I enable him one day to say, "He ruined me out
of love for me." Our friends often give us what our enemies wish us to receive; we are driven
by the unseasonable fondness of the former into the ruin which the latter hope will befall
us. Yet, often as it is the case, what can be more shameful than that there should be no difference
between a benefit and hatred?

XV. Let us never bestow gifts which may recoil upon us to our shame. As the sum total of friendship
consists in making our friends equal to ourselves, we ought to consider the interests of both
parties; I must give to him that wants, yet so that I do not want myself; I must help him who
is perishing, yet so that I do not perish myself, unless by so doing I can save a great man
or a great cause. I must give no benefit which it would disgrace me to ask for. I ought not
to make a small benefit appear a great one, nor allow great benefits to be regarded as small;
for although it destroys all feeling of gratitude to treat what you give like a creditor, yet
you do not reproach a man, but merely set off your gift to the best advantage by letting him
know what it is worth. Every man must consider what his resources and powers are, so that we
may not give either more or less than we are able. We must also consider the character and
position of the person to whom we give, for some men are too great to give small gifts, while
others are too small to receive great ones. Compare, therefore, the character both of the giver
and the receiver, and weigh that which you give between the two, taking care that what is given
be neither too burdensome nor too trivial for the one to give, nor yet such as the receiver
will either treat with disdain as too small, or think too great for him to deal with.

XVI. Alexander, who was of unsound mind, and always full of magnificent ideas, presented somebody
with a city. When the man to whom he gave it had reflected upon the scope of his own powers,
he wished to avoid the jealousy which so great a present would excite, saying that the gift
did not suit a man of his position. "I do not ask," replied Alexander, "what is becoming for
you to receive, but what is becoming for me to give." This seems a spirited and kingly speech,
yet really it is a most foolish one. Nothing is by itself a becoming gift for any one: all
depends upon who gives it, to whom he gives it, when, for what reason, where, and so forth,
without which details it is impossible to argue about it. Inflated creature! if it did not
become him to receive this gift, it could not become thee to give it. There should be a proportion
between men's characters and the offices which they fill; and as virtue in all cases should
be our measure, he who gives too much acts as wrongly as he who gives too little. Even granting
that fortune has raised you so high, that, where other men give cups, you give cities (which
it would show a greater mind in you not to take than to take and squander), still there must
be some of your friends who are not strong enough to put a city in their pockets.

XVII. A certain cynic asked Antigonus for a talent. Antigonus answered that this was too much
for a cynic to ask for. After this rebuff he asked for a penny. Antigonus answered that this
was too little for a king to give. "This kind of hair-splitting" (you say) "is contemptible:
he found the means of giving neither. In the matter of the penny he thought of the king, in
that of the talent he thought of the cynic, whereas with respect to the cynic it would have
been right to receive the penny, with respect to the king it would have been right to give
the talent. Though there may be things which are too great for a cynic to receive, yet nothing
is so small, that it does not become a gracious king to bestow it." If you ask me, I applaud
Antigonus; for it is not to be endured that a man who despises money should ask for it. Your
cynic has publicly proclaimed his hatred of money, and assumed the character of one who despises
it: let him act up to his professions. It is most inconsistent for him to earn money by glorifying
his poverty. I wish to use Chrysippus's simile of the game of ball, in which the ball must
certainly fall by the fault either of the thrower or of the catcher; it only holds its course
when it passes between the hands of two persons who each throw it and catch it suitably. It
is necessary, however, for a good player to send the ball in one way to a comrade at a long
distance, and in another to one at a short distance. So it is with a benefit: unless it be
suitable both for the giver and the receiver, it will neither leave the one nor reach the other
as it ought. If we have to do with a practised and skilled player, we shall throw the ball
more recklessly, for however it may come, that quick and agile hand will send it back again;
if we are playing with an unskilled novice, we shall not throw it so hard, but far more gently,
guiding it straight into his very hands, and we shall run to meet it when it returns to us.
This is just what we ought to do in conferring benefits; let us teach some men how to do so,
and be satisfied if they attempt it, if they have the courage and the will to do so. For the
most part, however, we make men ungrateful, and encourage them, to be so, as if our benefits
were only great when we cannot receive any gratitude for them; just as some spiteful ball-players
purposely put out their companion, of course to the ruin of the game, which cannot be carried
on without entire agreement Many men are of so depraved a nature that they had rather lose
the presents which they make than be thought to have received a return for them, because they
are proud, and like to lay people under obligations: yet how much better and more kindly would
it be if they tried to enable the others also to perform their parts, if they encouraged them
in returning gratitude, put the best construction upon all their acts, received one who wished
to thank them just as cordially as if he came to repay what he had received, and easily lent
themselves to the belief that those whom they have laid under an obligation wish to repay it. "Dorian,"
said Lord Henry at last, as the chaud-froid was being handed round, "what is the matter with
you to-night? You are quite out of sorts."

"I believe he is in love," cried Lady Narborough, "and that he is afraid to tell me for fear I
should be jealous. He is quite right. I certainly should."

"Dear Lady Narborough," murmured Dorian, smiling, "I have not been in love for a whole week--not,
in fact, since Madame de Ferrol left town."

"How you men can fall in love with that woman!" exclaimed the old lady. "I really cannot understand
it."

"It is simply because she remembers you when you were a little girl, Lady Narborough," said
Lord Henry. "She is the one link between us and your short frocks."

"She does not remember my short frocks at all, Lord Henry. But I remember her very well at Vienna thirty
years ago, and how decolletee she was then."

"She is still decolletee," he answered, taking an olive in his long fingers; "and when she is
in a very smart gown she looks like an edition de luxe of a bad French novel. She is really
wonderful, and full of surprises. Her capacity for family affection is extraordinary. When her third
husband died, her hair turned quite gold from grief."

"How can you, Harry!" cried Dorian.

"It is a most romantic explanation," laughed the hostess. "But her third husband, Lord Henry!
You don't mean to say Ferrol is the fourth?"

"Certainly, Lady Narborough."

"I don't believe a word of it."

"Well, ask Mr. Gray. He is one of her most intimate friends."

"Is it true, Mr. Gray?"

"She assures me so, Lady Narborough," said Dorian. "I asked her whether, like Marguerite de Navarre,
she had their hearts embalmed and hung at her girdle. She told me she didn't, because none of
them had had any hearts at all."

"Four husbands! Upon my word that is trop de zele."

"Trop d'audace, I tell her," said Dorian.

"Oh! she is audacious enough for anything, my dear. And what is Ferrol like? I don't know him."

"The
husbands of very beautiful women belong to the criminal classes," said Lord Henry, sipping
his wine.

Lady Narborough hit him with her fan. "Lord Henry, I am not at all surprised that the world says
that you are extremely wicked."

"But what world says that?" asked Lord Henry, elevating his eyebrows. "It can only be the next
world. This world and I are on excellent terms."

"Everybody I know says you are very wicked," cried the old lady, shaking her head.

Lord Henry looked serious for some moments. "It is perfectly monstrous," he said, at last, "the
way people go about nowadays saying things against one behind one's back that are absolutely
and entirely true."

"Isn't he incorrigible?" cried Dorian, leaning forward in his chair.

"I hope so," said his hostess, laughing. "But really, if you all worship Madame de Ferrol in
this ridiculous way, I shall have to marry again so as to be in the fashion."

"You will never marry again, Lady Narborough," broke in Lord Henry.

"You were far too happy. When a woman marries again, it is because she detested her first husband.
When a man marries again, it is because he adored his first wife. Women try their luck; men risk
theirs."

"Narborough wasn't perfect," cried the old lady.

"If he had been, you would not have loved him, my dear lady," was the rejoinder. "Women love us for
our defects. If we have enough of them, they will forgive us everything, even our intellects.
You will never ask me to dinner again after saying this, I am afraid, Lady Narborough, but it
is quite true."

"Of course it is true, Lord Henry. If we women did not love you for your defects, where would you all
be? Not one of you would ever be married. You would be a set of unfortunate bachelors. Not,
however, that that would alter you much. Nowadays all the married men live like bachelors, and
all the bachelors like married men."

"Fin de siecle," murmured Lord Henry.

"Fin du globe," answered his hostess.

"I wish it were fin du globe," said Dorian with a sigh. "Life is a great disappointment."

"Ah, my dear," cried Lady Narborough, putting on her gloves, "don't tell me that you have exhausted
life. When a man says that one knows that life has exhausted him. Lord Henry is very wicked,
and I sometimes wish that I had been; but you are made to be good--you look so good. I must
find you a nice wife. Lord Henry, don't you think that Mr. Gray should get married?"

"I am always telling him so, Lady Narborough," said Lord Henry with a bow.

"Well, we must look out for a suitable match for him. I shall go through Debrett carefully to-night
and draw out a list of all the eligible young ladies."

"With their ages, Lady Narborough?" asked Dorian.

"Of course, with their ages, slightly edited. But nothing must be done in a hurry. I want it
to be what The Morning Post calls a suitable alliance, and I want you both to be happy."

"What nonsense people talk about happy marriages!" exclaimed Lord Henry. "A man can be happy with
any woman, as long as he does not love her."

"Ah! what a cynic you are!" cried the old lady, pushing back her chair and nodding to Lady Ruxton.
"You must come and dine with me soon again. You are really an admirable tonic, much better than
what Sir Andrew prescribes for me. You must tell me what people you would like to meet, though.
I want it to be a delightful gathering."

"I like men who have a future and women who have a past," he answered. "Or do you think that
would make it a petticoat party?"

"I fear so," she said, laughing, as she stood up. "A thousand pardons, my dear Lady Ruxton," she
added, "I didn't see you hadn't finished your cigarette."

"Never mind, Lady Narborough. I smoke a great deal too much.

I am going to limit myself, for the future."

"Pray don't, Lady Ruxton," said Lord Henry. "Moderation is a fatal thing. Enough is as bad as
a meal. More than enough is as good as a feast."

Lady Ruxton glanced at him curiously. "You must come and explain that to me some afternoon, Lord Henry.
It sounds a fascinating theory," she murmured, as she swept out of the room.

"Now, mind you don't stay too long over your politics and scandal," cried Lady Narborough from
the door. "If you do, we are sure to squabble upstairs."

The men laughed, and Mr. Chapman got up solemnly from the foot of the table and came up to
the top. Dorian Gray changed his seat and went and sat by Lord Henry.

Mr. Chapman began to talk in a loud voice about the situation in the House of Commons. He
guffawed at his adversaries. The word doctrinaire--word full of terror to the British mind--reappeared
from time to time between his explosions. An alliterative prefix served as an ornament of
oratory. He hoisted the Union Jack on the pinnacles of thought. The inherited stupidity of the
race--sound English common sense he jovially termed it--was shown to be the proper bulwark
for society.

A smile curved Lord Henry's lips, and he turned round and looked at Dorian.

"Are you better, my dear fellow?" he asked. "You seemed rather out of sorts at dinner."

"I am quite well, Harry. I am tired. That is all."

"You were charming last night. The little duchess is quite devoted to you. She tells me she is going
down to Selby."

"She has promised to come on the twentieth."

"Is Monmouth to be there, too?"

"Oh, yes, Harry."

"He bores me dreadfully, almost as much as he bores her. She is very clever, too clever for a woman.
She lacks the indefinable charm of weakness. It is the feet of clay that make the gold of the
image precious. Her feet are very pretty, but they are not feet of clay. White porcelain feet,
if you like. They have been through the fire, and what fire does not destroy, it hardens. She
has had experiences."

"How long has she been married?" asked Dorian.

"An eternity, she tells me.

I believe, according to the peerage, it is ten years, but ten years with Monmouth must have
been like eternity, with time thrown in. Who else is coming?"

"Oh, the Willoughbys, Lord Rugby and his wife, our hostess, Geoffrey Clouston, the usual set.
I have asked Lord Grotrian."

"I like him," said Lord Henry. "A great many people don't, but I find him charming. He atones
for being occasionally somewhat overdressed by being always absolutely over-educated. He is
a very modern type."

"I don't know if he will be able to come, Harry. He may have to go to Monte Carlo with his
father."

"Ah! what a nuisance people's people are! Try and make him come. By the way, Dorian, you ran
off very early last night. You left before eleven. What did you do afterwards? Did you go
straight home?"

Dorian glanced at him hurriedly and frowned.

"No, Harry," he said at last, "I did not get home till nearly three."

"Did you go to the club?"

"Yes," he answered. Then he bit his lip. "No, I don't mean that. I didn't go to the club. I
walked about. I forget what I did.... How inquisitive you are, Harry! You always want to know
what one has been doing. I always want to forget what I have been doing. I came in at half-past
two, if you wish to know the exact time. I had left my latch-key at home, and my servant had
to let me in. If you want any corroborative evidence on the subject, you can ask him."

Lord Henry shrugged his shoulders. "My dear fellow, as if I cared! Let us go up to the drawing-room.
No sherry, thank you, Mr. Chapman. Something has happened to you, Dorian. Tell me what it is.
You are not yourself to-night."

"Don't mind me, Harry. I am irritable, and out of temper. I shall come round and see you to-morrow,
or next day. Make my excuses to Lady Narborough. I shan't go upstairs. I shall go home. I
must go home."

"All right, Dorian. I dare say I shall see you to-morrow at tea-time. The duchess is coming."

"I will try to be there, Harry," he said, leaving the room. As he drove back to his own house, he was
conscious that the sense of terror he thought he had strangled had come back to him. Lord Henry's
casual questioning had made him lose his nerves for the moment, and he wanted his nerve still.
Things that were dangerous had to be destroyed. He winced. He hated the idea of even touching
them.

Yet it had to be done. He realized that, and when he had locked the door of his library, he
opened the secret press into which he had thrust Basil Hallward's coat and bag. A huge fire
was blazing. He piled another log on it. The smell of the singeing clothes and burning leather
was horrible. It took him three-quarters of an hour to consume everything.
At the end he felt faint and sick, and having lit some Algerian pastilles
in a pierced copper brazier, he bathed his hands and forehead with
a cool musk-scented vinegar.

Suddenly he started. His eyes grew strangely
bright, and he gnawed nervously at his underlip. Between two of the
windows stood a large Florentine cabinet, made out of ebony and inlaid
with ivory and blue lapis. He watched it as though it were a thing
that could fascinate and make afraid, as though it held something
that he longed for and yet almost loathed. His breath quickened. A
mad craving came over him. He lit a cigarette and then threw it away.
His eyelids drooped till the long fringed lashes almost touched his
cheek. But he still watched the cabinet. At last he got up from the
sofa on which he had been lying, went over to it, and having unlocked
it, touched some hidden spring. A triangular drawer passed slowly
out. His fingers moved instinctively towards it, dipped in, and closed
on something. It was a small Chinese box of black and gold-dust lacquer,
elaborately wrought, the sides patterned with curved waves, and the
silken cords hung with round crystals and tasselled in plaited metal
threads. He opened it. Inside was a green paste, waxy in lustre, the
odour curiously heavy and persistent.

He hesitated for some moments,
with a strangely immobile smile upon his face. Then shivering, though
the atmosphere of the room was terribly hot, he drew himself up and
glanced at the clock. It was twenty minutes to twelve. He put the
box back, shutting the cabinet doors as he did so, and went into his
bedroom.

As midnight was striking bronze blows upon the dusky air,
Dorian Gray, dressed commonly, and with a muffler wrapped round his
throat, crept quietly out of his house. In Bond Street he found a
hansom with a good horse. He hailed it and in a low voice gave the
driver an address.

The man shook his head. "It is too far for me,"
he muttered.

"Here is a sovereign for you," said Dorian. "You shall
have another if you drive fast."

"All right, sir," answered the man,
"you will be there in an hour," and after his fare had got in he turned
his horse round and drove rapidly towards the river.

CHAPTER 16

A
cold rain began to fall, and the blurred street-lamps looked ghastly
in the dripping mist. The public-houses were just closing, and dim
men and women were clustering in broken groups round their doors.
From some of the bars came the sound of horrible laughter. In others,
drunkards brawled and screamed.

Lying back in the hansom, with his
hat pulled over his forehead, Dorian Gray watched with listless eyes
the sordid shame of the great city, and now and then he repeated to
himself the words that Lord Henry had said to him on the first day
they had met, "To cure the soul by means of the senses, and the senses
by means of the soul." Yes, that was the secret. He had often tried
it, and would try it again now. There were opium dens where one could
buy oblivion, dens of horror where the memory of old sins could be
destroyed by the madness of sins that were new.

The moon hung low
in the sky like a yellow skull. From time to time a huge misshapen
cloud stretched a long arm across and hid it. The gas-lamps grew fewer,
and the streets more narrow and gloomy. Once the man lost his way
and had to drive back half a mile. A steam rose from the horse as
it splashed up the puddles. The sidewindows of the hansom were clogged
with a grey-flannel mist.

"To cure the soul by means of the senses,
and the senses by means of the soul!" How the words rang in his ears!
His soul, certainly, was sick to death. Was it true that the senses
could cure it? Innocent blood had been spilled. What could atone for
that? Ah! for that there was no atonement; but though forgiveness
was impossible, forgetfulness was possible still, and he was determined
to forget, to stamp the thing out, to crush it as one would crush
the adder that had stung one. Indeed, what right had Basil to have
spoken to him as he had done? Who had made him a judge over others?
He had said things that were dreadful, horrible, not to be endured.

On
and on plodded the hansom, going slower, it seemed to him, at each
step. He thrust up the trap and called to the man to drive faster.
The hideous hunger for opium began to gnaw at him. His throat burned
and his delicate hands twitched nervously together. He struck at the
horse madly with his stick. The driver laughed and whipped up. He
laughed in answer, and the man was silent.

The way seemed interminable,
and the streets like the black web of some sprawling spider. The monotony
became unbearable, and as the mist thickened, he felt afraid.

Then
they passed by lonely brickfields. The fog was lighter here, and he
could see the strange, bottle-shaped kilns with their orange, fanlike
tongues of fire. A dog barked as they went by, and far away in the
darkness some wandering sea-gull screamed. The horse stumbled in a
rut, then swerved aside and broke into a gallop.

After some time
they left the clay road and rattled again over rough-paven streets.
Most of the windows were dark, but now and then fantastic shadows
were silhouetted against some lamplit blind. He watched them curiously.
They moved like monstrous marionettes and made gestures like live
things. He hated them. A dull rage was in his heart. As they turned
a corner, a woman yelled something at them from an open door, and
two men ran after the hansom for about a hundred yards. The driver
beat at them with his whip.

It is said that passion makes one think
in a circle. Certainly with hideous iteration the bitten lips of Dorian
Gray shaped and reshaped those subtle words that dealt with soul and
sense, till he had found in them the full expression, as it were,
of his mood, and justified, by intellectual approval, passions that
without such justification would still have dominated his temper.
From cell to cell of his brain crept the one thought; and the wild
desire to live, most terrible of all man's appetites, quickened into
force each trembling nerve and fibre. Ugliness that had once been
hateful to him because it made things real, became dear to him now
for that very reason. Ugliness was the one reality. The coarse brawl,
the loathsome den, the crude violence of disordered life, the very
vileness of thief and outcast, were more vivid, in their intense actuality
of impression, than all the gracious shapes of art, the dreamy shadows
of song. They were what he needed for forgetfulness. In three days
he would be free.

Suddenly the man drew up with a jerk at the top
of a dark lane. Over the low roofs and jagged chimney-stacks of the
houses rose the black masts of ships. Wreaths of white mist clung
like ghostly sails to the yards.

"Somewhere about here, sir, ain't
it?" he asked huskily through the trap.

Dorian started and peered
round. "This will do," he answered, and having got out hastily and
given the driver the extra fare he had promised him, he walked quickly
in the direction of the quay. Here and there a lantern gleamed at
the stern of some huge merchantman. The light shook and splintered
in the puddles. A red glare came from an outward-bound steamer that
was coaling. The slimy pavement looked like a wet mackintosh.

He
hurried on towards the left, glancing back now and then to see if
he was being followed. In about seven or eight minutes he reached
a small shabby house that was wedged in between two gaunt factories.
In one of the top-windows stood a lamp. He stopped and gave a peculiar
knock.

After a little time he heard steps in the passage and the
chain being unhooked. The door opened quietly, and he went in without
saying a word to the squat misshapen figure that flattened itself
into the shadow as he passed. At the end of the hall hung a tattered
green curtain that swayed and shook in the gusty wind which had followed
him in from the street. He dragged it aside and entered a long low
room which looked as if it had once been a third-rate dancing-saloon.
Shrill flaring gas-jets, dulled and distorted in the fly-blown mirrors
that faced them, were ranged round the walls. Greasy reflectors of
ribbed tin backed them, making quivering disks of light. The floor
was covered with ochre-coloured sawdust, trampled here and there into
mud, and stained with dark rings of spilled liquor. Some Malays were
crouching by a little charcoal stove, playing with bone counters and
showing their white teeth as they chattered. In one corner, with his
head buried in his arms, a sailor sprawled over a table, and by the
tawdrily painted bar that ran across one complete side stood two haggard
women, mocking an old man who was brushing the sleeves of his coat
with an expression of disgust. "He thinks he's got red ants on him,"
laughed one of them, as Dorian passed by. The man looked at her in
terror and began to whimper. We shall never want a subject for complaint if
we look at benefits on their wrong side.

XXIX. See how unjustly the gifts of heaven are valued even by some who profess themselves philosophers,
who complain that we are not as big as elephants, as swift as stags, as light as birds, as
strong as bulls; that the skins of seals are stronger, of hinds prettier, of bears thicker,
of beavers softer than ours; that dogs excel us in delicacy of scent, eagles in keenness of
sight, crows in length of days, and many beasts in ease of swimming. And although nature itself
does not allow some qualities, as for example strength and swiftness, to be combined in the
same person, yet they call it a monstrous thing that men are not compounded of different and
inconsistent good qualities, and call the gods neglectful of us because we have not been given
health which even our vices cannot destroy, or knowledge of the future. They scarcely refrain
from rising to such a pitch of impudence as to hate nature because we are below the gods, and
not on an equality with them. How much better is it to turn to the contemplation of so many
great blessings, and to be thankful that the gods have been pleased to give us a place second
only to themselves in this most beautiful abode, and that they have appointed us to be the
lords of the earth! Can any one compare us with the animals over whom we rule? Nothing has
been denied us except what could not have been granted. In like manner, thou that takest an
unfair view of the lot of mankind, think what blessings our Father has bestowed upon us, how
far more powerful animals than ourselves we have broken to harness, how we catch those which
are far swifter, how nothing that has life is placed beyond the reach of our weapons! We have
received so many excellencies, so many crafts, above all our mind, which can pierce at once
whatever it is directed against, which is swifter than the stars in their courses, for it arrives
before them at the place which they will reach after many ages; and besides this, so many fruits
of the earth, so much treasure, such masses of various things piled one upon another. You may
go through the whole order of nature, and since you find no entire creature which you would
prefer to be, you may choose from each, the special qualities which you would like to be given
to yourself; then, if you rightly appreciate the partiality of nature for you, you cannot but
confess yourself to be her spoiled child. So it is; the immortal gods have unto this day always
held us most dear, and have bestowed upon us the greatest possible honour, a place nearest
to themselves. We have indeed received great things, yet not too great.

XXX. I have thought it necessary, my friend Liberalis, to state these facts, both because when
speaking of small benefits one ought to make some mention of the greatest, and because also
this shameless and hateful vice (of ingratitude), starting with these, transfers itself from
them to all the rest. If a man scorn these, the greatest of all benefits, to whom will he feel
gratitude, what gift will he regard as valuable or deserving to be returned: to whom will he
be grateful for his safety or his life, if he denies that he has received from the gods that
existence which he begs from them daily? He, therefore, who teaches men to be grateful, pleads
the cause not only of men, but even of the gods, for though they, being placed above all desires,
cannot be in want of anything, yet we can nevertheless offer them our gratitude.

No one is justified in seeking an excuse for ingratitude in his own weakness or poverty, or
in saying, "What am I to do, and how? When can I repay my debt to my superiors the lords of
heaven and earth?" Avaricious as you are, it is easy for you to give them thanks, without expense;
lazy though you be, you can do it without labour. At the same instant at which you received
your debt towards them, if you wish to repay it, you have done as much as any one can do, for
he returns a benefit who receives it with good will.

XXXI. This paradox of the Stoic philosophy, that he returns a benefit who receives it with
good will, is, in my opinion, either far from admirable, or else it is incredible. For if we
look at everything merely from the point of view of our intentions, every man has done as much
as he chose to do; and since filial piety, good faith, justice, and in short every virtue is
complete within itself, a man may be grateful in intention even though he may not be able to
lift a hand to prove his gratitude. Whenever a man obtains what he aimed at, he receives the
fruit of his labour. When a man bestows a benefit, at what does he aim? clearly to be of service
and afford pleasure to him upon whom he bestows it. If he does what he wishes, if his purpose
reaches me and fills us each with joy, he has gained his object. He does not wish anything
to be given to him in return, or else it becomes an exchange of commodities, not a bestowal
of benefits. A man steers well who reaches the port for which he started: a dart hurled by
a steady hand performs its duty if it hits the mark; one who bestows a benefit wishes it to
be received with gratitude; he gets what he wanted if it be well received. "But," you say,
"he hoped for some profit also." Then it was not a benefit, the property of which is to think
nothing of any repayment. I receive what was given me in the same spirit in which it was given:
then I have repaid it. If this be not true, then this best of deeds has this worst of conditions
attached to it, that it depends entirely upon fortune whether I am grateful or not, for if
my fortune is adverse I can make no repayment. The intention is enough. What then? am I not
to do whatever I may be able to repay it, and ought I not ever to be on the watch for an opportunity
of filling the bosom [Footnote: Sinus, the fold of the toga over the breast, used as a pocket
by the Romans. The great French actor Talma, when dressed for the first time in correct classical
costume, indignantly asked where he was to put his snuff-box.] of him from whom I have received
any kindness? True; but a benefit is in an evil plight if we cannot be grateful for it even
when we are empty-handed.

XXXII. "A man," it is argued, "who has received a benefit, however gratefully he may have received
it, has not yet accomplished all his duty, for there remains the part of repayment; just as
in playing at ball it is something to catch the ball cleverly and carefully, but a man is not
called a good player unless he can handily and quickly send back the ball which he has caught."
This analogy is imperfect; and why? Because to do this creditably depends upon the movement
and activity of the body, and not upon the mind: and an act of which we judge entirely by the
eye, ought to be all clearly displayed. But if a man caught the ball as he ought to do, I should
not call him a bad player for not returning it, if his delay in returning it was not caused
by his own fault. "Yet," say you, "although the player is not wanting in skill, because he
did one part of his duty, and was able to do the other part, yet in such a case the game is
imperfect, for its perfection lies in sending the ball backwards and forwards." I am unwilling
to expose this fallacy further; let us think that it is the game, not the player that is imperfect:
so likewise in the subject which we are discussing, the thing which is given lacks something,
because another equal thing ought to be returned for it, but the mind of the giver lacks nothing,
because it has found another mind equal to itself, and as far as intentions go, has effected
what it wished.

XXXIII. A man bestows a benefit upon me: I receive it just as he wished it to be received:
then he gets at once what he wanted, and the only thing which he wanted, and therefore I have
proved myself grateful. After this it remains for me to enjoy my own resources, with the addition
of an advantage conferred upon me by one whom I have obliged; this advantage is not the remainder
of an imperfect service, but an addition to a perfected service. [Footnote: Nothing is wanted
to make a benefit, conferred from good motives, perfect: if it is returned, the gratitude is
to be counted as net profit.] For example, Phidias makes a statue. Now the product of an art
is one thing, and that of a trade is another. It is the business of the art to make the thing
which he wished to make, and that of the trade to make it with a profit. Phidias has completed
his work, even though he does not sell it. The product, therefore, of his work is threefold:
there is the consciousness of having made it, which he receives when his work is completed;
there is the fame which he receives; and thirdly, the advantage which he obtains by it, in
influence, or by selling it, or otherwise. In like manner the first fruit of a benefit is the
consciousness of it, which we feel when we have bestowed it upon the person whom we chose;
secondly and thirdly there is the credit which we gain by doing so, and there are those things
which we may receive in exchange for it. So when a benefit has been graciously received, the
giver has already received gratitude, but has not yet received recompense for it: that which
we owe in return is therefore something apart from the benefit itself, for we have paid for
the benefit itself when we accept it in a grateful spirit.

XXXIV. "What," say you, "can a man repay a benefit, though he does nothing?" He has taken the
first step, he has offered you a good thing with good feeling, and, which is the characteristic
of friendship, has placed you both on the same footing. In the next place, a benefit is not
repaid in the same manner as a loan: you have no reason for expecting me to offer you any payment;
the account between us depends upon the feelings alone. What I say will not appear difficult,
although it may not at first accord with your ideas, if you will do me the favour to remember
that there are more things than there are words to express them. There is an enormous mass
of things without names, which we do not speak of under distinctive names of their own, but
by the names of other things transferred to them. We speak of our own foot, of the foot of
a couch, of a sail, or of a poem; we apply the word 'dog' to a hound, a fish, and a star. Because
we have not enough words to assign a separate name to each thing, we borrow a name whenever
we want one. Bravery is the virtue which rightly despises danger, or the science of repelling,
sustaining, or inviting dangers: yet we call a brave man a gladiator, and we use the same word
for a good-for-nothing slave, who is led by rashness to defy death. Economy is the science
of avoiding unnecessary expenditure, or the art of using one's income with moderation: yet
we call a man of mean and narrow mind, most economical, although there is an immeasurable distance
between moderation and meanness. These things are naturally distinct, yet the poverty of our
language compels us to call both these men economical, just as he who views slight accidents
with rational contempt, and he who without reason runs into danger are alike called brave.
Thus a benefit is both a beneficent action, and also is that which is bestowed by that action,
such as money, a house, an office in the state: there is but one name for them both, though
their force and power are widely different.

XXXV. Wherefore, give me your attention, and you will soon perceive that I say nothing to which
you can object. That benefit which consists of the action is repaid when we receive it graciously;
that other, which consists of something material, we have not then repaid, but we hope to do
so. The debt of goodwill has been discharged by a return of goodwill; the material debt demands
a material return. Thus, although we may declare that he who has received a benefit with good-will
has returned the favour, yet we counsel him to return to the giver something of the same kind
as that which he has received. Some part of what we have said departs from the conventional
line of thought, and then rejoins it by another path. We declare that a wise man cannot receive
an injury; yet, if a man hits him with his fist, that man will be found guilty of doing him
an injury. We declare that a fool can possess nothing; yet if a man stole anything from a fool,
we should find that man guilty of theft. We declare that all men are mad, yet we do not dose
all men with hellebore; but we put into the hands of these very persons, whom we call madmen,
both the right of voting and of pronouncing judgment. Similarly, we say that a man who has
received a benefit with good-will has returned the favour, yet we leave him in debt nevertheless--bound
to repay it even though he has repaid it. This is not to disown benefits, but is an encouragement
to us neither to fear to receive benefits, nor to faint under the too great burden of them.
"Good things have been given to me; I have been preserved from starving; I have been saved
from the misery of abject poverty; my life, and what is dearer than life, my liberty, has been
preserved. How shall I be able to repay these favours? When will the day come upon which I
can prove my gratitude to him?" When a man speaks thus, the day has already come. Receive a
benefit, embrace it, rejoice, not that you have received it, but that you have to owe it and
return it; then you will never be in peril of the great sin of being rendered ungrateful by
mischance. I will not enumerate any difficulties to you, lest you should despair, and faint
at the prospect of a long and laborious servitude. I do not refer you to the future; do it
with what means you have at hand. You never will be grateful unless you are so straightway.
What, then, will you do? You need not take up arms, yet perhaps you may have to do so; you
need not cross the seas, yet it may be that you will pay your debt, even when the wind threatens
to blow a gale. Do you wish to return the benefit? Then receive it graciously; you have then
returned the favour--not, indeed, so that you can think yourself to have repaid it, but so
that you can owe it with a quieter conscience.

BOOK III.

I.

Not to return gratitude for benefits, my AEbutius Liberalis, is both base in itself, and is
thought base by all men; wherefore even ungrateful men complain of ingratitude, and yet what
all condemn is at the same time rooted in all; and so far do men sometimes run into the other
extreme that some of them become our bitterest enemies, not merely after receiving benefits
from us, but because they have received them. I cannot deny that some do this out of sheer
badness of nature; but more do so because lapse of time destroys their remembrance, for time
gradually effaces what they felt vividly at the moment. I remember having had an argument with
you about this class of persons, whom you wished to call forgetful rather than ungrateful,
as if that which caused a man to be ungrateful was any excuse for his being so, or as if the
fact of this happening to a man prevented his being ungrateful, when we know that it only happens
to ungrateful men. There are many classes of the ungrateful, as there are of thieves or of
homicides, who all have the same fault, though there is a great variety in its various forms.
The man is ungrateful who denies that he has received a benefit; who pretends that he has not
received it; who does not return it. The most ungrateful man of all is he who forgets it. The
others, though they do not repay it, yet feel their debt, and possess some traces of worth,
though obstructed by their bad conscience. They may by some means and at some time be brought
to show their gratitude, if, for instance, they be pricked by shame, if they conceive some
noble ambition such as occasionally rises even in the breasts of the wicked, if some easy opportunity
of doing so offers; but the man from whom all recollection of the benefit has passed away can
never become grateful. Which of the two do you call the worse--he who is ungrateful for kindness,
or he who does not even remember it? The eyes which fear to look at the light are diseased,
but those which cannot see it are blind. It is filial impiety not to love one's parents, but
not to recognise them is madness.

II. Who is so ungrateful as he who has so completely laid aside and cast away that which ought
to be in the forefront of his mind and ever before him, that he knows it not? It is clear that
if forgetfulness of a benefit steals over a man, he cannot have often thought about repaying it.

In short, repayment requires gratitude, time, opportunity, and the help of fortune; whereas,
he who remembers a benefit is grateful for it, and that too without expenditure. Since gratitude
demands neither labour, wealth, nor good fortune, he who fails to render it has no excuse behind
which to shelter himself; for he who places a benefit so far away that it is out of his sight,
never could have meant to be grateful for it. Just as those tools which are kept in use, and
are daily touched by the hand, are never in danger of growing rusty, while those which are
not brought before our eyes, and lie as if superfluous, not being required for common use,
collect dirt by the mere lapse of time, so likewise that which our thoughts frequently turn
over and renew never passes from our memory, which only loses those things to which it seldom
directs its eyes.

III. Besides this, there are other causes which at times erase the greatest services from our
minds. The first and most powerful of these is that, being always intent upon new objects of
desire, we think, not of what we have, but of what we are striving to obtain. Those whose mind
is fixed entirely upon what they hope to gain, regard with contempt all that is their own already.
It follows that since men's eagerness for something new makes them undervalue whatever they
have received, they do not esteem those from whom they have received it. As long as we are
satisfied with the position we have gained, we love our benefactor, we look up to him, and
declare that we owe our position entirely to him; then we begin to entertain other aspirations,
and hurry forward to attain them after the manner of human beings, who when they have gained
much always covet more; straightway all that we used to regard as benefits slip from our memory,
and we no longer consider the advantages which we enjoy over others, but only the insolent
prosperity of those who have outstripped us. Now no one can at the same time be both jealous
and grateful, because those who are jealous are querulous and sad, while the grateful are joyous.
In the next place, since none of us think of any time but the present, and but few turn back
their thoughts to the past, it results that we forget our teachers, and all the benefits which
we have obtained from them, because we have altogether left our childhood behind us: thus,
all that was done for us in our youth perishes unremembered, because our youth itself is never
reviewed. What has been is regarded by every one, not only as past, but as gone; and for the
same reason, our memory is weak for what is about to happen in the future.

IV. Here I must do Epicurus the justice to say that he constantly complains of our ingratitude
for past benefits, because we cannot bring back again, or count among our present pleasures,
those good things which we have received long ago, although no pleasures can be more undeniable
than those which cannot be taken from us. Present good is not yet altogether complete, some
mischance may interrupt it; the future is in suspense, and uncertain; but what is past is laid
up in safety. How can any man feel gratitude for benefits, if he skips through his whole life
entirely engrossed with the present and the future? It is remembrance that mates men grateful;
and the more men hope, the less they remember.

V. In the same way, my Liberalis, as some things remain in our memory as soon as they are learned,
while to know others it is not enough to have learned them, for our knowledge slips away from
us unless it be kept up--I allude to geometry and astronomy, and such other sciences as are
Hard to remember because of their intricacy--so the greatness of some benefits prevents their
being forgotten, while others, individually less, though many more in number, and bestowed
at different times, pass from our minds, because, as I have stated above, we do not constantly
think about them, and do not willingly recognize how much we owe to each of our benefactors.
Listen to the words of those who ask for favours. There is not one of them who does not declare
that his remembrance will be eternal, who does not vow himself your devoted servant and slave,
or find, if he can, some even greater expression of humility with which to pledge himself.
After a brief space of time these same men avoid their former expressions, thinking them abject,
and scarcely befitting free-born men; afterwards they arrive at the same point to which, as
I suppose, the worst and most ungrateful of men come--that is, they forget. So little does
forgetfulness excuse ingratitude, that even the remembrance of a benefit may leave us ungrateful.

VI. The question has been raised, whether this most odious vice ought to go unpunished; and
whether the law commonly made use of in the schools, by which we can proceed against a man
for ingratitude, ought to be adopted by the State also, since all men agree that it is just.
"Why not?" you may say, "seeing that even cities cast in each other's teeth the services which
they have performed to one another, and demand from the children some return for benefits conferred
upon their fathers?" On the other hand, our ancestors, who were most admirable men, made demands
upon their enemies alone, and both gave and lost their benefits with magnanimity. With the
exception of Macedonia, no nation has ever established an action at law for ingratitude. And
this is a strong argument against its being established, because all agree in blaming crime;
and homicide, poisoning, parricide, and sacrilege are visited with different penalties in different
countries, but everywhere with some penalty; whereas this most common vice is nowhere punished,
though it is everywhere blamed. We do not acquit it; but as it would be most difficult to reckon
accurately the penalty for so varying a matter, we condemn it only to be hated, and place it
upon the list of those crimes which we refer for judgment to the gods.

VII. Many arguments occur to me which prove that this vice ought not to come under the action
of the law. First of all, the best part of a benefit is lost if the benefit can be sued for
at law, as in the case of a loan, or of letting and hiring. Indeed, the finest part of a benefit
is that we have given it without considering whether we shall lose it or not, that we have
left all this to the free choice of him who receives it: if I call him before a judge, it begins
to be not a benefit, but a loan. Next, though it is a most honourable thing to show gratitude,
it ceases to be honourable if it be forced, for in that case no one will praise a grateful
man any more than he praises him who restores the money which was deposited in his keeping,
or who pays what he borrowed without the intervention of a judge. We should therefore spoil
the two finest things in human life,--a grateful man and a beneficent man; for what is there
admirable in one who does not give but merely lends a benefit, or in one who repays it, not
because he wishes, but because he is forced to do so? There is no credit in being grateful,
unless it is safe to be ungrateful. Besides this, all the courts would hardly be enough for
the action of this one law. Who would not plead under it? Who would not be pleaded against?
for every one exalts his own merits, every one magnifies even the smallest matters which he
has bestowed upon another. Besides this, those things which form the subject of a judicial
inquiry can be distinctly defined, and cannot afford unlimited licence to the judge; wherefore
a good cause is in a better position if it before a judge than before an arbitrator, because
the words of the law tie down a judge and define certain limits beyond which he may not pass,
whereas the conscience of an arbitrator is free and not fettered by any rules, so that he can
either give or take away, and can arrange his decision, not according to the precepts of law
and justice, but just as his own kindly feeling or compassion may prompt him. An action for
ingratitude would not bind a judge, but would place him in the position of an autocrat. It
cannot be known what or how great a benefit is; all that would be really important would be,
how indulgently the judge might interpret it. No law defines an ungrateful person, often, indeed,
one who repays what he has received is ungrateful, and one who has not returned it is grateful.
Even an unpractised judge can give his vote upon some matters; for instance, when the thing
to be determined is whether something has or has not been done, when a dispute is terminated
by the parties giving written bonds, or when the casting up of accounts decides between the
disputants. When, however, motives have to be guessed at, when matters upon which wisdom alone
can decide, are brought into court, they cannot be tried by a judge taken at random from the
list of "select judges," [Footnote: See Smith's "Dict. of Antiq.," s. v] whom property and
the inheritance of an equestrian fortune [Footnote: 400,000 sesterces] has placed upon the roll.

VIII. Ingratitude, therefore, is not only matter unfit to be brought into court, but no judge
could be found fit to try it; and this you will not be surprised at, if you examine the difficulties
of any one who should attempt to prosecute a man upon such a charge. One man may have given
a large sum of money, but he is rich and would not feel it; another may have given it at the
cost of his entire inheritance. The sum given is the same in each case, but the benefit conferred
is not the same. Add another instance: suppose that to redeem a debtor from slavery one man
paid money from his own private means, while another man paid the same sum, but had to borrow
it or beg for it, and allow himself to be laid under a great obligation to some one; would
you rank the man who so easily bestowed his benefit on an equality with him who was obliged
to receive a benefit himself before he could bestow it? Some benefits are great, not because
of their amount, but because of the time at which they are bestowed; it is a benefit to give
an estate whose fertility can bring down the price of corn, and it is a benefit to give a loaf
of bread in time of famine; it is a benefit to give provinces through which flow vast navigable
rivers, and it is a benefit, when men are parched with thirst, and can scarcely draw breath
through their dry throats, to show them a spring of water. Who will compare these cases with
one another, or weigh one against the other? It is hard to give a decision when it is not the
thing given, but its meaning, which has to be considered; though what is given is the same,
yet if it be given under different circumstances it has a different value. A man may have bestowed
a benefit upon me, but unwillingly; he may have complained of having given it; he may have
looked at me with greater haughtiness than he was wont to do; he may have been so slow in giving
it, that he would have done me a greater service if he had promptly refused it. How could a
judge estimate the value of these things, when words, hesitation, or looks can destroy all
their claim to gratitude?

IX. What, again, could he do, seeing that some things are called benefits because they are
unduly coveted, whilst others are not benefits at all, according to this common valuation,
yet are of even greater value, though not so showy? You call it a benefit to cause a man to
be adopted as a member of a powerful city, to get him enrolled among the knights, or to defend
one who is being tried for his life: what do you say of him who gives useful advice? of him
who holds you back when you would rush into crime? of him who strikes the sword from the hands
of the suicide? of him who by his power of consolation brings back to the duties of life one
who was plunged in grief, and eager to follow those whom he had lost? of him who sits at the
bedside of the sick man, and who, when health and recovery depend upon seizing the right moment,
administers food in due season, stimulates the failing veins with wine, or calls in the physician
to the dying man? Who can estimate the value of such services as these? who can bid us weigh
dissimilar benefits one with another? "I gave you a house," says one. Yes, but I forewarned
you that your own house would come down upon your head. "I gave you an estate," says he. True,
but I gave a plank to you when shipwrecked. "I fought for you and received wounds for you,"
says another. But I saved your life by keeping silence. Since a benefit is both given and returned
differently by different people, it is hard to make them balance.

X. Besides this, no day is appointed for repayment of a benefit, as there is for borrowed money;
consequently he who has not yet repaid a benefit may do so hereafter: for tell me, pray, within
what time a man is to be declared ungrateful? The greatest benefits cannot be proved by evidence;
they often lurk in the silent consciousness of two men only; are we to introduce the rule of
not bestowing benefits without witnesses? Next, what punishment are we to appoint for the ungrateful?
is there to be one only for all, though the benefits which they have received are different?
or should the punishment be varying, greater or less according to the benefit which each has
received? Are our valuations to be restricted to pecuniary fines? what are we to do, seeing
that in some cases the benefit conferred is life, and things dearer than life? What punishment
is to be assigned to ingratitude for these? One less than the benefit? That would be unjust.
One equal to it; death? What could be more inhuman than to cause benefits to result in cruelty?

XI. It may be argued, "Parents have certain privileges: these are regarded as exempt from the
action of ordinary rules, and so also ought to be the case with other beneficent persons."
Nay; mankind has assigned a peculiar sanctity to the position of parents, because it was advantageous
that children should be reared, and people had to be tempted into undergoing the toil of doing
so, because the issue of their experiment was doubtful. One cannot say to them, as one does
to others who bestow benefits, "Choose the man to whom you give: you must only blame yourself
if you are deceived; help the deserving." In rearing children nothing depends upon the judgment
of those who rear them; it is a matter of hope: in order, therefore, that people may be more
willing to embark upon this lottery, it was right that they should be given a certain authority;
and since it is useful for youth to be governed, we have placed their parents in the position
of domestic magistrates, under whose guardianship their lives may be ruled. Von Merck, who has been
Cedillo's right-hand man, was during the World War a German spy stationed in Brussels. A member
of Cedillo's staff[5] he traveled constantly between San Luis Potosí, where the arms were cached,
and the Nazi Legation in Mexico City.

On December 21, 1937, Baron von Merck flew to Guatemala--the same day that a cargo of arms from
Germany was to be landed off the wild jungle coast of Campeche in Southern Mexico.

Guatemala, just south of Mexico, is the most thoroughly organized fascist country in Central or
South America.

Its chief industries, coffee and bananas, are virtually controlled by Germans, whose enormous
plantations overlap into the state of Chiapas, Mexico. But President Jorge Ubico, who is not
much of an Aryan, prefers Mussolini's brand of fascism because the Nazi theory of Nordic supremacy
does not strike a sympathetic chord in the President's heart. As a result, the Italian Minister
to Guatemala is Ubico's adviser on almost all matters of state.

Guiseppe Sotanis, a mysterious Italian officer who sits in the Gran Hotel in San José, Costa Rica, collecting
stamps and studying his immaculate fingernails, arranges for shipments of Italian arms into Guatemala.
A few months ago Sotanis, the Italian minister to Guatemala, and Ubico met in Guatemala City. Shortly
thereafter the Italian arms manufacturing company, Bredda, sent Ubico two hundred eighty portable
machine guns, sixty anti-aircraft machine guns and seventy small caliber cannon.

But President Ubico is not hopelessly addicted to one brand of fascism. Nazi ships make no
attempt to conceal their landing of arms and munitions at Puerto Barrios. From there they
are transported by car, river and horse into the dense chicle forests in the mountain regions,
then across the Guatemalan border into Chiapas and Campeche.

During March, 1938, mysterious activities took place in the heart of the chicle forests in Campeche.
The region is a dense jungle inhabited by primitive Indian tribes. There is little reason for
anyone to build an airport in this territory, much of which has not
even been explored.

But if the Mexican Government will instruct its air squadron to go to Campeche and fly forty
miles north of the Rio Hondo and a little west of Quintana Roo border, they will find a completed
airport in the heart of the chicle jungle; and if they will fly a little due west of the small
villages of La Tuxpena and Esperanza in Campeche, they will find two more secret airports.

The
Mexican Government knows that arms are being smuggled in through its own ports, across the Guatemalan
border, and across the wide, sparsely inhabited two-thousand-mile stretch of American border. Both
American and Mexican border patrols have been increased, but it is almost impossible to watch
the entire region between Southern California and Brownsville. Few contraband runners are caught,
apparently because neither the American nor Mexican Governments seem
to know the routes followed or who the leading smugglers are.

On February 12, 1938, José Rebey and his brother Pablo, who live in the Altar district of Sonora
and know every foot of the desert, drove to Tucson, Arizona, where they met two unidentified Americans.
On February 16, 1938, José Rebey and Francisco Cuen, old and close friends of Gov. Roman Yocupicio,
drove a Buick to the sandy, deserted wastes near Sonoyta, just south of the American border where
one of the two unidentified Americans delivered a carload of cases securely covered with sheet
metal. As soon as the cases were transferred into Rebey's car, he turned back on Sonora's flat,
dusty roads, passing Caborca, La Cienega, and turning on the sun-dried rutted road to Ures,
which lies parched and dry in the semi-tropical sun.

Ures is the central cache for arms smuggled into Sonora by Yocupicio, and the Rebey brothers
and Cuen are among the chief contraband runners. The load they carried that day consisted of
Thompson guns and cartridges, and the route followed is the one they generally use. A secondary
route used by one of Cuen's chief aids, a police delegate from the El Tiro mine, lies over
the roads to Ures by way of Altar.

If in time of war it becomes necessary for guard or patrol work to deflect any troops from
the army, or ships from the navy, it is of advantage to the enemy. If a coming war found the
United States lined up with the democratic as against the fascist powers and serious uprisings
broke out in Mexico, it would require several U.S. regiments to patrol the border and a number
of U.S. ships to watch the thousands of miles of coast line to prevent arms running to American
countries sympathetic to the Berlin-Rome-Tokyo axis.

The three fascist powers that have cast longing eyes upon Central and South America have apparently divided
their activities in the Americas, with Japan concentrating on the coast lines and the Panama
Canal, Germany on the large Central and South American countries and Italy upon the small ones.

In
Mexico, Nazi agents work directly with Mexican fascist groups, and have undertaken to carry the
brunt of spreading anti-democratic propaganda to turn popular sentiment against the "Colossus
of the North," and to develop a receptive attitude toward the totalitarian form of government.

Italy
concentrates on espionage, with particular attention to Mexican aid to Loyalist Spain. It
was the Italian espionage network in Mexico which learned the course of the ill-fated "Mar
Cantabrico" which left New York and Vera Cruz with a cargo of arms for the Loyalists and was
intercepted and sunk by an Insurgent cruiser.

Though Germany, even more than Italy, is utilizing her propaganda machine in the Americas' markets,
the Japanese are not troubling about that just yet. Their commercial missions seem to be much
less interested in establishing business connections than in taking photographs. The chief
commercial activity all three countries are intensely interested in is getting concessions from Mexico
for iron, manganese and oil--materials essential for war. President Lázaro Cárdenas, however, has
stated his dislike of fascism on several occasions. Since Germany, Japan and Italy must obtain
these products wherever they can get them, it would be to their advantage if a government more
friendly to fascism were in power. But, should that prove impossible, the existence of a strong,
fascist movement would have, in time of war, tremendous potentialities for sabotage.

Hence, Mexico is today being battered by pro-fascist propaganda broadcasts from Germany on special
short-wave beams, and Nazi and fascist agents surreptitiously meet with discontented generals
to weave a network throughout the country.

The radio propaganda is devoted chiefly to selling the wonders of totalitarian government, and
to the dissemination of subtle, indirect comments calculated to turn popular feeling against the
United States. In addition to regular broadcasts, material printed in Spanish and in German
by the Fichte Bund with headquarters in Hamburg, Germany, is smuggled
into Mexico in commercial shipments.

A Nazi bund to direct this propaganda was organized secretly because of the government's unfriendly
attitude toward fascism. The bund operates as the Deutsche Volksgemeinschaft and its propaganda
center functions under the name of the "United German Charities." This organization, on the
top floor of the building at 80 Uruguay Street, Mexico City, is actually the "Brown House,"
in direct contact with Nazi propaganda headquarters in Hamburg.

Some of the propaganda distributed in Mexico is smuggled off Nazi ships docking in Los Angeles,
and is transported across the American border by agents working under Hermann Schwinn, director
of Nazi activities for the West Coast of the United States. The propaganda sent by Schwinn
across the American border is chiefly for distribution around Guaymas, where a special effort
is being made to win the sympathy of the people. Meanwhile Yocupicio caches arms in Ures and the bland
Japanese continue charting the harbors and coast lines.

The Nazis began to build fascism in Mexico right after Hitler got into power. In 1933 Schwinn
called a meeting in Mexicali of several Nazi agents operating out of Los Angeles, including General
Rodriguez, and several members of a veterans organization. It was at this meeting that the
Mexican Gold shirts were organized. Under the direction of Rodriguez and his right-hand men (Antonio
F. Escobar was one of them), the fascist organization drilled and paraded, but little official
attention was paid to them. Five years ago few people realized the intensity and possibilities
of Nazi propaganda and organization. The only ones in Mexico who watched the growth of the fascist
military body were the trade-unionists and the Communists. They remembered what happened in
Italy and Germany when the Black Shirts and the Brown Shirts were
permitted to grow strong.

On November 20, 1935, Rodriguez and his organization staged a military demonstration in Mexico City, and
marched upon the President's palace. Trade-unionists, liberals and Communists barred their way. When the
pitched battle was over, five Gold Shirts were dead, some sixty persons wounded, and Rodriguez
himself had been stabbed by a woman worker, on her lips the furious cry, "Down with fascism!"

When the Gold Shirt leader was discharged from the hospital, he found that his organization
had been made illegal, and he himself exiled. Rodriguez went to El Paso, Texas, and immediately,
working through Escobar, set about establishing the "Confederation of the Middle Class" to
take over now the illegal Gold Shirt work and consolidate the various Mexican fascist groups.
Its headquarters was established at 40 Passo de la Reforma.

Rodriguez kept in touch with Schwinn through Henry Allen, a native American of San Diego, who acts
as liaison man. It was Allen, on orders from Schwinn, who last year secretly met in Guaymas
Ramon F. Iturbe, a member of the Mexican Chamber of Deputies. Iturbe is in constant touch with
the fascist groups in Mexico City.

The Gold Shirts smuggled arms into Mexico along the border between
Laredo and Brownsville, and cached them in Monterrey.

On January 31, 1938, Gold Shirts attempted to attack Matamoros, near Brownsville. A Mexican
policeman was killed and another wounded in the fighting. Two days later Gold Shirts surrounded
Reynosa, some distance west of Matamoros, but met peasants armed with rifles, pistols and knives.
The fascists withdrew and Rodriguez vanished, only to appear in San
Diego, California, on February 19, 1938 for a secret meeting with
Plutarco Elias Calles, the former President of Mexico.

After a three-hour conference Rodriguez went to Los Angeles, met Schwinn, and proceeded to Mission,
Texas, where he established new headquarters.

A few days after these conferences, he sent two men into Mexico under forged passports to discuss
closer cooperation among the fascist leaders. The men sent into Mexico were an American named Mario
Baldwin, one of Rodriguez's chief assistants, and a Mexican named Sanchez Yanez. They established
headquarters at 31 José Joaquin Herrera, apartment 1-T, and met for their secret conferences in
Jesus de Avila's tailor shop at 22 Isabel la Catolico.

In the latter part of June, 1935, an amiable bar fly arrived in Mexico City from Berlin as
civilian attaché to the German Legation. A civilian attaché is the lowest grade in the diplomatic
ranks and the salary is just about enough to keep him going. Nevertheless, Dr. Heinrich Northe,
at that time not quite thirty, and not especially well-to-do, established a somewhat luxurious
place at 64 Tokyo St. and bought a private airplane for "pleasure jaunts" about Mexico. Northe
is seldom at the Nazi Legation. He is more apt to be found in Sonora, where Yocupicio is storing
arms and where the Japanese fishing fleet is active, or in Acapulco, whose harbor fascinates
the Japanese. He used to make frequent visits to Cedillo just before the General started his rebellion.
On March 4, 1938, Northe took off "for a vacation" in the Panama Canal Zone. He stopped off in Guatemala
on the way down.

The persistently vacationing commercial attaché, before coming to Mexico, was part of the Gestapo
network in Moscow and Bulgaria. Immediately after the Nazis got control of Germany, Northe
went into the German "diplomatic service," and was one of the first secret agents sent to the
German Embassy in Moscow.

The Russian secret service apparently watched him a little too closely, for he was shifted to
Sofia, Bulgaria, where he bought a private plane and flew wherever he wished. In 1935, when the
signers of the "anti-Communist pact" decided to concentrate upon Mexico, Northe was transferred
to Mexico City.

One of Northe's chief aids is a German adventurer who was a spy during the World War. When the War
ended, Hans Heinrich von Holleuffer, of 36 Danubio St., Mexico City,
worked hard at earning a dishonest penny in Republican Germany. When
the law got after him, he skipped to Mexico, where, without even pausing
for breath, he went to work on his fellow countrymen in the New World.
Berlin asked for his arrest and extradition and von Holleuffer fled
to Guatemala. That was in 1926. He came back to Mexico in 1931 under
the name of Hans Helbing.

When Hitler got into power von Holleuffer's
brother-in-law became a high official in the Gestapo. Since there
was no danger of the Nazis extraditing him on charges of fraud and
forgery, Hans Helbing became Hans Heinrich von Holleuffer again and,
without any visible means of support, established a swanky residence
at the above address, got an expensive automobile, a chauffeur, and
some very good-looking maids. Since he has not defrauded anyone lately,
the German colony in Mexico still wonders how he does it.

He does
it by being in charge of arms smuggling from Germany to Mexican fascists.
During the latter part of December, 1937, he directed the unloading
of one of the heaviest cargoes of arms yet shipped into Mexico. Northe
had informed von Holleuffer that a German vessel whose name even Northe
had not yet been given, would be ready to land a cargo of guns, munitions
and mountain artillery somewhere along the wild and deserted coast
of Campeche where there are miles of shore with not even an Indian
around. Von Holleuffer was instructed to arrange for unloading the
cargo and having it removed into the interior.

On December 19, 1937,
von Holleuffer arranged a meeting in Mexico City with Julio Rosenberg
of 13 San Juan de Letran and Curt Kaiser at 34 Bolivar, the latter's
home. He offered them fifty thousand pesos to take the contraband
off the boat and transport it through the chicle jungles to the destination
he would give them.

Shortly after the Japanese-Nazi pact was signed,
the Japanese Government arranged with the somewhat naive Mexican Government
for Japanese fishing experts to conduct "scientific explorations"
along Mexico's Pacific Coast in return for teaching Mexicans how to
catch fish scientifically. The agreement provided that two Japanese,
J. Yamashito and Y. Matsui, be employed by the Mexican Government
for the exploratory work. Whatever comes from this, is free; indeed, we are
not allowed to order all things to be done, nor are slaves compelled to obey us in all things;
they will not carry out treasonable orders, or lend their hands to an act of crime.

XXI. There are some things which the law neither enjoins nor forbids; it is in these that a
slave finds the means of bestowing benefits. As long as we only receive what is generally demanded
from a slave, that is mere service; when more is given than a slave need afford us, it is a
benefit; as soon as what he does begins to partake of the affection of a friend, it can no
longer be called service. There are certain things with which a master is bound to provide
his slave, such as food and clothing; no one calls this a benefit; but supposing that he indulges
his slave, educates him above his station, teaches him arts which free-born men learn, that
is a benefit. The converse is true in the case of the slave; anything which goes beyond the
rules of a slave's duty, which is done of his own free will, and not in obedience to orders,
is a benefit, provided it be of sufficient importance to be called by such a name if bestowed
by any other person.

XXII. It has pleased Chrysippus to define a slave as "a hireling for life." Just as a hireling
bestows a benefit when he does more than he engaged himself to do, so when a slave's love for
his master raises him above his condition and urges him to do something noble--something which
would be a credit even to men more fortunate by birth--he surpasses the hopes of his master,
and is a benefit found in the house. Do you think it is just that we should be angry with our
slaves when they do less than their duty, and that we should not be grateful to them when they
do more? Do you wish to know when their service is not a benefit? When the question can be
asked, "What if he had refused to do it?" When he does that which he might have refused to
do, we must praise his good will. Benefits and wrongs are opposites; a slave can bestow a benefit
upon his master, if he can receive a wrong from his master. Now an official has been appointed
to hear complaints of the wrongs done by masters to their slaves, whose duty it is to restrain
cruelty and lust, or avarice in providing them with the necessaries of life. What follows,
then? Is it the master who receives a benefit from his slave? nay, rather, it is one man who
receives it from another. Lastly, he did all that lay in his power; he bestowed a benefit upon
his master; it lies in your power to receive or not to receive it from a slave. Yet who is
so exalted, that fortune may not make him need the aid even of the lowliest?

XXIII. I shall now quote a number of instances of benefits, not all alike, some even contradictory.
Some slaves have given their master life, some death; have saved him when perishing, or, as
if that were not enough, have saved him by their own death; others have helped their master
to die, some have saved his life by stratagem. Claudius Quadrigarius tells us in the eighteenth
book of his "Annals," that when Grumentum was being besieged, and had been reduced to the greatest
straits, two slaves deserted to the enemy, and did valuable service. Afterwards, when the city
was taken, and the victors were rushing wildly in every direction, they ran before every one
else along the streets, which they well knew, to the house in which they had been slaves, and
drove their mistress before them; when they were asked who she might be, they answered that
she was their mistress, and a most cruel one, and that they were leading her away for punishment.
They led her outside the walls, and concealed her with the greatest care until the fighting
was over; then, as the soldiery, satisfied with the sack of the city, quickly resumed the manners
of Romans, they also returned to their own countrymen, and themselves restored their mistress
to them. She manumitted each of them on the spot, and was not ashamed to receive her life from
men over whom she had held the power of life and death. She might, indeed, especially congratulate
herself upon this; for had she been saved otherwise, she would merely have received a common
and hackneyed piece of kindness, whereas, by being saved as she was, she became a glorious
legend, and an example to two cities. In the confusion of the captured city, when every one
was thinking only of his own safety, all deserted her except these deserters; but they, that
they might prove what had been their intentions in effecting that desertion, deserted again
from the victors to the captive, wearing the masks of unnatural murderers.

They thought--and this was the greatest part of the service which they rendered--they were
content to seem to have murdered their mistress, if thereby their mistress might be saved from
murder. Believe me, it is the mark of no slavish soul to purchase a noble deed by the semblance
of crime.

When Vettius, the praetor of the Marsi, was being led into the presence of the Roman general,
his slave snatched a sword from the soldier who was dragging him along, and first slew his
master. Then he said, "It is now time for me to look to myself; I have already set my master
free," and with these words transfixed himself with one blow. Can you tell me of anyone who
saved his master more gloriously?

XXIV. When Caesar was besieging Corfinium, Domitius, who was shut up in the city, ordered a
slave of his own, who was also a physician, to give him poison. Observing the man's hesitation,
he said, "Why do you delay, as though the whole business was in your power? I ask for death
with arms in my hands." Then the slave assented, and gave him a harmless drug to drink. When
Domitius fell asleep after drinking this, the slave went to his son, and said, "Give orders
for my being kept in custody until you learn from the result whether I have given your father
poison or no." Domitius lived, and Caesar saved his life; but his slave had saved it before.

XXV. During the civil war, a slave hid his master, who had been proscribed, put on his rings
and clothes, met the soldiers who were searching for him, and, after declaring that he would
not stoop to entreat them not to carry out their orders, offered his neck to their swords.
What a noble spirit it shows in a slave to have been willing to die for his master, at a time
when few were faithful enough to wish their master to live! to be found kind when the state
was cruel, faithful when it was treacherous! to be eager for the reward of fidelity, though
it was death, at a time when such rich rewards were offered for treachery!

XXVI. I will not pass over the instances which our own age affords. In the reign of Tiberius
Caesar, there was a common and almost universal frenzy for informing, which was more ruinous
to the citizens of Rome than the whole civil war; the talk of drunkards, the frankness of jesters,
was alike reported to the government; nothing was safe; every opportunity of ferocious punishment
was seized, and men no longer waited to hear the fate of accused persons, since it was always
the same. One Paulus, of the Praetorian guard, was at an entertainment, wearing a portrait
of Tiberius Caesar engraved in relief upon a gem. It would be absurd for me to beat about the
bush for some delicate way of explaining that he took up a chamber-pot, an action which was
at once noticed by Maro, one of the most notorious informers of that time, and the slave of
the man who was about to fall into the trap, who drew the ring from the finger of his drunken
master. When Maro called the guests to witness that Paulus had dishonoured the portrait of
the emperor, and was already drawing up an act of accusation, the slave showed the ring upon
his own finger. Such a man no more deserves to be called a slave, than Maro deserved to be
called a guest.

XXVII. In the reign of Augustus men's own words were not yet able to ruin them, yet they sometimes
brought them into trouble. A senator named Rufus, while at dinner, expressed a hope that Caesar
would not return safe from a journey for which he was preparing, and added that all bulls and
calves wished the same thing. Some of those present carefully noted these words. At daybreak,
the slave who had stood at his feet during the dinner, told him what he had said in his cups,
and urged him to be the first to go to Caesar, and denounce himself. Rufus followed this advice,
met Caesar as he was going down to the forum, and, swearing that he was out of his mind the
day before, prayed that what he had said might fall upon his own head and that of his children;
he then begged Caesar pardon him, and to take him back into favour. When Caesar said that he
would do so, he added, "No one will believe that you have taken me back into favour unless
you make me a present of something;" and he asked for and obtained a sum of money so large,
that it would have been a gift not to be slighted even if bestowed by an unoffended prince.
Caesar added: "In future I will take care never to quarrel with you, for my own sake." Caesar
acted honourably in pardoning him, and in being liberal as well as forgiving; no one can hear
this anecdote without praising Caesar, but he must praise the slave first. You need not wait
for me to tell you that the slave who did his master this service was set free; yet his master
did not do this for nothing, for Caesar had already paid him the price of the slave's liberty.

XXVIII. After so many instances, can we doubt that a master may sometimes receive a benefit
from a slave? Why need the person of the giver detract from the thing which he gives? why should
not the gift add rather to the glory of the giver. All men descend from the same original stock;
no one is better born than another, except in so far as his disposition is nobler and better
suited for the performance of good actions. Those who display portraits of their ancestors
in their halls, and set up in the entrance to their houses the pedigree of their family drawn
out at length, with many complicated collateral branches, are they not notorious rather than
noble? The universe is the one parent of all, whether they trace their descent from this primary
source through a glorious or a mean line of ancestors. Be not deceived when men who are reckoning
up their genealogy, wherever an illustrious name is wanting, foist in that of a god in its
place. You need despise no one, even though he bears a commonplace name, and owes little to
fortune. Whether your immediate ancestors were freedmen, or slaves, or foreigners, pluck up
your spirits boldly, and leap over any intervening disgraces of your pedigree; at its source,
a noble origin awaits you. Why should our pride inflate us to such a degree that we think it
beneath us to receive benefits from slaves, and think only of their position, forgetting their
good deeds? You, the slave of lust, of gluttony, of a harlot, nay, who are owned as a joint
chattel by harlots, can you call anyone else a slave? Call a man a slave? why, I pray you,
whither are you being hurried by those bearers who carry your litter? whither are these men
with their smart military-looking cloaks carrying you? is it not to the door of some door-keeper,
or to the gardens of some one who has not even a subordinate office? and then you, who regard
the salute of another man's slave as a benefit, declare that you cannot receive a benefit from
your own slave. What inconsistency is this? At the same time you despise and fawn upon slaves,
you are haughty and violent at home, while out of doors you are meek, and as much despised
as you despise your slaves; for none abase themselves lower than those who unconscionably give
themselves airs, nor are anymore prepared to trample upon others than those who have learned
how to offer insults by having endured them.

XXIX. I felt it my duty to say this, in order to crush the arrogance of men who are themselves
at the mercy of fortune, and to claim the right of bestowing a benefit for slaves, in order
that I may claim it also for sons. The question arises, whether children can ever bestow upon
their parents greater benefits than those which they have received from them.

It is granted that many sons become greater and more powerful than their parents, and also
that they are better men. If this be true, they may give better gifts to their fathers than
they have received from them, seeing that their fortune and their good nature are alike greater
than that of their father. "Whatever a father receives from his son," our opponent will urge,
"must in any case be lees than what the son received from him, because the son owes to his
father the very power of giving. Therefore the father can never be surpassed in the bestowal
of benefits, because the benefit which surpasses his own is really his." I answer, that some
things derive their first origin from others, yet are greater than those others; and a thing
may be greater than that from which it took its rise, although without that thing to start
from it never could have grown so great. All things greatly outgrow their beginnings. Seeds
are the causes of all things, and yet are the smallest part of the things which they produce.
Look at the Rhine, or the Euphrates, or any other famous rivers; how small they are, if you
only view them at the place from whence they take their rise? they gain all that makes them
terrible and renowned as they flow along. Look at the trees which are tallest if you consider
their height, and the broadest if you look at their thickness and the spread of their branches;
compared with all this, how small a part of them is contained in the slender fibres of the
root? Yet take away their roots, and no more groves will arise, nor great mountains be clothed
with trees. Temples and cities are supported by their foundations; yet what is built as the
foundation of the entire building lies out of sight. So it is in other matters; the subsequent
greatness of a thing ever eclipses its origin. I could never have obtained anything without
having previously received the boon of existence from my parents; yet it does not follow from
this that whatever I obtain is less than that without which I could not obtain it. If my nurse
had not fed me when I was a child, I should not have been able to conduct any of those enterprises
which I now carry on, both with my head and with my hand, nor should I ever have obtained the
fame which is due to my labours both in peace and war; would you on that account argue that
the services of a nurse were more valuable than the most important undertakings? Yet is not
the nurse as important as the father, since without the benefits which I have received from
each of them alike, I should have been alike unable to effect anything? If I owe all that I
now can do to my original beginning, I cannot regard my father or my grandfather as being this
original beginning; there always will be a spring further back, from which the spring next
below is derived. Yet no one will argue that I owe more to unknown and forgotten ancestors
than to my father; though really I do owe them more, if I owe it to my ancestors that my father
begat me.

XXX. "Whatever I have bestowed upon my father," says my opponent, "however great it may be,
yet is less valuable than what my father has bestowed upon me, because if he had not begotten
me, it never could have existed at all." By this mode of reasoning, if a man has healed my
father when ill, and at the point of death, I shall not be able to bestow anything upon him
equivalent to what I have received from him; for had my father not been healed, he could not
have begotten me. Yet think whether it be not nearer the truth to regard all that I can do,
and all that I have done, as mine, due to my own powers and my own will? Consider what the
fact of my birth is in itself; you will see that it is a small matter, the outcome of which
is dubious, and that it may lead equally to good or to evil; no doubt it is the first step
to everything, but because it is the first, it is not on that account more important than all
the others. Suppose that I have saved my father's life, raised him to the highest honours,
and made him the chief man in his city, that I have not merely made him illustrious by my own
deeds, but have furnished him himself with an opportunity of performing great exploits, which
is at once important, easy, and safe, as well as glorious; that I have loaded him with appointments,
wealth, and all that attracts men's minds; still, even when I surpass all others, I am inferior
to him. Now if you say, "You owe to your father the power of doing all this," I shall answer,
"Quite true, if to do all this it is only necessary to be born; but if life is merely an unimportant
factor in the art of living well, and if you have bestowed upon me only that which I have in
common with wild beasts and the smallest, and some of the foulest of creatures, do not claim
for yourself what did not come into being in consequence of the benefits which you bestowed,
even though it could not have come into being without them."

XXXI. Suppose, father, that I have saved your life, in return for the life which I received
from you: in this case also I have outdone your benefit, because I have given life to one who
understands what I have done, and because I understood what I was doing, since I gave you your
life not for the sake of, or by the means of my own pleasure; for just as it is less terrible
to die before one has time to fear death, so it is a much greater boon to preserve one's life
than to receive it. I have given life to one who will at once enjoy it, you gave it to one
who knew not if he should ever live; I have given life to one who was in fear of death, your
gift of life merely enables me to die; I have given you a life complete, perfect; you begat
me without intelligence, a burden upon others. Do you wish to know how far from a benefit it
was to give life under such conditions? You should have exposed me as a child, for you did
me a wrong in begetting me. What do I gather from this? That the cohabitation of a father and
mother is the very least of benefits to their child, unless in addition this beginning of kindnesses
be followed up by others, and confirmed by other services. It is not a good thing to live,
but to live well. "But," say you, "I do live well." True, but I might have lived ill; so that
your part in me is merely this, that I live. If you claim merit to yourself for giving me mere
life, bare and helpless, and boast of it as a great boon, reflect that this you claim merit
for giving me is a boon which I possess in common with flies and worms. In the next place,
if I say no more than that I have applied myself to honourable pursuits, and have guided the
course of my life along the path of rectitude, then you have received more from your benefit
than you gave; for you gave me to myself ignorant and unlearned, and I have returned to you
a son such as you would wish to have begotten.

XXXII. My father supported me. If I repay this kindness, I give him more than I received, because
he has the pleasure, not only of being supported, but of being supported by a son, and receives
more delight from my filial devotion than from the food itself, whereas the food which he used
to give me merely affected my body. What? if any man rises so high as to become famous among
nations for his eloquence, his justice, or his military skill, if much of the splendour of
his renown is shed upon his father also, and by its clear light dispels the obscurity of his
birth, does not such a man confer an inestimable benefit upon his parents? Would anyone have
heard of Aristo and Gryllus except through Xenophon and Plato, their sons? Socrates keeps alive
the memory of Sophroniscus. It would take long to recount the other men whose names survive
for no other reason than that the admirable qualities of their sons have handed them down to
posterity. Did the father of Marcus Agrippa, of whom nothing was known, even after Agrippa
became famous, confer the greater benefit upon his son, or was that greater which Agrippa conferred
upon his father when he gained the glory, unique in the annals of war, of a naval crown, and
when he raised so many vast buildings in Rome, which not only surpassed all former grandeur,
but have been surpassed by none since? Did Octavius confer a greater benefit upon his son,
or the Emperor Augustus upon his father, obscured as he was by the intervention of an adoptive
father? What joy would he have experienced, if, after the putting down of the civil war, he
had seen his son ruling the state in peace and security? He would not have recognized the good
which he had himself bestowed, and would hardly have believed, when he looked back upon himself,
that so great a man could have been born in his house. Why should I go on to speak of others
who would now be forgotten, if the glory of their sons had not raised them from obscurity,
and kept them in the light until this day? In the next place, as we are not considering what
son may have given back to his father greater benefits than he received from him, but whether
a son can give back greater benefits, even if the examples which I have quoted are not sufficient,
and such benefits do not outweigh the benefits bestowed by the parents, if no age has produced.
an actual example, still it is not in the nature of things impossible. Though no solitary act
can outweigh the deserts of a parent, yet many such acts combined by one son may do so.

XXXIII. Scipio, while under seventeen years of age, rode among the enemy in battle, and saved
his father's life. Was it not enough, that in order to reach his father he despised so many
dangers when they were pressing hardest upon the greatest generals, that he, a novice in his
first battle, made his way through so many obstacles, over the bodies of so many veteran soldiers,
and showed strength and courage beyond his years? Add to this, that he also defended his father
in court, and saved him from a plot of his powerful enemies, that he heaped upon him a second
and a third consulship and other posts which were coveted even by consulars, that when his
father was poor he bestowed upon him the plunder which he took by military licence, and that
he made him rich with the spoils of the enemy, which is the greatest honour of a soldier. If
even this did not repay his debt, add to it that he caused him to be constantly employed in
the government of provinces and in special commands, add, that after he had destroyed the greatest
cities, and became without a rival either in the east or in the west, the acknowledged protector
and second founder of the Roman Empire, he bestowed upon one who was already of noble birth
the higher title of "the father of Scipio;" can we doubt that the commonplace benefit of his
birth was outdone by his exemplary conduct, and by the valour which was at once the glory and
the protection of his country? Next, if this be not enough, suppose that a son were to rescue
his father from the torture, or to undergo it in his stead. You can suppose the benefits returned
by the son as great as you please, whereas the gift he received from his father was of one
sort only, was easily performed, and was a pleasure to the giver; that he must necessarily
have given the same thing to many others, even to some to whom he knows not that he has given
it, that he had a partner in doing so, and that he had in view the law, patriotism, the rewards
bestowed upon fathers of families by the state, the maintenance of his house and family: everything
rather than him to whom he was giving life. They are preceded by a very well written and intelligent,
and at the same time modest, Introduction, signed F.J.C., the initials of Mr. Francis James Child;
who in fact was kind enough to forward the volume to me, and who, if I am not mistaken, was
formerly a correspondent of mine in a different part of the republic.

My particular reason for noticing the book is to impress upon editors in this country the necessity
of accuracy, not only for the sake of readers and critics here, but for the sake of those abroad,
because Mr. Child's work illustrates especially the disadvantage of the want of that accuracy.
It so happens that two, if not three, of the pieces included in the Cambridge volume, are absolutely
unique, and are now in the library of the Duke of Devonshire. They went through my hands some
years ago, and as they had been previously reprinted in London (two
of them for the Roxburghe Club), I took the opportunity of collating
my copies of them.

The third interlude, which was not reprinted for any society, but as a private speculation,
"by George Smeeton, in St. Martin's Church-yard," is Heywood's Pardoner and Frere, the full title
of which is "A mery playe betwene the pardoner, and the frere, the curate and neybour Pratte."
The original copy has the following imprint: "Imprynted by Wyllyam Rastell the v. day of Apryll,
the yere of our lorde, M. CCCCC. xxx III."

The reprint by Smeeton is in black letter, and it professes to be a fac-simile, or as nearly
so as possible; and although it consists of only eight leaves, it contains no fewer than forty
variations from the original, all more or less important, and one of them the total omission
of a line, so that the preceding line is left without its corresponding rhyme, and the sense materially
injured.

Unfortunately, Mr. Child reprinted in America from this defective reprint in England; but his
sagacity prevented him from falling into some of the blunders, although it could not supply him
with the wanting line; and his notes are extremely clear and pertinent. I shall not go over
the thirty-nine other errors; but I shall just quote the passage as it stands in the (as far
as I know) unique copy, now deposited at Devonshire House, and supply in italics the necessary
line. It occurs in a speech by the Pardoner, near the end, where he is praising one of his
relics:-- {210}

"I wyll edefy more, with the syght of it Than wyll all the pratynge of holy wryt; For that except
that the precher, hym selfe lyue well, His predycacyon wyll helpe neuer a dell, And I know well,
that thy lyuynge is nought: Thou art an apostata, yf it were well sought, An homycyde thou art
I know well inoughe," &c.

The line omitted is the more remarkable, because it contains an instance
of the employment of a word very old in our language, and in use in
the best periods of our prose and poetry: "apostata" is explained
in the Promptorium, is found in Skelton and Heywood, and so down to
the time of Massinger, who was especially fond of it.

How many copies
were issued of Smeeton's reprint of The Pardoner and the Frere, I
know not; but any of your readers, who chance to possess it, will
do well to add the absent line in the margin, so that the mistake
may be both rectified and recorded. These considerations do not destroy the respect due to parents, or make their children
behave worse to them, nay, better; for virtue is naturally ambitious, and wishes to outstrip
those who are before it. Filial piety will be all the more eager, if, in returning a father's
benefits, it can hope to outdo them; nor will this be against the will or the pleasure of the
father, since in many contests it is to our advantage to be outdone. How does this contest
become so desirable? How comes it to be such happiness to parents that they should confess
themselves outdone by the benefits bestowed by their children? Unless we decide the matter
thus, we give children an excuse, and make them less eager to repay their debt, whereas we
ought to spur them on, saying, "Noble youths, give your attention to this! You are invited
to contend in an honourable strife between parents and children, as to which party has received
more than it has given. Your fathers have not necessarily won the day because they are first
in the field: only take courage, as befits you, and do not give up the contest; you will conquer
if you wish to do so. In this honourable warfare you will have no lack of leaders who will
encourage you to perform deeds like their own, and bid you follow in their footsteps upon a
path by which victory has often before now been won over parents."

XXXVII. AEneas conquered his father in well doing, for he himself had been but a light and
a safe burden for him when he was a child, yet he bore his father, when heavy with age, through
the midst of the enemy's lines and the crash of the city which was falling around him, albeit
the devout old man, who bore the sacred images and the household gods in his hands, pressed
him with more than his own weight; nevertheless (what cannot filial piety accomplish!) AEneas
bore him safe through the blazing city, and placed him in safety, to be worshipped as one of
the founders of the Roman Empire. Those Sicilian youths outdid their parents whom they bore
away safe, when Aetna, roused to unusual fury, poured fire over cities and fields throughout
a great part of the island. It is believed that the fires parted, and that the flames retired
on either side, so as to leave a passage for these youths to pass through, who certainly deserved
to perform their daring task in safety. Antigonus outdid his father when, after having conquered
the enemy in a great battle, he transferred the fruits of it to him, and handed over to him
the empire of Cyprus. This is true kingship, to choose not to be a king when you might. Manlius
conquered his father, imperious [Footnote: There is an allusion to the surname of both the
father and the son, "Imperiosus" given them on account of their severity.] though he was, when,
in spite of his having previously been banished for a time by his father on, account of his
dulness and stupidity as a boy, he came to an interview which he had demanded with the tribune
of the people, who had filed an action against his father. The tribune had granted him the
interview, hoping that he would betray his hated father, and believed that he had earned the
gratitude of the youth, having, amongst other matters, reproached old Manlius with sending
him into exile, treating it as a very serious accusation; but the youth, having caught him
alone, drew a sword which he had hidden in his robe, and said, "Unless you swear to give up
your suit against my father, I will run you through with this sword. It is in your power to
decide how my father shall be freed from his prosecutor." The tribune swore, and kept his oath;
he related the reason of his abandonment of his action to an assembly at the Rostra. No other
man was ever permitted to put down a tribune with impunity.

XXXVIII. There are instances without number of men who have saved their parents from danger,
have raised them from the lowest to the highest station, and, taking them from the nameless
mass of the lower classes, have given them a name glorious throughout all ages. By no force
of words, by no power of genius, can one rightly express how desirable, how admirable, how
never to be erased from human memory it is to be able to say, "I obeyed my parents, I gave
way to them, I was submissive to their authority whether it was just, or unjust and harsh;
the only point in which I resisted them was, not to be conquered by them in benefits." Continue
this struggle, I beg of you, and even though weary, yet re-form your ranks. Happy are they
who conquer, happy they who are conquered. What can be more glorious than the youth who can
say to himself--it would not be right to say it to another--"I have conquered my father with
benefits"? What is more fortunate than that old man who declares everywhere to everyone that
he has been conquered in benefits by his son? What, again, is more blissful than to be overcome
in such a contest?

BOOK IV.

I.

Of all the matters which we have discussed, Aebutius Liberalis, there is none more essential,
or which, as Sallust says, ought to be stated with more care than that which is now before
us: whether the bestowal of benefits and the return of gratitude for them are desirable objects
in themselves. Some men are found who act honourably from commercial motives, and who do not
care for unrewarded virtue, though it can confer no glory if it brings any profit. What can
be more base than for a man to consider what it costs him to be a good man, when virtue neither
allures by gain nor deters by loss, and is so far from bribing any one with hopes and promises,
that on the other hand she bids them spend money upon herself, and often consists in voluntary
gifts? We must go to her, trampling what is merely useful under our feet: whithersoever she
may call us or send us we must go, without any regard for our private fortunes, sometimes without
sparing even our own blood, nor must we ever refuse to obey any of her commands. "What shall
I gain," says my opponent, "if I do this bravely and gratefully?" You will gain the doing of
it--the deed itself is your gain. Nothing beyond this is promised. If any advantage chances
to accrue to you, count it as something extra. The reward of honourable dealings lies in themselves.
If honour is to be sought after for itself, since a benefit is honourable, it follows that
because both of these are of the same nature, their conditions must also be the same. Now it
has frequently and satisfactorily been proved, that honour ought to be sought after for itself
alone.

II. In this part of the subject we oppose the Epicureans, an effeminate and dreamy sect who
philosophize in their own paradise, amongst whom virtue is the handmaid of pleasures, obeys
them, is subject to them, and regards them as superior to itself. You say, "there is no pleasure
without virtue." But wherefore is it superior to virtue? Do you imagine that the matter in
dispute between them is merely one of precedence? Nay, it is virtue itself and its powers which
are in question. It cannot be virtue if it can follow; the place of virtue is first, she ought
to lead, to command, to stand in the highest rank; you bid her look for a cue to follow. "What,"
asks our opponent, "does that matter to you? I also declare that happiness is impossible without
virtue. Without virtue I disapprove of and condemn the very pleasures which I pursue, and to
which I have surrendered myself. The only matter in dispute is this, whether virtue be the
cause of the highest good, or whether it be itself the highest good." Do you suppose, though
this be the only point in question, that it is a mere matter of precedence? It is a confusion
and obvious blindness to prefer the last to the first. I am not angry at virtue being placed
below pleasure, but at her being mixed up at all with pleasure, which she despises, whose enemy
she is, and from which she separates herself as far as possible, being more at home with labour
and sorrow, which are manly troubles, than with your womanish good things.

III. It was necessary to insert this argument, my Liberalis, because it is the part of virtue
to bestow those benefits which we are now discussing, and it is most disgraceful to bestow
benefits for any other purpose than that they should be free gifts. If we give with the hope
of receiving a return, we should give to the richest men, not to the most deserving: whereas
we prefer a virtuous poor man to an unmannerly rich one. That is not a benefit, which takes
into consideration the fortune of the receiver. Moreover, if our only motive for benefiting
others was our own advantage, those who could most easily distribute benefits, such as rich
and powerful men, or kings, and persons who do not stand in need of the help of others, ought
never to do so at all; the gods would not bestow upon us the countless blessings which they
pour upon us unceasingly by night and by day, for their own nature suffices them in all respects,
and renders them complete, safe, and beyond the reach of harm; they will, therefore, never
bestow a benefit upon any one, if self and self interest be the only cause for the bestowal
of benefits. To take thought, not where your benefit will be best bestowed, but where it may
be most profitably placed at interest, from whence you will most easily get it back, is not
bestowal of benefits, but usury. Now the gods have nothing to do with usury; it follows, therefore,
that they cannot be liberal; for if the only reason for giving is the advantage of the giver,
since God cannot hope to receive any advantages from us, there is no cause why God should give
anything.

IV. I know what answer may be made to this. "True; therefore God does not bestow benefits,
but, free from care and unmindful of us, He turns away from our world and either does something
else, or else does nothing, which Epicurus thought the greatest possible happiness, and He
is not affected either by benefits or by injuries." The man who says this cannot surely hear
the voices of worshippers, and of those who all around him are raising their hands to heaven
and praying for the success both of their private affairs and those of the state; which certainly
would not be the case, all men would not agree in this madness of appealing to deaf and helpless
gods, unless we knew that their benefits are sometimes bestowed upon us unasked, sometimes
in answer to our prayers, and that they give us both great and seasonable gifts, which shield
us from the most terrible dangers. Who is there so poor, so uncared for, born to sorrow by
so unkind a fate, as never to have felt the vast generosity of the Gods? The skulls are remarkably
white and perfect, and are altogether a very curious collection, differing greatly in size,
form, and thickness. The holes and fractures in many of them (made evidently during life) leave
no doubt that they belonged to persons who met with a violent death.

I will not pretend to reply to the concluding queries of your correspondent,
but I would just remark that, from what we know of the feeling of
our ancestors respecting the remains of the dead, it appears probably
that if from any cause a large quantity of human bones were found,
or were from any cause obliged to be disturbed, some ecclesiastic
or pious layman would take measures to have them removed to some consecrated
spot where they might be safe from further molestation.

They would hardly be treated in any such manner as Dr. Mantell states the bones removed by the
railway engineers from the Priory ground at Lewes were treated. I remain, sir, your very obedient
servant,

J.T.

Syndenham, Jan. 21. 1850.

* * * * *

LINES ATTRIBUTED TO HUDIBRAS.

Perhaps the following extract from a volume entitled The Relics of
Literature, published by Boys and Co., Ludgate Hill, 1820, may prove
interesting, as further illustrating the so frequently disputed passage
which forms the subject matter of your first article in No. 12.:--

"Few
popular quotations have more engaged the pens of critics than the
following:--

'For he that fights and runs away Will live to fight
another day.'

"These lines are almost universally supposed to form
a part of Hudibras; and, so confident have even scholars been on the
subject, that in 1784 a wager was made at Bootle's, of twenty to one,
that they were to be found in that inimitable poem.

Dodsley was referred to as the arbitrator, when he ridiculed the idea of consulting him on the
subject, saying, 'Every fool knows they are in Hudibras.' George
Selwyn, who was present, said to Dodsley, 'Pray, sir, will you be
good enough, then, to inform an old fool, who is at the same time
your wise worship's very humble servant, in what canto they are to
be found?' Dodsley took down the volume, but he could not find the
passage; the next day came, with no better success; and the sage bibliopole
was obliged to confess, 'that a man might be ignorant of the author
of this well-known couplet without being absolutely a fool.'"

  
   
   I have also the following memorandum in a
   common-place book of mine, but I do not remember from what source I transcribed it many years past:--

"The
couplet, thus erroneously ascribed to the author of Hudibras, occurs
in a small volume of Miscellaneous Poems, by Sir John Mennis, written in
the reign of Charles the Second, which has now become extremely scarce.


The true God is he who has placed, not a few oxen, but all the herds on their pastures throughout
the world; who furnishes food to the flocks wherever they wander; who has ordained the alternation
of summer and winter pasturage, and has taught us not merely to play upon a reed, and to reduce
to some order a rustic and artless song, but who has invented so many arts and varieties of
voice, so many notes to make music, some with our own breath, some with instruments. You cannot
call our inventions our own any more than you call our growth our own, or the various bodily
functions which correspond to each stage of our lives; at one time comes the loss of childhood's
teeth, at another, when our age is advancing and growing into robuster manhood, puberty and
the last wisdom-tooth marks the end of our youth.

VII. "Nature," says my opponent, "gives me all this." Do you not perceive when you say this
that you merely speak of God under another name? for what is nature but God and divine reason,
which pervades the universe and all its parts? You may address the author of our world by as
many different titles as you please; you may rightly call him Jupiter, Best and Greatest, and
the Thunderer, or the Stayer, so called, not because, as the historians tell us, he stayed
the flight of the Roman army in answer to the prayer of Romulus, but because all things continue
in their stay through his goodness. If you were to call this same personage Fate, you would
not lie; for since fate is nothing more than a connected chain of causes, he is the first cause
of all upon which all the rest depend. You will also be right in applying to him any names
that you please which express supernatural strength and power: he may have as many titles as
he has attributes.

VIII. Our school regards him as Father Liber, and Hercules, and Mercurius: he is Father Liber
because he is the parent of all, who first discovered the power of seed, and our being led
by pleasure to plant it; he is Hercules, because his might is unconquered, and when it is wearied
after completing its labours, will retire into fire; he is Mercurius, because in him is reasoning,
and numbers, and system, and knowledge. Whither-soever you turn yourself you will see him meeting
you: nothing is void of him, he himself fills his own work. Therefore, most ungrateful of mortals,
it is in vain that you declare yourself indebted, not to God, but to nature, because there
can be no God without nature, nor any nature without God; they are both the same thing, differing
only in their functions. If you were to say that you owe to Annaeus or to Lucius what you received
from Seneca, you would not change your creditor, but only his name, because he remains the
same man whether you use his first, second, or third name. So whether you speak of nature,
fate, or fortune, these are all names of the same God, using his power in different ways. So
likewise justice, honesty, discretion, courage, frugality, are all the good qualities of one
and the same mind; if you are pleased with any one of these, you are pleased with that mind.

IX. However, not to drift aside into a distinct controversy, God bestows upon us very many
and very great benefits without hope of receiving any return; since he does not require any
offering from us, and we are not capable of bestowing anything upon him: wherefore, a benefit
is desirable in itself. In it the advantage of the receiver is all that is taken into consideration:
we study this without regarding our own interests. "Yet," argues our opponent, "you say that
we ought to choose with care the persons upon whom we bestow benefits, because neither do husbandmen
sow seed in the sand: now if this be true, we follow our own interest in bestowing benefits,
just as much as in ploughing and sowing: for sowing is not desirable in itself. Besides this
you inquire where and how you ought to bestow a benefit, which would not need to be done if
the bestowal of a benefit was desirable in itself: because in whatever place and whatever manner
it might be bestowed, it still would be a benefit." We seek to do honourable acts, solely because
they are honourable; yet even though we need think of nothing else, we consider to whom we
shall do them, and when, and how; for in these points the act has its being. In like manner,
when I choose upon whom I shall bestow a benefit, and when I aim at making it a benefit; because
if it were bestowed upon a base person, it could neither be a benefit nor an honourable action.

X. To restore what has been entrusted to one is desirable in itself; yet I shall not always
restore it, nor shall I do so in any place or at any time you please. Sometimes it makes no
difference whether I deny that I have received it, or return it openly. I shall consider the
interests of the person to whom I am to return it, and shall deny that I have received a deposit,
which would injure him if returned. I shall act in the same manner in bestowing a benefit:
I shall consider when to give it, to whom, in what manner, and on what grounds. Nothing ought
to be done without a reason: a benefit is not truly so, if it be bestowed without a reason,
since reason accompanies all honorable action. How often do we hear men reproaching themselves
for some thoughtless gift, and saying, "I had rather have thrown it away than have given it
to him!" What is thoughtlessly given away is lost in the most discreditable manner, and it
is much worse to have bestowed a benefit badly than to have received no return for it; that
we receive no return is the fault of another; that we did not choose upon whom we should bestow
it, is our own. In choosing a fit person, I shall not, as you expect, pay the least attention
to whether I am likely to get any return from him, for I choose one who will be grateful, not
one who will return my goodness, and it often happens that the man who makes no return is grateful,
while he who returns a benefit is ungrateful for it. I value men by their hearts alone, and,
therefore, I shall pass over a rich man if he be unworthy, and give to a good man though he
be poor; for he will be grateful however destitute he may be, since whatever he may lose, his
heart will still be left him.

XI. I do not fish for gain, for pleasure, or for credit, by bestowing benefits: satisfied in
doing so with pleasing one man alone, I shall give in order to do my duty. Duty, however, leaves
one some choice; do you ask me, how I am to choose? I shall choose an honest, plain, man, with
a good memory, and grateful for kindness; one who keeps his hands off other men's goods, yet
does not greedily hold to his own, and who is kind to others; when I have chosen such a man,
I shall have acted to my mind, although fortune may have bestowed upon him no means of returning
my kindness. These invisible intelligences are the wonderful agencies through which good and
evil are effected. Natural laws are only the rules by which the great Father Spirit acts. Laws are
rules by which agents act, and they always imply agents. Men of olden times are often spoken
of as great metaphysicians. Who has not heard of Homer, Herodotus, Pindar, Demosthenes, Aristotle,
Plato and many others. But those ancient men, here as in physics, dealt so much in fancy that
they were not disposed to enter into the simple examination of their own minds or spirits. Entangled
in the doctrines of chance, fate and destiny they robbed the Creator of the sceptre of the universe.
They placed Jove, their supreme deity, under a decree that he could not change; confessed that
he could not, in many instances, help them when he desired to do so. The greatest hindrances
to progress among them were their failures to know the true character of Jove, or their want of a
correct knowledge of God, and the distinction between mind and matter. They failed to separate
between the two. Their gods were continually in an abominable quarrel about some interest that involved
human welfare, and for that very reason their theory of mind was nothing but a confused mass
of childish stories. They had no starting point from which to reason. They, failing to separate
between mind and matter, were led into endless theories about what they denominated the animal
and intellectual soul. The idea of one of their own poets that we are God's offspring was
of no avail, in science, to them, because they neither knew themselves nor their gods. We are,
therefore, indebted to the Bible for our superior knowledge in the science of mind. If the Gospel
had never reached us we would have been as great dreamers in mental science as the mystics of
India.

The doctrine of one Creator, who is a perfect spirit, and the father of our spirits, and that
he presides over all nature for the good of the whole; that matter is inert, and moves not unless
as it is moved; that all life and force is in mind or spirit; that
all spirits are free agents, and act from choice; that all spirits
have the same essential attributes; and that man is of the divine
"genos" kind or sort, and, as an intellectual being, is therefore
in the image of God, has simplified and extended our researches in
the science of mind, and based them on reason and common sense as
well as revelation.

From such considerations the doctrine of universal brotherhood has proceeded along with the
equal, civil, political and religious rights of all mankind. The ultimate fruit of all is the abolition
of oppression and slavery throughout the world, and the desire to see all men elevated to their
proper rank as intellectual and moral beings. Thus our views of God and nature, of mind and matter,
are of immense practical value to our race.

Do you say mind or spirit does not belong as a real factor to science? Well, we are astonished!
Science is correct, or certain knowledge arising from a deep and rational inquiry into the object
or subject of investigation. The question therefore comes back again, have we any knowledge
of mind? This is to ask, whether consciousness is knowledge! The term comes from the Latin "con,"
which signifies together, and "scio," I know, and is used to convey the idea that we know
the thing altogether, that is, have perfect or full knowledge. It is the mind's testimony concerning
itself. Now, if I can become acquainted with external and material objects through my senses,
certainly my consciousness of my own mental operations is, and must be, more certain and self-evident.
In judging, reasoning, reflecting, choosing, desiring, remembering, loving, hating and hoping,
along with all other operations of mind, I must know the operation intimately, perfectly and
altogether. If I am reflecting, I know it, and this consciousness is science, is certain knowledge,
is the very thing from which no man can escape so long as he is a rational being. Here is my
individuality, my personality, in that which is the indivisible unit of my nature, from which
I can not emigrate, and one attribute of which I can not amputate--the I! The thief may escape from justice,
but he can not escape from the dishonest wretch--himself.

The murderer in America may flee to England or France, but through conscious memory he is, and
will forever be, compelled to keep company with the murderous villain. He has this consciousness
and will keep it through eternity, even though he should be pardoned. Here, then, is certain
knowledge, more than seeing, hearing, or any other sense belonging to the physical, for it is
the conscious knowledge of that which sees and hears, and which reaches out through the senses
and connects itself with the objective.

It is therefore certain that, in case there is no such thing as mental science, there is no such
thing as science at all, in all the realm of the universe; because the mind, in the act of knowing,
knows itself or is conscious of its own operations, otherwise it could know nothing whatever,
could not be mind.

Have we not the most certain evidence of the existence of mind? Is light a certain evidence that
there is light, or a source of light? Is not reasoning a proof that there is something which reasons?
Can there be light without a cause? Can there be invention without an inventive being? The mind
is like a telescope in this respect, that it shows itself in showing that about which it is
occupied. The man who is content to believe what he sees, hears, tastes, smells and feels,
is only a sensuous believer--an animal, and not a man. Reason's glory is that it perceives
the invisible.

OUR INDEBTEDNESS TO REVELATION--No. IV.

BY P.T. RUSSELL.

LANGUAGE AND RELIGION, FROM WHENCE?

  
   There are conditions under which circumstantial evidence is the best
possible testimony.

These conditions are found inseparably connected with our present subject. That men now possess
the same powers of body and mind that they always manifested is disputed by no intelligent
individual. Those powers have been, through all the ages, precisely the same both in number
and kind. Has the history of humanity furnished a single case in which a person, perfectly
deaf during all his life, had the ability to speak words? Such is unknown in the history of the past,
and also in the records of the present. History is as blank at this point, as a barren oasis.
All the other faculties are as perfect with the deaf as they are with those whose hearing is
perfect. Their inventive genius is equally vigorous; this being true, why should the defect
of the ear deprive them of the power of speech? Will the Deist answer this question? Mr. Skeptic,
as you are in the same difficulty with the Deist, you may help him if you choose. If you are,
as you pretend, free and fearless thinkers, give us your thoughts upon this question. If you are
cowardly, then stand off and sneer at the question which you dare not try to answer. The facts developed
at this point ought to be remembered, and the question, why can the deaf, described, never
talk? ought to be pressed home to every heart.

MATHEMATICS WILL AID US HERE.

When we see a constant increase in the number of persons or things
in an undeviating ratio, with the aid of mathematics we can pass back
to the first of the series, to the first man living at the base of
the human series.

Ever remember that there can not be a series without a unit lying at its base.

Why do the life-long deaf never talk? You answer: All Adam's children learn to talk by hearing others
talk, and as those deaf ones never heard, so they never learned to talk. Very well. The first
man, at the beginning of the series of humanity, had no powers or faculties which his descendants
do not possess, and as they all have been under the necessity of learning to talk by hearing
others talk, will you unbelievers and skeptics tell us, if you can, how that first man became
a talker? Can the life-long deaf talk as well as those whose ears are perfect? No. Well, then,
the difficulty rests upon you. That you may remember it, I will repeat it once more, it is
this: who did the first man hear in order to learn the talker's trade?

WHERE DID LANGUAGE COME FROM?

Do you tell us that society made language?

Then society must be older than language, for the maker is always, of necessity, older than the thing
made. But without language there could be no interchange of ideas, and without this society
could not exist. Where there is no intelligent communication of ideas we never think of society.
Society does not exist where there is no intelligent communication of ideas between persons. The
trees in the grove are never spoken of as a society. They are not and can not be in the social
state. Neither are the brutes around us. Man is the only being upon earth capable of becoming
a constituent element or part of society. Mr. Blair says, in his lectures on Belleslettres, "It
would be extremely difficult to conceive how society could exist without language." Now, as society
can not exist without language, it is certain that society could not be the author of language,
for the author must be older than his production. But Mr. Blair springs another difficulty.
It is in these words: "It would be equally difficult to conceive how language could exist without
society." A moment's reflection will satisfy all reasonable persons that language can not exist
without society, and that which can not exist without the other can not be the maker--author--of
the other, for the maker must be older than the thing made. Then, as neither of these could exist
without the other, neither could be the author of the other.

So language and society are both effects, and their cause is outside of or antecedent to both,
for every effect has an antecedent cause.

WHO, OR WHAT, IS THAT CAUSE?

First, it must have existed before man. Second, it must have possessed the powers of speech;
and, therefore, must have been an intelligence. We have already seen this in our reflections
upon the fact that the life-long deaf, who are deprived of hearing words spoken, are always
dumb; so man, if he had never heard words spoken, would have remained dumb. He that created the
ear, could He not hear? Did He not know what He was doing? He that arranged the vocal powers
of man, could He not speak? Is there no evidence of an intelligent authorship here? He who
not only created but also endowed man with all His noble and God-like attributes, would He not delight
in visiting man and talking with him and learning him the art of speech? Did man not have the privilege
of learning to talk? Did he not hear and learn from the "ancient of days"--from his great author?
Is it not unreasonable to suppose that the author of man's being took no delight in him? Without
this the first man could never have commanded the use of words. Here we have the "Arriere pensee"
clue, that is, the clue in mental reservation; and here we meet the axiom. The clear is the
true, and the "Ariadne," the clue that leads us out of the labyrinth. Language at the first
must have been specific. This, in the nature of the case, must have been true; that is, each
and every word must have been used in such a manner as to convey a certain definite idea. As
we have already seen how mathematics aid us in passing back to the first man, so we can easily
see how to reach an approximate idea of his mental condition. Physiologically, he might have been
a full developed athlete, but in mentality, like the helpless infant. He is at the first uneducated.
True, he possesses powers of mind, but they are inactive.

No thought has passed through his mind to wake him up. He opens his eyes and immediately he
thinks, he hears, and thought is increased. He is connected with the objective world of things
by means of the five senses, and his mind goes to work upon these. His thoughts are all his own;
he himself thought them; they were within his reach. He saw and heard, but his thoughts, like
yours and mine, did not go beyond his perceivings. Yes, he wakes up and hears a rustling sound
in the air just above his head; looking up he discovers a pair of the birds of Paradise flying over
him; they light on the branch of a tree near by. These were the first things seen; he saw them in
the morning of the first day of his life. He looks and looks, and thinks these birds are older than
himself, for he remembers having seen them at the moment of the first
consciousness.

The question possible came up, Whence came they, and all the other things which I now see and
hear? Were they always here? No answer is found. His curiosity is aroused; his reason is perplexed;
he would be puzzled. He now reaches for thoughts too high for him; neither bird, beast, nor any
other part of all creation can give the light he seeks. Whichever way he turns he receives
no answer; he is bewildered; he is now anxious for light and ready to receive it. Man has found
his extremity, and this is God's opportunity. He visits man and talks to him, and man, hearing
the speech of his Creator, learns to talk. He is now able to ask for the solution of the perplexing
problem of the ages, From whence came all these beautiful and useful things with which I am surrounded?
Did they come of themselves, or did somebody make and arrange them? Here the Lord drives away
all his troubles, simply saying: "I created all these things; the earth and the heavens, and
all that is in them, the sun, moon and the stars also, and I now
place you here in this beautiful Eden, earth, to dress and keep it."

Thus man obtained the use of language and the foundation of religion at the same time. Of this
I will speak more at length in my next. Tell them farewell.

N.B.--Let the determined skeptic answer these essays if he can, and if he can not, let him be
an honest man and surrender.

MIND AND INSTINCT, OR STRICTURES UPON THE TEACHINGS OF EVOLUTIONISTS.

The evolution imagination ventures to affirm that man's intellectual superiority over the brute
"is not qualitative but quantitative." Then it follows, of necessity, that intellectually considered
the brute is the image of man just as much as man is the image of God, the difference being
quantitative and not qualitative. Evolutionists claim that "man's
superiority over the brute results from greater complexity and superior
development of the brain." Now if man, as they say, once lived the
life of the brute, and his superiority now is simply quantitative,
why is it that his inferiors of to-day are not passing into real manhood?
They are far superior to any creature which is "not far from the tadpole
stage of evolution." If we were once there, and evolutionists say
we were, why not take all brutes in as our kins-folk. "I worship him," you answer, "because of his glorious majesty and his unique
nature." Granting that you do this, you clearly do it without the attraction of any reward,
or any hope; there is therefore something which is desirable for itself, whose own worth attracts
you, that is, honour. Now what is more honourable than gratitude? the means of practising this
virtue are as extensive as life itself.

XX. "Yet," argues he, "there is also a certain amount of profit inherent in this virtue." In
what virtue is there not? But that which we speak of as desirable for itself is such, that
although it may possess some attendant advantages, yet it would be desirable even if stripped
of all these. It is profitable to be grateful; yet I will be grateful even though it harm me.
What is the aim of the grateful man? is it that his gratitude may win for him more friends
and more benefits? What then? If a man is likely to meet with affronts by showing his gratitude,
if he knows that far from gaining anything by it, he must lose much even of what he has already
acquired, will he not cheerfully act to his own disadvantage? That man is ungrateful who, in
returning a kindness, looks forward to a second gift--who hopes while he repays. I call him
ungrateful who sits at the bedside of a sick man because he is about to make a will, when he
is at leisure to think of inheritances and legacies. Though he may do everything which a good
and dutiful friend ought to do, yet, if any hope of gain be floating in his mind, he is a mere
legacy-hunter, and is angling for an inheritance. Like the birds which feed upon carcases,
which come close to animals weakened by disease, and watch till they fall, so these men are
attracted by death and hover around a corpse.

XXI. A grateful mind is attracted only by a sense of the beauty of its purpose. Do you wish
to know this to be so, and that it is not bribed by ideas of profit? There are two classes
of grateful men: a man is called grateful who has made some return for what he received; this
man may very possibly display himself in this character, he has something to boast of, to refer
to. We also call a man grateful who receives a benefit with goodwill, and owes it to his benefactor
with goodwill; yet this man's gratitude lies concealed within his own mind. What profit can
accrue to him from this latent feeling? yet this man, even though he is not able to do anything
more than this, is grateful; he loves his benefactor, he feels his debt to him, he longs to
repay his kindness; whatever else you may find wanting, there is nothing wanting in the man.
He is like a workman who has not the tools necessary for the practice of his craft, or like
a trained singer whose voice cannot be heard through the noise of those who interrupt him.
I wish to repay a kindness: after this there still remains something for me to do, not in order
that I may become grateful, but that I may discharge my debt; for, in many cases, he who returns
a kindness is ungrateful for it, and he who does not return it is grateful. Like all other
virtues, the whole value of gratitude lies in the spirit in which it is done; so, if this man's
purpose be loyal, any shortcomings on his part are due not to himself, but to fortune. A man
who is silent may, nevertheless, be eloquent; his hands may be folded or even bound, and he
may yet be strong; just as a pilot is a pilot even when upon dry land, because his knowledge
is complete, and there is nothing wanting to it, though there may be obstacles which prevent
his making use of it. In the same way, a man is grateful who only wishes to be so, and who
has no one but himself who can bear witness to his frame of mind. I will go even further than
this: a man sometimes is grateful when he appears to be ungrateful, when ill-judging report
has declared him to be so. Such a man can look to nothing but his own conscience, which can
please him even when overwhelmed by calumny, which contradicts the mob and common rumour, relies
only upon itself, and though it beholds a vast crowd of the other way of thinking opposed to
it, does not count heads, but wins by its own vote alone. Should it see its own good faith
meet with the punishment due to treachery, it will not descend from its pedestal, and will
remain superior to its punishment. "I have," it says, "what I wished, what I strove for. I
do not regret it, nor shall I do so; nor shall fortune, however unjust she may be, ever hear
me say, 'What did I want? What now is the use of having meant well?'" A good conscience is
of value on the rack, or in the fire; though fire be applied to each of our limbs, gradually
encircle our living bodies, and burst our heart, yet if our heart be filled with a good conscience,
it will rejoice in the fire which will make its good faith shine before the world.

XXII. Now let that question also which has been already stated be again brought forward; Why
is it that we should wish to be grateful when we are dying, that we should carefully weigh
the various services rendered us by different individuals, and carefully review our whole life,
that we may not seem to have forgotten any kindness? Nothing then remains for us to hope for;
yet when on the very threshold, we wish to depart from human life as full of gratitude as possible.
There is in truth an immense reward for this thing merely in doing it, and what is honourable
has great power to attract men's minds, which are overwhelmed by its beauty and carried off
their balance, enchanted by its brilliancy and splendour. "Yet," argues our adversary, "from
it many advantages take their rise, and good men obtain a safer life and love, and the good
opinion of the better class, while their days are spent in greater security when accompanied
by innocence and gratitude."

Indeed, nature would have been most unjust had she rendered this great blessing miserable,
uncertain, and fruitless. But consider this point, whether you would make your way to that
virtue, to which it is generally safe and easy to attain, even though the path lay over rocks
and precipices, and were beset with fierce beasts and venomous serpents. A virtue is none the
less to be desired for its own sake, because it has some adventitious profit connected with
it: indeed, in most cases the noblest virtues are accompanied by many extraneous advantages,
but it is the virtues that lead the way, and these merely follow in their train.

XXIII. Can we doubt that the climate of this abode of the human race is regulated by the motion
of the sun and moon in their orbits? that our bodies are sustained, the hard earth loosened,
excessive moisture reduced, and the surly bonds of winter broken by the heat of the one, and
that crops are brought to ripeness by the effectual all-pervading warmth of the other? that
the fertility of the human race corresponds to the courses of the moon? that the sun by its
revolution marks out the year, and that the moon, moving in a smaller orbit, marks out the
months? Yet, setting aside all this, would not the sun be a sight worthy to be contemplated
and worshipped, if he did no more than rise and set? would not the moon be worth looking at,
even if it passed uselessly through the heavens? Whose attention is not arrested by the universe
itself, when by night it pours forth its fires and glitters with innumerable stars? Who, while
he admires them, thinks of their being of use to him? Look at that great company gliding over
our heads, how they conceal their swift motion under the semblance of a fixed and immovable
work. How much takes place in that night which you make use of merely to mark and count your
days! What a mass of events is being prepared in that silence! What a chain of destiny their
unerring path is forming! Those which you imagine to be merely strewn about for ornament are
really one and all at work. Nor is there any ground for your belief that only seven stars revolve,
and that the rest remain still: we understand the orbits of a few, but countless divinities,
further removed from our sight, come and go; while the greater part of those whom our sight
reaches move in a mysterious manner and by an unknown path.

XXIV. What then? would you not be captivated by the sight of such a stupendous work, even though
it did not cover you, protect you, cherish you, bring you into existence and penetrate you
with its spirit? Though these heavenly bodies are of the very first importance to us, and are,
indeed, essential to our life, yet we can think of nothing but their glorious majesty, and
similarly all virtue, especially that of gratitude, though it confers great advantages upon
us, does not wish to be loved for that reason; it has something more in it than this, and he
who merely reckons it among useful things does not perfectly comprehend it. A man, you say,
is grateful because it is to his advantage to be so. If this be the case, then his advantage
will be the measure of his gratitude. Virtue will not admit a covetous lover; men must approach
her with open purse. The ungrateful man thinks, "I did wish to be grateful, but I fear the
expense and danger and insults to which I should expose myself: I will rather consult my own
interest." Men cannot be rendered grateful and ungrateful by the same line of reasoning: their
actions are as distinct as their purposes. The one is ungrateful, although it is wrong, because
it is his interest; the other is grateful, although it is not his interest, because it is right.

XXV. It is our aim to live in harmony with the scheme of the universe, and to follow the example
of the gods. Yet in all their acts the gods have no object in view other than the act itself,
unless you suppose that they obtain a reward for their work in the smoke of burnt sacrifices
and the scent of incense. See what great things they do every day, how much they divide amongst
us, with how great crops they fill the earth, how they move the seas with convenient winds
to carry us to all shores, how by the fall of sudden showers they soften the ground, renew
the dried-up springs of fountains, and call them into new life by unseen supplies of water.
All this they do without reward, without any advantage accruing to themselves. Let our line
of conduct, if it would not depart from its model, preserve this direction, and let us not
act honourably because we are hired to do so. We ought to feel ashamed that any benefit should
have a price: we pay nothing for the gods.

XXVI. "If," our adversary may say, "you wish to imitate the gods, then bestow benefits upon
the ungrateful as well as the grateful; for the sun rises upon the wicked as well as the good,
the seas are open even to pirates." By this question he really asks whether a good man would
bestow a benefit upon an ungrateful person, knowing him to be ungrateful. Allow me here to
introduce a short explanation, that we may not be taken in by a deceitful question. Understand
that according to the system of the Stoics there are two classes of ungrateful persons. One
man is ungrateful because he is a fool; a fool is a bad man; a man who is bad possesses every
vice: therefore he is ungrateful. In the same way we speak of all bad men as dissolute, avaricious,
luxurious, and spiteful, not because each man has all these vices in any great or remarkable
degree, but because he might have them; they are in him, even though they be not seen. The
second form of ungrateful person is he who is commonly meant by the term, one who is inclined
by nature to this vice. In the case of him who has the vice of ingratitude just as he has every
other, a wise man will bestow a benefit, because if he sets aside all such men there will be
no one left for him to bestow it on. As for the ungrateful man who habitually misapplies benefits
and acts so by choice, he will no more bestow a benefit upon him than he would lend money to
a spendthrift, or place a deposit in the hands of one who had already often refused to many
persons to give up the property with which they had entrusted him.

XXVII. We call some men timid because they are fools: in this they are like the bad men who
are steeped in all vices without distinction. Strictly speaking, we call those persons timid
who are alarmed even at unmeaning noises. A fool possesses all vices, but he is not equally
inclined by nature to all; one is prone to avarice, another to luxury, and another to insolence.
Those persons, therefore, are mistaken, who ask the Stoics, "What do you say, then? is Achilles
timid? Aristides, who received a name for justice, is he unjust? Fabius, who 'by delays retrieved
the day,' is he rash? Does Decius fear death? Is Mucius a traitor? Camillus a betrayer?" We
do not mean that all vices are inherent in all men in the same way in which some especial ones
are noticeable in certain men, but we declare that the bad man and the fool possess all vices;
we do not even acquit them of fear when they are rash, or of avarice when they are extravagant.
Just as a man has all his senses, yet all men have not on that account as keen a sight as Lynceus,
so a man that is a fool has not all vices in so active and vigorous a form as some persons
have spine of them, yet he has them all. All vices exist in all of them, yet all are not prominent
in each individual. One man is naturally prone to avarice, another is the slave of wine, a
third of lust; or, if not yet enslaved by these passions, he is so fashioned by nature that
this is the direction in which his character would probably lead him. Therefore, to return
to my original proposition, every bad man is ungrateful, because he has the seeds of every
villainy in him; but he alone is rightly so called who is naturally inclined to this vice.
Upon such a person as this, therefore, I shall not bestow a benefit. One who betrothed his
daughter to an ill-tempered man from whom many women had sought a divorce, would be held to
have neglected her interests; a man would be thought a bad father if he entrusted the care
of his patrimony to one who had lost his own family estate, and it would be the act of a madman
to make a will naming as the guardian of one's son a man who had already defrauded other wards.
So will that man be said to bestow benefits as badly as possible, who chooses ungrateful persons,
in whose hands they will perish.

XXVIII. "The gods," it may be said, "bestow much, even upon the ungrateful." But what they
bestow they had prepared for the good, and the bad have their share as well, because they cannot
be separated. It is better to benefit the bad as well, for the sake of benefiting the good,
than to stint the good for fear of benefiting the bad. Therefore the gods have created all
that you speak of, the day, the sun, the alternations of winter and summer, the transitions
through spring and autumn from one extreme to the other, showers, drinking fountains, and regularly
blowing winds for the use of all alike; they could not except individuals from the enjoyment
of them. A king bestows honours upon those who deserve them, but he gives largesse to the undeserving
as well. The thief, the bearer of false witness, and the adulterer, alike receive the public
grant of corn, and all are placed on the register without any examination as to character;
good and bad men share alike in all the other privileges which a man receives, because he is
a citizen, not because he is a good man. God likewise has bestowed certain gifts upon the entire
human race, from which no one is shut out. Indeed, it could not be arranged that the wind which
was fair for good men should be foul for bad ones, while it is for the good of all men that
the seas should be open for traffic and the kingdom of mankind be enlarged; nor could any law
be appointed for the showers, so that they should not fall upon the fields of wicked and evil
men. Some things are given to all alike: cities are founded for good and bad men alike; works
of genius reach, by publication, even unworthy men; medicine points out the means of health
even to the wicked; no one has checked the making up of wholesome remedies for fear that the
undeserving should be healed. You must seek for examination and preference of individuals in
such things as are bestowed separately upon those who are thought to deserve them; not in these,
which admit the mob to share them without distinction. There is a great difference between
not shutting a man out and choosing him. Even a thief receives justice; even murderers enjoy
the blessings of peace; even those who have plundered others can recover their own property;
assassins and private bravoes are defended against the common enemy by the city wall; the laws
protect even those who have sinned most deeply against them. There are some things which no
man could obtain unless they were given to all; you need not, therefore, cavil about those
matters in which all mankind is invited to share. As for things which men receive or not at
my discretion, I shall not bestow them upon one whom I know to be ungrateful.

XXIX. "Shall we, then," argues he, "not give our advice to an ungrateful man when he is at
a loss, or refuse him a drink of water when he is thirsty, or not show him the path when he
has lost his way? or would you do him these services and yet not give him anything?" Here I
will draw a distinction, or at any rate endeavour to do so. A benefit is a useful service,
yet all useful service is not a benefit; for some are so trifling as not to claim the title
of benefits. To produce a benefit two conditions must concur. First, the importance of the
thing given; for some things fall short of the dignity of a benefit. Who ever called a hunch
of bread a benefit, or a farthing dole tossed to a beggar, or the means of lighting a fire?
yet sometimes these are of more value than the most costly benefits; still their cheapness
detracts from their value even when, by the exigency of time, they are rendered essential.
The next condition, which is the most important of all, must necessarily be present, namely,
that I should confer the benefit for the sake of him whom I wish to receive it, that I should
judge him worthy of it, bestow it of my own free will, and receive pleasure from my own gift,
none of which conditions are present in the cases of which we have just now spoken; for we
do not bestow such things as those upon these who are worthy of them, but we give them carelessly,
as trifles, and do not give them so much to a man as to humanity.

XXX. I shall not deny that sometimes I would give even to the unworthy, out of respect for
others; as, for instance, in competition for public offices, some of the basest of men are
preferred on account of their noble birth, to industrious men of no family, and that for good
reasons; for the memory of great virtues is sacred, and more men will take pleasure in being
good, if the respect felt for good men does not cease with their lives. What made Cicero's
son a consul, except his father? What lately brought Cinna [Footnote: See Seneca on "Clemency,"
book i., ch. ix.] out of the camp of the enemy and raised him to the consulate? What made Sextus
Pompeius and the other Pompeii consuls, unless it was the greatness of one man, who once was
raised so high that, by his very fall, he sufficiently exalted all his relatives. What lately
made Fabius Persicus a member of more than one college of priests, though even profligates
avoided his kiss? Was it not Verrucosus, and Allobrogicus, and the three hundred who to serve
their country blocked the invader's path with the force of a single family? It is our duty
to respect the virtuous, not only when present with us, but also when removed from our sight:
as they have made it their study not to bestow their benefits upon one age alone, but to leave
them existing after they themselves have passed away, so let us not confine our gratitude to
a single age. If a man has begotten great men, he deserves to receive benefits, whatever he
himself may be: he has given us worthy men. If a man descends from glorious ancestors, whatever
he himself may be, let him find refuge under the shadow of his ancestry. As mean places are
lighted up by the rays of the sun, so let the degenerate shine in the light of their forefathers.

XXXI. In this place, my Liberalis, I wish to speak in defence of the gods. We sometimes say,
"What could Providence mean by placing an Arrhidaeus upon the throne?" Do you suppose that
the crown was given to Arrhidaeus? nay, it was given to his father and his brother. Why did
Heaven bestow the empire of the world upon Caius Caesar, the most bloodthirsty of mankind,
who was wont to order blood to be shed in his presence as freely as if he wished to drink of
it? Why, do you suppose that it was given to him? It was given to his father, Germanicus, to
his grandfather, his great grandfather, and to others before them, no less illustrious men,
though they lived as private citizens on a footing of equality with others. Why, when you yourself
were making Mamercus Scaurus consul, were you ignorant of his vices? did he himself conceal
them? did he wish to appear decent?

Did you admit a man who was so openly filthy to the fasces and the tribunal? Yes, it was because
you were thinking of the great old Scaurus, the chief of the Senate, and were unwilling that
his descendant should be despised.

XXXII. It is probable that the gods act in the same manner, that they show greater indulgence
to some for the sake of their parents and their ancestry, and to others for the sake of their
children and grandchildren, and a long line of descendants beyond them; for they know the whole
course of their works, and have constant access to the knowledge of all that shall hereafter
pass through their hands. These things come upon us from the unknown future, and the gods have
foreseen and are familiar with the events by which we are startled. "Let these men," says Providence,
"be kings, because their ancestors were good kings, because they regarded righteousness and
temperance as the highest rule of life, because they did not devote the state to themselves,
but devoted themselves to the state. Let these others reign, because some one of their ancestors
before them was a good man, who bore a soul superior to fortune, who preferred to be conquered
rather than to conquer in civil strife, because it was more to the advantage of the state.
[Footnote: Gertz, "Stud. Crit," p. 159, note.] It was not possible to make a sufficient return
to him for this during so long a time; let this other, therefore, out of regard for him, be
chief of the people, not because he knows how, or is capable, but because the other has earned
it for him. This man is misshapen, loathsome to look upon, and will disgrace the insignia of
his office. Men will presently blame me, calling me blind and reckless, not knowing upon whom
I am conferring what ought to be given to the greatest and noblest of men; but I know that,
in giving this dignity to one man, I am paying an old debt to another. How should the men of
to-day know that ancient hero, who so resolutely avoided the glory which pressed upon him,
who went into danger with the same look which other men wear when they have escaped from danger,
who never regarded his own interest as apart from that of the commonwealth?" "Where," you ask,
"or who is he? whence does he come?" "You know him not; it lies with me to balance the debit
and credit account in such cases as these; I know how much I owe to each man; I repay some
after a long interval, others beforehand, according as my opportunities and the exigencies
of my social system permit." I shall, therefore, sometimes bestow somewhat upon an ungrateful
man, though not for his own sake.

XXXIII. "What," argues he, "if you do not know whether your man be ungrateful or grateful--will
you wait until you know, or will you not lose the opportunity of bestowing a benefit? To wait
is a long business--for, as Plato says, it is hard to form an opinion about the human mind,--not
to wait, is rash." To this objector we shall answer, that we never should wait for absolute
knowledge of the whole case, since the discovery of truth is an arduous task, but should proceed
in the direction in which truth appeared to direct us. All our actions proceed in this direction:
it is thus that we sow seed, that we sail upon the sea, that we serve in the army, marry, and
bring up children. The result of all these actions is uncertain, so we take that course from
which we believe that good results may be hoped for. Who can guarantee a harvest to the sower,
a harbour to the sailor, victory to the soldier, a modest wife to the husband, dutiful children
to the father? We proceed in the way in which reason, not absolute truth, directs us. Wait,
do nothing that will not turn out well, form no opinion until you have searched but the truth,
and your life will pass in absolute in action. Since it is only the appearance of truth, not
truth itself, which leads me hither or thither, I shall confer benefits upon the man who apparently
will be grateful.

XXXIV. "Many circumstances," argues he, "may arise which may enable a bad man to steal into
the place of a good one, or may cause a good man to be disliked as though he were a bad one;
for appearances, to which we trust, are deceptive." Who denies it? Yet I can find nothing else
by which to guide my opinion. I must follow these tracks in my search after truth, for I have
none more trustworthy than these; I will take pains to weigh the value of these with all possible
care, and will not hastily give my assent to them. For instance, in a battle, it may happen
that my hand may be deceived by some mistake into turning my weapon against my comrade, and
sparing my enemy as though he were on my side; but this will not often take place, and will
not take place through any fault of mine, for my object is to strike the enemy, and defend
my countryman. If I know a man to be ungrateful, I shall not bestow a benefit upon him. But
the man has passed himself off as a good man by some trick, and has imposed upon me. Well,
this is not at all the fault of the giver, who gave under the impression that his friend was
grateful. "Suppose," asks he, "that you were to promise to bestow a benefit, and afterwards
were to learn that your man was ungrateful, would you bestow it or not? If you do, you do wrong
knowingly, for you give to one to whom you ought not; if you refuse, you do wrong likewise,
for you do not give to him to whom you promised to give. This case upsets your consistency,
and that proud assurance of yours that the wise man never regrets his actions, or amends what
he has done, or alters his plans." The wise man never changes his plans while the conditions
under which he formed them remain the same; therefore, he never feels regret, because at the
time nothing better than what he did could have been done, nor could any better decision have
been arrived at than that which was made; yet he begins everything with the saving clause,
"If nothing shall occur to the contrary." This is the reason why we say that all goes well
with him, and that nothing happens contrary to his expectation, because he bears in mind the
possibility of something happening to prevent the realization of his projects. It is an imprudent
confidence to trust that fortune will be on our side. The wise man considers both sides: he
knows how great is the power of errors, how uncertain human affairs are, how many obstacles
there are to the success of plans. Without committing himself, he awaits the doubtful and capricious
issue of events, and weighs certainty of purpose against uncertainty of result. Here also,
however, he is protected by that saving clause, without which he decides upon nothing, and
begins nothing.

XXXV. When I promise to bestow a benefit, I promise it, unless something occurs which makes
it my duty not to do so. What if, for example, my country orders me to give to her what I had
promised to my friend? or if a law be passed forbidding any one to do what I had promised to
do for him? Suppose that I have promised you my daughter in marriage, that then you turn out
to be a foreigner, and that I have no right of intermarriage with foreigners; in this case,
the law, by which I am forbidden to fulfil my promise, forms my defence. I shall be treacherous,
and hear myself blamed for inconsistency, only if I do not fulfil, my promise when all conditions
remain the same as when I made it; otherwise, any change makes me free to reconsider the entire
case, and absolves me from my promise. I may have promised to plead a cause; afterwards it
appears that this cause is designed to form a precedent for an attack upon my father. I may
have promised to leave my country, and travel abroad; then news comes that the road is beset
with robbers. I was going to an appointment at some particular place; but my son's illness,
or my wife's confinement, prevented me. All conditions must be the same as they were when I
made the promise, if you mean to hold me bound in honour to fulfil it. Now what greater change
can take place than that I should discover you to be a bad and ungrateful man? I shall refuse
to an unworthy man that which I had intended to give him supposing him to be worthy, and I
shall also have reason to be angry with him for the trick which he has put upon me.

XXXVI. I shall nevertheless look into the matter, and consider what the value of the thing
promised may be. If it be trifling, I shall give it, not because you are worthy of it, but
because I promised it, and I shall not give it as a present, but merely in order to make good
my words and give myself a twitch of the ear. I will punish my own rashness in promising by
the loss of what I gave. "See how grieved you are; mind you take more care what you say in
future." As the saying is, I will take tongue money from you. If the matter be important, I
will not, as Maecenas said, let ten million sesterces reproach me. I will weigh the two sides
of the question one against the other: there is something in abiding by what you have promised;
on the other hand, there is a great deal in not bestowing a benefit upon one who is unworthy
of it. Now, how great is this benefit? If it is a trifling one, let us wink and let it pass;
but if it will cause me much loss or much shame to give it, I had rather excuse myself once
for refusing it than have to do so ever after for giving it. The whole point, I repeat, depends
upon how much the thing given is worth: let the terms of my promise be appraised. Not only
shall I refuse to give what I may have promised rashly, but I shall also demand back again
what I may have wrongly bestowed: a man must be mad who keeps a promise made under a mistake.

XXXVII. Philip, king of the Macedonians, had a hardy soldier whose services he had found useful
in many campaigns. From time to time he made this man presents of part of the plunder as the
reward of his valour, and used to excite his greedy spirit by his frequent gifts. This man
was cast by shipwreck upon the estate of a certain Macedonian, who as soon as he heard the
news hastened to him, restored his breath, removed him to his own farmhouse, gave up his own
bed to him, nursed him out of his weakened and half-dead condition, took care of him at his
own expense for thirty days, restored him to health and gave him a sum of money for his journey,
as the man kept constantly saying, "If only I can see my chief, I will repay your kindness."
He told Philip of his shipwreck, said nothing about the help which he had received, and at
once demanded that a certain man's estate should be given to him. The man was a friend of his:
it was that very man by whom he had been rescued and restored to health. Sometimes, especially
in time of war, kings bestow many gifts with their eyes shut. One just man cannot deal with
such a mass of armed selfishness. It is not possible for any one to be at the same time a good
man and a good general. How are so many thousands of insatiable men to be satiated? What would
they have, if every man had his own? Thus Philip reasoned with himself while he ordered the
man to be put in possession of the property which he asked for. However, the other, when driven
out of his estate, did not, like a peasant, endure his wrongs in silence, thankful that he
himself was not given away also, but sent a sharp and outspoken letter to Philip, who, on reading
it, was so much enraged that he straightway ordered Pausanias to restore the property to its
former owner, and to brand that wickedest of soldiers, that most ungrateful of guests, that
greediest of shipwrecked men, with letters bearing witness to his ingratitude. He, indeed,
deserved to have the letters not merely branded but carved in his flesh, for having reduced
his host to the condition in which he himself had been when he lay naked and shipwrecked upon
the beach; still, let us see within what limits one ought to keep in punishing him. Of course
what he had so villainously seized ought to be taken from him. But who would be affected by
the spectacle of his punishment? The crime which he had committed would prevent his being pitied
even by any humane person.

XXXVIII. Will Philip then give you a thing because he has promised to give it, even though
he ought not to do so, even though he will commit a wrong by doing so, nay, a crime, even though
by this one act he will make it impossible for shipwrecked men to reach the shore? There is
no inconsistency in giving up an intention which we have discovered to be wrong and have condemned
as wrong; we ought candidly to admit, "I thought that it was something different; I have been
deceived." It is mere pride and folly to persist, "what I once have said, be it what it may,
shall remain unaltered and settled." There is no disgrace in altering one's plans according
to circumstances. Now, if Philip had left this man in possession of that seashore which he
obtained by his shipwreck, would he not have practically pronounced sentence of banishment
against all unfortunates for the future? "Rather," says Philip, "do thou carry upon thy forehead
of brass those letters, that they may be impressed upon the eyes of all throughout my kingdom.
Go, let men see how sacred a thing is the table of hospitality; show them your face, that upon
it they may read the decree which prevents its being a capital crime to give refuge to the
unfortunate under one's roof. The order will be more certainly respected by this means than
if I had inscribed it upon tablets of brass."

XXXIX. "Why then," argues our adversary, "did your Stoic philosopher Zeno, when he had promised
a loan of five hundred denarii to some person, whom he afterwards discovered to be of doubtful
character, persist in lending it, because of his promise, though his friends dissuaded him
from doing so?" In the first place a loan is on a different footing to a benefit. Even when
we have lent money to an undesirable person we can recall it; I can demand payment upon a certain
day, and if he becomes bankrupt, I can obtain my share of his property; but a benefit is lost
utterly and instantly. Besides, the one is the act of a bad man, the other that of a bad father
of a family. In the next place, if the sum had been a larger one, not even Zeno would have
persisted in lending it. It was five hundred denarii; the sort of sum of which one says, "May
he spend it in sickness," and it was worth paying so much to avoid breaking his promise. I
shall go out to supper, even though the weather be cold, because I have promised to go; but
I shall not if snow be falling. I shall leave my bed to go to a betrothal feast, although I
may be suffering from indigestion; but I shall not do so if I am feverish. I will become bail
for you, because I promised; but not if you wish me to become bail in some transaction of uncertain
issue, if you expose me to forfeiting my money to the state. There runs through all these cases,
I argue, an implied exception; if I am able, provided it is right for me to do so, if these
things be so and so. Make the position the same when you ask me to fulfil my promise, as it
was when I gave it, and it will be mere fickleness to disappoint you; but if something new
has taken place in the meanwhile, why should you wonder at my intentions being changed when
the conditions under which I gave the promise are changed? Put everything back as it was, and
I shall be the same as I was. We enter into recognizances to appear, yet if we fail to do so
an action will not in all cases lie against us, for we are excused for making default if forced
to do so by a power which we cannot resist.

XL. You may take the same answer to the question as to whether we ought in all cases to show
gratitude for kindness, and whether a benefit ought in all cases to be repaid. It is my duty
to show a grateful mind, but in some cases my own poverty, in others the prosperity of the
friend to whom I owe some return, will not permit me to give it. What, for instance, am I,
a poor man, to give to a king or a rich man in return for his kindness, especially as some
men regard it as a wrong to have their benefits repaid, and are wont to pile one benefit upon
another? In dealing with such persons, what more can I do than wish to repay them? Yet I ought
not to refuse to receive a new benefit, because I have not repaid the former one. I shall take
it as freely as it is given, and will offer myself to my friend as a wide field for the exercise
of his good nature: he who is unwilling to receive new benefits must be dissatisfied with what
he has already received. Do you say, "I shall not be able to return them?" What is that to
the purpose? I am willing enough to do so if opportunity or means were given me. He gave it
to me, of course, having both opportunity and means: is he a good man or a bad one? if he is
a good man, I have a good case against him, and I will not plead if he be a bad one. Neither
do I think it right to insist on making repayment, even though it be against the will of those
whom we repay, and to press it upon them however reluctant they may be; it is not repayment
to force an unwilling man to resume what you were once willing to take. Some people, if any
trifling present be sent to them, afterwards send back something else for no particular reason,
and then declare that they are under no obligation; to send something back at once, and balance
one present by another, is the next thing to refusing to receive it. On some occasions I shall
not return a benefit, even though I be able to do so. When? When by so doing I shall myself
lose more than he will gain, or if he would not notice any advantage to himself in receiving
that which it would be a great loss to me to return. The man who is always eager to repay under
all circumstances, has not the feeling of a grateful man, but of a debtor; and, to put it shortly,
he who is too eager to repay, is unwilling to be in his friend's debt; he who is unwilling,
and yet is in his friend's debt, is ungrateful.

BOOK V.

I.

In the preceding books I seem to have accomplished the object which I proposed to myself, since
in them I have discussed how a benefit ought to be bestowed, and how it ought to be received.
These are the limits of this action; when I dwell upon it further I am not obeying the orders,
but the caprices of my subject which ought to be followed whither it leads, not whither it
allures us to wander; for now and then something will arise, which, although it is all but
unconnected with the subject, instead of being a necessary part of it, still thrills the mind
with a certain charm. However, since you wish it to be so, let us go on, after having completed
our discussion of the heads of the subject itself, to investigate those matters which, if you
wish for truth, I must call adjacent to it, not actually connected with it; to examine which
carefully is not one worth one's while, and yet is not labour in vain. No praise, however,
which I can give to benefits does justice to you, Aebutius Liberalis, a man of excellent disposition
and naturally inclined to bestow them. Never have I seen any one esteem even the most trifling
services more kindly; indeed, your good-nature goes so far as to regard whatever benefit is
bestowed upon anyone as bestowed upon yourself; you are prepared to pay even what is owed by
the ungrateful, that no one may regret having bestowed benefits. You yourself are so far from
any boastfulness, you are so eager at once to free those whom you serve from any feeling of
obligation to you, that you like, when giving anything to any one, to seem not so much to be
giving a present as returning one; and therefore what you give in this manner will all the
more fully he repaid to you: for, as a rule, benefits come to one who does not demand repayment
of them; and just as glory follows those who avoid it, so men receive a more plentiful harvest
in return for benefits bestowed upon those who had it in their power to be ungrateful. With
you there is no reason why those who have received benefits from you should not ask for fresh
ones; nor would you refuse to bestow others, to overlook and conceal what you have given, and
to add to it more and greater gifts, since it is the aim of all the best men and the noblest
dispositions to bear with an ungrateful man until you make him grateful. Be not deceived in
pursuing this plan; vice, if you do not too soon begin to hate it, will yield to virtue.

II. Thus it is that you are especially pleased with what you think the grandly-sounding phrase,
"It is disgraceful to be worsted in a contest of benefits." Whether this be true or not deserves
to be investigated, and it means something quite different from what you imagine; for it is
never disgraceful to be worsted in any honourable contest, provided that you do not throw down
your arms, and that even when conquered you wish to conquer. All men do not strive for a good
object with the same strength, resources, and good fortune, upon which depend at all events
the issues of the most admirable projects, though we ought to praise the will itself which
makes an effort in the right direction. Even though another passes it by with swifter pace,
yet the palm of victory does not, as in publicly-exhibited races, declare which is the better
man; though even in the games chance frequently brings an inferior man to the front. As far
as loyalty of feeling goes, which each man wishes to be possessed in the fullest measure on
his own side, if one of the two be the more powerful, if he have at his disposal all the resources
which he wishes to use, and be favoured by fortune in his most ambitious efforts, while the
other, although equally willing, can only return less than he receives, or perhaps can make
no return at all, but still wishes to do so and is entirely devoted to this object; then the
latter is no more conquered than he who dies in arms, whom the enemy found it easier to slay
than to turn back. To be conquered, which you consider disgraceful, cannot happen to a good
man; for he will never surrender, never give up the contest, to the last day of his life he
will stand prepared and in that posture he will die, testifying that though he has received
much, yet that he had the will to repay as much as he had received.

III. The Lacedaemonians forbid their young men to contend in the pancratium, or with the caestus,
in which games the defeated party has to acknowledge himself beaten. The winner of a race is
he who first reaches the goal; he outstrips the others in swiftness, but not in courage. The
wrestler who has been thrown three times loses the palm of victory, but does not yield it up.
Since the Lacedaemonians thought it of great importance that their countrymen should be invincible,
they kept them away from those contests in which victory is assigned, not by the judge, or
by the issue of the contest itself, but by the voice of the vanquished begging the victor to
spare him as he falls. This attribute of never being conquered, which they so jealously guard
among their citizens, can be attained by all men through virtue and goodwill, because even
when all else is vanquished, the mind remains unconquered. For this cause no one speaks of
the three hundred Fabii as conquered, but slaughtered. Regulus was taken captive by the Carthaginians,
not conquered; and so were all other men who have not yielded in spirit when overwhelmed by
the strength and weight of angry fortune.

So is it with benefits. A man may have received more than he gave, more valuable ones, more
frequently bestowed; yet is he not vanquished. It may be that, if you compare the benefits
with one another, those which he has received will outweigh those which he has bestowed; but
if you compare the giver and the receiver, whose intentions also ought to be considered apart,
neither will prove the victor. It often happens that even when one combatant is pierced with
many wounds, while the other is only slightly injured, yet they are said to have fought a drawn
battle, although the former may appear to be the worse man.

IV. No one, therefore, can be conquered in a contest of benefits, if he knows how to owe a
debt, if he wishes to make a return for what he has received, and raises himself to the same
level with his friend in spirit, though he cannot do so in material gifts. As long as he remains
in this temper of mind, as long as he has the wish to declare by proofs that he has a grateful
mind, what difference does it make upon which side we can count the greater number of presents?
You are able to give much; I can do nothing but receive. Fortune abides with you, goodwill
alone with me; yet I am as much on an equality with you as naked or lightly armed men are with
a large body armed to the teeth. No one, therefore, is worsted by benefits, because each man's
gratitude is to be measured by his will. If it be disgraceful to be worsted in a contest of
benefits, you ought not to receive a benefit from very powerful men whose kindness you cannot
return, I mean such as princes and kings, whom fortune has placed in such a station that they
can give away much, and can only receive very little and quite inadequate returns for what
they give. I have spoken of kings and princes, who alone can cause works to be accomplished,
and whose superlative power depends upon the obedience and services of inferiors; but some
there are, free from all earthly lusts, who are scarcely affected by any human objects of desire,
upon whom fortune herself could bestow nothing. I must be worsted in a contest of benefits
with Socrates, or with Diogenes, who walked naked through the treasures of Macedonia, treading
the king's wealth under his feet. In good sooth, he must then rightly have seemed, both to
himself and to all others whose eyes were keen enough to perceive the real truth, to be superior
even to him at whose feet all the world lay. He was far more powerful, far richer even than
Alexander, who then possessed everything; for there was more that Diogenes could refuse to
receive than that Alexander was able to give.

V. It is not disgraceful to be worsted by these men, for I am not the less brave because you
pit me against an invulnerable enemy, nor does fire not burn because you throw into it something
over which flames have no power, nor does iron lose its power of cutting, though you may wish
to cut up a stone which is hard, impervious to blows, and of such a nature that hard tools
are blunted upon it. I give you the same answer about gratitude. A man is not disgracefully
worsted in a contest of benefits if he lays himself under an obligation to such persons as
these, whose enormous wealth or admirable virtue shut out all possibility of their benefits
being returned. As a rule we are worsted by our parents; for while we have them with us, we
regard them as severe, and do not understand what they do for us. When our age begins to bring
us a little sense, and we gradually perceive that they deserve our love for those very things
which used to prevent our loving them, their advice, their punishments, and the careful watch
which they used to keep over our youthful recklessness, they are taken from us. Few live to
reap any real fruit from children; most men feel their sons only as a burden. Yet there is
no disgrace in being worsted by one's parent in bestowing benefits; how should there be, seeing
that there is no disgrace in being worsted by anyone. We are equal to some men, and yet not
equal; equal in intention, which is all that they care for, which is all that we promise to
be, but unequal in fortune. And if fortune prevents any one from repaying a kindness, he need
not, therefore, blush, as though he were vanquished; there is no disgrace in failing to reach
your object, provided you attempt to reach it. It often is necessary, that before making any
return for the benefits which we have received, we should ask for new ones; yet, if so, we
shall not refrain from asking for them, nor shall we do so as though disgraced by so doing,
because, even if we do not repay the debt, we shall owe it; because, even if something from
without befalls us to prevent our repaying it, it will not be our fault if we are not grateful.
We can neither be conquered in intention, nor can we be disgraced by yielding to what is beyond
our strength to contend with.

VI. Alexander, the king of the Macedonians, used to boast that he had never been worsted by
anybody in a contest of benefits. If so, it was no reason why, in the fulness of his pride,
he should despise the Macedonians, Greeks, Carians, Persians, and other tribes of whom his
army was composed, nor need he imagine that it was this that gave him an empire reaching from
a corner of Thrace to the shore of the unknown sea. Socrates could make the same boast, and
so could Diogenes, by whom Alexander was certainly surpassed; for was he not surpassed on the
day when, swelling as he was beyond the limits of merely human pride, he beheld one to whom
he could give nothing, from whom he could take nothing? King Archelaus invited Socrates to
come to him. Socrates is reported to have answered that he should be sorry to go to one who
would bestow benefits upon him, since he should not be able to make him an adequate return
for them. In the first place, Socrates was at liberty not to receive them; next, Socrates himself
would have been the first to bestow a benefit, for he would have come when invited, and would
have given to Archelaus that for which Archelaus could have made no return to Socrates. Even
if Archelaus were to give Socrates gold and silver, if he learned in return for them to despise
gold and silver, would not Socrates be able to repay Archelaus? Could Socrates receive from
him as much value as he gave, in displaying to him a man skilled in the knowledge of life and
of death, comprehending the true purpose of each? Suppose that he had found this king, as it
were, groping his way in the clear sunlight, and had taught him the secrets of nature, of which
he was so ignorant, that when there was an eclipse of the sun, he up his palace, and shaved
his son's head, [Footnote: Gertz very reasonably conjectures that he shaved his own head which
reading would require a very trifling alteration of the text.] which men are wont to do in
times of mourning and distress. What a benefit it would have been if he had dragged the terror-stricken
king out of his hiding-place, and bidden him be of good cheer, saying, "This is not a disappearance
of the sun, but a conjunction of two heavenly bodies; for the moon, which proceeds along a
lower path, has placed her disk beneath the sun, and hidden it by the interposition of her
own mass. Sometimes she only hides a small portion of the sun's disk, because she only grazes
it in passing; sometimes she hides more, by placing more of herself before it; and sometimes
she shuts it out from our sight altogether, if she passes in an exactly even course between
the sun and the earth. Soon, however, their own swift motion will draw these two bodies apart;
soon the earth will receive back again the light of day. And this system will continue throughout
centuries, having certain days, known beforehand, upon which the sun cannot display all rays,
because of the intervention of the moon. Wait only for a short time; he will soon emerge, he
will soon leave that seeming cloud, and freely shed abroad his light without any hindrances."
Could Socrates not have made an adequate return to Archelaus, if he had taught him to reign?
as though Socrates would not benefit him sufficiently, merely by enabling him to bestow a benefit
upon Socrates. Why, then, did Socrates say this? Being a joker and a speaker in parables--a
man who turned all, especially the great, into ridicule--he preferred giving him a satirical
refusal, rather than an obstinate or haughty one, and therefore said that he did not wish to
receive benefits from one to whom he could not return as much as he received. He feared, perhaps,
that he might be forced to receive something which he did not wish, he feared that it might
be something unfit for Socrates to receive. Some one may say, "He ought to have said that he
did not wish to go." But by so doing he would have excited against himself the anger of an
arrogant king, who wished everything connected with himself to be highly valued. It makes no
difference to a king whether you be unwilling to give anything to him or to accept anything
from him; he is equally incensed at either rebuff, and to be treated with disdain is more bitter
to a proud spirit than not to be feared. Do you wish to know what Socrates really meant? He,
whose freedom of speech could not be borne even by a free state, was not willing of his own
choice to become a slave.

VII. I think that we have sufficiently discussed this part of the subject, whether it be disgraceful
to be worsted in a contest of benefits. Whoever asks this question must know that men are not
wont to bestow benefits upon themselves, for evidently it could not be disgraceful to be worsted
by oneself. Yet some of the Stoics debate this question, whether any one can confer a benefit
upon himself, and whether one ought to return one's own kindness to oneself. This discussion
has been raised in consequence of our habit of saying, "I am thankful to myself," "I can complain
of no one but myself," "I am angry with myself," "I will punish myself," "I hate myself," and
many other phrases of the same sort, in which one speaks of oneself as one would of some other
person. "If," they argue, "I can injure myself, why should I not be able also to bestow a benefit
upon myself? Besides this, why are those things not called benefits when I bestow them upon
myself which would be called benefits if I bestowed them upon another? If to receive a certain
thing from another would lay me under an obligation to him, how is it that if I give it to
myself, I do not contract an obligation to myself? why should I be ungrateful to my own self,
which is no less disgraceful than it is to be mean to oneself, or hard and cruel to oneself,
or neglectful of oneself?" The procurer is equally odious whether he prostitutes others or
himself. We blame a flatterer, and one who imitates another man's mode of speech, or is prepared
to give praise whether it be deserved or not; we ought equally to blame one who humours himself
and looks up to himself, and so to speak is his own flatterer. Vices are not only hateful when
outwardly practised, but also when they are repressed within the mind. Whom would you admire
more than he who governs himself and has himself under command? It is easier to rule savage
nations, impatient of foreign control, than to restrain one's own mind and keep it under one's
own control. Plato, it is argued, was grateful to Socrates for having been taught by him; why
should not Socrates be grateful to himself for having taught himself? Marcus Cato said, "Borrow
from yourself whatever you lack;" why, then, if I can lend myself anything, should I be unable
to give myself anything? The instances in which usage divides us into two persons are innumerable;
we are wont to say, "Let me converse with myself," and, "I will give myself a twitch of the
ear;" [Footnote: See book iv. ch. xxxvi.] and if it be true that one can do so, then a man
ought to be grateful to himself, just as he is angry with himself; as he blames himself, SO
he ought to praise himself; since he can impoverish himself, he can also enrich himself. Injuries
and benefits are the converse of one another: if we say of a man, 'he has done himself an injury,'
we can also say 'he has bestowed upon himself a benefit?'

VIII. It is natural that a man should first incur an obligation, and then that he should return
gratitude for it; a debtor cannot exist without a creditor, any more than a husband without
a wife, or a son without a father; someone must give in order that some one may receive. Just
as no one carries himself, although he moves his body and transports it from place to place;
as no one, though he may have made a speech in his own defence, is said to have stood by himself,
or erects a statue to himself as his own patron; as no sick man, when by his own care he has
regained his health, asks himself for a fee; so in no transaction, even when a man does what
is useful to himself, need he return thanks to himself, because there is no one to whom he
can return them. Though I grant that a man can bestow a benefit upon himself, yet at the same
time that he gives it, he also receives it; though I grant that a man may receive a benefit
from himself, yet he receives it at the same time that he gives it. The exchange takes place
within doors, as they say, and the transfer is made at once, as though the debt were a fictitious
one; for he who gives is not a different person to he who receives, but one and the same. The
word "to owe" has no meaning except as between two persons; how then can it apply to one man
who incurs an obligation, and by the same act frees himself from it? In a disk or a ball there
is no top or bottom, no beginning or end, because the relation of the parts is changed when
it moves, what was behind coming before, and what went down on one side coming up on the other,
so that all the parts, in whatever direction they may move, come back to the same position.
Imagine that the same thing takes place in a man; into however many pieces you may divide him,
he remains one. If he strikes himself, he has no one to call to account for the insult; if
he binds himself and locks himself up, he cannot demand damages; if he bestows a benefit upon
himself, he straightway returns it to the giver. It is said that there is no waste in nature,
because everything which is taken from nature returns to her again, and nothing can perish,
because it cannot fall out of nature, but goes round again to the point from whence it started.
You ask, "What connection has this illustration with the subject?" I will tell you. Imagine
yourself to be ungrateful, the benefit bestowed upon you is not lost, he who gave it has it;
suppose that you are unwilling to receive it, it still belongs to you before it is returned.
You cannot lose anything, because what you take away from yourself, you nevertheless gain yourself.
The matter revolves in a circle within yourself; by receiving you give, by giving you receive.

IX. "It is our duty," argues our adversary, "to bestow benefits upon ourselves, therefore we
ought also to be grateful to ourselves." The original axiom, upon which the inference depends,
is untrue, for no one bestows benefits upon himself, but obeys the dictates of his nature,
which disposes him to affection for himself, and which makes him take the greatest pains to
avoid hurtful things, and to follow after those things which are profitable to him. Consequently,
the man who gives to himself is not generous, nor is he who pardons himself forgiving, nor
is he who is touched by his own misfortunes tender-hearted; it is natural to do those things
to oneself which when done to others become generosity, clemency, and tenderness of heart.
A benefit is a voluntary act, but to do good to oneself is an instinctive one. The more benefits
a man bestows, the more beneficent he is, yet who ever was praised for having been of service
to himself? or for having rescued himself from brigands? No one bestows a benefit upon himself
any more than he bestows hospitality upon himself; no one gives himself anything, any more
than he lends himself anything. If each man bestows benefits upon himself, is always bestowing
them, and bestows them without any cessation, then it is impossible for him to make any calculation
of the number of his benefits; when then can he show his gratitude, seeing that by the very
act of doing so he would bestow a benefit? for what distinction can you draw between giving
himself a benefit or receiving a benefit for himself, when the whole transaction takes place
in the mind of the same man? Suppose that I have freed myself from danger, then I have bestowed
a benefit upon myself; suppose I free myself a second time, by so doing do I bestow or repay
a benefit? In the next place, even if I grant the primary axiom, that we can bestow benefits
upon ourselves, I do not admit that which follows; for even if we can do so, we ought not to
do so. Wherefore? Because we receive a return for them at once. It is right for me to receive
a benefit, then to lie under an obligation, then to repay it; now here there is no time for
remaining under an obligation, because we receive the return without any delay. No one really
gives except to another, no one owes except to another, no one repays except to another. An
act which always requires two persons cannot take place within the mind of one.

X. A benefit means the affording of something useful, and the word AFFORDING implies other
persons. Would not a man be thought mad if he said that he had sold something to himself, because
selling means alienation, and the transferring of a thing and of one's rights in that thing
to another person? Yet giving, like selling anything, consists in making it pass away from
you, handing over what you yourself once owned into the keeping of some one else.

If this be so, no one ever gave himself a benefit, because no one gives to himself; if not,
two opposites coalesce, so that it becomes the same thing to give and to receive. Yet there
is a great difference between giving and receiving; how should there not be, seeing that these
words are the converse of one another? Still, if any one can give himself a benefit, there
can be no difference between giving and receiving. I said a little before that some words apply
only to other persons, and are so constituted that their whole meaning lies apart from ourselves;
for instance, I am a brother, but a brother of some other man, for no one is his own brother;
I am an equal, but equal to somebody else, for who is equal to himself? A thing which is compared
to another thing is unintelligible without that other thing; a thing which is joined to something
else does not exist apart from it; so that which is given does not exist without the other
person, nor can a benefit have any existence without another person. This is clear from the
very phrase which describes it, 'to do good,' yet no one does good to himself, any more than
he favours himself or is on his own side. I might enlarge further upon this subject and give
many examples. Why should benefits not be included among those acts which require two persons
to perform them? Many honourable, most admirable and highly virtuous acts cannot take place
without a second person. Fidelity is praised and held to be one of the chief blessings known
among men, yet was any one ever on that account said to have kept faith with himself?

XI. I come now to the last part of this subject. The man who returns a kindness ought to expend
something, just as he who repays expends money; but the man who returns a kindness to himself
expends nothing, just as he who receives a benefit from himself gains nothing. A benefit and
gratitude for it must pass to and fro between two persons; their interchange cannot take place
within one man. He who returns a kindness does good in his turn to him from whom he has received
something; but the man who returns his own kindness, to whom does he do good? To himself? Is
there any one who does not regard the returning of a kindness, and the bestowal of a benefit,
as distinct acts? 'He who returns a kindness to himself does good to himself.' Was any man
ever unwilling to do this, even though he were ungrateful? nay, who ever was ungrateful from
any other motive than this? "If," it is argued, "we are right in thanking ourselves, we ought
to return our own kindness;" yet we say, "I am thankful to myself for having refused to marry
that woman," or "for having refused to join a partnership with that man." When we speak thus,
we are really praising ourselves, and make use of the language of those who return thanks to
approve our own acts. A benefit is something which, when given, may or may not be returned.
Now, he who gives a benefit to himself must needs receive what he gives; therefore, this is
not a benefit. A benefit is received at one time, and is returned at another; (but when a man
bestows a benefit upon himself, he both receives it and returns it at the same time). In a
benefit, too, what we commend and admire is, that a man has for the time being forgotten his
own interests, in order that he may do good to another; that he has deprived himself of something,
in order to bestow it upon another. Now, he who bestows a benefit upon himself does not do
this. A benefit is a thing which one gives not for one's own sake, but for the sake of him
to whom it is given; but he who bestows a benefit upon himself, does so for his own sake; therefore,
it is not a benefit.

XII. Now I seem to you not to have made good what I said at the beginning of this book. You
say that I am far from doing what is worth any one's while; nay, that in real fact I have thrown
away all my trouble. Wait, and soon you will be able to say this more truly, for I shall lead
you into covert lurking-places, from which when you have escaped, you will have gained nothing
except that you will have freed yourself from difficulties with which you need never have hampered
yourself. What is the use of laboriously untying knots which you yourself have tied, in order
that you might untie them? Yet, just as some knots are tied in fun and for amusement, so that
a tyro may find difficulty in untying them, which knots he who tied them can loose without
any trouble, because he knows the joinings and the difficulties of them, and these nevertheless
afford us some pleasure, because they test the sharpness of our wits, and engross, our attention;
so also these questions, which seem subtle and tricky, prevent our intellects becoming careless
and lazy, for they ought at one time to have a field given them to level, in order that they
may wander about it, and at another to have some dark and rough passage thrown in their way
for them to creep through, and make their way with caution. It is said by our opponent that
no one is ungrateful; and this is supported by the following arguments: "A benefit is that
which does good; but, as you Stoics say, no one can do good to a bad man; therefore, a bad
man does not receive a benefit. (If he does not receive it, he need not return it; therefore,
no bad man is ungrateful.) Furthermore, a benefit is an honourable and commendable thing. No
honourable or commendable thing can find any place with a bad man; therefore, neither can a
benefit. If he cannot receive one, he need not repay one; therefore, he does not become ungrateful.
Moreover, as you say, a good man does everything rightly; if he does everything rightly, he
cannot be ungrateful. A good man returns a benefit, a bad man does not receive one. If this
be so, no man, good or bad, can be ungrateful. Therefore, there is no such thing in nature
as an ungrateful man: the word is meaningless." We Stoics have only one kind of good, that
which is honourable. This cannot come to a bad man, for he would cease to be bad if virtue
entered into him; but as long as he is bad, no one can bestow a benefit upon him, because good
and bad are contraries, and cannot exist together. Therefore, no one can do good to such a
man, because whatever he receives is corrupted by his vicious way of using it. Just as the
stomach, when disordered by disease and secreting bile, changes all the food which it receives,
and turns every kind of sustenance into a source of pain, so whatever you entrust to an ill-regulated
mind becomes to it a burden, an annoyance, and a source of misery. Thus the most prosperous
and the richest men have the most trouble; and the more property they have to perplex them,
the less likely they are to find out what they really are. Nothing, therefore, can reach bad
men which would do them good; nay, nothing which would not do them harm. They change whatever
falls to their lot into their own evil nature; and things which elsewhere would, if given to
better men, be both beautiful and profitable, are ruinous to them. They cannot, therefore,
bestow benefits, because no one can give what he does not possess, and, therefore, they lack
the pleasure of doing good to others. 

A deep red flush suffused his face. "It's mutual!" he said. "I know he talks--"

Throughout the interview Schwinn tried almost pathetically, despite his obvious dislike of Gyssling,
to cover up the Consul's interference in American affairs. When I told Schwinn I had affidavits
showing that Rafael Demmler, President of the Steuben Society of Los Angeles, got two hundred
dollars in April, 1936, from the Nazi Consul to help maintain the Deutsches Haus as a center of
Nazi propaganda, he shook his head bewilderedly; and when I pointed out that he himself got
one hundred and forty-five dollars in cash from the Nazi Consul on Tuesday, April 28, 1936,
to cover expenses incurred by Schwinn in the effort to bring the German-American groups together
for the better dissemination of Nazi propaganda, his face turned alternately white and red
and finally he exploded:

"Did Gyssling tell you that?"

"I'm not saying who told it to me. But let's get on with some of your other 'patriotic' activities.
On Thursday, June 18, 1936, you visited Captain Trauernicht in company with Count von Bülow--"

For
the first time since the interview began Schwinn sat upright in his chair as if I had struck
him. All the other subjects had left him slightly disturbed but still with an obvious sense
that he was not on particularly dangerous ground. But at the mention of Von Bülow's name a look
of actual fear spread over his face.

"On that day," I continued, "you and the Count went directly to the
Captain's cabin where you handed over your reports--"

"What are you getting at?" Schwinn demanded sharply.

"I'm getting at the Count. What do you know about him?"

"Nothing. I know nothing about him. I've met him, that's all."

"Have you ever visited his home at Point Loma,[15] San Diego?"

Schwinn stared at me without answering.

"Have you ever been there?" I repeated.

"Yes," he said slowly.

"Did you ever observe how, through his study windows, you could see almost everything going on
at the American naval base--"

"I have nothing to say," Schwinn interrupted excitedly.

Among the men sent here directly by Rudolf Hess, Hitler's right-hand man, is a former German-American
businessman named Meyerhofer. This Nazi came here with special instructions from Hess, a personal
friend of his, to reorganize the Nazi machine in the United States. He arrived early in 1935
posing as a businessman. After consultations with Nazi leaders in New York, including the Nazi
Consul General, he went to Detroit to confer with Fritz Kuhn,[16] national head of the German-American
Bund. From Detroit he went to Chicago where he held more conferences with Nazi agents and then
went directly to Los Angeles for conferences with Schwinn, Von Bülow
and other secret agents operating in the United States.

  Meyerhofer's mission was not
   only to reorganize the propaganda machine
   but to try to place it on a self-supporting basis
   so that in the event of war when funds from Germany would be cut
off, an efficient Nazi machine could continue functioning.

It was with this knowledge in mind that I asked Schwinn what he knew about Meyerhofer. At the
mention of his name the Nazi leader for the West Coast again showed a flash of fear. He hesitated
a little longer than usual and then said in a low voice, "He is a member of our organization. He came
from Germany about thirty or forty years ago." Suddenly he added, "He's an American citizen."

"I
know he's an American citizen. But are you sure he didn't come from Germany--on his latest trip--in
January of last year?"

Schwinn smiled a little wryly. "He might have," he said in the same low tone.

"He's a personal friend of Rudolf Hess--"

"Listen!" Schwinn exclaimed. "You're on the wrong track!"

"Maybe; but what's his business here?"

"He's a businessman!"

"What's his business?"

Schwinn shrugged his shoulders. "I don't know," he said and then with growing excitement, "I
tell you you're on the wrong track!"

"Then what are you so excited about?"

"Because you're on the wrong track--"

"Okay. I'm on the wrong track and you know nothing about Nazi spies. Do you know of the visits
paid by the Japanese Consul in Los Angeles to Nazi ships when they come into port and of his
conferences with Nazi captains--"

"The Japanese! We have nothing to do with the Japanese. We are a patriotic group--"

"Yes, I know. What do you know about Schneeberger?"

Schwinn answered with an "M-m-m-m." His jaw bones showed against the ruddy flesh of his cheeks.
He stared up at the ceiling. "He was a Tyrolian peasant boy," he said without looking at me. "A
boy traveling around the world; you know, just chiseling his way around--"

"Just a bum, eh?"

"That's it," he agreed quickly. "Just a bum."

"What would your connections be with bums? Do you usually associate with Tyrolian bums who are chiseling
their way around the world?"

"Oh, he just came here like so many other people. He wanted money; so I gave him a little help
and he went to San Francisco and Oakland. He vanished. I haven't any idea where he might be now.
Maybe he's in Chicago now."

"He couldn't possibly be in Japan now, could he?"

"He spoke of going to Japan," Schwinn admitted.

"You saw him off on a Japanese training ship which the Japanese Government sent here from the
Canal Zone, didn't you?"

"I don't know," he said defiantly. "I know nothing about him."

"The treaty between Japan and Germany providing for exchange of information about Communists was
signed November 25, 1936. But in September, 1936, Schneeberger told you he was leaving on a Japanese
training ship for Japan. No training ship was expected on the West Coast at that time by the United
States port authorities, and yet a Japanese training ship appeared--ordered here from the Canal
Zone. It was on this ship that Schneeberger left. Apparently, then, the Nazis and the Japanese
had already been working together--and you were cooperating because you took Schneeberger around.
You took him to Count von Bülow's home at Point Loma, overlooking the American naval base. You
know that Schneeberger was not broke because he was spending money freely--"

"He was broke," Schwinn interrupted weakly.

"If he was so broke, how do you account for his carrying around an expensive camera and always
having plenty of film with which to photograph American naval and military spots?"

"I don't know. Maybe he carried the camera around to hock in case he went broke."

The absurdity of the excuse was so patent that I laughed.

  Schwinn smiled a little.

"All right. What do you know about a man named Maeder?"

Again that long, drawn-out "M-m-m-m." A long pause and Schwinn said, "Maeder is an American citizen,
I believe."

"Yes; you are, too. But what's his business in this country?"

"I don't know," Schwinn said helplessly. "I really don't know."

"You know nothing about his activities or observations of American naval and military bases?
Do you usually take in members without knowing anything about them?"

"Sometimes we do and sometimes we do not--"

"But orders were sent from Germany to make this an American organization--"

Schwinn nodded without admitting it verbally.

"And since you throw out all Germans who are not American citizens, you check with the Consul
General in New York as to whether they are fit--"

"We have nothing to do with the Consul General--"

"What happened to Willi Sachse who used to be a member here?"

"He is supposed to have gone back to Germany."

"Have you heard from him from Germany?"

"No; I haven't heard since he left."

"You received a letter recently from him from San Francisco where
he is watching foreign vessels--"

"Oh," said Schwinn, raising his hands in a helpless gesture, "I know you have spies in my organization."

We
talked a little longer--of visits he made to Nazi agents in the Middle West and in New York,
of secret conferences with propagandists and spies. But he refused to do any more than shrug
his shoulders at all new questions.

"I have said too much already," he said.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] Gissibl
left for Stuttgart, Germany, and leadership was taken over by his
brother, Peter.

[11] Before McFadden died, I published evidence that
while he was a member of Congress he worked with Nazi agents in this
country.

[12] As this book went to press, the U.S. Government had
just begun action to revoke Schwinn's citizenship, claiming that he
had obtained it by making false statements.

[13] Congressman Samuel
Dickstein. The McCormick Congressional Committee was frequently referred
to as the "Dickstein Committee" because Dickstein had introduced the
resolution for the investigation.

[14] During the trial of the four
Nazi spies in New York the Federal prosecutor brought out that they
also carried orders sealed in brown, manila paper.

[15] Von Bülow
has since sold his home and moved into the El Cortez Hotel in San
Diego.

[16] At that time working for Henry Ford.

VIII

Henry Ford
and Secret Nazi Activities

One of the Chief Nazi propagandists in
the United States recently ran in the United States Senate primaries
in Kansas and was almost nominated. He is Gerald B. Winrod, who poses
as a Protestant minister but has no affiliations with any reputable
church.

Winrod, even before he tried to get into the Senate, was
one of the most brazen of the Nazis' Fifth Column operating in this
country. He has held secret consultations with officials in the German
Embassy in Washington and carries on his propaganda under Fritz Kuhn's
direction.

Shortly after Winrod returned from a mysterious trip to
Germany and held an equally mysterious long consultation at the Nazi
Embassy in this country (1935), he organized the Capitol News and
Feature Service, with offices at 209 Kellogg Building, Washington.
The "news service" supplied smaller papers throughout the land with
"impartial comments" on the national scene. The Service was edited
by Dan Gilbert, a San Diego newspaperman, and the material was sent
free of charge (as is the material sent to the Latin American countries
from Germany and Italy). It was of course, deliberately calculated
to spread pro-Hitler sentiment and propaganda.

Few who read Winrod's
publications realize the extent of his activities. On March 1, 1937,
Senator Joseph T. Robinson addressed the United States Senate on what
appeared to him to be "unfair propaganda" carried on by Winrod against
President Roosevelt's proposed reorganization of the judiciary system.
The Senator stated that he could not understand why the issues should
be deliberately falsified by a gentleman of the cloth--that it reminded
him of the old Ku Klux Klan tactics.

The Senator did not know that
Winrod's propaganda against Roosevelt was only part of a propaganda
campaign cunningly and brazenly organized by Nazis in this country
in an effort to defeat a man who, they felt, was not friendly to them.
In this campaign, Nazi agents worked openly and secretly with a few
unscrupulous members of the Republican Party in an effort to defeat
Roosevelt.

Several years ago Winrod was a poverty-stricken man living
at 145 N. Green Street, Wichita, Kansas. He called himself a minister
but all church bodies have repudiated him. Without a church, he did
a little evangelistic preaching and lived off collections made from
his audience. It was a precarious livelihood and often the "Reverend"
did not have enough money to buy even ordinary necessities.

Records
in several Wichita department stores tell the story of the evangelist's
poverty before an angel came to visit him. All the storekeepers with
whom Winrod dealt requested that their names be withheld, but signified
their willingness to present their records to any governmental body
which might be interested in the sudden wealth he acquired after he
became an intense Hitler propagandist. In the days of his poverty
Winrod, the records show, could afford to buy only the cheapest furniture,
the cheapest clothes, and pay for them on the installment plan in
weekly payments ranging from fifty cents to two or three dollars a
week.

I am reproducing with this chapter several of the installment
cards. The reader will notice that as late as 1934 Winrod was paying
at the rate of one dollar a week. It was in this period that Nazi
agents in the United States were carrying on their intensive campaign,
and it was also in this period that Winrod began to harangue his audiences
about the "menace of the Jews and the Catholics."

Then one day, the
Reverend Gerald B. Winrod suddenly found himself possessed of enough
money to go to Germany. When he came back in February, 1935, he had
new suit cases, new clothes and a fat check book. The records in the
Wichita department stores where he had been getting credit for clothes
and furniture show that after his return from Germany he paid all
his debts in lump sums--by check. Then he became a publisher.

In
his newspaper, The Revealer, he published a report on his trip to
Europe, but did not mention where he got the money for the jaunt.
The report (February 15, 1935) told of his discovery that the German
people loved Hitler and that only "Jewish influence in high circles
of certain governments is making it impossible for Germany to carry
on normal trade and financial relations with other countries."

In
this period of his new-found prosperity he established contacts with
Nazi agents and pro-fascists like Harry A. Jung of the American Vigilant
Intelligence Federation, Colonel Edwin Emerson, James True and a host
of other patrioteers.

Before the Presidential election he made another
trip to Germany. When he returned, he enlarged his distribution apparatus
and was apparently important enough for high Nazi officials visiting
the United States to meet with him. One of these was Hans von Reitenkranz,
who came quietly to the United States as Hitler's personal representative
to arrange for oil purchases--oil which Germany needed badly for her
factories and especially for her growing war machine.

Von Reitenkranz
is a friend of Professor Kurt Sepmeier of the University of Wichita.
He introduced Winrod to the Professor. They became friendly. When
I was in Wichita making inquiries about the Reverend Winrod, I constantly
came across the Professor's trail. Both he and Winrod had been meeting
regularly but with an effort at secrecy.

In January, 1937, after
several meetings with Professor Sepmeier, Winrod went to Washington.
I also went to Washington and found that the Reverend was calling
at the German Embassy. On one of his visits he remained inside for
an hour and eighteen minutes. Whom he saw or what he discussed I do
not know; but immediately after this long visit, the News and Feature
Service was organized with money enough to send its items out free
of charge to the papers that would accept them.

Gilbert, who headed
the Service, was for many years the personal representative of William
Dudley Pelley, leader of the Silver Shirts. The Nazis had been trying
to get the Silver Shirts to cooperate with them in a fascist "united
front" and the appointment of Gilbert was the first indication that
a friendly cooperation had been established.

Winrod had been in constant
communication with Pelley, and Pelley had conferred several times
with Schwinn. The Nazis were eager to get a native American body into
the organization so they would have an American "front."

Gilbert
opened offices in Washington and, fearful lest their location become
known, rented Post Office Box No. 771, Ben Franklin Station, for use
as a mailing address.

SE. Well, but I pray you, do you not say, "you have preserved my son for me; had he perished,
I could not have survived him?" Do you not owe a benefit for the life of one whose safety you
value above your own? Moreover, should I save your son's life, you would fall down before my
knees, and would pay vows to heaven as though you yourself had been saved; you would say, "It
makes no difference whether you have saved mine or me; you have saved us both, yet me more
than him." Why do you say this, if you do not receive a benefit?

A.D. Because, if my son were to contract a loan, I should pay his creditor, yet I should not,
therefore, be indebted to him; or if my son were taken in adultery, I should blush, yet I should
not, therefore, be an adulterer. I say that I am under an obligation to you for saving my son,
not because I really am, but because I am willing to constitute myself your debtor of my own
free will. On the other hand I have derived from his safety the greatest possible pleasure
and advantage, and I have escaped that most dreadful blow, the loss of my child. True, but
we are not now discussing whether you have done me any good or not, but whether you have bestowed
a benefit upon me; for animals, stones, and herbs can do one good, but do not bestow benefits,
which can only be given by one who wishes well to the receiver. Now you do not wish well to
the father, but only to the son; and sometimes you do not even know the father. So when you
have said, "Have I not bestowed a benefit upon the father by saving the son?" you ought to
meet this with, "Have I, then, bestowed a benefit upon a father whom I do not know, whom I
never thought of?" And what will you say when, as is sometimes the case, you hate the father,
and yet save his son? Can you be thought to have bestowed a benefit upon one whom you hated
most bitterly while you were bestowing it?

However, if I were to lay aside the bickering of dialogue, and answer you as a lawyer, I should
say that you ought to consider the intention of the giver, you must regard his benefit as bestowed
upon the person upon whom he meant to bestow it. If he did it in honour of the father, then
the father received the benefit; if he thought only of the son, then the father is not laid
under any obligation: by the benefit which was conferred upon the son, even though the father
derives pleasure from it. Should he, however, have an opportunity, he will himself wish to
give you something, yet not as though he were forced to repay a debt, but rather as if he had
grounds for beginning an exchange of favours. No return for a benefit ought to be demanded
from the father of the receiver; if he does you any kindness in return for it, he should be
regarded as, a righteous man, but not as a grateful one. For there is no end to it; if I bestow
a benefit on the receiver's father, do I likewise bestow it upon his mother, his grandfather,
his maternal uncle, his children, relations, friends, slaves, and country? Where, then, does
a benefit begin to stop? for there follows it this endless chain of people, to whom it is hard
to assign bounds, because they join it by degrees, and are always creeping on towards it.

XX. A common question is, "Two brothers are at variance. If I save the life of one, do I confer
a benefit upon the other, who will be sorry that his hated brother did not perish?" There can
be no doubt that it is a benefit to do good to a man, even against that man's will, just as
he, who against his own will does a man good, does not bestow a benefit upon him. "Do you,"
asks our adversary, "call that by which he is displeased and hurt a benefit?" Yes; many benefits
have a harsh and forbidding appearance, such as cutting or burning to cure disease, or confining
with chains. We must not consider whether a man is grieved at receiving a benefit, but whether
he ought to rejoice: a coin is not bad because it is refused by a savage who is unacquainted
with its proper stamp. A man receives a benefit even though he hates what is done, provided
that it does him good, and that the giver bestowed it in order to do him good. It makes no
difference if he receives a good thing in a bad spirit. Consider the converse of this. Suppose
that a man hates his brother, though it is to his advantage to have a brother, and I kill this
brother, this is not a benefit, though he may say that it is, and be glad of it. Our most artful
enemies are those whom we thank for the wrongs which they do us.

"I understand; a thing which does good is a benefit, a thing which does harm is not a benefit.
Now I will suggest to you an act which neither does good nor harm, and yet is a benefit. Suppose
that I find the corpse of some one's father in a wilderness, and bury it, then I certainly
have done him no good, for what difference could it make to him in what manner his body decayed?
Nor have I done any good to his son, for what advantage does he gain by my act?" I will tell
you what he gains. He has by my means performed a solemn and necessary rite; I have performed
a service for his father which he would have wished, nay, which it would have been his duty
to have performed himself. Yet this act is not a benefit, if I merely yielded to those feelings
of pity and kindliness which would make me bury any corpse whatever, but only if I recognized
this body, and buried it, with the thought in my mind that I was doing this service to the
son; but, by merely throwing earth over a dead stranger, I lay no one under an obligation for
an act performed on general principles of humanity.

It may be asked, "Why are you so careful in inquiring upon whom you bestow benefits, as though
some day you meant to demand repayment of them? Some say that repayment should never be demanded;
and they give the following reasons. An unworthy man will not repay the benefit which he has
received, even if it be demanded of him, while a worthy man will do so of his own accord. Consequently,
if you have bestowed it upon a good man, wait; do not outrage him by asking him for it, as
though of his own accord he never would repay it. If you have bestowed it upon a bad man, suffer
for it, but do not spoil your benefit by turning it into a loan. Moreover the law, by not authorizing
you, forbids you, by implication, to demand the repayment of a benefit." All this is nonsense.
As long as I am in no pressing need, as long as I am not forced by poverty, I will lose my
benefits rather than ask for repayment; but if the lives of my children were at stake, if my
wife were in danger, if my regard for the welfare of my country and for my own liberty were
to force me to adopt a course which I disliked, I should overcome my delicacy, and openly declare
that I had done all that I could to avoid the necessity of receiving help from an ungrateful
man; the necessity of obtaining repayment of one's benefit will in the end overcome one's delicacy
about asking for it. In the next place, when I bestow a benefit upon a good man, I do so with
the intention of never demanding repayment, except in case of absolute necessity.

XXI. "But," argues he, "by not authorizing you, the law forbids you to exact repayment." There
are many things which are not enforced by any law or process, but which the conventions of
society, which are stronger than any law, compel us to observe. There is no law forbidding
us to divulge our friend's secrets; there is no law which bids us keep faith even with an enemy;
pray what law is there which binds us to stand by what we have promised? There is none. Nevertheless
I should remonstrate with one who did not keep a secret, and I should be indignant with one
who pledged his word and broke it. "But," he argues, "you are turning a benefit into a loan."
By no means, for I do not insist upon repayment, but only demand it; nay, I do not even demand
it, but remind my friend of it. Visiting officers and sailors, from German ships docked in New
York, appeared at these meetings to preach fascism and Nazism, until
a wave of resentment swept the country.

One of the keynotes of these talks was sounded by Edward F. Sullivan of Boston at a meeting held
at Turnhalle, Lexington Avenue and 85th Street, on June 5th, 1934, when he repeatedly referred
to Jews as "dirty, stinking kikes" and announced that he proposed to organize a strong Nazi group
in Boston.

Propaganda Minister Goebbels in Berlin became annoyed at the public
reaction, and the entire Nazi foreign propaganda service was reorganized.

Emerson was ordered back to Germany for explicit instructions on how to carry on propaganda without
antagonizing the entire country.

In October, 1933, Royal Scott Gulden (who has no connection with the mustard business, but is a distant
relative of the head of it), who had been cooperating with Emerson, tried to organize an espionage
system to watch Communists. In this effort Gulden enlisted the aid of Fred R. Marvin, a professional
patriot. At three o'clock on the afternoon of March 10, 1934, a very secret meeting was called
by Gulden at 139 East 57th Street. Present were Gulden, J. Schmidt and William Dudley Pelley,
head of the Silver Shirts.

The meeting decided to adopt anti-semitic propaganda--to play on latent anti-semitism--as part
of the first campaign to attract followers. The country was in a serious economic crisis with
considerable unrest throughout the land. Both Hitler and Mussolini got into power in periods
of great unrest by promising peace and security to the bewildered people. Men of means were
terrified by fears of "revolution" and this group, directed by Emerson, began to preach that
the revolution might come any minute and that the Jews were responsible for Moscow, the Third
International, the Mississippi flood and anything else that troubled the people. When the meeting
ended the "Order of '76"[7] had been born and Royal Scott Gulden appointed Secretary to direct espionage
and propaganda.

From the very beginning Emerson tried to get people into places which
would provide access to important information.

On February 22, 1934, a merger of the Republican Senatorial and Congressional Campaign Committees
to conduct the Party's Congressional campaign independent of the Republican National Committee
was announced in a joint statement by Senator Daniel O. Hastings of Delaware and Representative
Chester C. Bolton of Ohio, chairmen, respectively, of the two committees.

Several weeks before this announcement, the two committees had employed Sidney Brooks, for years
head of the research bureau of the International Telephone and Telegraph Company. Brooks,
because of his position, was close in the confidences of Republican Senators and Congressmen.
He heard state secrets and had his fingers on the political pulse of the country.

Shortly after he took charge of the joint committee for the Senators and Congressmen, Brooks
made a hurried visit to New York. On March 4, 1934, he drove to the Hotel Edison and went directly
to Room 830 where a man registered as "William D. Goodales--Los Angeles,"
was awaiting him.

Mr. "Goodales" was William Dudley Pelley, head of the Silver Shirts, who had come to New York
to confer with Brooks and Gulden. After this conference the two went to Gulden's office where
they had a confidential talk that lasted over an hour during which an agreement was made to merge
the Order of '76 with the Silver Shirts so as to carry on their propaganda more effectively.

Brooks
himself, on his mysterious visits to New York, went to 17 Battery Place, which houses the German
Consulate General. At that address he visited one John E. Kelly.
In a letter to Kelly dated as far back as December 27, 1933, he wrote:
"I will be in New York Friday to Monday and can be reached in the
usual manner--Gramercy 5-9193 (care Emerson)."

Sidney Brooks also
was a member of the secret Order of '76. Before anyone could join
he had to give, in his own handwriting and sealed with his own fingerprints,
certain details of his life. Brooks' application for membership in
this espionage group organized with the help of a Nazi sent to this
country, revealed that he was the son of the Nazi agent, Colonel Edwin
Emerson, and that he was using his mother's maiden name so that connection
could not be traced too easily. Caesar answered, "Of
course, I remember; indeed, I was perishing with thirst; and since was unable to walk to the
nearest spring, I would have crawled thither on my hands and knees, had not my comrade, a brave
and active man, brought me water in his helmet." "Could you, then, my general, recognize that
man or that helmet?" Caesar replied that he could not remember the helmet, but that he could
remember the man well; and he added, I fancy in anger at being led away to this old story in
the midst of a judicial enquiry, "At any rate, you are not he." "I do not blame you, Caesar,"
answered the man, "for not recognizing me; for when this took place, I was unwounded; but afterwards,
at the battle of Munda, my eye was struck out, and the bones of my skull crushed. Nor would
you recognize that helmet if you saw it, for it was split by a Spanish sword." Caesar would
not permit this man to be troubled with lawsuits, and presented his old soldier with the fields
through which a village right of way had given rise to the dispute.

XXV. In this case, what ought he to have done? Because his commander's memory was confused
by a multitude of incidents, and because his position as the leader of vast armies did not
permit him to notice individual soldiers, ought the man not to have asked for a return for
the benefit which he had conferred? To act as he did is not so much to ask for a return as
to take it when it lies in a convenient position ready for us, although we have to stretch
out our hands in order to receive it. I shall therefore ask for the return of a benefit, whenever
I am either reduced to great straits, or where by doing so I shall act to the advantage of
him from whom I ask it. Tiberius Caesar, when some one addressed him with the words, "Do you
remember....?" answered, before the man could mention any further proofs of former acquaintance,
"I do not remember what I was." Why should it not be forbidden to demand of this man repayment
of former favours? He had a motive for forgetting them: he denied all knowledge of his friends
and comrades, and wished men only to see, to think, and to speak of him as emperor. He regarded
his old friend as an impertinent meddler.

We ought to be even more careful to choose a favorable opportunity when we ask for a benefit
to be repaid to us than when we ask for one to be bestowed upon us. We must be temperate in
our language, so that the grateful may not take offence, or the ungrateful pretend to do so.
If we lived among wise men, it would be our duty to wait in silence until our benefits were
returned. Yet even to wise men it would be better to give some hint of what our position required.
We ask for help even from the gods themselves, from whose knowledge nothing is hid, although
our prayers cannot alter their intentions towards us, but can only recall them to their minds.
Homer's priest, [Il. i. 39 sqq.] I say, recounts even to the gods his duteous conduct and his
pious care of their altars. The second best form of virtue is to be willing and able to take
advice.[Hes. Op. 291.] A horse who is docile and prompt to obey can be guided hither and thither
by the slightest movement of the reins. We can fix it up snug like our winter camp at the other
end of the lake."

"Have you two camp?"

"Yes--a winter camp and a summer camp. But we have stayed comfortably here in the cook-tent until
the thermometer went fourteen degrees below zero. We'll sleep in it till we get your house
done, and you can take the tent. If there are no parties wanting guides, we might as well begin
it in the morning."

"But," faltered Françoise, "afterw'iles when de ice is t'ick, and
you go to de hudder camp--"

"Oh, we'll take care of you," he promised. "You and Gougou will go with us. We couldn't leave you
on this side."

"In de dark nights," shuddered Françoise.

"You needn't be afraid, any time. When we are off during the day we always leave Jess and Jim
to guard the camp. Jess is a Scotch collie and Jim is a blood-hound. He's there in the kennel. Neither
man nor varmint would have any chance with them."

"I been use' to live alone when my husban' is away, M'sieu' Brownee.
I not 'fraid like you t'ink. But if Gougou be cold and hongry."

"Now
that's enough," said Brown, with gentle severity. "Gougou will never
be cold and hungry again while there's a stick of wood to be cut on
the shores of this lake, or any game to bag, or a 'lunge to spear
through the ice. We get about two days' lumbering a week down by St.
Ignace. No use to work more than two days a week," he explained, jocosely.
"That gives us enough to live on; and everybody around here owes us
from fifty to a hundred dollars back pay for work, anyhow. I've bought
this ground, twenty acres of it, and another year I'm going to turn
it into a garden."

"Oh, a garden, M'sieu' Brownee! Me, I love some
garden! I plant honion once, salade also."

"But I want to get my
fences built before I put in improvements. It is a question whether a benefit can be taken away from one by force. Some say that it
cannot, because it is not a thing, but an act. A gift is not the same as the act of giving,
any more than a sailor is the same as the act of sailing. A sick man and a disease are not
the same thing, although no one can be ill without disease; and, similarly, a benefit itself
is one thing, and what any of us receive through a benefit is another. The benefit itself is
incorporeal, and never becomes invalid; but its subject-matter changes owners, and passes from
hand to hand. So, when you take away from anyone what you have given him, you take away the
subject-matter only of the benefit, not the benefit itself. Nature herself cannot recall what
she has given. She may cease to bestow benefits, but cannot take them away: a man who dies,
yet has lived; a man who becomes blind, nevertheless has seen. She can cut off her blessings
from us in the future, but she cannot prevent our having enjoyed them in the past. We are frequently
not able to enjoy a benefit for long, but the benefit is not thereby destroyed. Let Nature
struggle as hard as she please, she cannot give herself retrospective action. A man may lose
his house, his money, his property--everything to which the name of benefit can be given--yet
the benefit itself will remain firm and unmoved; no power can prevent his benefactor's having
bestowed them, or his having received them.

III. I think that a fine passage in Rabirius's poem, where M. Antonius, seeing his fortune
deserting him, nothing left him except the privilege of dying, and even that only on condition
that he used it promptly, exclaims,

  "What I have given, that I now possess!"

How much he might have possessed, had he chosen! These are riches to be depended upon, which
through all the turmoil of human life will remain steadfast; and the greater they are, the
less envy they will attract. Why are you sparing of your property, as though it were your own?
You are but the manager of it. All those treasures, which make you swell with pride, and soar
above mere mortals, till you forget the weakness of your nature; all that which you lock up
in iron-grated treasuries, and guard in arms, which you win from other men with their lives,
and defend at the risk of your own; for which you launch fleets to dye the sea with blood,
and shake the walls of cities, not knowing what arrows fortune may be preparing for you behind
your back; to gain which you have so often violated all the ties of relationship, of friendship,
and of colleagueship, till the whole world lies crushed between the two combatants: all these
are not yours; they are a kind of deposit, which is on the point of passing into other hands:
your enemies, or your heirs, who are little better, will seize upon them. "How," do you ask,
"can you make them your own?" "By giving them away." Do, then, what is best for your own interests,
and gain a sure enjoyment of them, which cannot be taken from you, making them at once more
certainly yours, and more honorable to you. That which you esteem so highly, that by which
you think that you are made rich and powerful, owns but the shabby title of "house," "slave,"
or "money;" but when you have given it away, it becomes a benefit.

IV. "You admit," says our adversary, "that we sometimes are under no obligation to him from
whom we have received a benefit. In that case it has been taken by force." Nay, there are many
things which would cause us to cease to feel gratitude for a benefit, not because the benefit
has been taken from me, but because it has been spoiled. Suppose that a man has defended me
in a lawsuit, but has forcibly outraged my wife; he has not taken away the benefit which he
conferred upon me, but by balancing it with an equivalent wrong, he has set me free from my
debt; indeed, if he has injured me more than he had previously benefited me, he not only puts
an end to my gratitude, but makes me free to revenge myself upon him, and to complain of him,
when the wrong outweighs the benefit; in such a case the benefit is not taken away, but is
overcome. Why, are not some fathers so cruel and so wicked that it is right and proper for
their sons to turn away from them, and disown them? Yet, pray, have they taken away the life
which they gave? No, but their unnatural conduct in later years has destroyed all the gratitude
which was due to them for their original benefit. In these cases it is not a benefit itself,
but the gratitude owing for a benefit which is taken away, and the result is, not that one
does not possess the benefit, but that one is not laid under any obligation by it. It is as
though a man were to lend me money, and then burn my house down; the advantage of the loan
is balanced by the damage which he has caused: I do not repay him, and yet I am not in his
debt. In like manner any one who may have acted kindly and generously to me, and who afterwards
has shown himself haughty, insulting, and cruel, places me in just the same position as though
I never had received anything from him: he has murdered his own benefits. Though the lease
may remain in force, still a man does not continue to be a tenant if his landlord tramples
down his crops, or cuts down his orchard; their contract is at an end, not because the landlord
has received the rent which was agreed upon, but because he has made it impossible that he
should receive it. So, too, a creditor often has to pay money to his debtor, should he have
taken more property from him in other transactions than he claims as having lent him. The judge
does not sit merely to decide between debtor and creditor, when he says, "You did lend the
man money; but then, what followed? You have driven away his cattle, you have murdered his
slave, you have in your possession plate which you have not paid for. After valuing what each
has received, I order you, who came to this court as a creditor, to leave it as a debtor."
In like manner a balance is struck between benefits and injuries. In many cases, I repeat,
a benefit is not taken away from him who receives it, and yet it lays him under no obligation,
if the giver has repented of giving it, called himself unhappy because he gave it, sighed or
made a wry face while he gave it; if he thought that he was throwing it away rather than giving
it, if he gave it to please himself, or to please any one except me, the receiver; if he persistently
makes himself offensive by boasting of what he has done, if he brags of his gift everywhere,
and makes it a misery to me, then indeed the benefit remains in my hands, but I owe him nothing
for it, just as sums of money to which a creditor has no legal right are owed to him, but cannot
be claimed by him.

V. Though you have bestowed a benefit upon me, yet you have since done me a wrong; the benefit
demanded gratitude, the wrong required vengeance: the result is that I do not owe you gratitude,
nor do you owe me compensation--each is cancelled by the other. When we say, "I returned him
his benefit," we do not mean that we restored to him the very thing which we had received,
but something else in its place. The cooking-tent had a foundation of logs and a canvas top. The floor
was of pure white sand. Boxes like lockers were stored under the eaves to hold food, and in one
corner a cylindrical camp-stove with an oven thrust its pipe through a tinned hole in the roof.
Plenty of iron skillets, kettles, and pans hung above the lockers on pegs in the logs; and the camp
dinner service of white ware, black-handled knives and forks, and
metal spoons, neatly washed, stood on a table.

Jess, the Scotch collie, who was always left to guard the tents in their owners' absence,
sat at her usual post within the door; and she and Brown exchanged repressed growls at the
strangers. Jess, being freed from her chain, trotted at his heels when he went back to the beach
to clean fish for supper. She sat and watched his deft and work-hardened hands as he dipped and
washed and drew and scaled his spoil. He was a clean-skinned, blue-eyed Canadian Irishman, well
made and sinewy, bright and open of countenance. His blond hair clung in almost flaxen tendrils
to his warm forehead. No ill-nature was visible about him, yet he turned like a man in fierce
self-defence on his partner, who followed Jess and stood also watching him.

"Puttany, you fool! what have you brought these cursed patois into camp for?"

"Joe La France vas my old pardner," softly pleaded the German.

"Damn you, man, we can't start an orphan-asylum and widows' home! We'll get a bad name at the hotels.
The real good people won't have us for guides."

"She told me in Allanville she had no place to stay. She did not know what to do. At the old
voman's, where Joe put her, they have need of her bed. The old voman is too poor to keep her
any more."
"I'd have done just what you did; that's what makes me so mad. How
long is she going to stay?"

"I don't know," sheepishly responded
his partner.

"A Dutchman ought to have more sense than to load up
with a lot of cursed patois. Nothing but French and Indian! We'll
have to put the precious dears in the sleeping-tent, and bunk down
ourselves with blankets in the other. Did you air the blankets good
this morning, Frank?"

"They vos veil aired."

"You're a soft mark,
Frank! One of us will have to marry Joe La France's widow--that's
what it will come to!" In legal processes we ourselves have no power,
we must go whither they lead us; in the case of a benefit the supreme power is mine, I pronounce
sentence. Consequently I do not separate or distinguish between benefits and wrongs, but send
them before the same judge. Unless I did so, you would bid me love and hate, give thanks and
make complaints at the same time, which human nature does not admit of. I would rather compare
the benefit and the injury with one another, and see whether there were any balance in my favour.
If anybody puts lines of other writing upon my manuscript he conceals, though he does not take
away, the letters which were there before, and in like manner a wrong coming after a benefit
does not allow it to be seen.

VII. Your face, by which I have agreed to be guided, now becomes wrinkled with frowns, as though
I were straying too widely from the subject. You seem to say to me:

 "Why steer to seaward?
  Hither bend thy course,
  Hug close the shore..."

I do hug it as close as possible. So now, if you think that we have dwelt sufficiently upon
this point, let us proceed to the consideration of the next--that is, whether we are at all
indebted to any one who does us good without wishing to do so. I might have expressed this
more clearly, if it were not right that the question should be somewhat obscurely stated, in
order that by the distinction immediately following it may be shown that we mean to investigate
the case both of him who does us good against his will, and that of him who does us good without
knowing it. That a man who does us good by acting under compulsion does not thereby lay us
under any obligation, is so clear, that no words are needed to prove it. Both this question,
and any other of the like character which may be raised, can easily be settled if in each case
we bear in mind that, for anything to be a benefit, it must reach us in the first place through
some thought, and secondly through the thought of a friend and well-wisher. Therefore we do
not feel any gratitude towards rivers, albeit they may bear large ships, afford an ample and
unvarying stream for the conveyance of merchandise, or flow beauteously and full of fish through
fertile fields. No one conceives himself to be indebted for a benefit to the Nile, any more
than he would owe it a grudge if its waters flooded his fields to excess, and retired more
slowly than usual; the wind does not bestow benefits, gentle and favorable though it may be,
nor does wholesome and useful food; for he who would bestow a benefit upon me, must not only
do me good, but must wish to do so. No obligation can therefore be incurred towards dumb animals;
yet how many men have been saved from peril by the swiftness of a horse!--nor yet towards trees--yet
how many sufferers from summer heat have been sheltered by the thick foliage of a tree! What
difference can it make, whether I have profited by the act of one who did not know that he
was doing me good, or one who could not know it, when in each case the will to do me good was
wanting? So when Steele established his own racket, he found one of his early aids in former
Senator Robinson of Indiana. Robinson was closely tied up with the Ku Klux Klan. Through Robinson
and through other politicians reached with the cry "Save America,"
he got a long list of prominent sponsors and gradually increased it
until now it reads like a Who's Who of reactionary industrialists
and innocent politicians.

With letters of introduction from Senator Robinson, Steele's high pressure gang set out to
collect in the name of patriotism.

The procedure was simple. Salesmen presented their letters of introduction to the mayor of
a city. The mayor was impressed with the high "patriotic" motives and especially with the
imposing list of names sponsoring the efforts. Yet none of these are remedies, even though they may have
been successful; and in like manner some men do us good, though they are unwilling--indeed,
because they are unwilling to do so--yet we need not feel grateful to them as though we had
received a benefit from them, because fortune has changed the evil which they intended into
good. Do you suppose that I am indebted to a man who strikes my enemy with a blow which he
aimed at me, who would have injured me had he not missed his mark? It often happens that by
openly perjuring himself a man makes even trustworthy witnesses disbelieved, and renders his
intended victim an object of compassion, as though he were being ruined by a conspiracy. Some
have been saved by the very power which was exerted to crush them, and judges who would have
condemned a man by law, have refused to condemn him by favour. Yet they did not confer a benefit
upon the accused, although they rendered him a service, because we must consider at what the
dart was aimed, not what it hits, and a benefit is distinguished from an injury not by its
result, but by the spirit in which it was meant. By contradicting himself, by irritating the
judge by his arrogance, or by rashly allowing his whole case to depend upon the testimony of
one witness, my opponent may have saved my cause. I do not consider whether his mistakes benefited
me or not, for he wished me ill.

IX. In order that I may be grateful, I must wish to do what my benefactor must have wished
in order that he might bestow a benefit. Can anything be more unjust than to bear a grudge
against a person who may have trodden upon one's foot in a crowd, or splashed one, or pushed
one the way which one did not wish to go? Yet it was by his act that we were injured, and we
only refrain from complaining of him, because he did not know what he was doing. The same reason
makes it possible for men to do us good without conferring benefits upon us, or to harm us
without doing us wrong, because it is intention which distinguishes our friends from our enemies.
How many have been saved from service in the army by sickness! Some men have been saved from
sharing the fall of their house, by being brought up upon their recognizances to a court of
law by their enemies; some have been saved by ship-wreck from falling into the hands of pirates;
yet we do not feel grateful to such things, because chance has no feeling of the service it
renders, nor are we grateful to our enemy, though his lawsuit, while it harassed and detained
us, still saved our lives. Nothing can be a benefit which does not proceed from good will,
and which is not meant as such by the giver. If any one does me a service, without knowing
it, I am under no obligation to him; should he do so, meaning to injure me, I shall imitate
his conduct.

X. Let us turn our attention to the first of these. Can you desire me to do anything to express
my gratitude to a man who did nothing in order to confer a benefit upon me? Passing on to the
next, do you wish me to show my gratitude to such a man, and of my own will to return to him
what I received from him against his will? What am I to say of the third, he who, meaning to
do an injury, blunders into bestowing a benefit? That you should have wished to confer a benefit
upon me is not sufficient to render me grateful; but that you should have wished not to do
so is enough to set me free from any obligation to you. A mere wish does not constitute a benefit;
and just as the best and heartiest wish is not a benefit when fortune prevents its being carried
into effect, neither is what fortune bestows upon us a benefit, unless good wishes preceded
it. In order to lay me under an obligation, you must not merely do me a service, but you must
do so intentionally.

XI. Cleanthes makes use of the following example:--"I sent," says he, "two slaves to look for
Plato and bring him to me from the Academy. One of them searched through the whole of the colonnade,
and every other place in which he thought that he was likely to be found, and returned home
alike weary and unsuccessful; the other sat down among the audience of a mountebank close by,
and, while amusing himself in the society of other slaves like a careless vagabond as he was,
found Plato, without seeking for him, as he happened to pass that way. We ought," says he,
"to praise that slave who, as far as lay in his power, did what he was ordered, and we ought
to punish the other whose laziness turned out so fortunate." It is goodwill alone which does
one real service; let us then consider under what conditions it lays us under obligations.
It is not enough to wish a man well, without doing him good; nor is it enough to do him good
without wishing him well. Suppose that some one wished to give me a present, but did not give
it; I have his good will, but I do not have his benefit, which consists of subject matter and
goodwill together. I owe nothing to one who wished to lend me money but did not do so, and
in like manner I shall be the friend of one who wished but was not able to bestow a benefit
upon me, but I shall not be under any obligation to him. I also shall wish to bestow something
upon him, even as he did upon me; but if fortune be more favorable to me than to him, and I
succeed in bestowing something upon him, my doing so will be a benefit bestowed upon him, not
a repayment out of gratitude for what he did for me. It will become his duty to be grateful
to me; I shall have begun the interchange of benefits; the series must be counted from my act.

XII. I already understand what you wish to ask; there is no need for you to say anything, your
countenance speaks for you. He did, however, hastily borrow a horse from the stable where he was
privileged, and pursuing the blood-hound along the lake shore, he cantered over a causeway of
logs and earth which had been raised above a swamp.

The trail was very fresh, for Jim, without swerving, followed the road where it turned at right
angles from the shore and wound inland among stumps. They had nearly reached Allanville, a
group of log huts beside a north-shore railroad, when Jim uttered the bay of victory.

Brown dropped from the saddle and called him sternly back. To be hunting Françoise with a blood-hound
out of leash--how horrible was this!

He tied his horse to a tree and took Jim by the collar, restraining
the creature's fierce joy of discovery.

Françoise must be near, unless a hound whose scent was unerring had become a fool.

What if she had left camp of her own will? She was so quiet, one could not be sure of her thoughts.
Brown was sure of his thoughts. He grinned in the lonely landscape, seeing himself as he had
appeared on recent Sundays, in his best turtle-tail neck-tie mounted on velvet.

"I've got it bad," he confessed.

Stooping to Jim's collar while the dog whined and strained, he passed a cabin. And there Jim
relaxed in the search and turned around. The moon stood high enough to make a wan fairy daylight.
Gougou, like a gnome, started from the ground to meet them, and the dog at once lay down and
fawned at his feet.

More slowly approaching from the cabin, Brown saw Françoise, still carrying in her hand the
bundle of her belongings brought from camp. In the shadow of the house a man watched the encounter,
and a sift of rank tobacco smoke hinted the pipes of fathers and sons resting from the day's
labor on the cabin door-sill or the sward. Voices of children could be heard, and other dogs
gave mouth, so that Brown laid severe commands on Jim before he could tremblingly speak to Françoise.

"Oh,
M'sieu' Brownee, I t'ink maybe you come!"

"But, Françoise, what made you leave?"

"It is my husban's brudder. I not know what to do! He bring us to dese folks to stay all night
till de cars go."

"Why didn't he show himself to us, and take you like a man?"
"Oh, M'sieu' Brownee--he say de priest hexcommunicate me--to live--so--in
de camp! It is not my fault--and I t'ink about you and M'sieu' Put-tanee--and
Gougou he bite his honcle, and kick and scream!"

"Damn the uncle!"
swore Brown, deeply.

"Oh, I been so anxion!" sobbed Françoise.

"We
must be married right off," said Brown. "I'll fix your brother-in-law.
Françoise, will yon have me for your husband?"

"Me, M'sieu' Brownee?"

"Yes,
you--you cursed sweet patois!"

"M'sieu' Brownee, you may call me
de cursed patois. I not know anyt'ings. But when André La France take
me away, oh, I t'ink I die! Let me honly be Françoise to do your mend'!
I be 'appier to honly look at you dan some womans who 'ave 'usban'!"

"Françoise,
kiss me--kiss me!" His voice broke with a sob. "If you loved me you
would have me!"

"M'sieu' Brownee, I ado' you!"

Suddenly giving way
to passionate weeping, and to all the tenderness which nature teaches
even barbarians to repress, she abandoned herself to his arms. By so
doing you do something for my sake, in that you grant me the chance of being ransomed; I owe
to fortune that my name was drawn, all I owe to you is that my name could be drawn. You have
given me the means of obtaining your benefit. For the greater part of that benefit I am indebted
to fortune; that I could be so indebted, I owe to you.

I shall take no notice whatever of those whose benefits are bestowed in a mercenary spirit,
who do not consider to whom, but upon what terms they give, whose benefits are entirely selfish.
Suppose that some one sells me corn; I cannot live unless I buy it; yet I do not owe my life
to him because I have bought it. I do not consider how essential it was to me, and that I could
not live without it; but how little thanks are due for it, since I could not have had it without
paying for it, and since the merchant who imported it did not consider how much good he would
do me, but how much he would gain for himself, I owe nothing for what I have bought and paid for.

XV. "According to this reasoning," says my opponent, "you would say that you owe nothing to
a physician beyond his paltry fee, nor to your teacher, because you have paid him some money;
yet these persons are all held very dear, and are very much respected." In answer to this I
should urge that some things are of greater value than the price which we pay for them. You
buy of a physician life and good health, the value of which cannot be estimated in money; from
a teacher of the liberal sciences you buy the education of a gentleman and mental culture;
therefore you pay these persons the price, not of what they give us, but of their trouble in
giving it; you pay them for devoting their attention to us, for disregarding their own affairs
to attend to us: they receive the price, not of their services, but of the expenditure of their
time. Yet this may be more truly stated in another way, which I will at once lay before you,
having first pointed out how the above may be confuted. Our adversary would say, "If some things
are of greater value than the price which we pay for them, then, though you may have bought
them, you still owe me something more for them." I answer, in the first place, what does their
real value matter, since the buyer and seller have settled the price between them? Next, I
did not buy it at it's own price, but at yours. "It is," you say, "worth more than its sale
price." True, but it cannot be sold for more. The price of everything varies according to circumstances;
after you have well praised your wares, they are worth only the highest price at which you
can sell them; a man who buys things cheap is not on that account under any obligation to the
seller. In the next place, even if they are worth more, there is no generosity in your letting
them go for less, since the price is settled by custom and the rate of the market, not by the
uses and powers of the merchandise. What would you state to be the proper payment of a man
who crosses the seas, holding a true course through the midst of the waves after the land has
sunk out of sight, who foresees coming storms, and suddenly, when no one expects danger, orders
sails to be furled, yards to be lowered, and the crew to stand at their posts ready to meet
the fury of the unexpected gale? and yet the price of such great skill is fully paid for by
the passage money. At what sum can you estimate the value of a lodging in a wilderness, of
a shelter in the rain, of a bath or fire in cold weather? Yet I know on what terms I shall
be supplied with these when I enter an inn. How much the man does for us who props our house
when it is about to fall, and who, with a skill beyond belief, suspends in the air a block
of building which has begun to crack at the foundation; yet we can contract for underpinning
at a fixed and cheap rate. The city wall keeps us safe from our enemies, and from sudden inroads
of brigands; yet it is, well known how much a day a smith would earn for erecting towers and
scaffoldings [Footnote: See Viollet-le-Duc's "Dictionnaire d'Architecture," articles "Architecture
Militaire" and "Hourds," for the probable meaning of "Propugnacula."]to provide for the public
safety.

XVI. I might go on for ever collecting instances to prove that valuable things are sold at
a low price. What then? why is it that I owe something extra both to my physician and to my
teacher, and that I do not acquit myself of all obligation to them by paying them their fee?
It is because they pass from physicians and teachers into friends, and lay us under obligations,
not by the skill which they sell to us, but by kindly and familiar good will. If my physician
does no more than feel my pulse and class me among those whom he sees in his daily rounds,
pointing out what I ought to do or to avoid without any personal interest, then I owe him no
more than his fee, because he views me with the eye not of a friend, but of a commander. [Footnote:
I read "Nbn tamquam amicus videt sed tamquam imperator."] Neither have I any reason for loving
my teacher, if he has regarded me merely as one of the mass of his scholars, and has not thought
me worthy of taking especial pains with by myself, if he has never fixed his attention upon
me, and if when he discharged his knowledge on the public, I might be said rather to have picked
it up than to have learnt it from him. What then is our reason for owing them much? It is,
not that what they have sold us is worth more than we paid for it, but that they have given
something to us personally. Suppose that my physician has spent more consideration upon my
case than was professionally necessary; that it was for me, not for his own credit, that he
feared: that he was not satisfied with pointing out remedies, but himself applied them, that
he sat by my bedside among my anxious friends, and came to see me at the crises of my disorder;
that no service was too troublesome or too disgusting for him to perform; that he did not hear
my groans unmoved; that among the numbers who called for him I was his favourite case; and
that he gave the others only so much time as his care of my health permitted him: I should
feel obliged to such a man not as to a physician, but as to a friend. Hence Allen was instructed
to become active in the Silver Shirt movement. He organized Down Town Post No. 47-10 and established
Silver Shirt recruiting headquarters in Room 693 at 730 South Grand Ave., Los Angeles.

In August, 1936, when a lot of Nazi and anti-Roosevelt money was being shelled out in efforts to
defeat Roosevelt, Allen became extremely active. While Pelley was out of town, he was instructed
to work with Kenneth Alexander, Pelley's right-hand man. Alexander was formerly a still-photographer
at United Artists Studios. The two opened offices in the Broadway Arcade Building and on October
1, 1935, moved to the Lankersheim Building at Third Street near Spring,
Los Angeles.

Rodriguez, after he was given assurances of Nazi aid, worked not only with Nazi agents in this
country but also with Julio Brunet, manager of the Ford factory in Mexico City.

The earliest documentary record I have of their tie-up is a letter Rodriguez wrote to Ford's manager
on September 27, 1934, on Gold Shirt stationery.

The letter merely asks Brunet to give jobs to two "worthy young men" and is written in a manner
that shows Rodriguez and Brunet are rather close.

By February 7, 1935, Rodriguez and the Ford executive in Mexico had become sufficiently intimate
for the fascist leader to express his appreciation of Brunet's placing Gold Shirts in the
plant. His letter addressed to the manager of the Ford Company follows:

We have been informed by our delegate, Senora N.M. Colunga, that she was very well treated
by you and that in addition you informed her that our request for
work for some of our comrades who needed it has also been heard.

Not doubting but that this will be fulfilled, A.R.M. [the Gold Shirts] sends you the most expressive
thanks for having seen in you the recognition of one of the greatest obligations of humanity
to Mexicanism.

On November 19, 1935, shortly before the Gold Shirts felt they were powerful enough to attempt
the overthrow of the Mexican Government and the establishment of a fascist dictatorship, Rodriguez
wrote to the manager of the Ford plant, asking for the two ambulances which had been promised
the fascists by the Ford manager. Rodriguez had organized his attempted Putsch carefully, with
a women's ambulance corps to care for the wounded in the expected fighting. The letter, again translated
almost literally, follows:

Sr. Manager of the Ford Company Nov. 19, 1935. City Highly Esteemed Señor:

This will be delivered to you personally by Sr. General Juan Alvarez C., who comes with the
object of ascertaining if that company would be able to supply two ambulances which they had
already offered, for the transportation of the Women's Sanitary Brigade on the 20th day of this
month at 8 A.M.

Thanking you in advance for the references, I am happy to repeat that I am at your command.
Affectionately and attentively, S.S.

NICHOLÁS RODRIGUEZ C. Supreme Commander.

In the street fighting that followed the attempted fascist Putsch a number were killed and wounded.
It was after this fight that Rodriguez was exiled.
I am reproducing some of these letters from carbon copies, initialed
by Rodriguez, which were in his files. Why he initials carbon copies
I don't know, but I have a stack of his correspondence with Nazi agents
and almost all of his carbons are initialed.

On October 4, 1936,
Allen wrote to the exiled fascist leader. Ostensibly the letter invited
him to address the Silver Shirts. Actually it was for a special conference
about "matters of vital importance to us both." This letter was written
when Schwinn was holding conferences with Pelley to merge forces in
a fascist united front, and when Schneeberger was preparing to leave
for Japan on a training ship ordered up from the Canal Zone by the
Japanese to take him on board. The letter follows:

Dear General Rodriguez:

Upon
receipt of this letter will you kindly communicate with me and advise
me whether it would be possible for you to come to Los Angeles in
the near future to make an address to our organization here. We shall
be glad to defray all expenses which will include airplane both ways
if you desire it. We shall also offer you bodyguard for your protection
if you deem it necessary.

XX. "According to this," argues our opponent, "you are under no obligation to the sun or the
moon; for they do not move for your sake alone." No, but since they move with the object of
preserving the balance of the universe, they move for my sake also, seeing that I am a fraction
of the universe. Besides, our position and theirs is not the same, for he who does me good
in order that he may by my means do good to himself, does not bestow a benefit upon me, because
he merely makes use of me as an instrument for his own advantage; whereas the sun and the moon,
even if they do us good for their own sakes, still cannot do good to us in order that by our
means they may do good to themselves, for what is there which we can bestow upon them?

XXI. "I should be sure," replies he, "that the sun and the moon wished to do us good, if they
were able to refuse to do so; but they cannot help moving as they do. In short, let them stop
and discontinue their work."

See now, in how many ways this argument may be refuted. One who cannot refuse to do a thing
may nevertheless wish to do it; indeed there is no greater proof of a fixed desire to do anything,
than not to be able to alter one's determination. A good man cannot leave undone what he does:
for unless he does it he will not be a good man. Is a good man, then, not able to bestow a
benefit, because he does what he ought to do, and is not able not to do what he ought to do?
Besides this, it makes a great difference whether you say, "He is not able not to do this,
because he is forced to do it," or "He is not able to wish not to do it;" for, if he could
not help doing it, then I am not indebted for it to him, but to the person who forced him to
do it; if he could not help wishing for it because he had nothing better to wish for, then
it is he who forces himself to do it, and in this case the debt which as acting under compulsion
he could not claim, is due to him as compelling himself.

"Let the sun and moon cease to wish to benefit us," says our adversary. I answer, "Remember
what has been said. Who can be so crazy as to refuse the name of free-will to that which has
no danger of ceasing to act, and of adopting the opposite course, since, on the contrary, he
whose will is fixed for ever, must be thought to wish more earnestly than any one else. Surely
if he, who may at any moment change his mind, can be said to wish, we must not deny the existence
of will in a being whose nature does not admit of change of mind."

XXII. "Well," says he "let them stop, if it be possible." What you say is this:--"Let all those
heavenly bodies, placed as they are at vast distances from each other, and arranged to preserve
the balance of the universe, leave their appointed posts: let sudden confusion arise, so that
constellations may collide with constellations, that the established harmony of all things
may be destroyed and the works of God be shaken into ruin; let the whole frame of the rapidly
moving heavenly bodies abandon in mid career those movements which we were assured would endure
for ages, and let those which now by their regular advance and retreat keep the world at a
moderate temperature, be instantly consumed by fire, so that instead of the infinite variety
of the seasons all may be reduced to one uniform condition; let fire rage everywhere, followed
by dull night, and let the bottomless abyss swallow up all the gods." Is it worth while to
destroy all this merely in order to refute you? Even though you do not wish it, they do you
good, and they wheel in their courses for your sake, though their motion may be due to some
earlier and more important cause.

XXIII. Besides this, the gods act under no external constraint, but their own will is a law
to them for all time. They have established an order which is not to be changed, and consequently
it is impossible that they should appear to be likely to do anything against their will, since
they wish to continue doing whatever they cannot cease from doing, and they never regret their
original decision, No doubt it is impossible for them to stop short, or to desert to the other
side, but it is so for no other reason than that their own force holds them to their purpose.
It is from no weakness that they persevere; no, they have no mind to leave the best course,
and by this it is fated that they should proceed. When, at the time of the original creation,
they arranged the entire universe, they paid attention to us as well as to the rest, and took
thought about the human race; and for this reason we cannot suppose that it is merely for their
own pleasure that they move in their orbits and display their work since we also are a part
of that work. We are, therefore; under an obligation to the sun and moon and the rest of the
heavenly host, because, although they may rise in order to bestow more important benefits than
those which we receive from them, yet they do bestow these upon us as they pass on their way
to greater things. Besides this, they assist us of set purpose, and, therefore, lay us under
an obligation, because we do not in their case stumble by chance upon a benefit bestowed by
one who knew not what he was doing, but they knew that we should receive from them the advantages
which we do; so that, though they may have some higher aim, though the result of their movements
may be something of greater importance than the preservation of the human race, yet from the
beginning thought has been directed to our comforts, and the scheme of the world has been arranged
in a fashion which proves that our interests were neither their least nor last concern. It
is our duty to show filial love for our parents, although many of them had no thought of children
when they married. Not so with the gods: they cannot but have known what they were doing when
they furnished mankind with food and comforts. Those for whose advantage so much was created,
could not have been created without design. Nature conceived the idea of us before she formed
us, and, indeed, we are no such trifling piece of work as could have fallen from her hands
unheeded. See how great privileges she has bestowed upon us, how far beyond the human race
the empire of mankind extends; consider how widely she allows us to roam, not having restricted
us to the land alone, but permitted us to traverse every part of herself; consider, too, the
audacity of our intellect, the only one which knows of the gods or seeks for them, and how
we can raise our mind high above the earth, and commune with those divine influences: you will
perceive that man is not a hurriedly put together, or an unstudied piece of work. Among her
noblest products nature has none of which she can boast more than man, and assuredly no other
which can comprehend her boast. What madness is this, to call the gods in question for their
bounty? If a man declares that he has received nothing when he is receiving all the while,
and from those who will always be giving without ever receiving anything in return, how will
he be grateful to those whose kindness cannot be returned without expense? and how great a
mistake is it not to be thankful to a giver, because he is good even to him who disowns him,
or to use the fact of his bounty being poured upon us in an uninterrupted stream, as an argument
to prove that he cannot help bestowing it. Suppose that such men as these say, "I do not want
it," "Let him keep it to himself," "Who asks him for it?" and so forth, with all the other
speeches of insolent minds: still, he whose bounty reaches you, although you say that it does
not, lays you under an obligation nevertheless; indeed, perhaps the greatest part of the benefit
which he bestows is that he is ready to give even when you are complaining against him.

XXIV. Do you not see how parents force children during their infancy to undergo what is useful
for their health? Though the children cry and struggle, they swathe them and bind their limbs
straight lest premature liberty should make them grow crooked, afterwards instill into them
a liberal education, threatening those who are unwilling to learn, and finally, if spirited
young men do not conduct themselves frugally, modestly, and respectably, they compel them to
do so. Force and harsh measures are used even to youths who have grown up and are their own
masters, if they, either from fear or from insolence, refuse to take what is good for them. It
is pure unadulterated country life. They get up early, because they have so much to do, and
go to bed early, because they have so little to think about.

There has not been a scandal in the neighbourhood since the time of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently
they all fall asleep after dinner. You shan't sit next either of them. You shall sit by me and
amuse me."

Dorian murmured a graceful compliment and looked round the room. Yes:
it was certainly a tedious party. It is a question whether they are right,
and show a truly dutiful feeling; their state of mind is morbid, like that of frantic lovers
who long for their mistress to be exiled, that they may accompany her when she leaves her country
forsaken by all her friends, or that she may be poor in order that she may the more need what
they give her, or who long that she may be ill in order that they may sit by her bedside, and
who, in short, out of sheer love form the same wishes as her enemies would wish for her. Thus
the results of hatred and of frantic love are very nearly the same; and these lovers are very
like those who hope that their friends may meet with difficulties which they may remove, and
who thus do a wrong that they may bestow a benefit, whereas it would have been much better
for them to do nothing, than by a crime to gain an opportunity of doing good service. Her guests
this evening were rather tedious. The fact was, as she explained to Dorian, behind a very
shabby fan, one of her married daughters had come up quite suddenly to stay with her, and, to
make matters worse, had actually brought her husband with her. "I think it is most unkind of
her, my dear," she whispered. "Of course I go and stay with them every summer after I come from
Homburg, but then an old woman like me must have fresh air sometimes,
and besides, I really wake them up.
All such men confer their benefits upon us by odious means, for they beg the gods to harm those
whom they mean to help, and wish them to be struck down before they raise them up; it is a
cruel feeling, brought about by a distorted sense of gratitude, to wish evil to befall one
whom one is bound in honour to succour. 

Jim, crouching on his belly in acknowledgment that his apprehension had been at fault during
some late encounter, slunk across the camp and took the path to the hotels.

Brown turned on Puttany following at his heels: "Frank, are you sure Joe La France is dead?"

"Oh
yes, he is det."

"Did you see him die? Were you there when he was
buried? Was he put underground with plenty of dirt on top of him,
or did he merely drop in the water?"

"I vas not there."

"Maybe the
lazy hound has resurrected. You
do not bestow a benefit upon a man by ceasing to wrong him, nor can it ever be a piece of good
service to anyone to remove from him a burden which you yourself imposed on him. True, you
may cure the hurt which you inflict, but I had rather that you did not hurt me at all. You
may gain my gratitude by curing me because I am wounded, but not by wounding me in order that
you may cure me: no man likes scars except as compared with wounds, which he is glad to see
thus healed, though he had rather not have received them. It would be cruel to wish such things
to befall one from whom you had never received a kindness; how much more cruel is it to wish
that they may befall one in whose debt you are.

