We may be fully aware that the evidence of a poet dedicating a work to his patron is open to
the suspicion of partiality and flattery, and we may be willing that as much should be deducted
on that score from the weight of the Monk of Bury's testimony as the reader may impartially
pronounce just; still the naked fact remains unimpeached, that the poet was importuned by Henry,
when Prince, to translate two works for the use of his countrymen. THE GRANITE NATIONAL PARKS

GRANITE'S
PART IN SCENERY

The granite national parks are Yosemite, Sequoia, including the proposed Roosevelt Park, General
Grant, Rocky Mountain, and Mount McKinley. Granite, as its name denotes, is granular in texture and
appearance. It is crystalline, which means that it is imperfectly crystallized. It is composed
of quartz, feldspar, and mica in varying proportions, and includes several common varieties
which mineralogists distinguish scientifically by separate names.

Because of its great range and abundance, its presence at the core of mountain ranges where
it is uncovered by erosion, its attractive coloring, its massiveness and its vigorous personality,
it figures importantly in scenery of magnificence the world over. In color granite varies from
light gray, when it shines like silver upon the high summits, to warm rose or dark gray, the
reds depending upon the proportion of feldspar in its composition.

It produces scenic effects very different indeed from those resulting from volcanic and sedimentary
rocks. While it bulks hugely in the higher mountains, running to enormous rounded masses below
the level of the glaciers, and to jagged spires and pinnacled walls upon the loftiest peaks,
it is found also in many regions of hill and plain. It is one of our commonest American rocks.

Much of the loftiest and noblest scenery of the world is wrought in granite. The Alps, the Andes,
and the Himalayas, all of which are world-celebrated for their lofty grandeur, are prevailingly
granite.

They abound in towering peaks, bristling ridges, and terrifying precipices. Their glacial
cirques are girt with fantastically toothed and pinnacled walls.

This is true of all granite ranges which are lofty enough to maintain glaciers. These are, in fact,
the very characteristics of Alpine, Andean, Himalayan, Sierran, Alaskan,
and Rocky Mountain summit landscape. It is why granite mountains are
the favorites of those daring climbers whose ambition is to equal
established records and make new ones; and this in turn is why some
mountain neighborhoods become so much more celebrated than others
which are quite as fine, or finer--because, I mean, of the publicity
given to this kind of mountain climbing, and of the unwarranted assumption
that the mountains associated with these exploits necessarily excel
others in sublimity. As a matter of fact, the accident of fashion
has even more to do with the fame of mountains than of men. He communicates to the aged man, whom he calls father, his worldly wants
and anxiety; who, addressing him by the endearing name of son, endeavours to suggest to him
some means of procuring a remedy for his distress. His advice is, to write a poem or two with
great pains, and present them to the Prince, with the full assurance that he would graciously
accept them, and relieve his wants. They must be written, he says, with especial care, because
of the Prince's great skill and judgment; whilst of their welcome the Prince's gentle and benign
bearing towards all worthy suitors gives a most certain pledge. If Occleve deserves our confidence,
Henry, in the estimation of his contemporaries, even whilst he was yet Prince of Wales, had
the character of a gentle and kind-hearted man; one whose "heart was full applied to grant,"
and not to send a petitioner empty away. Instead of his revelling amidst loose companions at
the Boar in East-Cheap, his contemporaries thought they should best meet his humour, if they
supplied him with a "tale fresh and gay,"[311] for his study when he was in his own chamber,
and   (p. 332) was still. So far from thinking that an author would suit his taste by furnishing
any of those works which minister what is grateful to a depraved mind, their admonition was,
to write nothing which could sow the seeds of vice. They deemed him, if any one, able to set
the true value on a literary work; and felt that, if they purposed to present any production
of their own for his perusal and gratification, they must take especial pains to make it really
good. They had formed, moreover, such an opinion of his high excellence, and his abhorrence
of flattery, that they thought a man had better undertake a pilgrimage to Jerusalem than be
guilty of any indiscretion in this particular. Let any impartial person meditate on these things;
let him         (p. 333) carefully read the extracts from Lydgate and Occleve which will be
found in the Appendix; and remembering on the one hand that they were poets anxious to obtain
the favour of the court, and on the other that no single act or word of vice, or insolence,
or levity, is recorded of Henry by any one of his contemporaries, let him then, like an honest
days-man, pronounce his verdict.

                   [Footnote 310: Thomas Occleve, or Hoccleve, was
                   Clerk of the Privy Seal to Henry IV; many small
                   payments to him in that character are recorded in
                   the Pell Rolls. He was probably born in the year
                   1370, and lived to be eighty years of age.]

                   [Footnote 311: Henry seems to have supplied himself
                   with books on various other subjects of interest to
                   him. He was, we are told, fond of the chase; and we
                   find payment in the Pell Rolls of 12l. 8s. to
                   John Robart for writing twelve books on hunting for
                   the use of the King (21 Nov. 1421). Payment is also
                   made for a variety of books to the executors of
                   Joan de Bohun, late Countess of Hereford, his
                   grandmother, 24th May, 1420. Two petitions,
                   presented after his death to the council of his
                   infant son, contribute also incidentally their
                   testimony to the same view of his character. The
                   first prays that the books in the possession of the
                   late King, which belonged to the Countess of
                   Westmoreland, "The Chronicle of Jerusalem," and
                   "The Journey of Godfrey Baylion," might be
                   restored. The other petition is, that "a large book
                   containing all the works of St. Gregory the Pope,"
                   left to the Church of Canterbury by Archbishop
                   Arundell, and lent to Henry V. by Gilbert
                   Umfraville, one of the executors of the
                   Archbishop's will, and which was directed in the
                   last will of the King to be restored, might be
                   delivered up by the Convent of Shene, where it had
                   been kept, to the Prior of Canterbury.--Rymer.
                   Foed. 11 Hen. IV.]

       *       *       *       *       *

The tradition with regard to Henry's conduct immediately upon his father's dissolution, as
we gather it from various writers who lived near that time, is one as to the full admission
of which even an eulogist of Henry of Monmouth needs not be jealous; much less will the candid
enquirer be apprehensive of its effect upon the character which he is investigating. The tradition
then is, that Prince Henry was attending the sick-bed of his father, who, rousing from a slumber
into which he had sunk for a while, asked him what the person was doing whom he observed in
the room. "My father," replied Henry, "it is the priest, who has just now consecrated the body
of our Lord; lift up your heart in all holy devotion to God!" His father then most affectionately
and fervently blessed him, and resigned his soul into the hands of his Redeemer. No sooner
had the King breathed his last, than Henry, under an awful sense of his own unworthiness, and
of the vanity of all worldly objects of desire, conscious also of the     (p. 334) necessity
of an abundant supply of divine grace to fit him for the discharge of the high duties of the
kindly office, to which the voice of Providence then called him, retired forthwith into an
inner oratory. There, prostrate in body and soul, and humbled to the dust before the majesty
of his Creator, he made a full confession of his past life. Whether the words put into his
mouth were the fruits of his biographer's imagination, or were committed to writing by Henry
himself, (a supposition thought by some by no means improbable,) they are the words of a sincere
Christian penitent. Henry, as we have frequently been reminded in these Memoirs, seems to have
made much progress in the knowledge of sacred things, and to have become familiarly acquainted
with the Holy Scriptures; and his confessional prayer breathes the aspirations of one who had
made the divine word his study. He earnestly implores "his most loving Father to have mercy
upon him, not suffering the miserable creature of his hand to perish, but making him as one
of his hired servants." After he had thus poured out his soul to God in his secret chamber,
he went under cover of the night to a minister of eminent piety, who lived near at hand at
Westminster. Seen presently broadside on, El Capitan bulks double, at least. Opposite, the valley
bellies. Cathedral Rocks and the mediæval towers known as Cathedral Spires, are enclosed in
a bay, which culminates in the impressive needle known as Sentinel Rock--all richly Gothic. Meantime
the broadened valley, another strong contrast in perfect key, delightfully
alternates with forest and meadow, and through it the quiet Merced
twists and doubles like a glistening snake.

And then we come to the Three Brothers.

Already some notion of preconception has possessed the observer. It could not have been chance
which set off the filmy Bridal Veil against El Capitan's bulk; which designed the Gothic climax
of Sentinel Rock; which wondrously proportioned the consecutive masses of the Three Brothers; which
made El Capitan, now looked back upon against a new background, a new and appropriate creation,
a thing of brilliance and beauty instead of bulk, mighty of mass, powerful in shape and poise,
yet mysteriously delicate and unreal. As we pass on with rapidly increasing excitement to the
supreme climax at the Valley's head, where gather together Glacier Point, Yosemite Falls of
unbelievable height and graciousness, the Royal Arches, manifestly a carving, the gulf-like entrances
of Tenaya and the Merced Canyons, and above all, and pervading all, the distinguished mysterious
personality of Half Dome, presiding priest of this Cathedral of Beauty, again there steals over
us the uneasy suspicion of supreme design. How could Nature have happened upon the perfect
composition, the flawless technique, the divine inspiration of this masterpiece of more than
human art? Is it not, in fact, the master temple of the Master Architect?

To appreciate the Valley we must consider certain details. It is eight miles long, and from
half a mile to a mile wide. Once prehistoric Lake Yosemite, its floor is as level as a ball
field, and except for occasional meadows, grandly forested. The sinuous Merced is forested
to its edges in its upper reaches, but lower down occasionally wanders through broad, blooming
opens. The rock walls are dark pearl-hued granite, dotted with pines wherever clefts or ledges
exist capable of supporting them; even El Capitan carries its pine-tree half way up its smooth
precipice. Frequently the walls are sheer; they look so everywhere.

                   The valley's altitude is 4,000 feet. The walls rise
                   from 2,000 to 6,000 feet higher; the average
                   is a little more than 3,000 feet above the valley
                   floor; Sentinel Dome and Mount Watkins somewhat exceed
                   4,000 feet; Half Dome nearly attains 5,000 feet;
                   Cloud's Rest soars nearly 6,000 feet.

Two large trench-like canyons
enter the valley at its head, one on either side of Half Dome. In the case of Henry of Monmouth, the
                   confession of his own unworthiness is adduced in
                   evidence only of his former habits of dissoluteness
                   and dissipation. The same confession in his
                   contemporary, Lord Cobham, is hailed only as an
                   indication of the work of grace in his soul.--See
                   Milner, Cent. XV. ch. i.]

CHAPTER XV.

The Author has already intimated in his Preface the reluctance with which he undertook to examine
the descriptions of the Prince of dramatic poets with a direct reference to the test of historical
truth; and he cannot enter upon that inquiry in this place without repeating his regret, nor
without alleging some of the reasons which seem to make the investigation an imperative duty
in these Memoirs.

In our endeavours to ascertain the real character and conduct of Henry V, it is not enough
that we close the volume of Shakspeare's dramas, determining to allow it no weight in the scale
of evidence. If nothing more be done, Shakspeare's representations will have       (p. 338)
weight, despite of our resolution. Were Shakspeare any ordinary writer, or were the parts of
his remains which bear on our subject few, unimportant, and uninteresting, the biographer,
without endangering the truth, might lay him aside with a passing caution against admitting
for evidence the poet's views of facts and character. But the large majority of readers in
England, who know anything of those times, have formed their estimate of Henry from the scenic
descriptions of Shakspeare, or from modern historians who have been indebted for their information
to no earlier or more authentic source than his plays. Even writers of a higher character,
and to whom the English student is much indebted, would tempt us to rest satisfied with the
general inferences to be drawn from the scenes of Shakspeare, though they willingly allow that
much of the detail was the fruit only of his fertile imagination. A modern author[313] opens
his chapter on the reign of Henry V. with a passage, a counterpart to which we find expressed,
or at least conveyed by implication, in many other writers, to whose views, however, the searcher
after truth and fact cannot possibly accede. "With the traditionary irregularities of the youth
of Henry V. we are early familiarized by the magical pen of Shakspeare, never more fascinating
than in portraying the associates and frolics of this illustrious Prince. But the personifications
of the poet   (p. 339) must not be expected to be found in the chroniclers who have annalised
this reign."--"The general facts of his irregularities, and their amendment, have never been
forgotten; but no historical Hogarth has painted the individual adventures of the princely rake."

                   [Footnote 313: Mr. Turner.]

It is not because we would palliate Henry's vices, if such there be on record, or disguise
his follies, or wish his irregularities to be forgotten in the vivid recollections of his conquests,
that we would try "our immortal bard" by the test of rigid fact. We do so, because he is the
authority on which the estimate of Henry's character, as generally entertained, is mainly founded. And
in 1916 it created the National Park Service, a bureau of the Department of the Interior,
to administer them in accordance with a definite policy.

V

The
distinction between the national forests and the national parks is
essential to understanding. But very many pass through life without laying
aside or correcting those impressions which they caught at the first opening of their minds;
and never have any other knowledge of the times of which his dramas speak, than what they have
learned from his representations. The great Duke of Marlborough is known to have confessed
that all his acquaintance with English history was derived from Shakspeare: whilst not unfrequently
persons of literary pursuits, who have studied our histories for themselves, are to the last
under the practical influence of their earliest associations: unknown to their own minds the
poet is still their   (p. 340) instructor and guide. The richness and variety of wild flower life
in all zones, each of its characteristic kind, astonishes the visitor new to the American wilderness.
Every meadow is ablaze with gorgeous coloring, every copse and sunny hollow, river bank and
rocky bottom, becomes painted in turn the hue appropriate to the changing seasons. Now blues
prevail in the kaleidoscopic display, now pinks, now reds, now yellows. Experience of other
national parks will show that the Yosemite is no exception; all are
gardens of wild flowers. It has indeed been alleged that he might have had means of information no
longer available by us; that manuscripts are forgotten, or lost, which bore testimony to Henry's
career of wantonness. But surely such a suggestion only renders it still more imperative to
examine with strict and exact scrutiny into the poet's descriptions. If these are at all countenanced
by a coincidence with ascertained historical facts, we must admit them as evidence, secondary
indeed, but still the best within our reach. But if they prove to be wholly untenable when
tested by facts, and irreconcileable with what history places beyond doubt, we have solid grounds
for rejecting them as legitimate testimonies. We must consider them either as the fascinating
but aëry visions of a poet who lived after the intervention of more than a century and a half,
or as inferences built by him on documents false and misleading. 

                   The Yosemite and the Sequoia are, however, the exclusive possessors
among the parks of a remarkably showy flowering plant, the brilliant,
rare, snow-plant.

So luring is the red pillar which the snow-plant lifts a foot or more above the shady mould,
and so easily is it destroyed, that, to keep it from extinction, the government fines covetous
visitors for every flower picked.

The birds are those of California--many, prolific, and songful. Ducks
raise their summer broods fearlessly on the lakes. But if a master poet should so describe the battle as to involve on the part of the
commander the absence of military skill, and of clear conceptions of a soldier's duty, or ignorance
of the enemy's position and strength, and of his own resources, or a suspicion of faintheartedness
and ungallant bearing, truth would require us to analyse the description, and either to restore
the fair fame of the commander, or to be convinced that he had justly lost his military character. Much
of the earth's crust was once underlaid by granites in a more or less fluid state. When terrific
internal pressures caused the earth's crust to fold and make mountains,
this liquefied granite invaded the folds and pushed close up under
the highest elevations.


