"My dear old Meynell, the thing is to be covered up. Ralph will acknowledge the child, and
all precautions are to be taken. I think what he does he will do thoroughly. Alice wishes it--and
what can I do, either for her or for the child? Nothing. And for me, I see but one way out--which
will be the best for her too in the end, poor darling. My wife's letter a week ago destroyed
my last hope. I am going out to-night--and I shall not come back. Stand by her, Richard. I
think this kind of lie on which we are all embarked is wrong (not that you had anything to
do with it!) But it is society which is wrong and imposes it on us. Anyway, the choice is made,
and now you must support and protect her--and the child--for my sake. For I know you love me,
dear boy--little as I deserve it. It is part of your general gift of loving, which has always
seemed to me so strange. However--whatever I was made for, you were made to help the unhappy.
So I have the less scruple in sending you this last word. She will want your help. The child's
lot in that household will not be a happy one; and Alice will have to look on. But, help her!--help
her above all to keep silence, for this thing, once done, must be irrevocable. Only so can
my poor Alice recover her youth--think, she is only twenty now!--and the child's future be
saved. Alice, I hope, will marry. And when the child marries, you may--nay, I think you must--tell
the husband. I have written this to Ralph. But for all the rest of the world, the truth is
now wiped out. The child is no longer mine--Alice was never my love--and I am going to the
last sleep. My sister Fanny Meryon knows something; enough to make her miserable; but no names
or details. Well!--good-bye. In your company alone have I ever seemed to touch the life that
might have been mine. But it is too late. The will in me--the mainspring--is diseased. This
is a poor return--but forgive me!--my very dear Richard! Here comes the boat; and there is
a splendid sea rising."

       *       *       *       *       *

There, in a locked drawer, not far from him, lay this letter. Meynell's thought plunged back
into the past; into its passionate feeling, its burning pity, its powerless affection. He recalled
his young hero-worship for his brilliant kinsman; the hour when he had identified the battered
form on the shore of the Donegal Lough; the sight of Alice's young anguish; and all the subsequent
effort on his part, for Christ's sake, for Neville's sake, to help and shield a woman and child,
effort from which his own soul had learnt so much.

Pure and sacred recollections!--mingled often with the moral or intellectual perplexities that
enter into all things human.

Then--at a bound--his thoughts rushed on to the man who, without pity, without shame, had dragged
all these sad things, these helpless, irreparable griefs, into the cruel light of a malicious
publicity--in the name of Christ--in the name of the Church!

To-morrow! He rose, with a face set like iron, and went back to his table to finish a half-written
review.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Theresa--after eleven--I shall be engaged. See that I am not disturbed."

Theresa murmured assent, but when her father closed the door of her sitting-room, she did not
go back immediately to her household accounts. Her good, plain face showed a disturbed mind.

Her father's growing excitability and irritation, and the bad accounts of Maurice, troubled
her sorely. It was only that morning Mr. Barron had become aware that Maurice had lost his
employment, and was again adrift in the world. Theresa had known it for a week or two, but
had not been allowed to tell. And she tried not to remember how often of late her brother had
applied to her for money.

Going back to her accounts with a sigh, she missed a necessary receipt and went into the dining-room
to look for it. While she was there the front door bell rang and was answered, unheard by her.
Thus it fell out that as she came back into the hall she found herself face to face with Richard
Meynell.

She stood paralyzed with astonishment. He bowed to her gravely and passed on. Something in
his look seemed to her to spell calamity. She went back to her room, and sat there dumb and
trembling, dreading what she might see or hear.

Meanwhile Meynell had been ushered into Barron's study by the old butler, who was no less astonished
than his mistress.

Barron rose stiffly to meet his visitor. The two men stood opposite each other as the door closed.

Barron spoke first.

"You will, I trust, let me know, Mr. Meynell, without delay to what I owe this unexpected visit.
I was of course quite ready to meet your desire for an interview, but your letter gave me no
clue--"

"I thought it better not," said Meynell quietly. "May we sit down?"

Barron mechanically waved the speaker to a chair, and sat down himself. Meynell seemed to pause
a moment, his eyes on the ground. Then suddenly he raised them.

"Mr. Barron, what I have come to say will be a shock to you. I have discovered the author of
the anonymous letters which have now for nearly three months been defiling this parish and
diocese."

Barron's sudden movement showed the effect of the words. But he held himself well in hand.

"I congratulate you," he said coldly. "It is what we have all been trying to discover."

"But the discovery will be painful to you. For the author of these letters, Mr. Barron--is--your
son Maurice."

At these words, spoken with an indescribable intensity and firmness, Barron sprang from, his seat.

"It was not necessary, I think, sir, to come to my house in order to insult my family and myself!
It would have been better to write. And you may be very sure that if you cannot punish your
slanderers we can--and will!"

His attitude expressed a quivering fury. Meynell took a packet from his breast-pocket and quietly
laid it on the table beside him.

"In this envelope you will find a document--a confession of a piece of wrongdoing on Maurice's
part of which I believe you have never been informed. His poor sister concealed it--and paid
for it. Do you remember, three years ago, the letting loose of some valuable young horses from
Farmer Grange's stables--the hue and cry after them--and the difficulty there was in recapturing
them on the Chase?"

Barron stared at the speaker--speechless.

"You remember that a certain young fellow was accused--James Aston--one of my Sunday school
teachers--who had proposed to Grange's daughter, and had been sent about his business by the
father? Aston was in fact just about to be run in by the police, when a clue came to my hands.
I followed it up. Then I found out that the ringleader in the whole affair had been your son
Maurice. If you remember, he was then at home, hanging about the village, and he had had a
quarrel with Grange--I forget about what. He wrote an anonymous post-card accusing Aston. However,
I got on the track; and finally I made him give me a written confession--to protect Aston.
Heavy compensation was paid to Grange--by your daughter--and the thing was hushed up. I was
always doubtful whether I ought not to have come to you. But it was not long after the death
of your wife. I was very sorry for you all--and Maurice pleaded hard. I did not even tell Stephen;
but I kept the confession. I came upon it a night or two ago, in the drawer where I had also
placed the letter to Dawes which I got from you. Suddenly, the likeness in the handwritings
struck me; and I made a very careful comparison."

He opened the packet, and took out the two papers, which he offered to Barron.

"I think, if you will compare the marked passages, you will see at least a striking resemblance."

With a shaking hand Barron refused the papers.

"I have no doubt, sir, you can manufacture any evidence you please!--but I do not intend to
follow you through it. Handwriting, as we all know, can be made to prove anything. Reserve
your documents for your solicitor. I shall at once instruct mine."

"But I am only at the beginning of my case," said Meynell with the same composure. "I think
you had better listen ... A passage in one of the recent letters gave me a hint--an idea. I
went straight to East the publican, and taxed him with being the accomplice of the writer.
I blustered a little--he thought I had more evidence than I had--and at last I got the whole
thing out of him. The first letter was written"--the speaker raised his finger, articulating
each word with slow precision, "by your son Maurice, and posted by East, the day after the
cage-accident at the Victoria pit; and they have pursued the same division of labour ever since.
East confesses he was induced to do it by the wish to revenge himself on me for the attack
on his license; and Maurice occasionally gave him a little money. I have all the dates of the
letters, and a statement of where they were posted. If necessary, East will give evidence."

A silence. Barron had resumed his seat, and was automatically lifting a small book which lay
on a table near him and letting it fall, while Meynell was speaking. When Meynell paused, he
said thickly--

"A plausible tale no doubt--and a very convenient one for you. But allow me to point out, it
rests entirely on East's word. Very likely he wrote the letters himself, and is attempting
to make Maurice the scapegoat."

"Where do you suppose he could have got his information from?" said Meynell, looking up. "There
is no suggestion that he saw Judith Sabin before her death."

Barron's face worked, while Meynell watched him implacably. At last he said:

"How should I know? The same question applies to Maurice."

"Not at all. There the case is absolutely clear. Maurice got his information from you."

"A gratuitous statement, sir!--which you cannot prove."

"From you"--repeated Meynell. "And from certain spying operations that he and East undertook
together. Do you deny that you told Maurice all that Judith Sabin told you--together with her
identification of myself?"

The room seemed to wait for Barron's reply. He made none. He burst out instead--

"What possible motive could Maurice have had for such an action? The thing isn't even plausible!"

"Oh, Maurice had various old scores to settle with me," said Meynell, quietly. "I have come
across him more than once in this parish--no need to say how. I tried to prevent him from publicly
disgracing himself and you; and I did prevent him. He saw in this business an easy revenge
on a sanctimonious parson who had interfered with his pleasures."

Barron had risen and was pacing the room with unsteady steps. Meynell still watched him, with
the same glitter in the eye. Meynell's whole nature indeed, at the moment, had gathered itself
into one avenging force; he was at once sword and smiter. The man before him seemed to him
embodied cruelty and hypocrisy; he felt neither pity nor compunction. And presently he said
abruptly--

"But I am afraid I have much more serious matter to lay before you than this business of the
letters."

"What do you mean?"

Taking another letter from his pocket, Meynell glanced at it a moment, and then handed it to
Barron. Barron was for an instant inclined to refuse it, as he had refused the others. But
Meynell insisted.

"Believe me, you had better read it. It is a letter from Mr. Flaxman to myself, and it concerns
a grave charge against your son. I bring you a chance of saving him from prosecution; but there
is no time to be lost."

Barron took the letter, carried it to the window, and stood reading it. Meynell sat on the
other side of the room watching him, still in the same impassive "possessed" state.

Suddenly, Barron put his hand over his face, and a groan he could not repress broke from him.
He turned his back and stood bending over the letter.

At the same instant a shiver ran through Meynell, like the return to life of some arrested
energy, some paralyzed power. The shock of that sound of suffering had found him iron; it left
him flesh. The spiritual habit of a lifetime revived; for "what we do we are."

He rose slowly, and went over to the window.

"You can still save him--from the immediate consequences of this at least--if you will. I have
arranged that with Flaxman. It was my seeing him enter the room alone where the coins were,
the night of the party, that first led to the idea that he might have taken them. Then, as
you see, certain dealers' shops were watched by a private detective. Maurice appeared--sold
the Hermes coin--was traced to his lodgings and identified. So far the thing has not gone beyond
private inquiry; for the dealer will do what Flaxman wants him to do. But Maurice still has
the more famous of the two coins; and if he attempts to sell that, after the notices to the
police, there may be an exposure any day. You must go up to London as soon as you can--"

"I will go to-night," said Barron, in a tone scarcely to be heard. He stood with his hands
on his sides, staring out upon the wintry garden outside, just as a gardener's boy laden with
holly and ivy for the customary Christmas decorations of the house was passing across the lawn.

There was silence a little. Meynell walked slowly up and down the room. At last Barron turned
toward him; the very incapacity of the plump and ruddy face for any tragic expression made
it the more tragic.

"I propose to write to the Bishop at once. Do you desire a public statement?"

"There must be a public statement," said Meynell gravely. "The thing has gone too far. Flaxman
and I have drawn one up. Will you look at it?"

Barron took it, and went to his writing-table.

"Wait a moment!" said Meynell, following him, and laying his hand on the open page. "I don't
want you to sign that by force majeure. Dismiss--if you can--any thought of any hold I may
have upon you, because of Maurice's misdoing. You and I, Barron, have known each other some
years. We were once friends. I ask you--not under any threat--not under any compulsion--to
accept my word as an honest man that I am absolutely innocent of the charge you have brought
against me."

Barron, who was sitting before his writing-table, buried his face in his hands a moment, then
raised it.

"I accept it," he said, almost inaudibly.

"You believe me?"

"I believe you."

Meynell drew a long breath. Then he added, with a first sign of emotion--"And I may also count
upon your doing henceforth what you can to protect that poor lady, Miss Puttenham, and her
kinsfolk, from the consequences of this long persecution?"

Barron made a sign of assent. Meynell left him to read and sign the public apology and retraction,
which Flaxman had mainly drawn up; while the Rector himself took up a Bradshaw lying on the
table, and walked to the window to consult it.

"You will catch the 1.40," he said, as Barron rose from the writing-table. "Let me advise you
to get him out of the country for a time."

Barron said nothing. He came heavily toward the window, and the two men stood looking at each
other, overtaken both of them by a mounting wave of consciousness. The events, passions, emotions
of the preceding months pressed into memory, and beat against the silence. But it was Meynell
who turned pale.

"What a pity--to spoil the fight!" he said in a low voice. "It would have been splendid--to
fight it--fair."

"I shall of course withdraw my name from the Arches suit," said Barron, leaning over a chair,
his eyes on the ground.

Meynell did not reply. He took up his hat; only saying as he went toward the door:

"Remember--Flaxman holds his hand entirely. The situation is with you." Then, after a moment's
hesitation, he added simply, almost shyly--"God help you! Won't you consult your daughter?"

Barron made no answer. The door opened and shut.

BOOK IV

MEYNELL AND MARY

".... but Life ere long
Came on me in the public ways and bent
Eyes deeper than of old; Death met I too,
  And saw the dawn glow through."

CHAPTER XX

A mild January day on the terrace of St. Germains. After a morning of hoar-frost the sun was
shining brightly on the terrace, and on the panorama it commands. A pleasant light lay on the
charming houses that front the skirts of the forest, on the blue-gray windings of the Seine,
on the groves of leafless poplars interwoven with its course, on the plain with its thickly
sown villages, on the height of Mont Valerien, behind which lay Paris. In spite of the sunshine,
however, it was winter, and there was no movement in St. Germains. The terrace and the road
leading from it to the town were deserted; and it was easy to see from the aspect of the famous
hotel at the corner of the terrace that, although not closed, it despaired of visitors. Only
a trio of French officers in the far distance of the terrace, and a white-capped bonne struggling
against the light wind with a basket on her arm, offered any sign of life to the observant
eyes of a young man who was briskly pacing up and down that section of the terrace which abuts
on the hotel.

The young man was Philip Meryon. His dark tweed suit and fur waistcoat disclosed a figure once
singularly agile and slender, on which self-indulgence was now beginning to tell. Nevertheless,
as the bonne passed him she duly noted and admired his pictorial good looks, opining at the
same time that he was not French. Why was he there? She decided in her own mind that he was
there for an assignation, by which she meant, of course, a meeting with a married woman; and
she smiled the incorrigible French smile.

Assignation or no, she would have seen, had she looked closer, that the young man in question
was in no merely beatific or expectant frame of mind. Meryon's look was a look both of excitement--as
of one under the influence of some news of a startling kind--and of anxiety.

Would she come? And if she came would he be able to bring and hold her to any decision, without--without
doing what even he shrank from doing?

For that ill chance in a thousand which Meynell had foreseen, and hoped, as mortals do, to
baffle, had come to pass. That morning, a careless letter enclosing the payment of a debt,
and written by a young actor, who had formed part of one of the bohemian parties at the Abbey,
during the summer, and had now been playing for a week in the Markborough theatre, had given
Meryon the clue to the many vague conjectures or perplexities which had already crossed his
mind with regard to Hester's origin and history.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Your sanctified cousin, Richard Meynell" [wrote the young man] "seems after all to be made
of the common clay. There are strange stories going the round about him here; especially in
a crop of anonymous letters of which the author can't be found. I send you a local newspaper
which has dared to print one of them with dashes for the names. The landlord of the inn told
me how to fill them up, and you will see I have done it. The beauteous maiden herself has vanished
from the scene--as no doubt you know. Indeed you probably know all about it. However, as you
are abroad, and not likely to see these local rags, and as no London paper will print these
things, you may perhaps be interested in what I enclose. Alack, my dear Philip, for the saints!
They seem not so very different from you and me."

       *       *       *       *       *

The eagerness with which Philip had read the newspaper cutting enclosed in the letter was only
equalled by the eagerness with which afterward he fell to meditating upon it; pursuing and
ferreting out the truth, through a maze of personal recollection and inference.

Richard!--nonsense! He laughed, from a full throat. Not for one moment was Philip misled by
Judith Sabin's mistake. He was a man of great natural shrewdness, blunted no doubt by riotous
living; but there was enough of it left, aided by his recent forced contacts with his cousin
Richard all turning on the subject of Hester, to keep him straight. So that without any demur
at all he rejected the story as it stood.

But then, what was the fact behind it? Impossible that Judith Sabin's story should be all delusion!
For whom did she mistake Richard?

Suddenly, as he sat brooding and smoking, a vision of Hester flashed upon him as she had stood
laughing and pouting, beneath the full length picture of Neville Flood, which hung in the big
hall of the Abbey. He had pointed it out to her on their way through the house--where she had
peremptorily refused to linger--to the old garden behind.

He could hear his own question: "There!--aren't you exactly like him? Turn and look at yourself
in the glass opposite. Oh, you needn't be offended! He was the handsome man of his day."

Of course! The truth jumped to the eyes, now that one was put in the way of seeing it. And
on this decisive recollection there had followed a rush of others, no less pertinent: things
said by his dead mother about the brother whom she had loved and bitterly regretted. So the
wronged lady whom he would have married but for his wife's obstinacy was "Aunt Alice!" Philip
remembered to have once seen her from a distance in the Upcote woods. Hester had pointed her
out, finger on lip, as they stood hiding in a thicket of fern; a pretty woman still. His mother
had never mentioned a name; probably she had never known it; but to the love-affair she had
always attributed some share in her brother's death.

From point to point he tracked it, the poor secret, till he had run it down. By degrees everything
fitted in; he was confident that he had guessed the truth.

Then, abruptly, he turned to look at its bearing on his own designs and fortunes.

He supposed himself to be in love with Hester. At any rate he was violently conscious of that
hawk-like instinct of pursuit which he was accustomed to call love. Hester's mad and childish
imprudences, which the cooler self in Meryon was quite ready to recognize as such, had made
the hawking a singularly easy task so far. Meynell, of course, had put up difficulties; with
regard to this Scotch business it had been necessary to lie pretty hard, and to bribe some
humble folk in order to get round him. But Hester, by the double fact that she was at once
so far removed from the mere ingenue, and so incredibly ready to risk herself, out of sheer
ignorance of life, both challenged and tempted the man whom a disastrous fate had brought across
her path, to such a point that he had long since lost control of himself, and parted with any
scruples of conscience he might possess.

At the same time he was by no means sure of her. He realized his increasing power over her;
he also realized the wild, independent streak in her. Some day--any day--the capricious, wilful
nature might tire, might change. The prey might escape, and the hawk go empty home. No dallying
too long! Let him decide what to risk--and risk it.

Meantime that confounded cousin of his was hard at work, through some very capable lawyers,
and unless the instructions he--Philip--had conveyed to the woman in Scotland, who, thank goodness,
was no less anxious to be rid of him than he to be rid of her, were very shrewdly and exactly
carried out, facts might in the end reach Hester which would give even her recklessness pause.
He knew that so far Meynell had been baffled; he knew that he carried about with him evidence
that, for the present, could be brought to bear on Hester with effect; but things were by no
means safe.

For his own affairs, they were desperate. As he stood there, he was nothing more in fact than
the common needy adventurer, possessed, however, of greater daring, and the debris of much
greater pretensions, than most such persons. His financial resources were practically at an
end, and he had come to look upon a clandestine marriage with Hester as the best means of replenishing
them. The Fox-Wilton family passed for rich; and the notion that they must and would be ready
to come forward with money, when once the thing was irrevocable, counted for much in the muddy
plans of which his mind was full. His own idea was to go to South America--to Buenos Ayres,
where money was to be made, and where he had some acquaintance. In that way he would shake
off his creditors, and the Scotch woman together; and Meynell would know better than to interfere.

       *       *       *       *       *

Suddenly a light figure came fluttering round the corner of the road leading to the chateau
and the town. Philip turned and went to meet her. And as he approached her he was shaken afresh
by the excitement of her presence, in addition to his more sordid preoccupation. Her wild,
provocative beauty seemed to light up the whole wintry scene; and the few passers-by, each
and all, stopped to stare at her. Hester laughed aloud when she saw Meryon; and with her usual
recklessness held up her umbrella for signal. It pleased her that two rapins in large black
ties and steeple hats paid her an insolent attention as they passed her; and she stopped to
pinch the cheek of a chubby child that had planted itself straight in her path.

"Am I late?" she said, as they met. "I only just caught the train. Oh! I am so hungry! Don't
let's talk--let's dejeuner."

Philip laughed.

"Will you dare the hotel?"

And he pointed to the Pavillion Henri Quatre.

"Why not? Probably there won't be a soul."

"There are always Americans."

"Why not, again? Tant mieux! Oh, my hair!"

And she put up her two ungloved hands to try and reduce it to something like order. The loveliness
of the young curving form, of the pretty hands, of the golden brown hair, struck full on Meryon's
turbid sense.

They turned toward the hotel, and were presently seated in a corner of its glazed gallery,
with all the wide, prospect of plain and river spread beneath them. Hester was in the highest
spirits, and as she sat waiting for the first plat, chattering, and nibbling at her roll, her
black felt hat with its plume of cock feathers falling back from the brilliance of her face,
she once more attracted all the attention available; from the two savants who, after a morning
in the Chateau, were lunching at a farther table; from an American family of all ages reduced
to silence by sheer wonder and contemplation; from the waiters, and, not least, from the hotel
dog, wagging his tail mutely at her knee.

Philip felt himself an envied person. He was, indeed, vain of his companion; but certain tyrannical
instincts asserted themselves once or twice. When, or if, she became his possession, he would
try and moderate some of this chatter and noise.

For the present he occupied himself with playing to her lead, glancing every now and then mentally,
with a secret start, at the information he had possessed about her since the morning.

She described to him, with a number of new tricks of gesture caught from her French class-mates,
how she had that morning outwitted all her guardians, who supposed that she had gone to Versailles
with one of the senior members of the class she was attending at the Conservatoire, a young
teacher, "tres sage," with whom she had been allowed once or twice to go to museums and galleries.
To accomplish it had required an elaborate series of deceptions, which Hester had carried through,
apparently, without a qualm. Except that at the end of her story there was a passing reference
to Aunt Alice--"poor darling!"--"who would have a fit if she knew."

Philip, coffee-cup in hand, half smiling, looked at her meantime through his partially closed
lids. Richard, indeed! She was Neville all through, the Neville of the picture, except for
the colour of the hair, and the soft femininity. And here she sat, prattling--foolish dear!--about
"mamma," and "Aunt Alice," and "my tiresome sisters!"

"Certainly you shall not pay for me!--not a sou," said Hester flushing. "I have plenty of money.
Take it please, at once." And she pushed her share over the table, with a peremptory gesture.

Meryon took it with a smile and a shrug, and she, throwing away the cigarette she had been
defiantly smoking, rose from the table.

"Now then, what shall we do? Oh! no museums! I am being educated to death! Let us go for a
walk in the forest; and then I must catch my train, or the world will go mad."

So they walked briskly into the forest, and were soon sufficiently deep among its leaf-strewn
paths, to be secure from all observation. Two hours remained of wintry sunlight before they
must turn back toward the station.

Hester walked along swinging a small silk bag in which she carried her handkerchief and purse.
Suddenly, in a narrow path girt by some tall hollies and withered oaks, she let it fall. Both
stooped for it, their hands touched, and as Hester rose she found herself in Meryon's arms.

She made a violent effort to free herself, and when it failed, she stood still and submitted
to be kissed, like one who accepts an experience, with a kind of proud patience. 

Can any of your readers inform me whether there is such a book?

I possess Mr. Singer's valuable editions of Cavendish, More, and Hall's Satires, and would wish
to place this volume on the same shelf.

J. MILNER BARRY.

Totnes, Feb. 21. 1850.

* * * * *

WHAT IS THE MEANING OF "LÆRIG?"

This query, evidently addressed to our Anglo-Saxon scholars by the
distinguished philologist to whom we are all so much indebted, not
having been hitherto replied to, perhaps the journal of "NOTES AND
QUERIES" is the most fitting vehicle for this suggestive note:--

TO
DR. JACOB GRIMM.

Allow me, though an entire stranger to you, to thank you for the pleasure I have derived, in
common with all ethnological students, from your very valuable labours, and especially from the
Geschichte der Deutschen Sprache.

At the same time I venture, with much diffidence, to offer a reply
to your question which occur in that work at p. 663.:--"Was heisst
lærig?"

Lye says, "Hæc vox occurrit apid Cædm. At interpretatio ejus minime liquet." In the Supplement
to his Dictionary it is explained "docilis, tyro!" Mr. Thorpe, in
his Analecta A.-S. (1st edit.

Gloss), says, "The meaning of this word is uncertain: it occurs again
in Cædmon;" and in his translation of Cædmon he thus renders the passage:--"Ofer
linde lærig=over the linden shields."

Here then lærig, evidently an adjective, is rendered by the substantive shields; and linde,
evidently a substantive, is rendered by the adjective linden.

In two other passages, Mr. Thorpe more correctly translates lindum=bucklers.

Lind,

which Lye explained by the Latin labarium, vexillum, that excellent scholar, the late lamented
Mr. Price, was the first, I believe, to show frequently signified a shield; which was, probably
for lightness, made of the wood of the lime tree, and covered with skin, or leather of various
colours. Thus we have "sealwe linde" and "hwite linde" in Cædm., "geolwe linde" in Beowulf.

All this is superfluous to you, sir, I know--"Retournons à nos moutons," as Maistre Pierre Pathelin
says.

The sense required in the passage in Brythnoth seems to me to be:--

"bærst
bordes lærig=the empty (hollow concave) shields

"and seo byrne sang=and
the armour (lorica) resounded."

And in Cædmon:--

"ofer linde lærig=over
the empty (hollow concave) shield."

In Judith, Th. Anal. 137, 53.
we have a similar epithet:--

"hwealfum lindum=vaulted (arched concave)
shields."

We should remember that Somner has ge-lær, void, empty,
vacuus; and Lye, with a reference to the Herbarium, lær-nesse, vacuitas.
In the Teuthonista we have lær, vacuus, concavus. In Heiland, 3, 4.
"larea stodun thar stenuatu sehsi=empty stood there stone-vats six."
I need not call to your mind the O.H.G. lári.

I think, therefore,
we cannot doubt that what is intended to be expressed by the A.-S.
lærig is empty, hollow, concave. But if we wanted further confirmation,
leer, leery, leary are still in use in Devonshire, Dorsetshire, and
perhaps elsewhere, for empty, hollow, as the provincial Glossaries
will show.

"Hester!" he broke out, "don't let's talk about this any more--it's damned nonsense! Let's
talk about ourselves. Hester!--darling!--I want to make you happy!--I want to carry you away.
Hester, will you marry me at once? As far as the French law is concerned, I have arranged it
all. You could come with me to a certain Mairie I know, to-morrow, and we could marry without
anybody having a word to say to it; and then, Hester, I'd carry you to Italy! I know a villa
on the Riviera--the Italian Riviera--in a little bay all orange and lemon and blue sea. We'd
honeymoon there; and when we were tired of honeymooning--though how could any one tire of honeymooning,
with you, you darling!--we'd go to South America. I have an opening at Buenos Ayres which promises
to make me a rich man. Come with me!--it is the most wonderful country in the world. You would
be adored there--you would have every luxury--we'd travel and ride and explore--we'd have a
glorious life!"

He had caught her hands again, and stood towering over her, intoxicated with his own tinsel
phrases; almost sincere; a splendid physical presence, save for the slight thickening of face
and form, the looseness of the lips, the absence of all freshness in the eyes.

But Hester, after a first moment of dreamy excitement, drew herself decidedly away.

"No, no!--I can't be such a wretch--I can't! Mamma and Aunt Alice would break their hearts.
I'm a selfish beast, but not quite so bad as that! No, Philip--we can meet and amuse ourselves,
can't we?--and get to know each other?--and then if we want to, we can marry--some time."

"That means you don't love me!" he said, fiercely.

"Yes, yes, I do!--or at least I--I like you. And perhaps in time--if you let me alone--if you
don't tease me--I--I'll marry you. But let's do it openly. It's amusing to get one's own way,
even by lies, up to a certain point. They wouldn't let me see you, or get to know you, and
I was determined to know you. So I had to behave like a little cad, or give in. But marrying's
different."

He argued with her hotly, pointing out the certainty of Meynell's opposition, exaggerating
the legal powers of guardians, declaring vehemently that it was now or never. Hester grew very
white as they wandered on through the forest, but she did not yield. Some last scruple of conscience,
perhaps--some fluttering fear, possessed her.

So that in the end Philip was pushed to the villainy that even he would have avoided.

Suddenly he turned upon her.

"Hester, you drive me to it! I don't want to--but I can't help it. Hester, you poor little
darling!--you don't know what has happened--you don't know what a position you're in. I want
to save you from it. I would have done it, God knows, without telling you the truth if I could;
but you drive me to it!"

"What on earth do you mean?"

She stopped beside him in a clearing of the forest. The pale afternoon sun, now dropping fast
to westward, slipped through the slender oaks, on which the red leaves still danced, touched
the girl's hair and shone into her beautiful eyes. She stood there so young, so unconscious;
a victim, on the threshold of doom. Philip, who was no more a monster than other men who do
monstrous things, felt a sharp stab of compunction; and then, rushed headlong at the crime
he had practically resolved on before they met.

He told her in a few agitated words the whole--and the true--story of her birth. He described
the return of Judith Sabin to Upcote Minor, and the narrative she had given to Henry Barron,
without however a word of Meynell in the case, so far at least as the original events were
concerned. For he was convinced that he knew better, and that there was no object in prolonging
an absurd misunderstanding. His version of the affair was that Judith in a fit of excitement
had revealed Hester's parentage to Henry Barron; that Barron out of enmity toward Meynell,
Hester's guardian, and by way of getting a hold upon him, had not kept the matter to himself,
but had either written or instigated anonymous letters which had spread such excitement in
the neighbourhood that Lady Fox-Wilton had now let her house, and practically left Upcote for
good. The story had become the common talk of the Markborough district; and all that Meynell,
and "your poor mother," and the Fox-Wilton family could do, was to attempt, on the one hand,
to meet the rush of scandal by absence and silence; and on the other to keep the facts from
Hester herself as long as possible.

The girl had listened to him with wide, startled eyes. Occasionally a sound broke from her--a
gasp--an exclamation--and when he paused, pursued by almost a murderer's sense of guilt, he
saw her totter. In an instant he had his arm round her, and for once there was both real passion
and real pity in the excited words he poured into her ears.

"Hester, dearest!--don't cry, don't be miserable, my own beautiful Hester! I am a beast to
have told you, but it is because I am not only your lover, but your cousin--your own flesh
and blood. Trust yourself to me! You'll see! Why should that preaching fellow Meynell interfere?
I'll take care of you. You come to me, and we'll show these damned scandal-mongers that what
they say is nothing to us--that we don't care a fig for their cant--that we are the masters
of our own lives--not they!"

And so on, and so on. The emotion was as near sincerity as he could push it; but it did not
fail to occur, at least once, to a mind steeped in third-rate drama, what a "strong" dramatic
scene might be drawn from the whole situation.

Hester heard him for a few minutes, in evident stupefaction; then with a recovery of physical
equilibrium she again vehemently repulsed him.

"You are mad--you are mad! It is abominable to talk to me like this. What do you mean? 'My
poor mother'--who is my mother?"

She faced him tragically, the certainty which was already dawning in her mind--prepared indeed,
through years, by all the perplexities and rebellions of her girlhood--betraying itself in
her quivering face, and lips. Suddenly, she dropped upon a fallen log beside the path, hiding
her face in her hands, struggling again with the sheer faintness of the shock. And Philip,
kneeling in the dry leaves beside her, completed his work, with the cruel mercy of the man
who kills what he has wounded.

He asked her to look back into her childhood; he reminded her of the many complaints she had
made to him of her sense of isolation within her supposed family; of the strange provisions
of Sir Ralph's will; of the arrangement which had made her Meynell's ward in a special sense.

"Why, of course, that was so natural! You remember I suggested to you once that Richard probably
judged Neville from the same Puritanical standpoint that he judged me? Well, I was a fool to
talk like that. I remember now perfectly what my mother used to say. They were of different
generations, but they were tremendous friends; and there was only a few years between them.
I am certain it was by Neville's wish that Richard became your guardian." He laughed, in some
embarrassment. "He couldn't exactly foresee that another member of the family would want to
cut in. I love you--I adore you! Let's give all these people the slip. Hester, my pretty, pretty
darling--look at me! I'll show you what life means--what love means!"

And doubly tempted by her abasement, her bewildered pain, he tried again to take her in his arms.

But she held him at arm's length.

"If," she said, with pale lips--"if Sir Neville was my father--and Aunt Alsie"--her voice failed
her--"were they--were they never married?"

He slowly and reluctantly shook his head.

"Then I'm--I'm--oh! but that's monstrous--that's absurd! I don't believe it!"

She sprang to her feet. Then, as she stood confronting his silence, the whole episode of that
bygone September afternoon--the miniature--Aunt Alice's silence and tears--rushed back on memory.
She trembled, and the iron entered into her soul.

"Let's go back to the station," she said, resolutely. "It's time."

They walked back through the forest paths, for some time without speaking, she refusing his
aid. And all the time swiftly, inexorably, memory and inference were at work, dragging to light
the deposit--obscure, or troubling, or contradictory--left in her by the facts and feelings
of her childhood and youth.

She had told him with emphasis at luncheon that he was not to be allowed to accompany her home;
that she would go back to Paris by herself. But when, at the St. Germains station, Meryon jumped
into the empty railway carriage beside her, she said nothing to prevent him. She sat in the
darkest corner of the carriage, her arms hanging beside her, her eyes fixed on objects of which
she saw nothing. Her pride in herself, her ideal of herself, which is to every young creature
like the protective sheath to the flower, was stricken to the core. She thought of Sarah and
Lulu, whom she had all her life despised and ridiculed. But they had a right to their name
and place in the world!--and she was their nameless inferior, the child taken in out of pity,
accepted on sufferance. She thought of the gossip now rushing like a mud-laden stream through
every Upcote or Markborough drawing-room. All the persons whom she had snubbed or flouted were
concerning themselves maliciously with her and her affairs--were pitying "poor Hester Fox-Wilton."

Her heart seemed to dry and harden within her. The strange thought of her real mother--her
suffering, patient, devoted mother--did not move her. It was bound up with all that trampled
on and humiliated her.

And, moreover, strange and piteous fact, realized by them both! this sudden sense of fall and
degradation had in some mysterious way altered her whole relation to the man who had brought
it upon her. His evil power over her had increased. He felt instinctively that he need not
in future be so much on his guard. His manner toward her became freer. She had never yet returned
him the kisses which, as on this day, she had sometimes allowed him to snatch. But before they
reached Paris she had kissed him; she had sought his hands with hers; and she had promised
to meet him again.

While these lamentable influences and events were thus sweeping Hester's life toward the abyss,
mocking all the sacrifices and the efforts that had been made to save her, the publication
of Barron's apology had opened yet another stage in "the Meynell case."

As drafted by Flaxman, it was certainly comprehensive enough. For himself, Meynell would have
been content with much less; but in dealing with Barron, he was the avenger of wrongs not his
own, both public and private; and when his own first passion of requital had passed away, killed
in him by the anguish of his enemy, he still let Flaxman decide for him. And Flaxman, the mildest
and most placable of men, showed himself here inexorable, and would allow no softening of terms.
So that Barron "unreservedly withdrew" and "publicly apologized" "for those false and calumnious
charges, which to my great regret, and on erroneous information, I have been led to bring against
the character and conduct of the Rev. Richard Meynell, at various dates, and in various ways,
during the six months preceding the date of this apology."

With regard to the anonymous letters--"although they were not written, nor in any way authorized,
by me, I now discover to my sorrow that they were written by a member of my family on information
derived from me. I apologize for and repudiate the false and slanderous statements these letters
contain, and those also included in letters I myself have written to various persons. I agree
that a copy of this statement shall be sent to the Bishop of Markborough, and to each parish
clergyman in the diocese of Markborough; as also that it shall be published in such newspapers
as the solicitors of the Rev. Richard Meynell may determine."

The document appeared first on a Saturday, in all the local papers, and was greedily read and
discussed by the crowds that throng into Markborough on market day, who again carried back
the news to the villages of the diocese. It was also published on the same day in the Modernist
and in the leading religious papers. Its effect on opinion was rapid and profound. The Bishop
telegraphed--"Thank God. Come and see me." France fidgeted a whole morning among his papers,
began two or three letters to Meynell, and finally decided that he could write nothing adequate
that would not also be hypocritical. Dornal wrote a little note that Meynell put away among
those records that are the milestones of life. From all the leading Modernists, during January,
came a rush of correspondence and congratulations, in all possible notes and tones of indignant
triumph; and many leaders on the other side wrote with generous emotion and relief. Only in
the extreme camp of the extreme Right there was, of course, silence and chagrin. Compared to
the eternal interests of the Church, what does one man's character matter?

The old Bishop of Dunchester, a kind of English Doellinger, the learned leader of a learned
party, and ready in the last years of life to risk what would have tasked the nerves and courage
of a man in the prime of physical and mental power, wrote:

"MY DEAR RICHARD MEYNELL: Against my better judgment, I was persuaded that you might have been
imprudent. I now know that you have only been heroic. Forgive me--forgive us all. Nothing will
induce me to preach the sermon of our opening day. And if you will not, who will, or can?"

Rose meanwhile descended upon the Rectory, and with Flaxman's help, though in the teeth of
Anne's rather jealous opposition, she carried off Meynell to Maudeley, that she might "help
him write his letters," and watch for a week or two over a man wearied and overtaxed. It was
by her means also that the reaction in public opinion spread far beyond Meynell himself. It
is true that even men and women of good will looked at each other in bewilderment, after the
publication of the apology, and asked each other under their breaths--"Then is there no story!--and
was Judith Sabin's whole narrative a delusion?" But with whatever might be true in that narrative
no public interest was now bound up; and discussion grew first shamefaced, and then dropped.
The tendency strengthened indeed to regard the whole matter as the invention of a half-crazy
and dying woman, possessed of some grudge against the Fox-Wilton family. Many surmised that
some tragic fact lay at the root of the tale, since those concerned had not chosen to bring
the slanderer to account. But what had once been mere matter for malicious or idle curiosity
was now handled with compunction and good feeling. People began to be very sorry for the Fox-Wiltons,
very sorry for "poor Miss Puttenham." Cards were left, and friendly inquiries were made; and
amid the general wave of scepticism and regret, the local society showed itself as sentimental,
and as futile as usual.

Meanwhile poor Theresa had been seen driving to the station with red eyes; and her father,
it was ascertained, had been absent from home since the day before the publication of the apology.
It was very commonly guessed that the "member of my family" responsible for the letters was
the unsatisfactory younger son; and many persons, especially in Church circles, were secretly
sorry for Barron, while everybody possessed of any heart at all was sorry for his elder son
Stephen.

Stephen indeed was one of Meynell's chief anxieties during these intermediate hours, when a
strong man took a few days' breathing space between the effort that had been, and the effort
that was to be. The young man would come over, day by day, with the same crushed, patient look,
now bringing news to Meynell which they talked over where none might overhear, and now craving
news from Paris in return. As to Stephen's own report, Barron, it seemed, had made all arrangements
to send Maurice to a firm of English merchants trading at Riga. The head of the firm was under
an old financial obligation to Henry Barron, and Stephen had no doubt that his father had made
it heavily worth their while to give his brother this fresh chance of an honest life. There
had been, Stephen believed, some terrible scenes between the father and son, and Stephen neither
felt nor professed to feel any hope for the future. Barron intended himself to accompany Maurice
to Riga and settle him there. Afterward he talked of a journey to the Cape. Meanwhile the White
House was shut up, and poor Theresa had come to join Stephen in the little vicarage whence
the course of events in the coming year would certainly drive him out.

So much for the news he gave. As to the news he hungered for, Meynell had but crumbs to give
him. To neither Stephen nor any one else could Alice Puttenham's letters be disclosed. Meynell's
lips were sealed upon her story now as they had ever been; and, however shrewdly he might guess
at Stephen's guesses, he said nothing, and Stephen asked nothing on the subject.

As to Hester, he was told that she was well, though often moody and excitable, that she seemed
already to have tired of the lessons and occupations she had taken up with such prodigious
energy at the beginning of her stay, and that she had made violent friends with a young teacher
from the Ecole Normale, a refined, intelligent woman, in every way fit to be her companion,
with whom on holidays she sometimes made long excursions out of Paris.

But to Meynell, poor Alice Puttenham poured out all the bitterness of her heart:

"It seems to me that the little hold I had over her, and the small affection she had for me
when we arrived here, are both now less than they were. During the last week especially (the
letter was dated the fourteenth of January) I have been at my wits' end how to amuse or please
her. She resents being watched and managed more than ever. One feels there is a tumult in her
soul to which we have no access. Her teachers complain of her temper and her caprice. And yet
she dazzles and fascinates as much as ever. I suspect she doesn't sleep--she has a worn look
quite unnatural at her age--but it makes her furious to be asked. Sometimes, indeed, she seems
to melt toward me; the sombre look passes away, and she is melancholy and soft, with tears
in her eyes now and then, which I dare not notice.

"Oh, my dear friend, I am grateful for all you tell me of the changed situation at Markborough.
But after all the thing is done--there can be no undoing it. The lies mingled with the truth
have been put down. Perhaps people are ready now to let the truth itself slip back with the
lies into the darkness. But how can we--Edith and I--and Hester--ever live the old life again?
The old shelter, the old peace, are gone. We are wanderers and pilgrims henceforward!

"As far as I know, Hester is still in complete ignorance of all that has happened. I have told
her that Edith finds Tours so economical that she prefers to stay abroad for a couple of years,
and to let the Upcote house. And I have said also that when she herself is tired of Paris,
I am ready to take her to Germany, and then to Italy. She laughed, as though I had said something
ridiculous! One never knows her real mind. But at least I see no sign of any suspicion in her;
and I am sure that she has seen no English newspaper that could have given her a clue. As to
Philip Meryon, as I have told you before, I often feel a vague uneasiness; but watch as I will,
I can find nothing to justify it. Oh! Richard, my heart is broken for her. A little love from
her, and the whole world would change for me. But even what I once possessed these last few
months seem to have taken from me!"

"The thing is done!--there can be no undoing it." That was the sore burden of all Meynell's
thoughts, awakening in him, at times, the "bitter craving to strike heavy blows" at he knew
not what. What, indeed, could ever undo the indecency, the cruelty, the ugly revelations of
these three months? The grossness of the common public, the weakness of friends, the solemn
follies to which men are driven by hate or bigotry: these things might well have roused the
angry laughter that lives in all quick and honest souls. But the satiric mood, when it appeared,
soon vanished.

This bitterness might have festered within him, but for the blessedness of Mary Elsmere's letters.
She had seen the apology; she knew nothing of its causes. But she betrayed a joy that was almost
too proud to know itself as joy; since what doubt could there ever have been but that right
and nobleness would prevail? Catharine wrote the warmest and kindest of letters. But Mary's
every word was balm, just because she knew nothing, and wrote out of the fulness of her mere
faith in him, ready to let her trust take any shape he would. And though she knew nothing,
she seemed by some divine instinct to understand also the pain that overshadowed the triumph;
to be ready to sit silent with him before the irreparable. Day by day, as he read these letters,
his heart burned within him; and Rose noted the growing restlessness. But he had heavy arrears
of parish business upon him, of correspondence, of literary work. He struggled on, the powers
of mind and body flagging, till one night, when he had been nearly a week at Maudeley, Rose
came to him one evening, and said with a smile that had in it just a touch of sweet mockery--

"My dear friend, you are doing no good here at all! Go and see Mary!"

He turned upon her, amazed.

"She has not sent for me."

Rose laughed out.

"Did you expect her to be as modern as that?"

He murmured--

"I have been waiting for a word."

"What right had you to wait? Go and get it out of her! Where will you stay?"

He gasped.

"There is the farm at the head of the valley."

"Telegraph to-night."

He thought a little--the colour flooding into his face. And then he quietly went to Rose's
writing-table, and wrote his telegram.

CHAPTER XXI

But before he took the midday train from Markborough to the North, on the following day, Meynell
spent half an hour with his Bishop in the episcopal library.

It was a strange meeting. When Bishop Craye first caught sight of the entering figure, he hurried
forward, and as the door closed upon the footman, he seized Meynell's hand in both his own.

"I see what you have gone through," he said, with emotion; "and you would not let me help you!"

Meynell smiled faintly.

"I knew you wished to help me--but--"

Then his voice dropped, and the Bishop would not have pressed him for the world. They fell
upon the anonymous letters, a comparatively safe topic, and the relation of Barron to them.
Naturally Meynell gave the Bishop no hint whatever of the graver matter which had finally compelled
Barron's surrender. He described his comparison of the Dawes letters with "a document in the
young man's handwriting which I happened to have in my possession," and the gradual but certain
conviction it had brought about.

"I was extraordinarily blind, however, not to find the clue earlier."

"It is not only you, my dear Meynell, that need regret it!" cried the Bishop. "I hope you have
sometimes given a thought to the men on our side compelled to see the fight waged--"

"With such a weapon? I knew very well that no one under your influence, my lord, would touch
it," said Meynell simply.

The Bishop observed him, and with an inner sympathy, one might almost say a profound and affectionate
admiration, which contrasted curiously with the public position in which they stood to each
other. It was now very generally recognized, and especially in Markborough and its diocese,
that Meynell had borne himself with extraordinary dignity and patience under the ordeal through
which he had passed. Thus I can at present only combat with counter-arguments the contention
that I misunderstood the true state of affairs in America. The hypothesis of secret collusion
between America and England seems in the present case unnecessary; the attitude of public opinion
in America is in itself sufficient explanation of the situation at the time. Sympathy for us from
the very first day of the war there was none; but had the general feeling been as strongly for
us as it actually was against us, no doubt the Government would have
kicked against the English illegalities, and enforced an embargo against
her.

I still hold to my view that Mr. Wilson made a real effort to maintain the observance of a
strict neutrality; but the decisive factor was that he found himself, as a result of his efforts,
in increasing measure in conflict with the overwhelming Germanophobe sentiment of the people, and
continually exposed to the reproach put forward in the Eastern States that he was a pro-German.

The American public, indifferent as it was to the affairs of Europe and entirely ignorant of its complicated
problems, failed to understand the full extent of the peril to the very existence of the German
Empire, which compelled its rulers, much against their will and with heavy hearts, to have recourse
to the invasion of Belgium. They themselves, living in perfect security and under pleasant conditions,
had no means of realizing the perilous position of a comparatively small people, such as the
Germans, surrounded by greedy foes, and straitened within narrow frontiers; their judgment,
as already remarked, was swayed by their individual sentiments of justice and humanity.


But in general they talked with extraordinary frankness and mutual good feeling; and they grasped
hands more than cordially at the end. They might have been two generals, meeting before a battle,
under the white flag.

       *       *       *       *       *

Still the same mild January weather; with unseasonable shoots putting forth, and forebodings
on the part of all garden-lovers, as fresh and resentful as though such forebodings, with their
fulfilments, were not the natural portion of all English gardeners.

In the Westmoreland dales, the month was rainier than elsewhere, but if possible, milder. Yellow
buds were already foolishly breaking on the gorse, and weak primroses, as though afraid to
venture, and yet venturing, were to be found in the depths of many woods.

Meynell had slept at Whindale. In the morning a trap conveyed him and his bag to the farmhouse
at the head of the valley; and the winter sun had only just scattered the mists from the dale
when, stick in hand, he found himself on the road to Mrs. Elsmere's little house, Burwood.

With every step his jaded spirits rose. He was a passionate lover of mountains, with that modern
spirit which finds in them man's best refuge from modernness. The damp fragrance of the mossy
banks and bare hedges; the racing freshness of the stream, and the little eddies of foam blown
from it by the wind; the small gray sheep in the fields; the crags overhead dyed deep in withered
heather; the stone farmhouses with their touch of cheerful white on door and window; all the
exquisite detail of grass, and twig and stone; and overhead the slowly passing clouds in the
wide sweep of the dale--these things to him were spiritual revival, they dressed and prepared
him for that great hour to which dimly, yet through all his pulses, he felt he was going.

The little house sent up a straight column of blue smoke into the quiet air. Its upper windows
were open; the sun was on its lichened porch, and on the silver stem of the birch tree which
rose from the mossy grass beside it.

He did not need to knock. Mary was in the open doorway, her face all light and rose colour;
and in the shadows of the passage behind her stood Catharine. When with the touch of Mary's
hand still warm in his, Meynell turned to greet her mother, he was seized, even through the
quiet emotion which held them all, by an impression of change. Some energy of physical life
had faded from the worn nobility of Catharine's face, instead a "grave heavenliness" which
disquieted the spectator, beautiful as it was.

But the momentary shock was lost in the quiet warmth of her greeting.

"You are going to take her for a walk?" she asked wistfully, as Mary left them alone in the
little sitting-room.

"You allow it?" said Meynell, hardly knowing what he said, and still retaining her hand.

Catharine smiled.

"Mary is her own mistress." Then she added, with a deep, involuntary sigh: "Whatever she says
to you, she knows she has her mother's blessing."

Meynell stooped and kissed her hand.

A few minutes later, he and Mary had taken the road along the dale.

Catharine stood under the little porch to look after them. Mingled sweetness and bitterness
filled her mind. If the Elzevirs could not print the "Corpus Juris Civilis" without a false
heading to a chapter, we may excuse a dictionary-maker and his printer for an occasional slip.
But it is a most useful book, and scholars will find it immensely convenient.

Scenes of Clerical Life. By GEORGE ELIOT. Originally published in "Blackwood's Magazine." New
York: Harper & Brothers. 1858.

Fiction represents the character of the age to which it belongs, not
merely by actual delineations of its times, like those of "Tom Jones"
and "The Newcomer," but also in an indirect, though scarcely less
positive manner, by its exhibition of the influence of the times upon
its own form and general direction, whatever the scene or period it
may have chosen for itself.

The story of "Hypatia" is laid in Alexandria almost two thousand years ago, but the book reflects
the crudities of modern English thought; and even Mr. Thackeray, the greatest living master
of costume, succeeds in making his "Esmond" only a joint-production of the Addisonian age and our
own. Thus the novels of the last few years exhibit very clearly the spirit that characterizes
the period of regard for men and women as men and women, without reference to rank, beauty, fortune,
or privilege. Novelists recognize that Nature is a better romance-maker than the fancy, and
the public is learning that men and women are better than heroes and heroines, not only to live with,
but also to read of. Now and then, therefore, we get a novel, like these "Scenes of Clerical
Life," in which the fictitious element is securely based upon a broad
groundwork of actual truth, truth as well in detail as in general.

It is not often, however, even yet, that we find a writer wholly unembarrassed
by and in revolt against the old theory of the necessity of perfection
in some one at least of the characters of his story.

Sometimes, indeed, a daring romance-writer ventures, during the earlier chapters of his story, to
represent a heroine without beauty and without wealth, or a hero with some mortal blemish.
But after a time his resolution fails;--each new chapter gives a new charm to the ordinary
face; the eyes grow "liquid" and "lustrous," always having been "large"; the nose, "naturally
delicate," exhibits its "fine-cut lines"; the mouth acquires an indescribable expression of loveliness;
and the reader's hoped-for Fright is transformed by Folly or Miss Pickering into a commonplace,
tiresome, novelesque Beauty.
 These six months of strenuous battle and leadership, these new
responsibilities, and the fierce call which had been made on every gift and power, ending in
the dumb, proud struggle, the growing humiliation of the preceding weeks, had left him ripened
indeed, magnified indeed, as a personality; but it was as though down the shadowed vista of
life he saw his youth, as "Another self," a Doppelgaenger, disappearing forever.

While she!--before her were all the years of glamour, of happy instinctive action, when a man
or woman is worth just what they dream, when dream and act flow together. Could he give her
anything worth her having in exchange for this sheer youth of hers? He saw before him a long
and dusty struggle; the dust of it choking, often, the purest sources of feeling. Cares about
money; cares about health; the certain enmity of many good men; the bitterness that waits on
all controversial success or failure: all these there must be--he could not shield her from them.

She, on her part, saw plainly that he was depressed, knew well that he had suffered. As the
Bishop had perceived, it was written on his aspect. But her timidity as yet prevented her from
taking the initiative with him, as later she would learn to do. She felt for him at this stage
partly the woman's love, partly the deep and passionate loyalty of the disciple. And it was
possibly this very loyalty in her from which Meynell shrank. He felt toward himself and his
role, in the struggle to which he was committed, a half despairing, half impatient irony, which
saved him from anything like a prophetic pose. Some other fellow would do it so much better!
But meanwhile it had to be done.

So that, charged as was the atmosphere between them, it was some time before they found a real
freedom of speech. The openings, the gambits, which were to lead them to the very heart of
the game, were at first masked and hesitating. They talked a little--perfunctorily--about the
dale and its folk, and Mary fell without difficulty now and then into the broad Westmoreland
speech, which delighted Meynell's ear, and brought the laugh back to his eyes. Then, abruptly,
he told her that the campaign of slander was over, and that the battle, instead of "infinite
mess and dislocation," was now to be a straight and clean one. He said nothing of Barron; but
he spoke tenderly of the Bishop, and Mary's eyes swam a little.

She on her part dared to speak of Alice and Hester. And very soon it was quietly recognized
between these two that Alice's story was known to Mary; and, for the first time in his life,
Meynell spoke with free emotion and self-criticism of the task which Neville Flood had laid
upon him. Had there been in Mary some natural dread of the moment when she must first hear
the full story of his relation to Alice? If so, it was soon dispelled. He could not have told
the story more simply; but its beauty shone out. Only, she was startled, even terrified, by
certain glimpses which his talk gave her into his feeling with regard to Hester. She saw plainly
that the possibility of a catastrophe, in spite of all he could do, was ever present to him;
and she saw also, or thought she saw, that his conception of his own part in the great religious
campaign was strangely--morbidly--dependent upon the fate of Hester. If he was able to save
her from herself and from the man who threatened her, well and good; if not, as he had said
to Mary once before, he was not fit to be any man's leader, and should feel himself the Jonah
of any cause. There was a certain mystical passion in it, the strong superstition of a man
in whom a great natural sensitiveness led often and readily to despondency; as though he "asked
for a sign."

They passed the noisy little river by the stepping-stones and then climbed a shoulder of fell
between Long Whindale and the next valley. Descending a sunny mountainside, they crossed some
water meadows, and mounted the hill beyond, to a spot that Mary had marked in her walks. Beside
a little tumbling stream and beneath a thicket of holly, lay a flat-topped rock commanding
all the spectacle of flood and fell. Mary guided him there; and then stood silent and flushed,
conscious that she herself had brought the supreme moment to its birth. The same perception
rushed upon Meynell. He looked into her eyes, smiling and masterful, all his hesitations cleared
away....

"Sit there, my lady of the fells!"

He led her to the rocky throne, and, wrapped in his old Inverness cloak, he took a place on
a lesser stone at her feet. Suddenly, he raised a hand and caught hers. She found herself trembling,
and looking down into his upturned face.

"Mary!--Mary darling!--is it mine?"

The question was just whispered, and she whispered her reply. They were alone in a lovely wilderness
of fell and stream. Only a shepherd walked with his flock in a field half a mile away, and
across the valley a ploughman drove his horses.

At the murmur in his ear, Meynell, this time, put up both hands, and drew her down to him.
The touch of her fresh lips was rapture. And yet--

"My rose!" he said, almost with a groan. "What can you make of such an old fellow? I love you--love
you--but I am not worthy of you!"

"I am the judge of that," she said softly. And looking up he saw the colour in her cheeks fluttering,
and two bright tears in her eyes. Timidly she took one hand away from him and began to stroke
back the hair from his brow.

"You look so tired!"--she murmured--"as though you had been in trouble. And I wasn't there!"

"You were always there!"

And springing from his lowly seat, he came to the rock beside her, and drew her within the
shelter of his cloak, looking down upon her with infinite tenderness.

"You don't know what you're undertaking," he said, his eyes moist, his lips smiling. "I am
an old bachelor, and my ways are detestable! Can you ever put up with the pipes and the dogs?
I am the untidiest man alive!"

"Will Anne ever let me touch your papers?"

"Goodness! what will Anne say to us! I forgot Anne," he said, laughing. Then, bending over
her, "We shall be poor, darling!--and very uncomfortable. Can you really stand it--and me?"

"Shall we have a roof over our heads at all?" asked Mary, but so dizzily happy that she knew
but vaguely what she said.

"I have already bespoken a cottage. They are going to make me Editor of the Modernist. We shall
have bread and butter, dearest, but not much more."

"I have a little," said Mary, shyly.

Meynell looked rather scared.

"Not much, I hope!"

"Enough for gowns!--and--and a little more."

"I prefer to buy my wife's gowns--I will!" said Meynell with energy. "Promise me, darling,
to put all your money into a drawer--or a money-box. Then when we want something really amusing--a
cathedral--or a yacht--we'll take it out."

So they laughed together, he all the while holding her close crushed against him, and she deafened
almost by the warm beating of a man's heart beneath her cheek.

And presently silence came, a silence in which one of the rare ecstasies of life came upon
them and snatched them to the third heaven. From the fold of the hill in which they sat, sheltered
both by the fell itself, and by the encircling hollies, they overlooked a branching dale, half
veiled, and half revealed by sunny cloud. Above the western fells they had just crossed, hung
towers and domes of white cumulus, beneath which a pearly sunshine slipped through upon the
broad fell-side, making of it one wide sunlit pleasance, dyed in the red and orange of the
withered fern, and dotted with black holly and juniper. Round the head of the dale the curtain
of cloud hung thicker, save where one superb crag tore it asunder, falling sheer into the green
gentleness of the fields. In the silence, all the voices of nature spoke; the rising wind,
which flung itself against the hill-slopes at their feet; the insistent flow of the river,
descending from the reservoirs far away; and the sharp chatter of the little beck leaping at
their side from stone to stone. Passionately, in Meynell's heart the "buried life" awoke, which
only love can free from the cavern where it lies, and bring into the full energy of day.

"One goes on talking--preaching--babbling--about love," he said to her; "what else is there
to preach about? If love is not the key to life, then there is no key, and no man need preach
any more. Only, my Amor has been till now a stern God! He has in his hands!--I know it!--all
the noblest rewards and ecstasies of life; but so far, I have seen him wring them out of horror,
or pain. The most heavenly things I have ever seen have been the things of suffering. I think
of a poor fellow dying in the pit and trying to give me his last message to his wife; of a
mother fading out of life, still clasping her babes, with hands twisted almost out of human
shape by hard work; or a little lad--" his voice dropped--"only last week!--who saved his worthless
brother's life by giving him warning of some escaping trucks, and was crushed himself. 'I couldn't
help it, sir!'--apologizing to me and the foreman, as we knelt by him!--'I knew Jim had the
drink in him.' In all these visions, Love was divine--but awful! And here!--here!--I see his
wings outspread upon that mountain-side; he comes clothed, not in agony, but in this golden
peace--this beauty--this wild air; he lays your head upon my breast!"

Or again:

"There is a new philosophy which has possessed me for months; the thought of a great man, which
seizes upon us dull lesser creatures, and seems to give us, for a time at least, new eyes and
ears, as though, like Melampus, we had caught the hidden language of the world! It rests on
the notion of the endless creativeness and freedom of life. It is the negation of all fate,
all predestination. Nothing foreknown, nothing predestined! No necessity--no anangke--darling!--either
in the world process, or the mind of God, that you and I should sit here to-day, heart to heart!
It was left for our wills to do, our hearts to conceive, God lending us the world, so to speak,
to work on! All our past cutting into--carving out--this present; all our past alive in the
present; as all this present shall be alive in the future. There is no 'iron law' for life
and will, beloved--they create, they are the masters, they are forever new. All the same!"--his
tone changed--"I believe firmly that this rock knew from all eternity that you and I should
sit here to-day!"

Presently, Mary disengaged herself. Her hat was not what it had been; her hair had escaped
its bounds, and must be rigorously put to rights. She sat there flushed and bareheaded, her
hands working; while Meynell's eyes devoured her.

"It is January, Richard, and the sun is sinking."

"In your world perhaps, dear, not in mine."

"We must go back to mother." She laid a hand on his.

"We will go back to mother!" he said, joyously, with a tender emphasis on the word, without
moving however. "Mary!--next to you I love your mother!"

Mary's sweet face darkened a little; she buried it in her hands. Meynell drew them tenderly away.

"All that affection can do to soften the differences between us, shall be done," he said, with
his whole heart. "I believe too that the sense of them will grow less and less."

Mary made no reply, except by the slight pressure of her fingers on his. She sat in an absorbed
sadness, thinking of her mother's life, and the conflict which had always haunted and scorched
it, between love and religion; first in the case of her husband, and then in that of her daughter.
"But oh! how could I--how could I help it?" was the cry of Mary's own conscience and personality.

She turned with painful eagerness to Meynell. "How did you think her?--how does she strike you?"

"Physically?" He chose his words. "She is so beautiful! But--sometimes--I think she looks frail."

The tears sprang to Mary's eyes. She quickly threw herself upon his misgiving, and tried to
argue it away, both in herself and him. She dwelt upon her mother's improvement in sleep and
appetite, her cheerfulness, her increased power of walking; she was insistent, almost resentful,
her white brow furrowed with pain, even while her hand lay warm in Meynell's. He must needs
comfort her; must needs disavow his own impression. After all, what value had such an impression
beside the judgment of her daily and hourly watchfulness?--the favourable opinion too, so she
insisted, of their local doctor.

As they walked home, he startled her by saying that he should only have three days in the valley.

"Three days!" She looked her remonstrance.

"You know the trial begins next week?"

Yes, she knew, but had understood that the pleadings were all ready, and that a North-Western
train would take him to London in six hours.

"I have to preach at St. Hilda's, Westminster," he said, with a shrug, and a look of distaste.

Mary asked questions, and discovered that the sermon would no doubt be made the opportunity
for something like a demonstration; and that he shrank from the thought of it.

She perceived, indeed, a certain general flagging of the merely combative forces in him, not
without dismay. Such moments of recoil are natural to such men--half saints, half organizers.
The immediate effect of her perception of it was to call out something heroic and passionate
in herself. She was very sweet, and very young; there were eighteen years between them; and
yet in these very first hours of their engagement, he felt her to be not only rest, but inspiration;
not only sympathy, but strength.

When they neared the little ivy-covered house, on their return home, Mary broke from him. Her
step on the gravel was heard by Catharine. She came quickly to the door and stood awaiting
them. Mary ran forward and threw herself into the tender arms that drew her into the shadows
of the passage.

"Oh, mother! mother!--he does love you!" she said, with a rush of tears.

If Catharine's eyes also were dim, she only answered with a tender mockery.

"Don't pretend that was all he said to you in these two hours!"

And still holding Mary, she turned, smiling, to Meynell, and let him claim from her, for the
first time, a son's greeting.

For three blissful days, did Meynell pitch his tent in Long Whindale. Though the weather broke,
and the familiar rain shrouded the fells, he and Mary walked incessantly among them, exploring
those first hours of love, when every tone and touch is charged, for lovers, with the whole
meaning of the world. And in the evenings he sat between the two women in the little cottage
room, reading aloud Catharine's favourite poets; or in the familiar talk, now gay now grave,
of their new intimacy, disclosing himself ever more fully, and rooting himself ever more firmly
in their hearts. His sudden alarm as to Catharine's health passed away, and Mary's new terror
with it. Scarcely a word was said of the troubles ahead. But it was understood that Mary would
be in London to hear him preach at St. Hilda's.

On the last day of Meynell's visit, Catharine, greatly to her surprise, received a letter from
Hester Fox-Wilton.

It contained a breathless account of an evening spent in seeing Oedipus Rex played by Mounet
Sully at the Comedie Francaise. In this half-sophisticated girl, the famous performance, traditional
now through two generations of playgoers, had clearly produced an emotion whereof the expression
in her letter greatly disquieted Catharine Elsmere. She felt too--a little grimly--the humour
of its address to herself.

"Tell me how to answer it, please," she said, handing it to Meynell with a twitching lip. "It
is a language I don't understand! And why did they take her to such a play?"

Meynell shared her disquiet. For the Greek conception of a remorseless fate, as it is forever
shaped and embodied in the tale of Oedipus, had led Hester apparently to a good deal of subsequent
browsing in the literature--the magazine articles at any rate--of French determinism; and she
rattled through some of her discoveries in this reckless letter:

"You talked to me so nicely, dear Mrs. Elsmere, that last evening at Upcote. I know you want
me--you want everybody--'to be good!'

"But 'being good' has nothing to do with us.

"How can it?--such creatures, such puppets as we are!

"Poor wretch, Oedipus! He never meant any one any harm--did he?--and yet--you see!

"'Apollo, friends, Apollo it was, that brought all these my woes, my sore, sore woes!--to pass.'

"Dear Mrs. Elsmere!--you can't think what a good doctrine it is after all--how it steadies
one! What chance have we against these blundering gods?

"Nothing one can do makes any difference. It is, really very consoling if you come to think
of it; and it's no sort of good being angry with Apollo!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Part nonsense, part bravado," said Catharine, raising clear eyes, with half a smile in them,
to Meynell. "But it makes one anxious."

His puckered brow showed his assent.

"As soon as the trial is over--within a fortnight certainly--I shall run over to see them."

       *       *       *       *       *

Meynell and Mary travelled to town together, and Mary was duly deposited for a few days with
some Kensington cousins.

On the night of their arrival--a Saturday--Meynell, not without some hesitation, made an appearance
at the Reformers' Club, which had been recently organized as a London centre for the Movement,
in Albemarle Street.

It was no sooner known that he was in the building than a flutter ran through the well-filled
rooms. That very morning an article in the Modernist signed R. M. had sounded a note of war,
so free, lofty, and determined, that men were proud to be on Meynell's side in such a battle.
On the following Tuesday the Arches Trial was to begin. Meynell was to defend himself; and
the attention of the country would be fixed upon the duel between him and the great orthodox
counsel, Sir Wilfrid Marsh.

Men gathered quickly round him. Most of the six clergy who, with him, had launched the first
Modernist Manifesto, were present, in expectation of the sermon on the morrow, and the trial
of the following week. Chesham and Darwen, his co-defendants in the Arches suit, with whom
he had been in constant correspondence throughout the winter, came to discuss a few last points
and understandings; Treherne, the dear old scholar in whose house they had met to draw up the
Manifesto, under the shadow of the Cathedral, pressed his hand and launched a Latin quotation;
Rollin, fat, untidy and talkative as ever, could not refrain from "interviewing" Meynell, for
a weekly paper; while Derrick, the Socialist and poet, talked to him in a low voice and with
eyes that blazed, of certain "brotherhoods" that had been spreading the Modernist faith, and
Modernist Sacraments among the slums of a great midland town.

And in the voices that spoke to him, and the eyes that met his, Meynell could not but realize
a wide and warm sympathy, an eagerness to make amends--sometimes a half confessed compunction
for a passing doubt.

He stood among them, haggard and worn, but steeped in a content and gratitude that had more
sources than they knew. And under the kindling of their faith and their affection, his own
hesitations passed away; his will steeled itself to the tasks before him.

The following day will be long remembered in the annals of the Movement. The famous church,
crowded in every part with an audience representing science, literature, politics, the best
of English thought and English social endeavour, was but the outward and visible sign of things
inward and spiritual.

"Can these dry bones live?"

As Meynell gave out the text, there were many who remembered the picture of Oxford hanging
in Newman's study at Edgbaston, and those same words written below it.

"Can these dry bones live?"--So Newman had asked in despair, of his beloved University, and
of English religion, in the early years after he had deserted Anglicanism for Rome. And now,
more than half a century afterward, the leader of a later religious movement asked the same
question on the eve of another contest which would either regenerate or destroy the English
Church. The impulse given by Newman and the Tractarians had spent itself, though not without
enormous and permanent results within the life of the nation; and now it was the turn of that
Liberal reaction and recoil which had effaced Newman's work in Oxford, yet had been itself
wandering for years without a spiritual home. During those years it had found its way through
innumerable channels of the national life as a fertilizing and redeeming force. It had transformed
education, law, science and history. Yet its own soul had hungered. And now, thanks to that
inner necessity which governs the spiritual progress of men, the great Liberal Movement, enriched
with a thousand conquests, was sweeping back into the spiritual field; demanding its just share
in the National Church; and laying its treasures at the feet of a Christ, unveiled, illuminated,
by its own labour, by the concentrated and passionate effort of a century of human intelligence.

Starting from this conception--the full citizen-right within the Church of both Liberal and
High Churchman--the first part of Meynell's sermon became a moving appeal for religious freedom;
freedom of development and "variation," within organized Christianity itself. Simpler Creeds,
modernized tests, alternative forms, a "unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,"--with these
ideas the Modernist preacher built up the vision of a Reformed Church, co-extensive with the
nation, resting on a democratic government, yet tenderly jealous of its ancient ceremonies,
so long as each man might interpret them "as he was able," and they were no longer made a source
of tyranny and exclusion.

Then, from the orthodox opponent in whose eyes the Modernist faith was a mere beggarly remnant,
Meynell turned to the sceptic for whom it was only a modified superstition. An eloquent prelude,
dealing with the preconceptions, the modern philosophy and psychology which lie at the root
of religious thought to-day--and the rest of the sermon flowed on into what all Christian eloquence
must ultimately be, the simple "preaching of Christ."

Amid the hush of the crowded church Meynell preached the Christ of our day--just as Paul of
Tarsus preached the Christ of a Hellenized Judaism to the earliest converts; as St. Francis,
in the Umbrian hills preached the Lord of Poverty and Love; as the Methodist preachers among
the villages of the eighteenth century preached the democratic individualism of the New Testament
to the English nascent democracy.

In each case the form of the preaching depended on the knowledge and the thought-world of the
preacher. So with Meynell's Christ.

Not the phantom of a Hellenistic metaphysic; not the Redeemer and Judge of a misunderstood
Judaism; not the mere ethical prophet of a German professorial theology; but the King of a
spiritual kingdom, receiving allegiance, and asking love, from the free consciences of men;
repeating forever in the ears of those in whom a Divine influence has prepared the way, the
melting and constraining message: "This do in remembrance of me."

"'Of me--and of all the just, all the righteous, all the innocent, of all the ages, in me--pleading
through me--symbolized in me! Are you for Man--or for the Beast that lurks in man? Are you
for Chastity--or Lust? Are you for Cruelty--or Love? Are you for Foulness or Beauty? Choose!--choose
this day.'

"The Christ who thus speaks to you and me, my brethren, is no longer a man made God, a God
made man. Those categories of thought, for us, are past. But neither is he merely the crucified
Galilean, the Messianic prophet of the first century. For by a mysterious and unique destiny--unique
at least in degree--that life and death have become Spirit and Idea. The Power behind the veil,
the Spirit from whom issues the world, has made of them a lyre, enchanted and immortal, through
which He breathes His music into men. The setting of the melody varies with the generations,
but the melody remains. And as we listen to it to-day, expressed through the harmonies of that
thought which is ourselves--blood of our blood, life of our life--we are listening now, listening
always, as the disciples listened in Nazareth, to the God within us, the very God who was 'in
Christ reconciling the world unto Himself.'

"Of that God, all life is in some sense, the sacramental expression. But in the course of ages
some sacraments and symbols of the divine are approved and verified beyond others--immeasurably
beyond others. This is what has happened--and so far as we can see by the special will and
purpose of God--with the death-unto-life--with the Cross of Christ....

"The symbol of the Cross is concerned with our personal and profoundest being. But the symbol
of the Kingdom is social, collective--the power of every reformer, every servant of men....

"Many thinkers," said the preacher, in his concluding passage, while all eyes were fixed on
the head sprinkled with gray, and the strong humanity of the face--"many men, in all ages and
civilizations have dreamed of a City of God, a Kingdom of Righteousness, an Ideal State, and
a Divine Ruler. Jesus alone has made of that dream, history; has forced it upon, and stamped
it into history. The Messianic dream of Judaism--though wrought of nobler tissue--it's not
unlike similar dreams in other religions; but in this it is unique, that it gave Jesus of Nazareth
his opportunity, and that from it has sprung the Christian Church. Jesus accepted it with the
heart of a child; he lived in it; he died for it; and by means of it, his spiritual genius,
his faithfulness unto death transformed a world. He died indeed, overwhelmed; with the pathetic
cry of utter defeat upon his lips. And the leading races of mankind have knelt ever since to
the mighty spirit who dared not only to conceive and found the Kingdom of God, but to think
of himself as its Spiritual King--by sheer divine right of service, of suffering, and of death!
Only through tribulation and woe--through the peirasmos or sore trial of the world--according
to Messianic belief, could the Kingdom be realized, and Messiah revealed. It was the marvellous
conception of Jesus, inspired by the ancient poetry and prophecy of his nation, that he might,
as the Suffering Servant, concentrate in himself the suffering due from his race, and from
the world, and by his death bring about--violently, "by force"--the outpouring of the Spirit,
the Resurrection, and the dawn of the heavenly Kingdom. He went up to Jerusalem to die; he
provoked his death; he died. And from the Resurrection visions which followed naturally on
such a life and death, inspired by such conceptions, and breathing them with such power into
the souls of other men, arose the Christian Church.

"The Parousia for which the Lord had looked, delayed. It delays still. The scope and details
of the Messianic dream itself mean nothing to us any more.

"But its spirit is immortal. The vision of a kingdom of Heaven--a polity of the soul, within,
or superseding the earthly polity--once interfused with man's thought and life, has proved
to be imperishable, a thing that cannot die.

"Only it must be realized afresh from age to age; embodied afresh in the conceptions and the
language of successive generations.

"And these developing embodiments and epiphanies of the kingdom can only be brought into being
by the method of Christ--that is to say, by 'violence'.

"Again and again has the kingdom 'suffered violence'--has been brought fragmentarily into the
world 'by force'--by the only irresistible force--that of suffering, of love, of self-renouncing
faith.

"To that 'force' we, as religious Reformers, appeal.

"The parables of the mustard seed and the leaven do not express the whole thought of Christ.
When the work of preparation is over, still men must brace themselves, as their Master did,
to the last stroke of 'violence'--to a final effort of resolute, and, if need be, revolutionary
action--to the 'violence' that brings ideas to birth and shapes them into deeds.

"It was to 'violence' of this sacred sort that the Christian Church owed its beginning; and
it is this same 'violence' that must, as the generations rise and fall, constantly maintain
it among men. To cut away the old at need and graft in the new, requires the high courage and
the resolute hand of faith. Only so can the Christian Life renew itself; only so can efficacy
and movement return to powers exhausted or degenerate; only so 'can these dry bones live!'"

Amid the throng as it moved outward into the bustle of Westminster, Flaxman found himself rubbing
shoulders with Edward Norham. Norham walked with his eyes on the ground, smiling to himself.

"A little persecution!" he said, rubbing his hands, as he looked up--"and how it would go!"

"Well--the persecution begins this week--in the Court of Arches."

"Persecution--nonsense! You mean 'propaganda.' I understand Meynell's defence will proceed
on totally new lines. He means to argue each point on its merits?"

"Yes. The Voysey judgment gave him his cue. You will remember, Voysey was attacked by the Lord
Chancellor of the day--old Lord Hatherley--as a 'private clergyman,' who 'of his own mere will,
not founding himself upon any critical inquiry, but simply upon his own taste and judgment'
maintained certain heresies. Now Meynell, I imagine, will give his judges enough of 'critical
inquiry' before they have done with him!"

Norham shrugged his shoulders.

"All very well! Why did he sign the Articles?"

"He signed them at four-and-twenty!" said Flaxman hotly. "Will you maintain that a system which
insists upon a man's beliefs at forty-four being identical with his beliefs at twenty-four
is not condemned ipso facto!"

"Oh I know what you say!--I know what you say!" cried Norham good-humouredly. "We shall all
be saying it in Parliament presently--Good heavens! Well, I shall look into the court to-morrow,
if I can possibly find an hour, and hear Meynell fire away."

"As Home Secretary, you may get in!"--laughed Flaxman--"on no other terms. There isn't a seat
to be had--there hasn't been for weeks."

The trial came on. The three suits from the Markborough diocese took precedence, and were to
be followed by half a dozen others--test cases--from different parts of England. But on the
Markborough suits everything turned. The Modernist defendants everywhere had practically resolved
on the same line of defence; on the same appeal from the mind of the sixteenth century to the
mind of the twentieth; from creeds and formularies to history; from a dying to a living Church.

The chief counsel for the promoters, Sir Wilfrid Marsh, made a calm, almost a conciliatory
opening. He was a man of middle height, with a large, clean-shaven face, a domed head and smooth
straight hair, still jetty black. He wore a look of quiet assurance and was clearly a man of
all the virtues; possessing a portly wife and a tribe of daughters.

His speech was marked in all its earlier sections by a studied liberality and moderation. "I
am not going to appeal, sir, for that judgment in the promoters' favour which I confidently
claim, on any bigoted or obscurantist lines. The Church of England is a learned Church; she
is also a Church of wide liberties."

No slavish submission to the letter of the Articles on the Liturgy was now demanded of any
man. Subscription had been relaxed; the final judgment in the Essays and Reviews case had given
a latitude in the interpretation of Scripture, of which, as many recent books showed, the clergy--"I
refer now to men of unquestioned orthodoxy"--had taken reasonable advantage; prayer-book revision
"within the limits of the faith," if constantly retarded by the divisions of the faithful,
was still probable; both High Churchmen and Broad Churchmen--here an aside dropped out, "so
far as Broad Churchmen still exist!"--are necessary to the Church.

But there are limits. "Critical inquiry, sir, if you will--reasonable liberty, within the limits
of our formularies and a man's ordination vow--by all means!

"But certain things are vital! With certain fundamental beliefs let no one suppose that either
the bishops, or convocation, or these Church courts, or Parliament, or what the defendants
are pleased to call the nation" [one must imagine the fine gesture of a sweeping hand] "can
meddle." The animus imponentis is not that of the Edwardian or Elizabethan legislation, it
is not that of the Bishops! it is that of the Christian Church itself!--handing down the deposition
fidei from the earliest to the latest times.

"The Creeds, sir, are vital! Put aside Homilies, Articles, the judgments and precedents of
the Church Courts--all these are, in this struggle, beside the mark. Concentrate on the Creeds!
Let us examine what the defendants in these suits have made of the Creeds of Christendom."

The evidence was plain. Regarded as historical statement, the defendants had dealt drastically
and destructively with the Creeds of Christendom; no less than with the authority of "Scripture,"
understanding "authority" in any technical sense.

It was indeed the chief Modernist contention, as the orator showed, that formal creeds were
mere "landmarks in the Church's life," crystallizations of thought, that were no sooner formed
than they became subject to the play, both dissolvent and regenerating, of the Christian consciousness.

"And so you come to that inconceivable entity, a Church without a creed--a mere chaos of private
opinion, where each man is a law unto himself."

On this theme, Sir Wilfrid--who was a man of singularly strong private opinions, of all kinds
and on all subjects--spoke for a whole day; from the rising almost to the going down of the sun.

At the end of it Canon Dornal and a barrister friend, a devout Churchman, walked back toward
the Temple along the Embankment.

The walk was very silent, until midway the barrister said abruptly--

"Is it any plainer to you now, than when Sir Wilfrid began, what authority--if any--there is
in the English Church; or what limits--if any--there are to private judgment within it?"

Dornal hesitated.

"My answer, of course, is Sir Wilfrid's. We have the Creeds."

They walked on in silence a moment. Then the first speaker said:

"A generation ago would you not have said--what also Sir Wilfrid carefully avoided saying--'We
have the Scriptures.'"

"Perhaps," said Dornal despondently.

"And as to the Creeds," the other resumed, after another pause--"Do you think that one per
cent of the Christians that you and I know believe in the Descent into Hell, or the Resurrection
of the Body?"

Dornal made no reply.

Cyril Fenton also walked home with a young priest just ordained. Both were extremely dissatisfied
with the later portions of Sir Wilfrid's speech, which had seemed to them tainted in several
passages with Erastian complacency toward the State. Parliament especially, and a possible
intervention of Parliament, ought never to have been so much as mentioned--even for denunciation--in
an ecclesiastical court.

"Parliament!" cried Fenton, coming to a sudden stop beside the water in St. James' Park, his
eyes afire, "What is Parliament but the lay synod of the Church of England!"

During the three days of Sir Wilfrid's speech, Meynell took many notes, and he became perforce
very familiar with some of the nearer faces in the audience day after day; with the Bishop
of S----, lank and long-jawed, with reddish hair turning to gray, a deprecating manner in society,
but in the pulpit a second Warburton for truculence and fire; the Bishop of D----, beloved,
ugly, short-sighted, the purest and humblest soul alive; learned, mystical, poetical, in much
sympathy with the Modernists, yet deterred by the dread of civil war within the Church, a master
of the Old Latin Versions, and too apt to address schoolgirls on the charms of textual criticism;
the Bishop of F----, courtly, peevish and distrusted; the Dean of Markborough, with the green
shade over his eyes, and fretful complaint on his lips of the "infection" generated by every
Modernist incumbent; and near him, Professor Vetch, with yet another divinity professor beside
him, a young man, short and slight, with roving, grasshopper eyes.

The temperature of Sir Wilfrid's address rose day by day, and the case for the prosecution
closed thunderously in a fierce onslaught on the ethics of the Modernist position, and on the
personal honesty and veracity of each and every Modernist holding office in the Anglican Church,
claiming sentences of immediate deprivation against the defendants, of their vicarages and
incumbencies, and of all profits and benefits derived therefrom "unless within a week from
this day they (the defendants) should expressly and unreservedly retract the several errors
in which they have so offended."

The court broke up in a clamour of excitement and discussion, with crowds of country parishioners
standing outside to greet the three incriminated priests as they came out.

The following morning Meynell rose. And for one brilliant week, his defence of the Modernist
position held the attention of England.

On the fourth or fifth day of his speech, the white-haired Bishop of Dunchester, against whom
proceedings had just been taken in the Archbishop's Court, said to his son:

"Herbert, just before I was born there were two great religious leaders in England--Newman
and Arnold of Rugby. Arnold died prematurely, at the height of bodily and spiritual vigour;
Newman lived to the age of eighty-nine, and to be a Cardinal of the Roman Church. His Anglican
influence, continued, modified, distributed by the High Church movement, has lasted till now.
To-day we have been listening again, as it were, to the voice of Arnold, the great leader whom
the Liberals lost in '42, Arnold was a devoutly orthodox believer, snatched from life in the
very birth-hour of that New Learning of which we claim to be the children. But a church of
free men, coextensive with the nation, gathering into one fold every English man, woman and
child, that was Arnold's dream, just as it is Meynell's.... And yet though the voice, the large
heart, the fearless mind, and the broad sympathies were Arnold's, some of the governing ideas
were Newman's. As I listened, I seemed"--the old man's look glowed suddenly--"to see the two
great leaders, the two foes of a century ago, standing side by side, twin brethren in a new
battle, growing out of the old, with a great mingled host behind them."

Each day the court was crowded, and though Meynell seemed to be addressing his judges, he was
in truth speaking quite as consciously to a sweet woman's face in a far corner of the crowded
hall. Mary went into the long wrestle with him, as it were, and lived through every moment
of it at his side. Then in the evening there were half hours of utter silence, when he would
sit with her hands in his, just gathering strength for the morrow.

Six days of Meynell's speech were over. On the seventh the Court opened amid the buzz of excitement
and alarm. The chief defendant in the suit was not present, and had sent--so counsel whispered
to each other--a hurried note to the judge to the effect that he should be absent through the
whole remainder of the trial owing to "urgent private business."

In a few more hours it was known that Meynell had left England, and men on both sides looked
at each other in dismay.

Meanwhile Mary had forwarded to her mother a note written late at night, in anguish of soul:

"Alice wires to me to-night that Hester has disappeared--without the smallest trace. But she
believes she is with Meryon. I go to Paris to-night--Oh, my own, pray that I may find her!--R. M."

CHAPTER XXII

The mildness of the winter had passed away. A bleak February afternoon lay heavy on Long Whindale.
A strong and bitter wind from the north blew down the valley with occasional spits and snatches
of snow, not enough as yet to whiten the heights, but prophesying a wild night and a heavy
fall. The blasts in the desolate upper reach of the dale were so fierce that a shepherd on
the path leading over the pass to Marly Head could scarcely hold himself upright against them.
Tempestuous sounds filled all the upper and the lower air. From the high ridges came deep reverberating
notes, a roaring in the wind; while the trees along the stream sent forth a shriller voice,
as they whistled and creaked and tossed in the eddying gusts. Cold gray clouds were beating
from the north, hanging now over the cliffs on the western side, now over the bare screes and
steep slopes of the northern and eastern walls. Gray or inky black, the sharp edges of the
rocks cut into the gloomy sky; while on the floor of the valley, blanched grass and winding
stream seemed alike to fly scourged before the persecuting wind.

A trap--Westmoreland calls it a car--a kind of box on wheels, was approaching the head of the
dale from the direction of Whinborough. It stopped at the foot of the steep and narrow lane
leading to Burwood, and a young lady got out.

"You're sure that's Burwood?" she said, pointing to the house partially visible at the end
of the lane.

The driver answered in the affirmative.

"Where Mrs. Elsmere lives?"

"Aye, for sure." The man as he spoke looked curiously at the lady he had brought from Whinborough
station. She was quite a young girl he guessed, and a handsome one. But there seemed to be
something queer about her. She looked so tumbled and tired.

Hester Fox-Wilton took out her purse, and paid him with an uncertain hand, one or more of the
shillings falling on the road, where the driver and she groped for them. Then she raised the
small bag she had brought with her in the car, and turned away.

"Good day to yer, miss," said the man as he mounted the box. She made no reply. After he had
turned his horse and started on the return journey to Whinborough, he looked back once or twice.
But the high walls of the lane hid the lady from him.

Hester, however, did not go very far up the lane. She sank down very soon on a jutting stone
beneath the left-hand wall, with her bag beside her, and sat there looking at the little house.
It was a pleasant, home-like place, even on this bitter afternoon. In one of the windows was
a glow of firelight; white muslin curtains everywhere gave it a dainty, refined look; and it
stood picturesquely within the shelter of its trees, and of the yew hedge which encircled the
garden.

Yet Hester shivered as she looked at it. She was very imperfectly clothed for such an afternoon,
in a serge jacket and skirt supplemented by a small fur collarette, which she drew closer round
her neck from time to time, as though in a vain effort to get warm. But she was not conscious
of doing so, nor of the cold as cold. All her bodily sensations were miserable and uncomfortable.
But she was only actively aware of the thoughts racing through her mind.

There they were, within a stone's throw of her--Mary and Mrs. Elsmere--in the warm, cosy little
house, without an idea that she, Hester, the wretched, disgraced Hester, was sitting in the
lane so close to them. And yet they were perhaps thinking of her--they must have often thought
about her in the last fortnight. Mrs. Elsmere must of course have been sorry. Good people were
always sorry when such things happened. And Mary?--who was eight years older--older! than this
girl of eighteen who sat there, sickened by life, conscious of a dead wall of catastrophe drawn
between her and the future.

Should she go to them? Should she open their door and say--"Here I am!--Horrible things have
happened. No decent person will ever know me or speak to me again. But you said--you'd help
me--if I wanted it. Perhaps it was a lie--like all the rest?"

Then as the reddened eyelids fell with sheer fatigue, there rose on the inward sight the vision
of Catharine Elsmere's face--its purity, its calm, its motherliness. For a moment it drew,
it touched, it gave courage. And then the terrible sense of things irreparable, grim matters
of fact not to be dreamed or thought away, rushed in and swept the clinging, shipwrecked creature
from the foothold she had almost reached.

She rose hastily.

"I can't! They don't want to see me--they've done with me. Or perhaps they'll cry--they'll
pray with me, and I can't stand that! Why did I ever come? Where on earth shall I go?"

And she looked round her in petulant despair, angry with herself for having done this foolish
thing, angry with the loneliness and barrenness of the valley, where no inn opened doors of
shelter for such as she, angry with the advancing gloom, and with the bitter wind that teased
and stung her.

A little way up the lane she saw a small gate that led into the Elsmeres' garden. She took
her bag, and opening the gate, she placed it inside. Then she ran down the lane, drawing her
fur round her, and shivering with cold.

"I'll think a bit--" she said to herself--"I'll think what to say. Perhaps I'll come back soon."

When she reached the main road again, she looked uncertainly to right and left. Which way?
The thought of the long dreary road back to Whinborough repelled her. She turned toward the
head of the valley. Perhaps she might find a house which would take her in. The driver had
said there was a farm which let lodgings in the summer. She had money--some pounds at any rate;
that was all right. And she was not hungry. She had arrived at a junction station five miles
from Whinborough by a night train. At six o'clock in the morning she had found herself turned
out of the express, with no train to take her on to Whinborough. But there was a station hotel,
and she had engaged a room and ordered a fire. There she had thrown herself down without undressing
on the bed, and had slept heavily for four or five hours. Then she had had some breakfast,
and had taken a midday train to Whinborough, and a trap to Long Whindale.

She had travelled straight from Nice without stopping. She would not let herself think now
as she hurried along the lonely road what it was she had fled from, what it was that had befallen.
The slightest glimpse into this past made her begin to sob, she put it away from her with all
her strength. But she had had, of course, to decide where she should go, with whom she should
take refuge.

Not with Uncle Richard, whom she had deceived and defied. Not with "Aunt Alice." No sooner
did the vision of that delicate withered face, that slender form come before her, than it brought
with it terrible fancies. Her conduct had probably killed "Aunt Alice." She did not want to
think about her.

But Mrs. Elsmere knew all about bad men, and girls who got into trouble. She, Hester, knew,
from a few things she had heard people say--things that no one supposed she had heard--that
Mrs. Elsmere had given years of her life, and sacrificed her health, to "rescue" work. The
rescue of girls from such men as Philip? How could they be rescued?--when--

All that was nonsense. But the face, the eyes--the shining, loving eyes, the motherly arms--yes,
those, Hester confessed to herself, she had thirsted for. They had brought her all the way
from Nice to this northern valley--this bleak, forbidding country. She shivered again from
head to foot, as she made her way painfully against the wind.

Yet now she was flying even from Catharine Elsmere; even from those tender eyes that haunted her.

The road turned toward a bridge, and on the other side of the bridge degenerated into a rough
and stony bridle path, giving access to two gray farms beneath the western fell. On the near
side of the bridge the road became a cart-track leading to the far end of the dale. 

Dangerous word! The ideal standard of excellence is, to be sure, fortunately changing, and the
unreal ideal will soon be confined to the second-rate writers for second-rate readers. But all the
great novelists of the two last generations indulged themselves and their readers in these unrealities.
It is vastly easier to invent a consistent character than to represent an inconsistent one;--a
hero is easier to make (so all historians have found) than a man.

Suppose, however, novelists could be placed in a society made up of their favorite characters,--forced
into real, lifelike intercourse with them;--Richardson, for instance, with his Harriet Byron or
Clarissa, attended by Sir Charles; Miss Burney with Lord Orville
and Evelina; Miss Edgeworth with Caroline Percy, and that marvellous
hero, Count Altenburg; Scott with the automatons that he called Waverley
and Flora McIvor.

Suppose they were brought together to share the comforts (cold comforts they would be) of
life, to pass days together, to meet every morning at breakfast; with what a ludicrous sense of
relief, at the close of this purgatorial period, would not the unhappy novelists have fled from
these deserted heroes and heroines, and the precious proprieties
of their romance, to the very driest and mustiest of human bores,--gratefully
rejoicing that the world was not filled with such creatures as they
themselves had set before it as ideals!

To copy Nature faithfully and heartily is certainly not less needful when stories are presented in
words than when they are told on canvas or in marble. In the "Scenes from Clerical Life" we
have a happy example of such copying. The three stories embraced under this title are written
vigorously, with a just appreciation of the romance of reality, and with honest adherence to
truth of representation in the sombre as well as the brighter portions of life. It demands
not only a large intellect, but a large heart, to gain such a candid
and inclusive appreciation of life and character as they display.

The greater part of each story reads like a reminiscence of real life, and the personages introduced
show little sign of being "rubbed down" or "touched up and varnished" for effect. The narrative
is easy and direct, full of humor and pathos; and the descriptions
of simple life in a country village are often charming from their
freshness, vivacity, and sweetness.

More than this, these stories give proof of that wide range of experience which does not so much
depend on an extended or varied acquaintance with the world, as upon an intelligent and comprehensive
sympathy, which makes each new person with whom one is connected a new illustration of the unsolved
problems of life and a new link in the unending chain of human development.

The book is one that deserves a more elegant form than that which the Messrs. Harper have given
it in their reprint.

Twin Roses: A Narrative. 16mo.

This volume belongs to a series of narratives intended to illustrate Mrs. Ritchie's experiences
of theatrical life, and especially to do justice to the many admirable people who have adopted
the stage as a profession. Though it has many defects, in respect to plot and characterization,
it seems to us the most charming in style and beautiful in sentiment
of Mrs. Ritchie's works.

The two sisters, the "twin roses," are, we believe, drawn from life; but the author's own imagination
has enveloped them in an atmosphere of romantic sweetness, and their qualities are fondly exaggerated
into something like unreality. They seem to have been first idolized and then idealized, but
never realized. Still, the most beautiful and tender passages of
the whole book are those in which they are lovingly portrayed.

The scenes in the theatre are generally excellent. The perils, pains, pleasures, failures, and triumphs
of the actor's life are well described. The defect, which especially mars the latter portion of the
volume, is the absence of any artistic reason for the numerous descriptions of scenery which
are introduced. The tourist and the novelist do not happily combine.

Still, the sentiment of the book is so pure, fresh, and artless, its moral tone so high, its
style so rich and melodious, and its purpose so charitable and good, that the reader is kept
in pleased attention to the end, and lays it down with regret.


She too stopped to look at him, and at his dog. The mere neighbourhood of a living being brought
a kind of comfort.

"It's going to snow--" she said, as she stood beside him, surprised by the sound of her own
voice amid the roar of the wind.

"Aye--it's onding o' snaw--" said the shepherd, his shrewd blue eyes travelling over her face
and form. "An' it'll mappen be a rough night."

"Are you taking your sheep into shelter?"

He pointed to a half-ruined fold, with three sycamores beside it, a stone's throw away. The
gate of it was open, and the dog was gradually chasing the sheep within it.

"I doan't like leavin' 'em on t' fells this bitter weather. I'm afraid for t' ewes. It's too
cauld for 'em. They'll be for droppin' their lambs too soon if this wind goes on. It juist
taks t' strength out on 'em, doos the wind."

"Do you think it's going to snow a great deal?"

The old man looked round at the clouds and the mountains; at the powdering of snow that had
already whitened the heights.

"It'll be more'n a bit!" he said cautiously. "I dessay we'll have to be gettin' men to open
t' roads to-morrow."

"Does it often block the roads?"

"Aye, yance or twice i' t' winter. An' ye can't let 'em bide. What's ter happen ter foak as
want the doctor?"

"Did you ever know people lost on these hills?" asked the girl, looking into the blackness
ahead of them. Her shrill, slight voice rang out in sharp contrast to the broad gutturals of
his Westmoreland speech.

"Aye, missy--I've known two men lost on t' fells sin I wor a lad."

"Were they shepherds, like you?"

"Noa, missy--they wor tramps. Theer's mony a fellow cooms by this way i' th' bad weather to
Pen'rth, rather than face Shap fells. They say it's betther walkin'. But when it's varra bad,
we doan't let 'em go on--noa, it's not safe. Theer was a mon lost on t' fells nine year ago
coom February. He wor an owd mon, and blind o' yan eye. He'd lost the toother, dippin' sheep."

"How could he do that?" Hester asked indifferently, still staring ahead into the advancing
storm, and trembling with cold from head to foot.

"Why, sum o' the dippin' stuff got into yan eye, and blinded him. It was my son, gooin afther
th' lambs i' the snaw, as found him. He heard summat--a voice like a lile child cryin'--an
he scratted aboot, an dragged th' owd man out. He worn't deed then, but he died next mornin'.
An t' doctor said as he'd fair broken his heart i' th' storm--not in a figure o' speach yo
unnerstan--but juist th' plain truth."

The old man rose. The sheep had all been folded. He called to his dog, and went to shut the
gate. Then, still curiously eyeing Hester, he came back, followed by his dog, to the place
where she stood, listlessly watching.

"Doan't yo go too far on t' fells, missy. It's coomin' on to snaw, an it'll snaw aw neet. Lor
bless yer, it's wild here i' winter. An when t' clouds coom down like yon--" he pointed up
the valley--"even them as knaws t' fells from a chilt may go wrang."

"Where does this path lead?" said Hester, absently.

"It goes oop to Marly Head, and joins on to th' owd road--t' Roman road, foak calls it--along
top o' t' fells. An' if yo follers that far enoof you may coom to Ullswatter an' Pen'rth."

"Thank you. Good afternoon," said Hester, moving on.

The old shepherd looked after her doubtfully, then said to himself that what the lady did was
none of his business, and turned back toward one of the farms across the bridge. Who was she?
She was a strange sort of body to be walking by herself up the head of Long Whindale. He supposed
she came from Burwood--there was no other house where a lady like that could be staying. But
it was a bit queer anyhow.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hester walked on. She turned a craggy corner beyond which she was out of sight of any one on
the lower stretches of the road. The struggle with the wind, the roar of water in her ears,
had produced in her a kind of trance-like state. She walked mechanically, half deafened, half
blinded, measuring her force against the wind, conscious every now and then of gusts of snow
in her face, of the deepening gloom overhead climbing up and up the rocky path. But, as in
that fatal moment when she had paused in the Burwood lane, her mind was not more than vaguely
conscious of her immediate surroundings. It had become the prey of swarming recollections--captured
by sudden agonies, unavailing, horror-stricken revolts.

At last, out of breath, and almost swooning, she sank down under the shelter of a rock, and
became in a moment aware that white mists were swirling and hurrying all about her, and that
only just behind her, and just above her, was the path clear. Without knowing it, she had climbed
and climbed till she was very near the top of the pass. She looked down into a witch's cauldron
of mist and vapour, already thickened with snow, and up into an impenetrable sky, as it seemed,
close upon her head, from which the white flakes were beginning to fall, steadily and fast.

She was a little frightened, but not much. After all, she had only to rest and retrace her
steps. The watch at her wrist told her it was not much past four; and it was February. It would
be daylight till half-past five, unless the storm put out the daylight. A little rest--just
a little rest! But she began to feel ill and faint, and so bitterly, bitterly cold. The sense
of physical illness, conquering the vague overwhelming anguish of heart and mind, began to
give her back some clearness of brain.

Who was she?--why was she there? She was Hester Fox-Wilton--no! Hester Meryon, who had escaped
from a man who had called himself, for a few days at least, her husband; a man whom in scarcely
more than a week she had come to loathe and fear; whose nature and character had revealed to
her infamies of which she had never dreamed; who had claimed to be her master, and use her
as he pleased, and from whom she had escaped by night, after a scene of which she still bore
the marks.

"You little wild-cat! You think you can defy me--do you?"

And then her arms held--and her despairing eyes looking down into his mocking ones--and the
helpless sense of indignity and wrong--and of her own utter and criminal folly.

And through her memory there ran in an ugly dance those things, those monstrous things, he
had said to her about the Scotch woman. It was not at all absolutely sure that she, Hester,
was his wife. He had shown her those letters at St. Germains, of course, to reassure her; and
the letters were perfectly genuine letters, written by the people they professed to be written
by. Still Scotch marriage law was a damned business--one never knew. He hoped it was all right;
but if she did hate him as poisonously as she said, if she did really want to get rid of him,
he might perhaps be able to assist her.

Had he after all tricked and ruined her? Yet as her consciousness framed the question in the
conventional phrases familiar to her through newspapers and novels, she hardly knew what they
meant, this child of eighteen, who in three short weeks had been thrust through the fire of
an experience on which she had never had time to reflect. Flattered vanity, and excitement,
leading up almost from the first day to instinctive and fierce revolt--intervals of acquiescence,
of wild determination to be happy, drowned in fresh rebellions of soul and sense--through these
alternations the hours had rushed on, culminating in her furtive and sudden escape from the
man of whom she was now in mad fear--her blind flight for "home."

The commonness of her case, the absence of any romantic or poetic element in it--it was that
which galled, which degraded her in her own eyes. Only three weeks since she had felt that
entire and arrogant belief in herself, in her power over her own life and Philip's, on which
she now looked back as merely ludicrous!--inexplicable in a girl of the most ordinary intelligence.
What power had girls over men?--such men as Philip Meryon?

Her vanity was bleeding to death--and her life with it. Since the revelation of her birth,
she seemed to have been blindly struggling to regain her own footing in the world--the kind
of footing she was determined to have. Power and excitement; not to be pitied, but to be followed,
wooed, adored; not to be forced on the second and third bests of the world, but to have the
"chief seat," the daintest morsel, the beau role always--had not this been her instinctive,
unvarying demand on life? And now? If she were indeed married, she was tied to a man who neither
loved her, nor could bring her any position in the world; who was penniless, and had only entrapped
her that he might thereby get some money out of her relations; who, living or dead, would be
a disgrace to her, standing irrevocably between her and any kind of honour or importance in
society.

And if he had deceived her, and she were not his wife--she would be free indeed; but what would
her freedom matter to her? What decent man would ever love her now--marry her--set her at his
side? At eighteen--eighteen! all those chances were over for her. It was so strange that she
could have laughed at her own thoughts; and yet at the same time it was so ghastly true! No
need now to invent a half-sincere chatter about "Fate." She felt herself in miserable truth
the mere feeble mouse wherewith the great cat Fate was playing.

And yet--after all--she herself had done it!--by her own sheer madness. She seemed to see Aunt
Alice's plaintive face, the eyes that followed her, the lip that trembled when she said an
unkind or wanton thing; she heard again the phrases of Uncle Richard's weekly letters, humorous,
tender phrases, with here and there an occasional note of austerity, or warning.

Oh yes--she had done it--she had ruined herself.

She felt the tears running over her cheeks, mingling with the snow as it pelted in her face.
Suddenly she realized how cold she was, how soaked. She must--must go back to shelter--to human
faces--to kind hands. She put out her own, groping helplessly--and rose to her feet.

But the darkness was now much advanced, and the great snowstorm of the night had begun. She
could not see the path below her at all, and only some twenty yards of its course above her.
In the whirling gloom and in the fury of the wind, although she turned to descend the path,
her courage suddenly failed her. She remembered a stream she had crossed on a little footbridge
with a rail; could she ever see to recross it again?--above the greedy tumult of the water?
Peering upward it seemed to her that she saw something like walls in front of her--perhaps
another sheepfold? That would give her shelter for a little, and perhaps the snow would stop--perhaps
it was only a shower. She struggled on, and up, and found indeed some fragments of walls, beside
the path, one of the many abandoned places among the Westmoreland fells that testify to the
closer settlement of the dales in earlier centuries.

And just as she clambered within them, the clouds sweeping along the fell-side lifted and parted
for the last time, and she caught a glimpse of a wide, featureless world, the desolate top
of the fells, void of shelter or landmark, save that straight across it, from gloom to gloom,
there ran a straight white thing--a ghostly and forsaken track. The Roman road, no doubt, of
which the shepherd had spoken. And a vision sprang into her mind of Roman soldiers tramping
along it, helmeted and speared, their heads bent against these northern storms--shivering like
herself. She gazed and gazed, fascinated, till her bewildered eyes seemed to perceive shadows
upon it, moving--moving--toward her.

A panic fear seized her.

"I must get home!--I must!--"

And sobbing, with the sudden word "mother!" on her lips, she ran out of the shelter she had
found, taking, as she supposed, the path toward the valley. But blinded with snow and mist,
she lost it almost at once. She stumbled on over broken and rocky ground, wishing to descend,
yet keeping instinctively upward, and hearing on her right from time to time, as though from
depths of chaos, the wild voices of the valley, the wind tearing the cliffs, the rushing of
the stream. Soon all was darkness; she knew that she had lost herself; and was alone with rock
and storm. Still she moved; but nerve and strength ebbed; and at last there came a step into
infinity--a sharp pain--and the flame of consciousness went out.

CHAPTER XXIII

The February afternoon in Long Whindale, shortened by the first heavy snowstorm of the winter,
passed quickly into darkness. Down through all the windings of the valley the snow showers
swept from the north, becoming, as the wind dropped a little toward night, a steady continuous
fall, which in four or five hours had already formed drifts of some depth in exposed places.

Toward six o'clock, the small farmer living across the lane from Burwood became anxious about
some sheep which had been left in a high "intak" on the fell. He was a thriftless, procrastinating
fellow, and when the storm came on about four o'clock had been taking his tea in a warm ingle-nook
by his wife's fire. He was then convinced that the storm would "hod off," at least till morning,
that the sheep would get shelter enough from the stone walls of the "intak," and that all was
well. But a couple of hours later the persistence of the snowfall, together with his wife's
reproaches, goaded him into action. He went out with his son and lanterns, intending to ask
the old shepherd at the Bridge Farm to help them in their expedition to find and fold the sheep.

Meanwhile, in the little sitting-room at Burwood Catherine Elsmere and Mary were sitting, the
one with her book, the other with her needlework, while the snow and wind outside beat on the
little house. But Catharine's needlework often dropped unheeded from her fingers; and the pages
of Mary's book remained unturned. The postman who brought letters up the dale in the morning,
and took letters back to Whinborough at night, had just passed by in his little cart, hooded
and cloaked against the storm, and hoping to reach Whinborough before the drifts in the roads
had made travelling too difficult. Mary had put into his hands a letter addressed to the Rev.
Richard Meynell, Hotel Richelieu, Paris. And beside her on the table lay a couple of sheets
of foreign notepaper, covered closely with Meynell's not very legible handwriting.

Catharine also had some open letters on her lap. Presently she turned to Mary.

"The Bishop thinks the trial will certainly end tomorrow."

"Yes," said Mary, without raising her eyes.

Catharine took her daughter's hand in a tender clasp.

"I am so sorry!--for you both."

"Dearest!" Mary laid her mother's hand against her cheek. "But I don't think Richard will be
misunderstood again."

"No. The Bishop says that mysterious as it all is, nobody blames him for being absent. They
trust him. But this time, it seems, he did write to the Bishop--just a few words."

"Yes, I know. I am glad." But as she spoke, the pale severity of the girl's look belied the
word she used. During the fortnight of Meynell's absence, while he and Alice Puttenham in the
south of France had been following every possible clue in a vain search for Hester, and the
Arches trial had been necessarily left entirely to the management of Meynell's counsel, and
to the resources of his co-defendants, Darwen and Chesham, Mary had suffered much. To see his
own brilliant vindication of himself and his followers, in the face of religious England, snuffed
out and extinguished in a moment by the call of this private duty had been hard!--all the more
seeing that the catastrophe had been brought about by misconduct so wanton, so flagrant, as
Hester's. There had sprung up in Mary's mind, indeed, a saeva indignatio, not for herself,
but for Richard, first and foremost, and next for his cause. Dark as she knew Meynell's forebodings
and beliefs to be, anxiety for Hester must sometimes be forgotten in a natural resentment for
high aims thwarted, and a great movement risked, by the wicked folly of a girl of eighteen,
on whom every affection and every care had been lavished.

"The roads will be impassable to-morrow," said Catharine, drawing aside the curtain, only to
see a window already blocked with drifted snow. "But--who can be ringing on such a night!"

For a peal of the front door bell went echoing through the little house.

Mary stepped into the hall, and herself opened the door, only to be temporarily blinded by
the rush of wind and snow through the opening.

"A telegram!" she exclaimed, in wonder. "Please come in and wait. Isn't it very bad?"

"I hope I'll be able to get back!" laughed the young man who had brought it. "The roads are
drifting up fast. It was noa good bicycling. I got 'em to gie me a horse. I've just put him
in your stable, miss."

But Mary heard nothing of what he was saying. She had rushed back into the sitting-room.

"Mother!--Richard and Miss Puttenham will be here to-night. They have heard of Hester."

In stupefaction they read the telegram, which had had been sent from Crewe:

"Received news of Hester on arrival Paris yesterday. She has left M. Says she has gone to find
your mother. Keep her. We arrive to-night Whinborough 7.10."

"It is now seven," said Catharine, looking at her watch. "But where--where is she?"

Hurriedly they called their little parlour-maid into the room and questioned her with closed
doors. No--she knew nothing of any visitor. Nobody had called; nobody, so far as she knew,
had passed by, except the ordinary neighbours. Once in the afternoon, indeed, she had thought
she heard a carriage pass the bottom of the lane, but on looking out from the kitchen she had
seen nothing of it.

Out of this slender fact, the only further information that could be extracted was a note of
time. It was, the girl thought, about four o'clock when she heard the carriage pass.

"But it couldn't have passed," Catharine objected, "or you would have seen it go up the valley."

The girl assented, for the kitchen window commanded the road up to the bridge. Then the carriage,
if she had really heard it, must have come to the foot of the lane, turned and gone back toward
Whinborough again. There was no other road available.

The telegraph messenger was dismissed, after a cup of coffee; and thankful for something to
do, Catharine and Mary, with minds full of conjecture and distress, set about preparing two
rooms for their guests.

"Will they ever get here?" Mary murmured to herself, when at last the two rooms lay neat and
ready, with a warm fire in each, and she could allow herself to open the front door again,
an inch or two, and look out into the weather. Nothing to be seen but the whirling snow-flakes.
The horrid fancy seized her that Hester had really been in that carriage and had turned back
at their very door. So that again Richard, arriving weary and heart-stricken, would be disappointed.
Mary's bitterness grew.

But all that could be done was to listen to every sound without, in the hope of catching something
else than the roaring of the wind, and to give the rein to speculation and dismay.

Catharine sat waiting, in her chair, the tears welling silently. It touched her profoundly
that Hester, in her sudden despair, should have thought of coming to her; though apparently
it was a project she had not carried out. All her deep heart of compassion yearned over the
lost, unhappy one. Oh, to bring her comfort!--to point her to the only help and hope in the
arms of an all-pitying God. Catharine knew much more of Meryon's history and antecedents--from
Meynell--than did Mary. She was convinced that the marriage, if there had been a marriage,
had been a bogus one, and that the disgrace was irreparable. But in her stern, rich nature,
now that the culprit had turned from her sin, there was not a thought of condemnation; only
a yearning pity, an infinite tenderness.

At last toward nine o'clock there were steps on the garden path. Mary flew to the door. In
the porch there stood the old shepherd from the Bridge Farm. His hat, beard, and shoulders
were heavy with snow, and his face shone like a red wrinkled apple, in the light of the hall lamp.

"Beg your pardon, miss, but I've just coom from helpin' Tyson to get his sheep in. Varra careless
of him to ha' left it so long!--aw mine wor safe i't' fold by fower o'clock. An' I thowt, miss,
as I'd mak bold, afore goin' back to t' farm, to coom an' ast yo, if t' yoong leddy got safe
hoam this afternoon? I wor a bit worritted, for I thowt I saw her on t' Mardale Head path,
juist afther I got hoam, from t' field abuve t' Bridge Farm, an' it wor noan weather for a
stranger, miss, yo unnerstan', to be oot on t' fells, and it gettin' so black--"

"What young lady?" cried Mary. "Oh, come in, please."

And she drew him hurriedly into the sitting-room, where Catharine had already sprung to her
feet in terror. There they questioned him. Yes--they had been expecting a lady. When had he
seen her?--the young lady he spoke of? What was she like? In what direction had she gone? He
answered their questions as clearly as he could, his own honest face growing steadily longer
and graver.

And all the time he carried, unconsciously, something heavy in his hand, on the top of which
the snow had settled. Presently Mary perceived it.

"Sit down, please!" she pushed a chair toward him. "You must be tired out! And let me take that--"

She held out her hand. The old man looked down--recollecting.

"That's noan o' mine, miss. I--"

Catharine cried out--

"It's hers! It's Hester's!"

She took the bag from Mary, and shook the snow from it. It was a small dressing-bag of green
leather and on it appeared the initials--"H. F.-W."

They looked at each other speechless. The old man hastened to explain that on opening the gate
which led to the house from the lane his foot had stumbled against something on the path. By
the light of his lantern he had seen it was a bag of some sort, had picked it up and brought it in.

"She was in the carriage!" said Mary, under her breath, "and must have just pushed this inside
the gate before--"

Before she went to her death? Was that what would have to be added? For there was horror in
both their minds. The mountains at the head of Long Whindale run up to no great height, but
there are plenty of crags on them with a sheer drop of anything from fifty to a hundred feet.
Ten or twenty feet would be quite enough to disable an exhausted girl. Five hours since she
was last seen!--and since the storm began; four hours, at least, since thick darkness had descended
on the valley.

"We must do something at once." Catharine addressed the old man in quick, resolute tones. "We
must get a party together."

But as she spoke there were further sounds outside--of trampling feet and voices--vying with
the storm. Mary ran into the hall. Two figures appeared in the porch in the light of the lamp
as she held it up, with a third behind them, carrying luggage. In front stood Meynell, and
an apparently fainting woman, clinging to and supported by his arm.

"Help me with this lady, please!" said Meynell, peremptorily, not recognizing who it was holding
the light. "This last little climb has been too much for her. Alice!--just a few steps more!"

And bending over his charge, he lifted the frail form over the threshold, and saw, as he did
so, that he was placing her in Mary's arms.

"She is absolutely worn out," he said, drawing quick breath, while all his face relaxed in
a sudden, irrepressible joy. "But she would come." Then, in a lower voice--"Is Hester here?"
Mary shook her head, and something in her eyes warned him of fresh calamity. He stooped suddenly
to look at Alice, and perceived that she was quite unconscious. He and Mary, between them,
raised her and carried her into the sitting-room. Then, while Mary ministered to her, Meynell
grasped Catharine's hand--with the brusque question--

"What has happened?"

Catharine beckoned to old David, the shepherd, and she, with David and Meynell, went across,
out of hearing, into the tiny dining-room of the cottage. Meanwhile the horses and man who
had brought the travellers from Whinborough had to be put up for the night, for the man would
not venture the return journey.

Meynell had soon heard what there was to tell. He himself was gray with fatigue and sleeplessness;
but there was no time to think of that.

"What men can we get?" he asked of the shepherd.

Old David ruminated, and finally suggested the two sons of the farmer across the lane, his
own master, the young tenant of the Bridge Farm, and the cowman from the same farm.

"And the Lord knaws I'd goa wi you myself, sir"--said the fine-featured old man, a touch of
trouble in his blue eyes--"for I feel soomhow as though there were a bit o' my fault in it.
But we've had a heavy job on t' fells awready, an I should be noa good to you."

He went over to the neighbouring farm, to recruit some young men, and presently returned with
them, the driver, also, from Whinborough, a stalwart Westmoreland lad, eager to help.

Meanwhile Meynell had snatched some food at Catharine's urgent entreaty, and had stood a moment
in the sitting-room, his hand in Mary's, looking down upon the just reviving Alice.

"She's been a plucky woman," he said, with emotion; "but she's about at the end of her tether."
And in a few brief sentences he described the agitated pursuit of the last fortnight; the rapid
journeys, prompted now by this clue, now by that; the alternate hopes and despairs; with no
real information of any kind, till Hester's telegram, sent originally to Upcote and reforwarded,
had reached Meynell in Paris, just as they had returned thither for a fresh consultation with
the police at headquarters.

As the sound of men's feet in the kitchen broke in upon the hurried narrative, and Meynell
was leaving the room, Alice opened her eyes.

"Hester?" The pale lips just breathed the name.

"We've heard of her." Meynell stooped to the questioner. "It's a real clue this time. She's
not far away. But don't ask any more now. Let Mrs. Elsmere take you to bed--and there'll be
more news in the morning."

She made a feeble sign of assent.

A quarter of an hour later all was ready, and Mary stood again in the porch, holding the lamp
high for the departure of the rescuers. There were five men with lanterns, ropes, and poles,
laden, besides, with blankets, and everything else that Catharine's practical sense could suggest.
Old David would go with the rest as far as the Bridge Farm.

The snow was still coming down in a stealthy and abundant fall, but the wind showed some signs
of abating.

"They'll find it easier goin', past t' bridge, than it would ha' been an hour since," said
old David to Mary, pitying the white anxiety of her face. She thanked him with a smile, and
then while he marched ahead, she put down the lamp and leant her head a moment against Meynell's
shoulder, and he kissed her hair.

Down went the little procession to the main road. Through the lane the lights wavered, and
presently, standing at the kitchen window, Catharine and Mary could watch them dancing up the
dale, now visible, now vanishing. It must be at least, and at best, two or three hours before
the party reappeared; it might be much more. They turned from useless speculation to give all
their thoughts to Alice Puttenham.

Too exhausted to speak or think, she was passive in their hands. She was soon in bed, in a
deep sleep, and Mary, having induced her mother to lie down in the sitting-room, and having
made up fires throughout the house, sent the servants to bed, and herself began her watch in
Alice Puttenham's room.

Dreary and long, the night passed away. Once or twice through the waning storm Mary heard the
deep bell of the little church, tolling the hours; once or twice she went hurriedly downstairs
thinking there were steps in the garden, only to meet her mother in the hall, on the same bootless
errand. At last, worn with thinking and praying, she fell fitfully asleep, and woke to find
moonlight shining through the white blind in Alice Puttenham's room. She drew aside the blind
and saw with a shock of surprise that the storm was over; the valley lay pure white under a
waning moon just dipping to the western fells; the clouds were upfurling; and only the last
echoes of the gale were dying through the bare, snow-laden trees that fringed the stream. It
was four o'clock. Six hours, since the rescue party had started. Alack!--they must have had
far to seek.

Suddenly--out of the dark bosom of the valley, lights emerged. Mary sprang to her feet. Yes!
it was they--it was Richard returning.

One look at the bed, where the delicate pinched face still lay high on the pillows, drenched
in a sleep which was almost a swoon, and Mary stole out of the room.

There was time to complete their preparations and renew the fires. When Catharine softly unlatched
the front door, everything was ready--warm blankets, hot milk, hot water bottles. But now they
hardly dared speak to each other; dread kept them dumb. Nearer and nearer came the sound of
feet and lowered voices. Soon they could hear the swing of the gate leading into the garden.
Four men entered, carrying something. Meynell walked in front with the lantern.

As he saw the open door, he hurried forward. They read what he had to say in his haggard look
before he spoke.

"We found her a long way up the pass. She has had a bad fall--but she is alive. That's all
one can say. The exposure alone might have killed her. She hasn't spoken--not a word. That
good fellow"--he nodded toward the Whinborough lad who had brought them from, the station--"will
take one of his horses and go for the doctor. We shall get him here in a couple of hours."

Silently they brought her in, the stalwart, kindly men, they mounted the cottage stairs, and
on Mary' bed they laid her down.

O crushed and wounded youth! The face, drawn and fixed in pain, was marble-cold and marble-white;
the delicate mire-stained hands hung helpless. Masses of drenched hair fell about the neck
and bosom; and there was a wound on the temple which had been bandaged, but was now bleeding
afresh. Catharine bent over her in an anguish, feeling for pulse and heart. Meynell, whispering,
pointed out that the right leg was broken below the knee. He himself had put it in some rough
splints, made out of the poles the shepherds were carrying.

Both Catharine and Mary had ambulance training, and, helped by their two maids, they did all
they could. They cut away the soaked clothes. They applied warmth in every possible form; they
got down some spoonfuls of warm milk and brandy, dreading always to hear the first sounds of
consciousness and pain.

They came at last--the low moans of one coming terribly back to life. Meynell returned to the
room, and knelt by her.

"Hester--dear child!--you are quite safe--we are all here--the doctor will be coming directly."

His tone was tender as a woman's. His ghostly face, disfigured by exhaustion, showed him absorbed
in pity. Mary, standing near, longed to kneel down by him, and weep; but there was an austere
sense that not even she must interrupt the moment of recognition.

At last it came. Hester opened her eyes--

"Uncle Richard?--Is that Uncle Richard?"

A long silence, broken by moaning, while Meynell knelt there, watching her, sometimes whispering
to her.

At last she said, "I couldn't face you all. I'm dying." She moved her right hand restlessly.
"Give me something for this pain--I--I can't stand it."

"Dear Hester--can you bear it a little longer? We will do all we can. We have sent for the
doctor. He has a motor. He will be here very soon."

"I don't want to live. I want to stop the pain. Uncle Richard!"

"Yes, dear Hester."

"I hate Philip--now."

"It's best not to talk of him, dear. You want all your strength."

"No--I must. There's not much time. I suppose--I've--I've made you very unhappy?"

"Yes--but now we have you again--our dear, dear Hester."

"You can't care. And I--can't say--I'm sorry. Don't you remember?"

His face quivered. He understood her reference to the long fits of naughtiness of her childhood,
when neither nurse, nor governess, nor "Aunt Alice" could ever get out of her the stereotyped
words "I'm sorry." But he could not trust himself to speak. And it seemed as though she understood
his silence, for she feebly moved her uninjured hand toward him; and he raised it to his lips.

"Did I fall--a long way? I don't recollect--anything."

"You had a bad fall, my poor child. Be brave!--the doctor will help you."

He longed to speak to her of her mother, to tell her the truth. It was borne in upon him that
he must tell her--if she was to die; that in the last strait, Alice's arms must be about her.
But the doctor must decide.

Presently, she was a little easier. The warm stimulant dulled the consciousness which came
in gusts.

Once or twice, as she recognized the faces near her, there was a touch of life, even of mockery.
There was a moment when she smiled at Catharine--

"You're sweet. You won't say--'I told you so'!"

In one of the intervals when she seemed to have lapsed again into unconsciousness Meynell reported
something of the search. They had found her a long distance from the path, at the foot of a
steep and rocky scree, some twenty or thirty feet high, down which she must have slipped headlong.
There she had lain for some eight hours in the storm before they found her. She neither moved
nor spoke when they discovered her, nor had there been any sign of life, beyond the faint beating
of the pulse, on the journey down.

The pale dawn was breaking when the doctor arrived. His verdict was at first not without hope.
She might live; if there were no internal injuries of importance. The next few hours would
show. He sent his motor back to Whinborough Cottage Hospital for a couple of nurses, and prepared,
himself, to stay the greater part of the day. He had just gone downstairs to speak to Meynell,
and Catharine was sitting by the bed, when Hester once more roused herself.

"How that man hurt me!--don't let him come in again."

Then, in a perfectly hard, clear voice, she added imperiously--"I want to see my mother."

Catharine stooped toward her, in an agitation she found it difficult to conceal.

"Dear Hester!--we are sending a telegram as soon as the post-office is open to Lady Fox-Wilton."

Hester moved her hand impatiently.

"She's not my mother, and I'm glad. Where is--my mother?" She laid a strange, deep emphasis
on the word, opening her eyes wide and threateningly. Catharine understood at once that, in
some undiscovered way, she knew what they had all been striving to keep from her. It was no
time for questioning. Catharine rose quietly.

"She is here, Hester, I will go and tell her."

Leaving one of the maids in charge, Catharine ran down to the doctor, who gave a reluctant
consent, lest more harm should come of refusing the interview than of granting it. And as Catharine
ran up again to Mary's room she had time to reflect, with self-reproach, on the strange completeness
with which she at any rate had forgotten that frail ineffectual woman asleep in Mary's room
from the moment of Hester's arrival till now.

But Mary had not forgotten her. When Catharine opened the door, it was to see a thin, phantom-like
figure, standing fully dressed, and leaning on Mary's arm. Catharine went up to her with tears,
and kissed her, holding her hands close.

"Hester asks for you--for her mother--her real mother. She knows."

"She knows?" Alice stood paralyzed a moment, gazing at Catharine. Then the colour rushed back
into her face. "I am coming--I am coming--at once," she said impetuously. "I am quite strong.
Don't help me, please. And--let me go in alone. I won't do her harm. If you--and Mary--would
stand by the door--I would call in a moment--if--"

They agreed. She went with tottering steps across the landing. On the threshold, Catharine
paused; Mary remained a little behind. Alice went in and shut the door.

The blinds in Hester's room were up, and the snow-covered fells rising steeply above the house
filled it with a wintry, reflected light; a dreary light, that a large fire could not dispel.
On the white bed lay Hester, breathing quickly and shallowly; bright colour now in each sunken
cheek. The doctor himself had cut off a great part of her hair--her glorious hair. The rest
fell now in damp golden curls about her slender neck, beneath the cap-like bandage which hid
the forehead and temples and gave her the look of a young nun. At first sight of her, Alice
knew that she was doomed. Do what she would, she could not restrain the low cry which the sight
tore from the depths of life.

Hester feebly beckoned. Alice came near, and took the right hand in hers, while Hester smiled,
her eyelids fluttering. "Mother!"--she said, so as scarcely to be heard--and then again--"Mother!"

Alice sank down beside her with a sob, and without a word they gazed into each other's eyes.
Slowly Hester's filled with tears. But Alice's were dry. In her face there was as much ecstasy
as anguish. It was the first look that Hester's soul had ever given her. All the past was in
it; and that strange sense, on both sides, that there was no future.

At last Alice murmured:

"How did you know?"

"Philip told me."

The girl stopped abruptly. It had been on her tongue to say--"It was that made me go with him."

But she did not say it. And while Alice's mind, rushing miserably over the past, was trying
to piece together some image of what had happened, Hester began to talk intermittently about
the preceding weeks. Alice tried to stop her; but to thwart her only produced a restless excitement,
and she had her way.

She spoke of Philip with horror, yet with a perfectly clear sense of her own responsibility.

"I needn't have gone--but I would go. There was a devil in me--that wanted to know. Now I know--too
much. I'm glad it's over. This life isn't worth while--not for me."

So, from these lips of eighteen, came the voice of the world's old despairs!

Presently she asked peremptorily for Meynell, and he came to her.

"Uncle Richard, I want to be sure"--she spoke strongly and in her natural voice--"am I Philip's
wife--or--or not? We were married on January 25th, at the Mairie of the 10th Arrondissement,
by a man in a red scarf. We signed registers and things. Then--when we quarrelled--Philip said--he
wasn't certain about that woman--in Scotland. You might be right. Tell me the truth, please.
Am I--his wife?"

And as the words dropped faintly, the anxiety in her beautiful death-stricken eyes was strange
and startling to see. Through all her recklessness, her defiance of authority and custom, could
be seen at last the strength of inherited, implanted things; the instinct of a race, a family,
overleaping deviation.

Meynell bent over her steadily, and took her hand in both his own.

"Certainly, you are his wife. Have no anxiety at all about that. My inquiries all broke down.
There was no Scotch marriage."

Hester said nothing for a little; but the look of relief was clear. Alice on the farther side
of the bed dropped her face in her hands. Was it not only forty-eight hours since, in Paris,
Meynell had told her that he had received conclusive evidence of the Scotch marriage, and that
Hester was merely Philip's victim, not his wife? Passionately her heart thanked him for the
falsehood. She saw clearly that Hester's mortal wounds were not all bodily. She was dying partly
of self-contempt, self-judgment. Meynell's strong words--his "noble lie"--had lifted, as it
were, a fraction of the moral weight that was destroying her; had made a space--a freedom,
in which the spirit could move. 

See a like phrase at p. 77." What help we should get by thinking Death one of the senses, it
would demand another Oedipus to unriddle.

Mr. Halliwell can astonish us no longer, but we are surprised at Mr. Dilke, the very competent
editor of the "Old English Plays," 1815. From him we might have hoped for better things. "Death
o' sense!" is an exclamation. Throughout these volumes we find a for o',--as, "a clock" for "o'clock,"
"a the side" for "o' the side."

A similar exclamation is to be found in three other places in the same play, where the sense
is obvious. Mr. Halliwell refers to one of them on p. 77,--"Death a man! is she delivered!" The
others are,--"Death a justice! are we in Normandy?"

(p. 98); and "Death a discretion! if I should prove a foole now," or, as given by Mr. Halliwell,
"Death, a discretion!"

Now let us apply Mr. Halliwell's explanation.

"Death a man!" you might as well think Death was a man, that is,
one of the men!--or a discretion, that is, one of the discretions!--or
a justice, that is, one of the quorum!

We trust Mr. Halliwell may never have the editing of Bob Acres's imprecations. "Odd's triggers!"
he would say, "that is, as odd as, or as strange as, triggers."

Vol.

III., p. 77,--"the vote-killing mandrake." Mr. Halliwell's note is,
"vote-killing.--'Voice-killing,' ed. 1613. It may well he doubted
whether either be the correct reading." He then gives a familiar citation
from Browne's "Vulgar Errors." And again she clung to her mother's
hand, feebly turning her face to be kissed.

Once she opened her eyes when Mary was beside her, and smiled brightly.

"I've been such a trouble, Mary--I've spoilt Uncle Richard's life. But now you'll have him
all the time--and he'll have you. You dear!--Kiss me. You've got a golden mother. Take care
of mine--won't you?--my poor mother!"

So the hours wore on. Science was clever and merciful and eased her pain. Love encompassed
her, and when the wintry light failed, her faintly beating heart failed with it, and all was
still....

"Richard!--Richard!--Come with me."

So, with low, tender words, Mary tried to lead him away, after that trance of silence in which
they had all been standing round the dead. He yielded to her; he was ready to see the doctor
and to submit to the absolute rest enjoined. But already there was something in his aspect
which terrified Mary. Through the night that followed, as she lay awake, a true instinct told
her that the first great wrestle of her life and her love was close upon her.

CHAPTER XXIV

On the day following Hester's death an inquest was held in the dining-room at Burwood. Meynell
and old David, the shepherd, stood out chief among the witnesses.

"This poor lady's name, I understand, sir," said the gray-haired Coroner, addressing Meynell,
when the first preliminaries were over, "was Miss Hester Fox-Wilton; she was the daughter of
the late Sir Ralph Fox-Wilton; she was under age; and you and Lady Fox-Wilton--who is not here,
I am told, owing to illness--were her guardians?"

Meynell assented. He stood to the right of the Coroner, leaning heavily on the chair before
him. The doctor who had been called in to Hester sat beside him, and wondered professionally
whether the witness would get through.

"I understand also," the Coroner resumed, "that Miss Fox-Wilton had left the family in Paris
with whom you and Lady Fox-Wilton had placed her, some three weeks ago, and that you have since
been in search of her, in company I believe with Miss Fox-Wilton's aunt, Miss Alice Puttenham.
Miss Puttenham, I hope, will appear?"

The doctor rose--

"I am strongly of opinion, sir, that, unless for most urgent reasons, Miss Puttenham should
not be called upon. She is in a very precarious state, in consequence of grief and shock, and
I should greatly fear the results were she to make the effort."

Meynell intervened.

"I shall be able, sir, I think, to give you sufficient information, without its being necessary
to call upon Miss Puttenham."

He went on to give an account, as guarded as he could make it, of Hester's disappearance from
the family with whom she was boarding, of the anxiety of her relations, and the search that
he and Miss Puttenham had made.

His conscience was often troubled. Vaguely, his mind was pronouncing itself all the while--"It
is time now the truth were known. It is better it should be known." Hester's death had changed
the whole situation. But he could himself take no step whatever toward disclosure. And he knew
that it was doubtful whether he should or could have advised Alice to take any.

The inquiry went on, the Coroner avoiding the subject of Hester's French escapade as much as
possible. After all there need be--there was--no question of suicide; only some explanation
had to be suggested of the dressing-bag left within the garden gate, and of the girl's reckless
climb into the fells, against old David's advice, on such an afternoon.

Presently, in the midst of David's evidence, describing his meeting with Hester by the bridge,
the handle of the dining-room door turned. The door opened a little way and then shut again.
Another minute or two passed, and then the door opened again timidly as though some one were
hesitating outside. The Coroner annoyed, beckoned to a constable standing behind the witnesses.
But before he could reach it, a lady had slowly pushed it open, and entered the room.

It was Alice Puttenham.

The Coroner looked up, and the doctor rose in astonishment. Alice advanced to the table, and
stood at the farther end from the Coroner, looking first at him and then at the jury. Her face--emaciated
now beyond all touch of beauty--and the childish overhanging lip quivered as she tried to speak;
but no words came.

"Miss Puttenham, I presume?" said the Coroner. "We were told, madam, that you were not well
enough to give evidence."

Meynell was at her side.

"What do you wish?" he said, in a low voice, as he took her hand.

"I wish to give evidence," she said aloud.

The doctor turned toward the Coroner.

"I think you will agree with me, sir, that as Miss Puttenham has made the effort, she should
give her evidence as soon as possible, and should give it sitting."

A murmur of assent ran round the table. Over the weather-beaten Westmoreland faces had passed
a sudden wave of animation.

Alice took her seat, and the oath. Meynell sitting opposite to her covered his face with his
hands. He foresaw what she was about to do, and his heart went out to her.

Everybody at the table bent forward to listen. The two shorthand writers lifted eager faces.

"May I make a statement?" The thin voice trembled through the room.

The Coroner assured the speaker that the Court was willing and anxious to hear anything she
might have to say.

Alice fixed her eyes on the old man, as though she would thereby shut out all his surroundings.

"You are inquiring, sir--into the death--of my daughter."

The Coroner made a sudden movement.

"Your daughter, madam? I understood that, this poor young lady was the daughter of the late
Sir Ralph and Lady Fox-Wilton?"

"She was their adopted daughter. Her father was Mr. Neville Flood, and I--am her mother. Mr.
Flood, of Sandford Abbey, died nearly twenty years ago. He and I were never married. My sister
and brother-in-law adopted the child. She passed always as theirs, and when Sir Ralph died,
he appointed--Mr. Meynell--and my sister her guardians. Mr. Meynell has always watched over
her--and me. Mr. Flood was much attached to him. He wrote to Mr. Meynell, asking him to help
us--just before his death."

She paused a moment, steadying herself by the table.

There was not a sound, not a movement in the room. Only Meynell uncovered his eyes and tried
to meet hers, so as to give her encouragement.

She resumed--

"Last August the nurse who attended me--in my confinement--came home to Upcote. She made a
statement to a gentleman there--a false statement--and then she died. I wished then to make
the truth public--but Mr. Meynell--as Hester's guardian--and for her sake, as well as mine--did
not wish it. She knew nothing--then; and he was afraid of its effect upon her. I followed his
advice, and took her abroad, in order to protect her from a bad man who was pursuing her. We
did all we could--but we were not able to protect her. They were married without my knowing--and
she went away with him. Then he--this man--told her--or perhaps he had done it before, I don't
know--who she was. I can only guess how he knew; but he is Mr. Flood's nephew. My poor child
soon found out what kind of man he was. She tried to escape from him. And because Mrs. Elsmere
had been always very kind to her, she came here. She knew how--"

The voice paused, and then with difficulty shaped its words again.

"She knew that we should grieve so terribly. She shrank from seeing us. She thought we might
be here--and that--partly--made her wander away again--in despair--when she actually got here.
But her death was a pure accident--that I am sure of. At the last, she tried to get home--to
me. That was the only thing she was conscious of--before she fell. When she was dying--she
told me she knew--I was her mother. And now--that she is dead--"

The voice changed and broke--a sudden cry forced its way through--

"Now that she is dead--no one else shall claim her--but me. She's mine now--my child--forever--only
mine!"

She broke off incoherently, bowing her head upon her hands, her slight shoulders shaken by
her sobs.

The room was silent, save for a rather general clearing of throats. Meynell signalled to the
doctor. They both rose and went to her. Meynell whispered to her.

The Coroner spoke, drawing his handkerchief hastily across his eyes.

"The Court is very grateful to you, Miss Puttenham, for this frank and brave statement. We
tender you our best thanks. There is no need for us to detain you longer."

She rose, and Meynell led her from the room. Outside was a nurse to whom he resigned her.

"My dear, dear friend!" Trembling, her eyes met the deep emotion in his. "That was right--that
will bring you help. Aye! you have her now--all, all your own."

On the day of Hester's burying Long Whindale lay glittering white under a fitful and frosty
sunshine. The rocks and screes with their steep beds of withered heather made dark scrawls
and scratches on the white; the smoke from the farmhouses rose bluish against the snowy wall
of fell; and the river, amid the silence of the muffled roads and paths, seemed the only audible
thing in the valley.

In the tiny churchyard the new-made grave had been filled in with frozen earth, and on the
sods lay flowers piled there by Rose Flaxman's kind and busy hands. She and Hugh had arrived
from the south that morning.

Another visitor had come from the south, also to lay flowers on that wintry grave. Stephen
Barron's dumb pain was bitter to see. The silence of spiritual and physical exhaustion in which
Meynell had been wrapped since the morning of the inquest was first penetrated and broken up
by the sight of Stephen's anguish. And in the attempt to comfort the younger, the elder man
laid hold on some returning power for himself.

But he had been hardly hit; and the depth of the wound showed itself strangely--in a kind of
fear of love itself, a fear of Mary! Meynell's attitude toward her during these days was almost
one of shrinking. The atmosphere between them was electrical; charged with things unspoken,
and a conflict that must be faced.

       *       *       *       *       *

The day after Hester's funeral the newspapers were full of the sentence delivered on the preceding
day, in the Arches Court, on Meynell and his co-defendants. A telegram from Darwen the evening
before had conveyed the news to Meynell himself.

The sentence of deprivation ab officio et beneficio in the Church of England, on the ground
of heretical opinion and unauthorized services, had been expressed by the Dean of Arches in
a tone and phraseology of considerable vehemence. According to him the proceedings of the Modernists
were "as contrary to morality as to law," and he marvelled how "honest men" could consent to
occupy the position of Meynell and his friends.

Notice of appeal to the Privy Council was at once given by the Modernist counsel, and a flame
of discussion arose throughout England.

Meanwhile, on the morning following the publication of the judgment, Meynell finished a letter,
and took it into the dining-room, where Rose and Mary were sitting. Rose, reading his face,
disappeared, and he put the letter into Mary's hands.

It was addressed to the Bishop of Dunchester. The great gathering in Dunchester Cathedral,
after several postponements to match the delays in the Court of Arches, was to take place within
a fortnight from this date, and Meynell had been everywhere announced as the preacher of the
sermon, which was to be the battle-cry of the Movement, in the second period of its history;
the period of open revolt, of hot and ardent conflict.

The letter which Mary was invited to read was short. It simply asked that the writer should
be relieved from a task he felt he could not adequately carry out. He desired to lay it down,
not for his own sake, but for the sake of the cause. "I am not the man, and this is not my
job. This conviction has been borne in upon me during the last few weeks with an amazing clearness.
I will only say that it seems to represent a command--a prohibition--laid upon me, which I
cannot ignore. There are of course tragic happenings and circumstances connected with it, my
dear lord, on which I will not dwell. The effect of them at present on my mind is that I wish
to retire from a public and prominent part in our great Movement; at any rate for a time. I
shall carry through the Privy Council appeal; but except for that intend to refuse all public
appearance. When the sentence is confirmed, as of course it will be, it will be best for me
to confine myself to thinking and writing in solitude and behind the scenes. 'Those also serve
who only stand and wait.' The quotation is hackneyed, but it must serve. Through thought and
self-proving, I believe that in the end I shall help you best. I am not the fighter I thought
I was; the fighter that I ought to be to keep the position that has been so generously given
me. Forgive me for a while if I go into the wilderness--a rather absurd phrase, however, as
you will agree, when I tell you that I am soon to marry a woman whom I love with my whole heart.
But it applies to my connection with the Modernist Movement, and to my position as a leader.
My old friends and colleagues--many of them at least--will, I fear, blame the step I am taking.
It will seem to them a mere piece of flinching and cowardice. But each man's soul is in his
own keeping; and he alone can judge his own powers."

The letter then became a quiet discussion of the best man to be chosen in the writer's stead,
and passed on into a review of the general situation created by the sentence of the Court of
Arches.

But of these later pages of the letter Mary realized nothing. She sat with it in her hands,
after she had read the passage which has been quoted, looking down, her mouth trembling.

Meynell watched her uneasily--then came to sit by her, and took her hand.

"Dearest!--you understand?" he said, entreatingly.

"It is--because of Hester?" She spoke with difficulty.

He assented, and then added--

"But that letter--shall only go with your permission."

She took courage. "Richard, you know so much better than I, but--Richard!--did you ever neglect
Hester?"

He tried to answer her question truly.

"Not knowingly."

"Did you ever fail to love her, and try to help her?"

He drew a long breath.

"But there she lies!" He raised his head. Through the window, on a rocky slope, half a mile
away, could be seen the tiny church of Long Whindale, and the little graveyard round it.

"It is very possible that I see the thing morbidly"--he turned to her again with a note of
humility, of sad appeal, that struck most poignantly on the woman's heart--"but I cannot resist
it. What use can I be to any human being as guide, or prophet, or counsellor--if I was so little
use to her? Is there not a kind of hypocrisy--a dismal hypocrisy--in my claim to teach--or
inspire--great multitudes of people--when this one child--who was given into my care--"

He wrung her hands in his, unable to finish his sentence.

Bright tears stood in her eyes; but she persevered. She struck boldly for the public, the impersonal
note. She set against the tragic appeal of the dead the equally tragic appeal of the living.
She had in her mind the memory of that London church, with the strained upturned faces, the
"hungry sheep"--girls among them, perhaps, in peril like Hester, men assailed by the same vile
impulses that had made a brute of Philip Meryon. During the preceding months Mary's whole personality
had developed with great rapidity, after a somewhat taciturn and slowly ripening youth. The
need, enforced upon her by love itself, of asserting herself even against the mother she adored;
the shadow of Meynell's cloud upon her, and her suffering under it, during the weeks of slander;
and now this rending tragedy at her doors--had tempered anew the naturally high heart, and
firm will. At this critical moment, she saved Meynell from a fatal step by the capacity she
showed of loving his cause, only next to himself. And, indeed, Meynell was made wholesomely
doubtful once or twice whether it were not in truth his cause she loved in him. For the sweet
breakdowns of love which were always at her lips she banished by a mighty effort, till she
should have won or lost. Thus throughout she showed herself her mother's daughter--with her
father's thoughts.

It was long, however, before she succeeded in making any real impression upon him. All she
could obtain at first was delay, and that Catharine should be informed.

As soon as that had been done, the position became once more curiously complex. Here was a
woman to whom the whole Modernist Movement was anathema, driven finally into argument for the
purpose of compelling the Modernist leader, the contriver and general of Modernist victory,
to remain at his post!

For it was part of Catharine's robust character to look upon any pledge, any accepted responsibility,
as something not to be undone by any mere feeling, however sharp, however legitimate. You had
undertaken the thing, and it must, at all costs, be carried through. That was the dominant
habit of her mind; and there were persons connected with her on whom the rigidity of it had
at times worked harshly.

On this occasion it was no doubt interfered with--(the Spirit of Comedy would have found a
certain high satisfaction in the dilemma)--by the fact that Meynell's persistence in the course
he had entered upon must be, in her eyes, and sub specie religionis, a persistence in heresy
and unbelief. What decided it ultimately, however, was that she was not only an orthodox believer,
but a person of great common sense--and Mary's mother.

Her natural argument was that after the tragic events which had occurred, and the public reports
of them which had appeared, Meynell's abrupt withdrawal from public life would once more unsettle
and confuse the public mind. If there had been any change in his opinions--

"Oh! do not imagine"--she turned a suddenly glowing face upon him--"I should be trying to dissuade
you, if that were your reason. No!--it is for personal and private reasons you shrink from
the responsibility of leadership. And that being so, what must the world say--the ignorant
world that loves to think evil?"

He looked at her a little reproachfully.

"Those are not arguments that come very naturally from you!"

"They are the right ones!--and I am not ashamed of them. My dear friend--I am not thinking
of you at all. I leave you out of count; I am thinking of Alice--and--Mary!"

Catharine unconsciously straightened herself, a touch of something resentful--nay, stern--in
the gesture. Meynell stared in stupefaction.

"Alice!--Mary!" he said.

"Up to this last proposed action of yours, has not everything that has happened gone to soften
people's hearts? to make them repent doubly of their scandal, and their false witness? Every
one knows the truth now--every one who cares; and every one understands. But now--after the
effort poor Alice has made--after all that she and you have suffered--you insist on turning
fresh doubt and suspicion on yourself, your motives, your past history. Can't you see how people
may gossip about it--how they may interpret it? You have no right to do it, my dear Richard!--no
right whatever. Your 'good report' belongs not only to yourself--but--to Mary!"

Catharine's breath had quickened; her hand shook upon her knee. Meynell rose from his seat,
paced the room and came back to her.

"I have tried to explain to Mary"--he said, desperately--"that I should feel myself a hypocrite
and pretender in playing the part of a spiritual leader--when this great--failure--lay upon
my conscience."

At that Catharine's tension gave way. Perplexity returned upon her.

"Oh! if it meant--if it meant"--she looked at him with a sudden, sweet timidity--"that you
felt you had tried to do for Hester what only grace--what only a living Redeemer--could do
for her--"

She broke off. But at last, as Meynell, her junior by fifteen years--her son almost--looked
down into her face--her frail, aging, illumined face--there was something in the passion of
her faith which challenged and roused his own; which for the moment, at any rate, and for the
first time since the crisis had arisen revived in him the "fighter" he had tried to shed.

"The fault was not in the thing preached," he said, with a groan; "or so it seems to me--but
in the preacher. The preacher--was unequal to the message."

Catharine was silent. And after a little more pacing he said in a more ordinary tone--and a
humble one--

"Does Mary share this view of yours?"

At this Catharine was almost angry.

"As if I should say a word to her about it! Does she know--has she ever known--what you and
I knew?"

His eyes, full of trouble, propitiated her. He took her hand and kissed it.

"Bear with me, dear mother! I don't see my way, but Mary--is to me--my life. At any rate, I
won't do in a hurry what you disapprove."

Thus a little further delay was gained. The struggle lasted indeed another couple of days,
and the aspect of both Meynell and Mary showed deep marks of it by the end. Throughout it Mary
made little or no appeal to the mere womanly arts. And perhaps it was the repression of them
that cost her most.

On the third day of discussion, while the letter still lay unposted in Meynell's writing-case,
he went wandering by himself up the valley. The weather was soft again, and breathing spring.
The streams ran free; the buds were swelling on the sycamores; and except on the topmost crags
the snow had disappeared from the fells. Harsh and austere the valley was still; the winter's
grip would be slow to yield; but the turn of the year had come.

That morning a rush of correspondence forwarded from Upcote had brought matters to a crisis.
On the days immediately following the publication of the evidence given at the inquest on Hester
the outside world had made no sign. All England knew now why Richard Meynell had disappeared
from the Arches Trial, only to become again the prey of an enormous publicity, as one of the
witnesses to the finding and the perishing of his young ward. And after Alice Puttenham's statement
in the Coroner's Court, for a few days the England interested in Richard Meynell simply held
its breath and let him be.

But he belonged to the public; and after just the brief respite that decency and sympathy imposed,
the public fell upon him. The Arches verdict had been given; the appeal to the Privy Council
had been lodged. With every month of the struggle indeed, as the Modernist attack had grown
more determined, and its support more widespread, so the orthodox defence had gathered force
and vehemence. Yet through the length and breadth of the country the Modernist petition to
Parliament was now kindling such a fire as no resistance could put out. Debate in the House
of Commons on the Modernist proposals for Church Reform would begin after Easter. Already every
member of the House was being bombarded from both sides by his constituents. Such a heat of
religious feeling, such a passion of religious hope and fear, had not been seen in England
for generations.

And meanwhile Meynell, whose action had first released the great forces now at work, who as
a leader was now doubly revered, doubly honoured by those who clamoured to be led by him, still
felt himself utterly unable to face the struggle. Heart and brain were the prey of a deadly
discouragement; the will could make no effort; his confidence in himself was lamed and helpless.
Not even the growing strength and intensity of his love for Mary could set him, it seemed,
spiritually, on his feet.

He left the old bridge on his left, and climbed the pass. And as he walked, some words of Newman
possessed him; breathed into his ear through all the wind and water voices of the valley:

Thou to wax fierce In the cause of the Lord To threat and to pierce With the heavenly sword!
Anger and Zeal And the Joy of the brave Who bade thee to feel--

Dejectedly, he made his way along the fatal path; he found the ruin where Hester had sheltered;
he gradually identified the route which the rescue party had taken along the side of the fell;
and the precipitous scree where they had found her. The freshly disturbed earth and stones
still showed plainly where she had fallen, and where he and the shepherds had stood, trampling
the ground round her. He sat down beside the spot, haunted by the grim memory of that helpless,
bleeding form amid the snow. Not yet nineteen!--disgraced--ruined--the young body broken in
its prime. Had he been able to do no better for Neville's child than that? The load of responsibility
crushed him; and he could not resign himself to such a fate for such a human being. Before
him, on the chill background of the tells, he beheld, perpetually, the two Hesters: here, the
radiant, unmanageable child, clad in the magic of her teasing, provocative beauty; there, the
haggard and dying girl, violently wrenched from life. Religious faith was paralyzed within
him. How could he--a man so disowned of God--prophesy to his brethren?....

Thus there descended upon him the darkest hour of his history. It was simply a struggle for
existence on the part of all those powers of the soul that make for action, against the forces
that make for death and inertia.

It lasted long; and it ended in the slow and difficult triumph, the final ascendency of the
"Yeas" of Life over the "Nays," which in truth his character secured. He won the difficult
fight not as a philosopher, but as a Christian; impelled, chastened, brought into line again,
by purely Christian memories and Christian ideas. The thought of Christ healed him--gradually
gave him courage to bear an agony of self-criticism, self-reproach, that was none the less
overwhelming because his calmer mind, looking on, knew it to be irrational. There was no prayer
to Christ, no "Christe eleison" on his rips. But there was a solemn kneeling by the Cross;
a solemn opening of the mind to the cleansing and strengthening forces that flow from that
life and death which are Christendom's central possession; the symbol through which, now understood
in this way, now in that, the Eternal speaks to the Christian soul.

So, amid "the cheerful silence of the fells," a good man, heavily, took back his task. From
this wreck of affection, this ruin of hope, he must go forth to preach love and hope to other
men; from the depths of his grief and his defeat he must summon others to struggle and victory.

He submitted.

Then--not till then--naked and stripped as he was of all personal complacency; smarting under
the conviction of personal weakness and defeat; tormented still, as he would ever be, by all
the "might have beens" of Hester's story, he was conscious of the "supersensual moment," the
inrush of Divine strength, which at some time or other rewards the life of faith.

On his way back to Burwood through the gleams and shadows of the valley, he turned aside to
lay a handful of green moss on the new-made grave. There was a figure beside it. It was Mary,
who had been planting snowdrops. He helped her, and then they descended to the main road together.
Looking at his face, she hardly dared, close as his hand clung to hers, to break the silence.

It was dusk, and there was no one in sight. In the shelter of a group of trees, he drew her to him.

"You have your way," he said, sadly.

She trembled a little, her delicate cheek close against his.

"Have I persecuted you?"

He smiled.

"You have taught me what the strength of my wife's will is going to be."

She winced visibly, and the tears came into her eyes.

"Dearest!--" he protested. "Must you not be strong? But for you--I should have gone under."

The primitive instinct of the woman, in this hour of painful victory, would have dearly liked
to disavow her own power. The thought of ruling her beloved was odious. Yet as they walked
on hand in hand, the modern in Mary prevailed, and she must needs accept the equal rights of
a love which is also life's supreme friendship.

A few more days Meynell spent in the quiet of the valley, recovering, as best he could, and
through a struggle constantly renewed, some normal steadiness of mood and nerve; dealing with
an immense correspondence; and writing the Dunchester sermon; while Stephen Barron, who had
already resigned his own living, was looking after the Upcote Church and parish. Meanwhile
Alice Puttenham lay upstairs in one of the little white rooms of Burwood, so ill that the doctors
would not hear of her being moved. Edith Fox-Wilton had proposed to come and nurse her, in
spite of "this shocking business which had disgraced us all." But Catharine at Alice's entreaty
had merely appealed to the indisputable fact that the tiny house was already more than full.
There was no danger, and they had a good trained nurse.

Once or twice it was, in these days, that again a few passing terrors ran through Mary's mind,
on the subject of her mother. The fragility which had struck Meynell's unaccustomed eye when
he first arrived in the valley forced itself now at times, though only at times, on her reluctant
sense. There were nights when, without any definite reason, she could not sleep for anxiety.
And then again the shadow entirely passed away. Catharine laughed at her; and when the moment
came for Mary to follow Meynell to the Dunchester meeting, it was impossible even for her anxious
love to persuade itself that there was good reason for her to stay away.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before Meynell departed southward there was a long conversation between him and Alice; and
it was at her wish, to which he now finally yielded, that he went straight to Markborough,
to an interview with Bishop Craye.

In that interview the Bishop learnt at last the whole story of Hester's birth and of her tragic
death. The beauty of Meynell's relation to the mother and child was plainly to be seen through
a very reticent narrative; and to the tale of those hours in Long Whindale no man of heart
like the little Bishop could have listened unmoved. At the end, the two men clasped hands in
silence; and the Bishop looked wistfully at the priest that he and the diocese were so soon
to lose.

For the rest, as before, they met as equals, curiously congenial to each other, in spite of
the battle in front. The Bishop's certainty of victory was once more emphatically shown by
the friendly ease with which he still received his rebellious incumbent. Any agreeable outsider
of whatever creed--Renan or Loisy or Tyrrell--might have been thus welcomed at the Palace.
It was true that till the appeal was decided Meynell remained formally Rector of Upcote Minor.
The church and the parish were still in his hands; and the Bishop pointedly made no reference
to either. But a very few weeks now would see Meynell's successor installed, and the parish
reduced to order.

Such at least was the Bishop's confidence, and in the position in which he found himself--with
seven Modernist evictions pending in his diocese, and many more than seven recalcitrant parishes
to deal with, he was not the man to make needless friction.

In Meynell's view, indeed, the Bishop's confidence was excessive; and the triumph of the orthodox
majority in the Church, if indeed it were to triumph, was neither so near, nor likely to be
so complete, as the Bishop believed. He had not yet been able to resume all the threads of
leadership, but he was clear that there had been no ebbing whatever of the Modernist tide.
On the contrary, it seemed to him that the function at Dunchester might yet ring through England,
and startle even such an optimist as Bishop Craye.

The next few days he spent among his own people, and with the Flaxmans. The old red sandstone
church of Upcote Minor was closely packed on Sunday; and the loyalty of the parish to their
Rector, their answer to the Arches judgment, was shown in the passion, the loving intelligence
with which every portion of the beautiful Modernist service was followed by an audience of
working men and women gathered both from Upcote itself and from the villages round, who knew
very well--and gloried in the fact--that from their midst had started the flame now running
through the country. Many of them had been trained by Methodism, and were now returning to
the Church that Wesley had been so loath to leave. "The Rector's changed summat," said men
to each other, puzzled by that aspect--that unconscious aspect--of spiritual dignity that falls
like a robe of honour, as life goes on, about the Knights of the Spirit. But they knew, at
least, from their newspapers, how and when that beautiful girl who had grown up from a child
in their midst had perished; they remembered the winter months of calumny and persecution;
and their rough, kind hearts went out to the man who was so soon, against their will and their
protest, to be driven out from the church where for twenty years he had preached to his people
a Christ they could follow, and a God they could adore.

The week passed, and the Dunchester meeting was at hand. Meynell was to spend the night before
the great service with the old Bishop, against whom--together with the whole of his Chapter--Privy
Council action was now pending. Mary was to be the guest of one of the Canons in the famous Close.

Meynell arrived to find the beautiful old town in commotion. As a protest against the Modernist
demonstration, all the students from a famous Theological College in a neighbouring diocese
under a High Church bishop had come over to attend a rival service in the second church of
the town, where the congregation was to be addressed "on this outrage to our Lord" by one of
the ablest and most saintly of the orthodox leaders--the Rev. Cyril Fenton, of the Markborough
diocese--soon, it was rumoured, to be appointed to a Canonry of St. Paul's. The streets were
full of rival crowds, jostling each other. Three hundred Modernist clergy were staying in or
near the town; the old Cathedral city stared at them amazed; and from all parts had come, besides,
the lay followers of the new Movement thronging to a day which represented for them the first
fruits of a harvest, whereof not they perhaps but their children would see the full reaping.

On the evening before the function Meynell went into the Cathedral with Mary just as the lengthening
March afternoon was beginning to wane. They stepped through the western doors set open to the
breeze and the sunshine into a building all opal and ebony, faintly flooded with rose from
the sky without; a building of infinite height and majesty, where clustered columns of black
marble, incredibly light, upheld the richness of the bossed roof, where every wall was broidered
history, where every step was on "the ruined sides of Kings," and the gathered fragments of
ancient glass, jewels themselves, let through a jewelled light upon the creamy stone.

For the first time, since Hester's death, Meynell's sad face broke into joy. The glorious church
appeared to him as the visible attestation of the Divine creative life in men, flowing on endlessly,
from the Past, through the Present, to the unknown Future.

From the distance came a sound of chanting. They walked slowly up the nave, conscious of a
strange tumult in the pulse, as though the great building with its immemorial history were
half lending itself to, half resisting, the emotion that filled them. In the choir a practice
was going on. Some thirty young clergy were going through the responses and canticles of the
new service-book, with an elder man, also in clerical dress, directing them. At the entrance
of the southern choir aisle stood the senior verger of the Cathedral in his black gown--open-mouthed
and motionless, listening to the strange sounds.

Meynell and Mary knelt for a moment of impassioned prayer, and then sat down to listen. Through
the fast darkening church, chanted by half the choir, there stole those words of noblest poetry:

"A new commandment--a new commandment--I give unto you ..." To be answered by the voices on
the other side--"That ye love--ye love one another!"

And again:

"I have called you friends. Ye are my friends"--

With the reply:

"If ye do the things which I command you."

And yet again:

"The words that I speak unto you:"--

"They--they are spirit; and they are life!"

A moment's silence, before all the voices, gathering into one harmony, sent the last versicle
ringing through the arches of the choir, and the springing tracery of the feretory, and of
the Lady Chapel beyond.

"Lord to whom shall we go?--Thou--thou hast the words of eternal life!"

"Only a few days or weeks," murmured Meynell, as they passed out into the evening light, "and
we two--and those men singing there--shall be outcasts and wanderers, perhaps for a time, perhaps
while we live. But to-day--and to-morrow--we are still children in the house of our fathers--sons,
not slaves!--speaking the free speech of our own day in these walls, as the men who built them
did in theirs. That joy, at least, no one shall take from us!"

At that "sad word Joy" Mary slipped her hand into his, and so they walked silently through
the Close, toward the Palace, pursued by the rise and fall of the music from within. 

An edition of an English author ought to be intelligible to English readers, and, if the editor
do not make it so, he wrongs the old poet, for two centuries lapt in lead, to whose works he
undertakes to play the gentleman-usher. A play written in our own tongue should not be as
tough to us as Aeschylus to a ten-years' graduate, nor do we wish to be reduced to the level of a
chimpanzee, and forced to gnaw our way through a thick shell of misprints and mispointings only
to find (as is generally the case with Marston) a rancid kernel of meaning after all. But even
Marston sometimes deviates into poetry, as a man who wrote in that age could hardly help doing,
and one of the few instances of it is in a speech of Erichtho, in the first scene of the fourth
act of "Sophonisba," (Vol.

I. p. 197,) which Mr. Halliwell presents to us in this shape:--

----"hard by the reverent (!) ruines Of a once glorious temple rear'd to Jove Whose very rubbish....
....yet beares A deathlesse majesty, though now quite rac'd, [razed,] Hurl'd down by wrath
and lust of impious kings, So that where holy Flamins [Flamens] wont to sing Sweet hymnes to
Heaven, there the daw and crow, The ill-voyc'd raven, and still chattering
pye, Send out ungratefull sounds and loathsome filth; Where statues
and Joves acts were vively limbs,

* * * * *

Where tombs and beautious
urnes of well dead men Stood in assured rest," etc.

The verse and
a half in Italics are worthy of Chapman; but why did not Mr. Halliwell,
who explains up-pont and I um, change "Joves acts were vively limbs"
to "Jove's acts were lively limned," which was unquestionably what
Marston wrote?

In the "Scourge of Villanie," (Vol. III. p. 252,) there is a passage which has a modern application
in America, though happily archaic in England, which Mr. Halliwell suffers to stand thus:--

"Once
Albion lived in such a cruel age Than man did hold by servile vilenage: Poore brats were slaves
of bondmen that were borne, And marted, sold: but that rude law is torne And disannuld, as too too
inhumane."

This should read--

"Man man did hold in servile villanage; Poor brats were slaves (of
bondmen that were born)";

and we hope that some American poet will
one day be able to write in the past tense similar verses of the barbarity
of his forefathers.

We will give one more scrap of Mr. Halliwell's text:--

"Yfaith, why then, caprichious mirth, Skip, light moriscoes, in our frolick blond, Flagg'd veines,
sweete, plump with fresh-infused joyes!"

which Marston, doubtless, wrote thus:--

"I'faith, why then, capricious Mirth, Skip light moriscoes in our frolic blood! Flagged veins,
swell plump with fresh-infused joys!"

We have quoted only a few examples from among the scores that we
had marked, and against such a style of "editing" we invoke the shade
of Marston himself. In the Preface to the Second Edition of the "Fawn,"
he says, "Reader, know I have perused this coppy, to make some satisfaction
for the first faulty impression; yet so urgent hath been my business
that some errors have styll passed, which thy discretion may amend." Simply the power--depending upon a thousand laborious processes--of constructing
a magic lens within the mind which allows us to look deep into the past, to see its life and
colour and movement again, as no generation but our own has yet been able to see it. We hold
our breath sometimes, as for a brief moment perhaps we catch its very gesture, its very habit
as it lived, the very tone of its voices. It has been a new and marvellous gift of our God
to us; and it has transformed or is transforming Christianity.

"Like science, this new discipline of the human mind is divine and authoritative. It lessens
the distance between our human thought and the thought of God, because, in the familiar phrase,
it enables us to "think, in some sort, His thoughts after Him." Like science it marches slowly
on its way; through many mistakes; through hypothesis and rectification; through daring vision
and laborious proof; to an ever-broadening certainty. History has taken hold of the Christian
tradition. History has worked upon it with an amazing tenderness, and patience, and reverence.
And at the end of a hundred years what do we see?--that half of Christendom, at least, which
we in this church represent?

"We see a Christ stripped of Jewish legend, and Greek speculation, and medieval scholasticism;
moving simply and divinely among the ways of His Jewish world, a man among men. We can watch,
dimly indeed by comparison with our living scrutiny of living men, but still more clearly than
any generation of Christendom since the disappearance of the first has been able to watch,
the rise of His thoughts, the nature of His environment, the sequence of His acts, the original
significance, the immediate interpretation, the subsequent influence of His death. We know
much more of Jesus of Nazareth than the fathers of Nicaea knew; probably than St. Paul knew;
certainly than Irenaeus or Clement knew.

"But that is only half the truth; only half of what history has to tell. On the one side we
have to do with the recovered fact: on the other with its working through two thousand years
upon the world.

"There, for the Modernist, lies revelation!--in the unfolding of the Christian idea, through
the successive stages of human thought and imagination, it has traversed, down to the burst
of revelation in the present day. Yet we are only now at the beginning of an immense development.
The content of the Christian idea of love--love, self-renouncing, self-fulfilling--is infinite,
inexhaustible, like that of beauty, or of truth. Why? At this moment, I am only concerned to
give you the Christian answer, which is the answer of a reasonable faith. Because, like the
streams springing forever from 'the pure founts of Cephisus,' to nourish the swelling plains
below, these governing ideas of our life--tested by life, confirmed by life--have their source
in the very being of God, sharers in His Eternity, His Ever-Fruitfulness....

"But even so, you have not exhausted the wealth of Christianity; For to the potency of the
Christian idea is added the magic of an incomparable embodiment in human life. The story of
Jesus bears the idea which it enshrines eternally through the world. It is to the idea as the
vessel of the Grail.

"... Do these conceptions make us love our Master less? Ask your own hearts? There must be
many in this crowded church that have known sorrow--intolerable anguish and disappointment--gnawing
self-reproach--during the past year, or months, or weeks; many that have watched sufferings
which no philosophic optimism can explain, and catastrophes that leave men dumb. Some among
them will have been driven back upon their faith--driven to the foot of the Cross. Through
all intellectual difference, has not the natural language of their fathers been also their
language? Is there anything in their changed opinions which has cut them off from that sacrifice

"Renewed in every pulse,
 That on the tedious Cross
 Told the long hours of death, as, one by one,
 The life-strings of that tender heart gave way?

"Is there anything in this new compelling knowledge that need--that does--divide us--whose
consciences dare not refuse it--from the immortal triumph of that death? In our sharpest straits,
are we not comforted and cleansed and sustained by the same thoughts, the same visions that
have always sustained and comforted the Christian? No!--the sons of tradition and dogma have
no monopoly in the exaltation, the living passion of the Cross! We, too, watching that steadfastness
grow steadfast; bowed before that innocent suffering, grow patient; drinking in the wonder
of that faith, amid utter defeat, learn to submit and go forward. In us too, as we behold--Hope
'masters Agony!'--and we follow, for a space at least, with our Master, into the heavenly house,
and still our sore hearts before our God."

       *       *       *       *       *

Quietly and low, in tones that shook here and there, the words had fallen upon the spell-bound
church.

Mary covered her eyes. But they saw only the more intently the vision of Hester maimed and
dying; and the face of Meynell bending over her.

       *       *       *       *       *

Then from this intimity, this sacredness of feeling, the speaker passed gradually and finally
into the challenge, the ringing yet brotherly challenge, it was in truth his mission to deliver.
The note of battle--honourable, inevitable battle--pealed through the church, and when it ceased
the immense congregation rose, possessed by one heat of emotion, and choir and multitude broke
into the magnificent Modernist hymn, "Christus Rex"--written by the Bishop of the See, and
already familiar throughout England.

The service was over. Out streamed the great congregation. The Close was crowded to see them
come. Lines of theological students were drawn up there, fresh-faced boys in round collars
and long black coats, who, as the main body of the Modernist clergy approached, began defiantly
to chant the Creed. Meynell, with the old yet stately Bishop leaning on his arm, passed them
with a friendly, quiet look. He caught sight for a moment of the tall form of Fenton, standing
at their rear--the long face ascetically white, and sternly fixed.

He left the Bishop at the gates of the Palace, and went back quickly for Mary. Suddenly he
ran into an advancing figure and found his hand grasped by Dornal.

The two men gazed at each other.

"You were not there?" said Meynell, wondering.

"I was." Dornal hesitated a moment, and then his blue eyes melted and clouded.

"And there was one man there--not a Modernist--who grieved, like a Modernist, over the future!"

"Ah, the future!" said Meynell, throwing his head back. "That is not for you or me--not for
the bishops, nor for that body which we call the Church--that is for England to settle."

       *       *       *       *       *

But another meeting remained.

At the parting with Dornal, Meynell turned a corner and saw in front of him, walking alone,
a portly gentleman, with a broad and substantial back. A start ran through him. After a moment's
hesitation, he began to quicken his steps, and soon overtook the man in question.

Barron--for it was he--stopped in some astonishment, some confusion even, which he endeavoured
to hide. Meynell held out his hand--rather timidly; and Barron just touched it.

"I have been attending the service at St. Mathias," he said, stiffly.

"I imagined so," said Meynell, walking on beside him, and quite unconscious of the fact that
a passing group of clergy opposite were staring across the street in amazement at the juxtaposition
of the two men, both well known to them. "Did it satisfy you?"

"Certainly. Fenton surpassed himself."

"He has a great gift," said Meynell, heartily. They moved on in silence, till at last Meynell
said, with renewed hesitation--"Will you allow me to inquire after Maurice? I hope your mind
is more at ease about him."

"He is doing well--for the moment." Another pause--broken by Barron, who said hurriedly in
a different voice--"I got from him the whole story of the letters. There was nothing deliberate
in it. It was a sudden, monkeyish impulse. He didn't mean as much harm by it as another man
would have meant."

"No doubt," said Meynell, struck with pity, as he looked at the sunken face of the speaker.
"And anyway--bygones are bygones. I hope your daughter is well?"

"Quite well, I thank you. We are just going abroad."

There was no more to be said. Meynell knew very well that the orthodox party had no room in
its ranks, at that moment, for Henry Barron; and it was not hard to imagine what exclusion
and ostracism must mean to such a temper. But the generous compunctions in his own mind could
find no practical expression; and after a few more words they parted.

       *       *       *       *       *

Next morning, while every newspaper in the country was eagerly discussing the events at Dunchester,
Catharine, in the solitude of Long Whindale, and with a full two hours yet to wait for the
carrier who brought the papers from Whinborough, was pondering letters from Rose and Mary written
from Dunchester on the preceding afternoon. Her prayer-book lay beside her. Before the post
arrived she had been reading by herself the Psalms and Lessons, according to the old-fashioned
custom of her youth.

The sweetness of Mary's attempt to bring out everything in the Modernist demonstration that
might be bearable or even consoling to Catharine, and to leave untold what must pain her, was
not lost upon her mother. Catharine sat considering it, in a reverie half sorrow, half tenderness,
her thin hands clasped upon the letter:

       *       *       *       *       *

"Mother, beloved!--Richard and I talked of you all the way back to the Palace; and though there
were many people waiting to see him, he is writing to you now; and so am I. Through it all,
he feels so near to you--and to my father; so truly your son, your most loving son....

"Dearest--I am troubled to hear from Alice this morning that yesterday you were tired and even
went to lie down. I know my too Spartan mother doesn't do that without ten times as much reason
as other people. Oh! do take care of yourself, my precious one. To-morrow, I fly back to you
with all my news. And you will meet me with that love of yours which has never failed me, as
it never failed my father. It will take Richard and me a life time to repay it. But we'll try!
... Dear love to my poor Alice. I have written separately to her."

       *       *       *       *       *

Rose's letter was in another vein.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Dearest Catharine, it is all over--a splendid show, and Richard has come out of it finely,
though I must say he looks at times more like a ghost than a man. From the Church point of
view, dear, you were wise not to come, for your feelings must have been sadly mixed, and you
might have been compelled to take Privy Council proceedings against yourself. "My best presentations
of the gospel to you are so incomplete! Sometimes, when I am alone, I have such sweet and rapturous
visions of the love of God and the truths of his word, that I think, if I could speak to you
then, I should move your hearts. I am like a child, who, walking forth some sunny summer's morning,
sees grass and flower all shining with drops of dew. 'Oh,' he cries, 'I'll carry these beautiful
things to my mother!' And, eagerly plucking them, the dew drops into
his little palm, and all the charm is gone. He compares it to 'the guesses
of a ten-year old child at the contents of his father's library.' Hugh thinks it good--but
I don't expect you to.)"

       *       *       *       *       *

Then followed a vivacious account of the day and its happenings.

"And now comes the real tug of war. In a few weeks the poor Modernists will be all camping
in tents, it seems, by the wayside. Very touching and very exciting. But I am getting too sleepy
to think about it. Dear Cathie--I run on--but I love you. Please keep well. Good-bye."

       *       *       *       *       *

Catharine laid the letter down, still smiling against her will over some of its chatter, and
unconsciously made happy by the affection that breathed from its pages no less than from Mary's.

Yet certainly she was very tired. She became sharply conscious of her physical weakness as
she sat on by the fire, now thinking of her Mary, and now listening for Alice's step upon the
stairs. Alice had grown very dear to Catharine, partly for her own sake, and partly because
to be in bitter need and helplessness was to be sure of Catharine's tenderness. Very possibly
they two, when Mary married, might make their home together. And Catharine promised herself
to bring calm at least and loving help to one who had suffered so much.

The window was half open to the first mild day of March; beside it stood a bowl of growing
daffodils, and a pot of freesias that scented the room. Outside a robin was singing, the murmur
of the river came up through the black buds of the ash-trees, and in the distance a sheep-dog
could be heard barking on the fells. So quiet it was--the spring sunshine--and so sweet. Back
into Catharine's mind there flowed the memory of her own love-story in the valley; her hand
trembled again in the hand of her lover.

Then with a sudden onset her mortal hour came upon her. She tried to move, to call, and could
not. There was no time for any pain of parting. For one remaining moment of consciousness there
ran through the brain the images, affections, adorations of her life. Swift, incredibly swift,
the vision of an opening glory--a heavenly throng!... Then the tired eyelids fell, the head
lay heavily on the cushion behind it, and in the little room the song of the robin and the
murmur of the stream flowed on--unheard.

THE END